
Learning the bash Shell, 3rd Edition
Table of Contents
SPECIAL OFFER: Upgrade this ebook with O'Reilly
Preface
bash Versions
Summary of bash Features
Intended Audience
Code Examples
Chapter Summary
Conventions Used in This Handbook
We'd Like to Hear from You
Using Code Examples
Safari Enabled
Acknowledgments for the First Edition
Acknowledgments for the Second Edition
Acknowledgments for the Third Edition
1. bash Basics
1.1. What Is a Shell?
1.2. Scope of This Book
1.3. History of UNIX Shells
1.3.1. The Bourne Again Shell
1.3.2. Features of bash
1.4. Getting bash
1.5. Interactive Shell Use
1.5.1. Commands, Arguments, and Options
1.6. Files
1.6.1. Directories
1.6.2. Filenames, Wildcards, and Pathname Expansion
1.6.3. Brace Expansion
1.7. Input and Output
1.7.1. Standard I/O
1.7.2. I/O Redirection
1.7.3. Pipelines
1.8. Background Jobs

1.8.1. Background I/O
1.8.2. Background Jobs and Priorities
1.9. Special Characters and Quoting
1.9.1. Quoting
1.9.2. Backslash-Escaping
1.9.3. Quoting Quotation Marks
1.9.4. Continuing Lines
1.9.5. Control Keys
1.10. Help
2. Command-Line Editing
2.1. Enabling Command-Line Editing
2.2. The History List
2.3. emacs Editing Mode
2.3.1. Basic Commands
2.3.2. Word Commands
2.3.3. Line Commands
2.3.4. Moving Around in the History List
2.3.5. Textual Completion
2.3.6. Miscellaneous Commands
2.4. vi Editing Mode
2.4.1. Simple Control Mode Commands
2.4.2. Entering and Changing Text
2.4.3. Deletion Commands
2.4.4. Moving Around in the History List
2.4.5. Character-Finding Commands
2.4.6. Textual Completion
2.4.7. Miscellaneous Commands
2.5. The fc Command
2.6. History Expansion
2.7. readline
2.7.1. The readline Startup File
2.7.2. Key Bindings Using bind
2.8. Keyboard Habits
3. Customizing Your Environment
3.1. The .bash_profile, .bash_logout, and .bashrc Files
3.2. Aliases
3.3. Options

3.3.1. shopt
3.4. Shell Variables
3.4.1. Variables and Quoting
3.4.2. Built-In Variables
3.5. Customization and Subprocesses
3.5.1. Environment Variables
3.5.2. The Environment File
3.6. Customization Hints
4. Basic Shell Programming
4.1. Shell Scripts and Functions
4.1.1. Functions
4.2. Shell Variables
4.2.1. Positional Parameters
4.2.2. Local Variables in Functions
4.2.3. Quoting with $@ and $*
4.2.4. More on Variable Syntax
4.3. String Operators
4.3.1. Syntax of String Operators
4.3.2. Patterns and Pattern Matching
4.3.3. Length Operator
4.3.4. Extended Pattern Matching
4.4. Command Substitution
4.5. Advanced Examples: pushd and popd
5. Flow Control
5.1. if/else
5.1.1. Exit Status
5.1.2. Return
5.1.3. Combinations of Exit Statuses
5.1.4. Condition Tests
5.1.5. Integer Conditionals
5.2. for
5.3. case
5.4. select
5.5. while and until
6. Command-Line Options and Typed Variables
6.1. Command-Line Options
6.1.1. shift

6.1.2. Options with Arguments
6.1.3. getopts
6.2. Typed Variables
6.3. Integer Variables and Arithmetic
6.3.1. Arithmetic Conditionals
6.3.2. Arithmetic Variables and Assignment
6.3.3. Arithmetic for Loops
6.4. Arrays
7. Input/Output and Command-Line Processing
7.1. I/O Redirectors
7.1.1. Here-documents
7.1.2. File Descriptors
7.2. String I/O
7.2.1. echo
7.2.2. printf
7.2.3. read
7.3. Command-Line Processing
7.3.1. Quoting
7.3.2. command, builtin, and enable
7.3.3. eval
8. Process Handling
8.1. Process IDs and Job Numbers
8.2. Job Control
8.2.1. Foreground and Background
8.2.2. Suspending a Job
8.3. Signals
8.3.1. Control-Key Signals
8.3.2. kill
8.3.3. ps
8.4. trap
8.4.1. Traps and Functions
8.4.2. Process ID Variables and Temporary Files
8.4.3. Ignoring Signals
8.4.4. disown
8.4.5. Resetting Traps
8.5. Coroutines
8.5.1. wait

8.5.2. Advantages and Disadvantages of Coroutines
8.5.3. Parallelization
8.6. Subshells
8.6.1. Subshell Inheritance
8.6.2. Nested Subshells
8.7. Process Substitution
9. Debugging Shell Programs
9.1. Basic Debugging Aids
9.1.1. Set Options
9.1.2. Fake Signals
9.1.3. Debugging Variables
9.2. A bash Debugger
9.2.1. Structure of the Debugger
9.2.2. The Preamble
9.2.3. Debugger Functions
9.2.4. A Sample bashdb Session
9.2.5. Exercises
10. bash Administration
10.1. Installing bash as the Standard Shell
10.1.1. POSIX Mode
10.1.2. Command-Line Options
10.2. Environment Customization
10.2.1. umask
10.2.2. ulimit
10.2.3. Types of Global Customization
10.3. System Security Features
10.3.1. Restricted Shell
10.3.2. A System Break-In Scenario
10.3.3. Privileged Mode
11. Shell Scripting
11.1. What's That Do?
11.1.1. Comments
11.1.2. Variables and Constants
11.2. Starting Up
11.3. Potential Problems
11.4. Don't Use bash
12. bash for Your System

12.1. Obtaining bash
12.2. Unpacking the Archive
12.3. What's in the Archive
12.3.1. Documentation
12.3.2. Configuring and Building bash
12.3.3. Testing bash
12.3.4. Potential Problems
12.3.5. Installing bash as a Login Shell
12.3.6. Examples
12.4. Who Do I Turn to?
12.4.1. Asking Questions
12.4.2. Reporting Bugs
A. Related Shells
A.1. The Bourne Shell
A.2. The IEEE 1003.2 POSIX Shell Standard
A.3. The Korn Shell
A.4. pdksh
A.5. zsh
A.6. Shell Clones and Unix-like Platforms
A.6.1. Cygwin
A.6.2. DJGPP
A.6.3. MKS Toolkit
A.6.4. AT&T UWIN
B. Reference Lists
B.1. Invocation
B.2. Prompt String Customizations
B.3. Built-In Commands and Reserved Words
B.4. Built-In Shell Variables
B.5. Test Operators
B.6. set Options
B.7. shopt Options
B.8. I/O Redirection
B.9. emacs Mode Commands
B.10. vi Control Mode Commands
C. Loadable Built-Ins
D. Programmable Completion
SPECIAL OFFER: Upgrade this ebook with O'Reilly

OceanofPDF.com

Learning the bash Shell, 3rd Edition
Cameron Newham
Editor
Mike Loukides
Copyright © 2009 O'Reilly Media, Inc.
O'Reilly Media
OceanofPDF.com

SPECIAL OFFER: Upgrade this ebook with
O'Reilly
Click here for more information on this offer!
OceanofPDF.com

Preface
The first thing users of the UNIX or Linux operating systems come face to
face with is the shell. "Shell" is the UNIX term for a user interface to the
system—something that lets you communicate with the computer via the
keyboard and the display. Shells are just separate programs that encapsulate
the system, and, as such, there are many to choose from.
Systems are usually set up with a "standard" shell that new users adopt
without question. However, some of these standard shells are rather old and
lack many features of the newer shells. This is a shame, because shells have
a large bearing on your working environment. Since changing shells is as
easy as changing hats, there is no reason not to change to the latest and
greatest in shell technology.
Of the many shells to choose from, this book introduces the Bourne Again
shell (bash for short), a modern general-purpose shell. Other useful modern
shells are the Korn shell (ksh) and the "Tenex C shell" (tcsh); both are also
the subjects of O'Reilly handbooks.
OceanofPDF.com

bash Versions
This book is relevant to all versions of bash, although older versions lack
some of the features of the most recent version.[1] You can easily find out
which version you are using by typing echo $BASH_VERSION. The
earliest public version of bash was 1.0, and the most recent is 3.0 (released
in July 2004). If you have an older version, you might like to upgrade to the
latest one. Chapter 12 shows you how to go about it.
[1] Throughout this book we have clearly marked with footnotes the features
that are not present in the earlier versions.
OceanofPDF.com

Summary of bash Features
bash is a backward-compatible evolutionary successor to the Bourne shell
that includes most of the C shell's major advantages as well as features from
the Korn shell and a few new features of its own. Features appropriated
from the C shell include:
Directory manipulation, with the pushd, popd, and dirs commands.
Job control, including the fg and bg commands and the ability to stop
jobs with CTRL-Z.
Brace expansion, for generating arbitrary strings.
Tilde expansion, a shorthand way to refer to directories.
Aliases, which allow you to define shorthand names for commands or
command lines.
Command history, which lets you recall previously entered commands.
bash's major new features include:
Command-line editing, allowing you to use vi- or emacs-style editing
commands on your command lines.
Key bindings that allow you to set up customized editing key
sequences.
Integrated programming features: the functionality of several external
UNIX commands, including test, expr, getopt, and echo, has been
integrated into the shell itself, enabling common programming tasks to
be done more cleanly and efficiently.
Control structures, especially the select construct, which enables easy
menu generation.
New options and variables that give you more ways to customize your
environment.
One dimensional arrays that allow easy referencing and manipulation
of lists of data.
Dynamic loading of built-ins, plus the ability to write your own and
load them into the running shell.

OceanofPDF.com

Intended Audience
This book is designed to address casual UNIX and Linux users who are just
above the "raw beginner" level. You should be familiar with the process of
logging in, entering commands, and doing simple things with files.
Although Chapter 1 reviews concepts such as the tree-like file and directory
scheme, you may find that it moves too quickly if you're a complete
neophyte. In that case, we recommend the O'Reilly handbook, Learning the
UNIX Operating System, by Jerry Peek, Grace Todino, and John Strang.
If you're an experienced user, you may wish to skip Chapter 1 altogether.
But if your experience is with the C shell, you may find that Chapter 1
reveals a few subtle differences between the bash and C shells.
No matter what your level of experience is, you will undoubtedly learn
many things in this book that will make you a more productive bash user—
from major features down to details at the "nook-and-cranny" level that you
may not have been aware of.
If you are interested in shell programming (writing shell scripts and
functions that automate everyday tasks or serve as system utilities), you
should also find this book useful. However, we have deliberately avoided
drawing a strong distinction between interactive shell use (entering
commands during a login session) and shell programming. We see shell
programming as a natural, inevitable outgrowth of increasing experience as
a user.
Accordingly, each chapter depends on those previous to it, and although the
first three chapters are oriented toward interactive use only, subsequent
chapters describe interactive, user-oriented features in addition to
programming concepts.
This book aims to show you that writing useful shell programs doesn't
require a computing degree. Even if you are completely new to computing,
there is no reason why you shouldn't be able to harness the power of bash
within a short time.

Toward that end, we decided not to spend too much time on features of
exclusive interest to low-level systems programmers. Concepts like file
descriptors and special file types might only confuse the casual user, and
anyway, we figure those of you who understand such things are smart
enough to extrapolate the necessary information from our cursory
discussions.
OceanofPDF.com

Code Examples
This book is full of examples of shell commands and programs designed to
be useful in your everyday life as a user, not just to illustrate the feature
being explained. In Chapter 4 and onwards, we include various
programming problems, which we call tasks, that illustrate particular shell
programming concepts. Some tasks have solutions that are refined in
subsequent chapters. The later chapters also include programming
exercises, many of which build on the tasks in the chapter.
Feel free to use any code you see in this book and to pass it along to friends
and colleagues. We especially encourage you to modify and enhance it
yourself.
If you want to try examples but you don't use bash as your login shell, you
must put the following line at the top of each shell script:
#!/bin/bash
If bash isn't installed as the file /bin/bash, substitute its pathname in the
above.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter Summary
If you want to investigate specific topics rather than read the entire book
through, here is a chapter-by-chapter summary:
Chapter 1 introduces bash and tells you how to install it as your login shell.
Then it surveys the basics of interactive shell use, including overviews of
the UNIX file and directory scheme, standard I/O, and background jobs.
Chapter 2 discusses the shell's command history mechanism (including the
emacs- and vi-editing modes), history substitution and the fc history
command, and key bindings with readline and bind.
Chapter 3 covers ways to customize your shell environment without
programming by using the startup and environment files. Aliases, options,
and shell variables are the customization techniques discussed.
Chapter 4 is an introduction to shell programming. It explains the basics of
shell scripts and functions, and discusses several important "nuts-and-bolts"
programming features: string manipulation operators, brace expansion,
command-line arguments (positional parameters), and command
substitution.
Chapter 5 continues the discussion of shell programming by describing
command exit status, conditional expressions, and the shell's flow-control
structures: if, for, case, select, while, and until.
Chapter 6 goes into depth about positional parameters and command-line
option processing, then discusses special types and properties of variables,
integer arithmetic, and arrays.
Chapter 7 gives a detailed description of bash I/O. This chapter covers all of
the shell's I/O redirectors, as well as the line-at-a-time I/O commands read
and echo. It also discusses the shell's command-line processing mechanism
and the eval command.
Chapter 8 covers process-related issues in detail. It starts with a discussion
of job control, then gets into various low-level information about processes,

including process IDs, signals, and traps. The chapter then moves to a
higher level of abstraction to discuss coroutines and subshells.
Chapter 9 discusses various debugging techniques, like trace and verbose
modes, and the "fake" signal traps. It then presents in detail a useful shell
tool, written using the shell itself: a bash debugger.
Chapter 10 gives information for system administrators, including
techniques for implementing system-wide shell customization and features
related to system security.
Chapter 11 discusses ways to make bash scripts more maintainable.
Chapter 12 shows you how to go about getting bash and how to install it on
your system. It also outlines what to do in the event of problems along the
way.
Appendix A compares bash to several similar shells, including the standard
Bourne shell, the POSIX shell standard, the Korn shell (ksh), the public-
domain Korn shell (pdksh), and the Z Shell (zsh).
Appendix B contains lists of shell invocation options, built-in commands,
built-in variables, conditional test operators, options, I/O redirection, and
emacs- and vi-editing mode commands.
Appendix C gives information on writing and compiling your own loadable
built-ins.
Appendix D looks at the basics of programmable completion.
OceanofPDF.com

Conventions Used in This Handbook
We leave it as understood that when you enter a shell command, you press
RETURN at the end. RETURN is labeled ENTER on some keyboards.
Characters called CTRL-X, where X is any letter, are entered by holding
down the CTRL (or CTL, or CONTROL) key and pressing that letter.
Although we give the letter in uppercase, you can press the letter without
the SHIFT key.
Other special characters are LINEFEED (which is the same as CTRL-J),
BACKSPACE (same as CTRL-H), ESC, TAB, and DEL (sometimes
labeled DELETE or RUBOUT).
This book uses the following font conventions:
Italic
Used for UNIX filenames, commands not built into the shell (which
are files anyway), and shell functions. Italic is also used for dummy
parameters that should be replaced with an actual value, to distinguish
the vi and emacs programs from their bash modes, and to highlight
special terms the first time they are defined.
Bold
Used for bash built-in commands, aliases, variables, and options, as
well as command lines when they are within regular text. Bold is used
for all elements typed in by the user within regular text.
Constant Width
Used in examples to show the contents of files or the output from
commands.
Constant Bold
Used in examples to show interaction between the user and the shell;
any text the user types in is shown in Constant Bold. For example:$
pwd/home/cam/adventure/carrol $
Constant Italic
Used in displayed command lines for dummy parameters that should
be replaced with an actual value.
Square Brackets

Used in Chapter 2 to show the position of the cursor on the command
line being edited. For example:grep -l Alice < ~cam/book/[a]iw
We use UNIX as a shorthand for "UNIX and Linux." Purists will
correctly insist that Linux is not UNIX—but as far as this book is
concerned, they behave identically.
OceanofPDF.com

We'd Like to Hear from You
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the
publisher:
O'Reilly Media, Inc.
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
(800) 998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
(707) 829-0515 (international or local)
(707) 829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any
additional information. You can access this page at:
http://www.oreilly.com/catalog/bash3
To comment or ask technical questions about this book, send email to:
bookquestions@oreilly.com
For more information about our books, conferences, Resource Centers, and
the O'Reilly Network, see our web site at:
http://www.oreilly.com
OceanofPDF.com

Using Code Examples
This book is here to help you get your job done. In general, you may use the
code in this book in your programs and documentation. You do not need to
contact us for permission unless you're reproducing a significant portion of
the code. For example, writing a program that uses several chunks of code
from this book does not require permission. Selling or distributing a CD-
ROM of examples from O'Reilly books does require permission. Answering
a question by citing this book and quoting example code does not require
permission. Incorporating a significant amount of example code from this
book into your product's documentation does require permission.
We appreciate, but do not require, attribution. An attribution usually
includes the title, author, publisher, and ISBN. For example "Learning the
bash Shell, Third Edition, by Cameron Newham and Bill Rosenblatt.
Copyright 2005 O'Reilly Media, Inc., 0-596-00965-8."
OceanofPDF.com

Safari Enabled
When you see a Safari® Enabled icon on the cover of your favorite
technology book, that means the book is available online through the
O'Reilly Network Safari Bookshelf.
Safari offers a solution that's better than e-books. It's a virtual library that
lets you easily search thousands of top tech books, cut and paste code
samples, download chapters, and find quick answers when you need the
most accurate, current information. Try it for free at
http://safari.oreilly.com.
OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments for the First Edition
This project has been an interesting experience and wouldn't have been
possible without the help of a number of people. Firstly, I'd like to thank
Brian Fox and Chet Ramey for creating bash and making it the polished
product it is today. Thanks also to Chet Ramey for promptly answering all
of my questions on bash and pointing out my errors.
Many thanks to Bill Rosenblatt for Learning the korn Shell, on which this
book is based; Michael O'Reilly and Michael Malone at iiNet Technologies
for their useful comments and suggestions (and my net.connection!); Chris
Thorne, Justin Twiss, David Quin-Conroy, and my mum for their
comments, suggestions, and corrections; Linus Torvalds for the Linux
operating system which introduced me to bash and was the platform for all
of my work on the book; Brian Fox for providing a short history of bash;
David Korn for information on the latest Korn shell. Thanks also to
Depeche Mode for "101" as a backdrop while I worked, Laurence
Durbridge for being a likable pest and never failing to ask "Finished the
book yet?" and Adam (for being in my book).
The sharp eyes of our technical reviewers picked up many mistakes. Thanks
to Matt Healy, Chet Ramey, Bill Reynolds, Bill Rosenblatt, and Norm
Walsh for taking time out to go through the manuscript.
The crew at O'Reilly were indispensable in getting this book out the door.
I'd like to thank Lenny Muellner for providing me with the formatting tools
for the job, Chris Reilley for the figures, and Edie Freedman for the cover
design. On the production end, I'd like to thank David Sewell for his
copyediting, Clairemarie Fisher O'Leary for managing the production
process, Michael Deutsch and Jane Ellin for their production assistance,
Ellen Siever for tools support, Kismet McDonough for providing quality
assurance, and Seth Maislin for the index.
I'm grateful to Frank Willison for taking me up on my first piece of email to
ORA: "What about a book on bash?"

Last but by no means least, a big thank you to my editor, Mike Loukides,
who helped steer me through this project.
OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments for the Second Edition
Thanks to all the people at O'Reilly. Gigi Estabrook was the editor for the
second edition. Nicole Gipson Arigo was the production editor and project
manager. Nancy Wolfe Kotary and Ellie Fountain Maden performed quality
control checks. Seth Maislin wrote the index. Edie Freedman designed the
cover, and Nancy Priest designed the interior format of the book. Lenny
Muellner implemented the format in troff. Robert Romano updated the
illustrations for the second edition.
OceanofPDF.com

Acknowledgments for the Third Edition
Thanks to the production people at O'Reilly and to the indexer.
Thanks to Chet Ramey for once again swiftly answering my queries on
bash and for providing helpful comments on the book. I'd also like to thank
Ian Macdonald for his feedback on Programmable Completion.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1. bash Basics
Since the early 1970s, when it was first created, the UNIX operating system
has become more and more popular. During this time it has branched out
into different versions, and taken on such names as Ultrix, AIX, Xenix,
SunOS, and Linux. Starting on minicomputers and mainframes, it has
moved onto desktop workstations and even personal computers used at
work and home. No longer a system used only by academics and computing
wizards at universities and research centers, UNIX is used in many
businesses, schools, and homes. As time goes on, more people will come
into contact with UNIX.
You may have used UNIX at your school, office, or home to run your
applications, print documents, and read your electronic mail. But have you
ever thought about the process that happens when you type a command and
hit RETURN?
Several layers of events take place whenever you enter a command, but
we're going to consider only the top layer, known as the shell. Generically
speaking, a shell is any user interface to the UNIX operating system, i.e.,
any program that takes input from the user, translates it into instructions
that the operating system can understand, and conveys the operating
system's output back to the user. Figure 1-1 shows the relationship between
user, shell, and operating system.
Figure 1-1. The shell is a layer around the UNIX operating system
There are various types of user interfaces. bash belongs to the most
common category, known as character-based user interfaces. These
interfaces accept lines of textual commands that the user types in; they
usually produce text-based output. Other types of interfaces include the

increasingly common graphical user interfaces (GUI), which add the
ability to display arbitrary graphics (not just typewriter characters) and to
accept input from a mouse or other pointing device, touch-screen interfaces
(such as those on some bank teller machines), and so on.
OceanofPDF.com

What Is a Shell?
The shell's job, then, is to translate the user's command lines into operating
system instructions. For example, consider this command line:
sort -n phonelist > phonelist.sorted
This means, "Sort lines in the file phonelist in numerical order, and put the
result in the file phonelist.sorted." Here's what the shell does with this
command:
1. Breaks up the line into the pieces sort, -n, phonelist, >, and
phonelist.sorted. These pieces are called words.
2. Determines the purpose of the words: sort is a command, -n and
phonelist are arguments, and > and phonelist.sorted, taken together,
are I/O instructions.
3. Sets up the I/O according to > phonelist.sorted (output to the file
phone list.sorted) and some standard, implicit instructions.
4. Finds the command sort in a file and runs it with the option -n
(numerical order) and the argument phonelist (input filename).
Of course, each of these steps really involves several substeps, each of
which includes a particular instruction to the underlying operating system.
Remember that the shell itself is not UNIX—just the user interface to it.
UNIX is one of the first operating systems to make the user interface
independent of the operating system.
OceanofPDF.com

Scope of This Book
In this book you will learn about bash, which is one of the most recent and
powerful of the major UNIX shells. There are two ways to use bash: as a
user interface and as a programming environment.
This chapter and the next cover interactive use. These two chapters should
give you enough background to use the shell confidently and productively
for most of your everyday tasks.
After you have been using the shell for a while, you will undoubtedly find
certain characteristics of your environment (the shell's "look and feel") that
you would like to change, and tasks that you would like to automate.
Chapter 3 shows several ways of doing this.
Chapter 3 also prepares you for shell programming, the bulk of which is
covered in Chapter 4 through Chapter 6. You need not have any
programming experience to understand these chapters and learn shell
programming. Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 give more complete descriptions of
the shell's I/O and process-handling capabilities, while Chapter 9 discusses
various techniques for debugging shell programs.
You'll learn a lot about bash in this book; you'll also learn about UNIX
utilities and the way the UNIX operating system works in general. It's
possible to become a virtuoso shell programmer without any previous
programming experience. At the same time, we've carefully avoided going
into excessive detail about UNIX internals. We maintain that you shouldn't
have to be an internals expert to use and program the shell effectively, and
we won't dwell on the few shell features that are intended specifically for
low-level systems programmers.
OceanofPDF.com

History of UNIX Shells
The independence of the shell from the UNIX operating system per se has
led to the development of dozens of shells throughout UNIX history—
although only a few have achieved widespread use.
The first major shell was the Bourne shell (named after its inventor, Steven
Bourne); it was included in the first popular version of UNIX, Version 7,
starting in 1979. The Bourne shell is known on the system as sh. Although
UNIX has gone through many, many changes, the Bourne shell is still
popular and essentially unchanged. Several UNIX utilities and
administration features depend on it.
The first widely used alternative shell was the C shell, or csh. This was
written by Bill Joy at the University of California at Berkeley as part of the
Berkeley Software Distribution (BSD) version of UNIX that came out a
couple of years after Version 7.
The C shell gets its name from the resemblance of its commands to
statements in the C Programming Language, which makes the shell easier
for programmers on UNIX systems to learn. It supports a number of
operating system features (e.g., job control; see Chapter 8) that were unique
to BSD UNIX but by now have migrated to most other modern versions. It
also has a few important features (e.g., aliases; see Chapter 3) that make it
easier to use in general.
In recent years a number of other shells have become popular. The most
notable of these is the Korn shell. This shell is a commercial product that
incorporates the best features of the Bourne and C shells, plus many
features of its own.[1] The Korn shell is similar to bash in most respects;
both have an abundance of features that make them easy to work with. The
advantage of bash is that it is free. For further information on the Korn shell
see Appendix A.
OceanofPDF.com

The Bourne Again Shell
The Bourne Again shell (named in punning tribute to Steve Bourne's shell)
was created for use in the GNU project.[2] The GNU project was started by
Richard Stallman of the Free Software Foundation (FSF) for the purpose of
creating a UNIX-compatible operating system and replacing all of the
commercial UNIX utilities with freely distributable ones. GNU embodies
not only new software utilities, but a new distribution concept: the copyleft.
Copylefted software may be freely distributed so long as no restrictions are
placed on further distribution (for example, the source code must be made
freely available).
bash, intended to be the standard shell for the GNU system, was officially
"born" on Sunday, January 10, 1988. Brian Fox wrote the original versions
of bash and readline and continued to improve the shell up until 1993.
Early in 1989 he was joined by Chet Ramey, who was responsible for
numerous bug fixes and the inclusion of many useful features. Chet Ramey
is now the official maintainer of bash and continues to make further
enhancements.
In keeping with the GNU principles, all versions of bash since 0.99 have
been freely available from the FSF. bash has found its way onto every
major version of UNIX and is rapidly becoming the most popular Bourne
shell derivative. It is the standard shell included with Linux, a widely used
free UNIX operating system, and Apple's Mac OS X.
In 1995 Chet Ramey began working on a major new release, 2.0, which was
released to the public for the first time on December 23, 1996. bash 2.0
added a range of new features to the old release (the one before being
1.14.7) and brought the shell into better compliance with various standards.
bash 3.0 improves on the previous version and rounds out the feature list
and standards compliance.
This book describes bash 3.0. It is applicable to all previous releases of
bash. Any features of the current release that are different in, or missing
from, previous releases will be noted in the text.

OceanofPDF.com

Features of bash
Although the Bourne shell is still known as the "standard" shell, bash is
becoming increasingly popular. In addition to its Bourne shell compatibility,
it includes the best features of the C and Korn shells as well as several
advantages of its own.
bash's command-line editing modes are the features that tend to attract
people to it first. With command-line editing, it's much easier to go back
and fix mistakes or modify previous commands than it is with the C shell's
history mechanism—and the Bourne shell doesn't let you do this at all.
The other major bash feature that is intended mostly for interactive users is
job control. As Chapter 8 explains, job control gives you the ability to stop,
start, and pause any number of commands at the same time. This feature
was borrowed almost verbatim from the C shell.
The rest of bash's important advantages are meant mainly for shell
customizers and programmers. It has many new options and variables for
customization, and its programming features have been significantly
expanded to include function definition, more control structures, integer
arithmetic, advanced I/O control, and more.
[1] The Korn shell can be downloaded for free but it comes with a license
that will require payment if the shell is used in certain situations.
[2] GNU is a recursive acronym, standing for "GNU's Not UNIX."
OceanofPDF.com

Getting bash
You may or may not be using bash right now. Your system administrator
probably set your account up with whatever shell he uses as the "standard"
on the system. You may not even have been aware that there is more than
one shell available.
Yet it's easy for you to determine which shell you are using. Log in to your
system and type echo $SHELL at the prompt. You will see a response
containing sh, csh, ksh, or bash; these denote the Bourne, C, Korn, and
bash shells, respectively. (There's also a chance that you're using another
shell such as tcsh.)
If you aren't using bash and you want to, then you first need to find out if it
exists on your system. Just type bash. If you get a new prompt consisting of
some information followed by a dollar sign (e.g., bash3 $ ), then all is well;
type exit to go back to your normal shell.
If you get a "not found" message, your system may not have it. Ask your
system administrator or another knowledgeable user; there's a chance that
you might have some version of bash installed on the system in a place
(directory) that is not normally accessible to you. If not, read Chapter 11 to
find out how you can obtain a version of bash.
Once you know you have bash on your system, you can invoke it from
whatever other shell you use by typing bash as above. However, it's much
better to install it as your login shell, i.e., the shell that you get
automatically whenever you log in. You may be able to do the installation
by yourself. Here are instructions that are designed to work on the widest
variety of UNIX systems. If something doesn't work (e.g., you type in a
command and get a "not found" error message or a blank line as the
response), you'll have to abort the process and see your system
administrator. Alternatively, turn to Chapter 12 where we demonstrate a less
straightforward way of replacing your current shell.
You need to find out where bash is on your system, i.e., in which directory
it's installed. You might be able to find the location by typing whereis bash

(especially if you are using the C shell); if that doesn't work, try whence
bash, which bash, or this complex command:[3]
grep bash /etc/passwd | awk -F: '{print $7}' | sort -u
You should see a response that looks like /bin/bash or /usr/local/bin/bash.
To install bash as your login shell, type chsh bash-name, where bash-name
is the response you got to your whereis command (or whatever worked).
For example:
% chsh /usr/local/bin/bash
You'll either get an error message saying that the shell is invalid, or you'll
be prompted for your password.[4] Type in your password, then log out and
log back in again to start using bash.
[3] Make sure you use the correct quotation mark in this command: ' rather
than `.
[4] For system security reasons, only certain programs are allowed to be
installed as login shells.
OceanofPDF.com

Interactive Shell Use
When you use the shell interactively, you engage in a login session that
begins when you log in and ends when you type exit or logout or press
CTRL-D. [5] During a login session, you type in command lines to the shell;
these are lines of text ending in RETURN that you type in to your terminal
or workstation.
By default, the shell prompts you for each command with an information
string followed by a dollar sign, though as you will see in Chapter 3, the
entire prompt can be changed.
OceanofPDF.com

Commands, Arguments, and Options
Shell command lines consist of one or more words, which are separated on
a command line by blanks or TABs. The first word on the line is the
command. The rest (if any) are arguments (also called parameters) to the
command, which are names of things on which the command will act.
For example, the command line lp myfile consists of the command lp (print
a file) and the single argument myfile. lp treats myfile as the name of a file
to print. Arguments are often names of files, but not necessarily: in the
command line mail cam, the mail program treats cam as the username to
which a message will be sent.
An option is a special type of argument that gives the command specific
information on what it is supposed to do. Options usually consist of a dash
followed by a letter; we say "usually" because this is a convention rather
than a hard-and-fast rule. The command lp -h myfile contains the option -h,
which tells lp not to print the "banner page" before it prints the file.
Sometimes options take their own arguments. For example, lp -d lp1 -h
myfile has two options and one argument. The first option is -d lp1, which
means "Send the output to the printer (destination) called lp1." The second
option and argument are the same as in the previous example.
[5] The shell can be set up so that it ignores a single CTRL-D to end the
session. We recommend doing this, because CTRL-D is too easy to type by
accident. See the section on options in Chapter 3 for further details.
OceanofPDF.com

Files
Although arguments to commands aren't always files, files are the most
important types of "things" on any UNIX system. A file can contain any
kind of information, and indeed there are different types of files. Three
types are by far the most important:
Regular files
Also called text files; these contain readable characters. For example,
this book was created from several regular files that contain the text of
the book plus human-readable formatting instructions to the troff word
processor.
Executable files
Also called programs; these are invoked as commands. Some can't be
read by humans; others—the shell scripts that we'll examine in this
book—are just special text files. The shell itself is a (non-human-
readable) executable file called bash.
Directories
These are like folders that contain other files—possibly other
directories (called subdirectories).
OceanofPDF.com

Directories
Let's review the most important concepts about directories. The fact that
directories can contain other directories leads to a hierarchical structure,
more popularly known as a tree, for all files on a UNIX system.
Figure 1-1 shows part of a typical directory tree; rectangles are directories
and ovals are regular files.
Figure 1-2. A tree of directories and files
The top of the tree is a directory called root that has no name on the system.
[6] All files can be named by expressing their location on the system relative
to root; such names are built by listing all of the directory names (in order
from root), separated by slashes (/), followed by the file's name. This way
of naming files is called a full (or absolute) pathname.
For example, say there is a file called aaiw that is in the directory book,
which is in the directory cam, which is in the directory home, which is in
the root directory. This file's full pathname is /home/cam/book/aaiw.
The working directory

Of course, it's annoying to have to use full pathnames whenever you need to
specify a file. So there is also the concept of the working directory
(sometimes called the current directory), which is the directory you are "in"
at any given time. If you give a pathname with no leading slash, then the
location of the file is worked out relative to the working directory. Such
pathnames are called relative pathnames; you'll use them much more often
than full pathnames.
When you log in to the system, your working directory is initially set to a
special directory called your home (or login) directory. System
administrators often set up the system so that everyone's home directory
name is the same as their login name, and all home directories are contained
in a common directory under root.
For example, /home/cam is a typical home directory. If this is your working
directory and you give the command lp memo, then the system looks for
the file memo in /home/cam. If you have a directory called hatter in your
home directory, and it contains the file teatime, then you can print it with
the command lp hatter/teatime.
Tilde notation
As you can well imagine, home directories occur often in pathnames.
Although many systems are organized so that all home directories have a
common parent (such as /home or /users), you should not rely on that being
the case, nor should you even have to know the absolute pathname of
someone's home directory.
Therefore, bash has a way of abbreviating home directories: just precede
the name of the user with a tilde (~). For example, you could refer to the file
story in user alice's home directory as ~alice/story. This is an absolute
pathname, so it doesn't matter what your working directory is when you use
it. If alice's home directory has a subdirectory called adventure and the file
is in there instead, you can use ~alice/adventure/story as its name.
Even more convenient, a tilde by itself refers to your own home directory.
You can refer to a file called notes in your home directory as ~/notes (note
the difference between that and ~notes, which the shell would try to

interpret as user notes's home directory). If notes is in your adventure
subdirectory, then you can call it ~/adventure/notes. This notation is
handiest when your working directory is not in your home directory tree,
e.g., when it's some system directory like /tmp.
Changing working directories
If you want to change your working directory, use the command cd. If you
don't remember your working directory, the command pwd tells the shell to
print it.
cd takes as an argument the name of the directory you want to become your
working directory. It can be relative to your current directory, it can contain
a tilde, or it can be absolute (starting with a slash). If you omit the
argument, cd changes to your home directory (i.e., it's the same as cd ~ ).
Table 1-1 gives some sample cd commands. Each command assumes that
your working directory is /home/cam just before the command is executed,
and that your directory structure looks like Figure 1-1.
Table 1-1. Sample cd commands
Command
New working directory
cd book
/home/cam/book
cd book/wonderland
/home/cam/book/wonderland
cd ~/book/wonderland /home/cam/book/wonderland
cd /usr/lib
/usr/lib
cd ..
/home
cd ../gryphon
/home/gryphon
cd ~gryphon
/home/gryphon
The first four are straightforward. The next two use a special directory
called .. (two dots), which means "parent of this directory." Every directory
has one of these; it's a universal way to get to the directory above the
current one in the hierarchy—which is called the parent directory.[7]

Another feature of bash's cd command is the form cd -, which changes to
whatever directory you were in before the current one. For example, if you
start out in /usr/lib, type cd without an argument to go to your home
directory, and then type cd -, you will be back in /usr/lib.
OceanofPDF.com

Filenames, Wildcards, and Pathname Expansion
Sometimes you need to run a command on more than one file at a time. The
most common example of such a command is ls, which lists information
about files. In its simplest form, without options or arguments, it lists the
names of all files in the working directory except special hidden files,
whose names begin with a dot (.).
If you give ls filename arguments, it will list those files—which is sort of
silly: if your current directory has the files duchess and queen in it and you
type ls duchess queen, the system will simply print those filenames.
Actually, ls is more often used with options that tell it to list information
about the files, like the -l (long) option, which tells ls to list the file's owner,
size, time of last modification, and other information, or -a (all), which also
lists the hidden files described above. But sometimes you want to verify the
existence of a certain group of files without having to know all of their
names; for example, if you use a text editor, you might want to see which
files in your current directory have names that end in .txt.
Filenames are so important in UNIX that the shell provides a built-in way to
specify the pattern of a set of filenames without having to know all of the
names themselves. You can use special characters, called wildcards, in
filenames to turn them into patterns. Table 1-2 lists the basic wildcards.
Table 1-2. Basic wildcards
Wildcard Matches
?
Any single character
*
Any string of characters
[set]
Any character in set
[! set]
Any character not in set
The ? wildcard matches any single character, so that if your directory
contains the files program.c, program.log, and program.o, then the

expression program.? matches program.c and program.o but not
program.log.
The asterisk (*) is more powerful and far more widely used; it matches any
string of characters. The expression program.* will match all three files in
the previous paragraph; text editor users can use the expression *.txt to
match their input files.[8]
Table 1-3 should help demonstrate how the asterisk works. Assume that you
have the files bob, darlene, dave, ed, frank, and fred in your working
directory.
Table 1-3. Using the * wildcard
Expression Yields
fr*
frank fred
*ed
ed fred
b*
bob
*e*
darlene dave ed fred
*r*
darlene frank fred
*
bob darlene dave ed frank fred
d*e
darlene dave
g*
g*
Notice that * can stand for nothing: both *ed and *e* match ed. Also notice
that the last example shows what the shell does if it can't match anything: it
just leaves the string with the wildcard untouched.
The remaining wildcard is the set construct. A set is a list of characters (e.g.,
abc), an inclusive range (e.g., a-z), or some combination of the two. If you
want the dash character to be part of a list, just list it first or last. Table 1-4
should explain things more clearly.
Table 1-4. Using the set construct wildcards
Expression
Matches
[abc]
a, b, or c

Expression
Matches
[.,;]
Period, comma, or semicolon
[-_]
Dash or underscore
[a-c]
a, b, or c
[a-z]
All lowercase letters
[!0-9]
All non-digits
[0-9!]
All digits and exclamation point
[a-zA-Z]
All lower- and uppercase letters
[a-zA-Z0-9_-] All letters, all digits, underscore, and dash
In the original wildcard example, program.[co] and program.[a-z] both
match program.c and program.o, but not program.log.
An exclamation point after the left bracket lets you "negate" a set. For
example, [!.;] matches any character except period and semicolon; [!a-zA-
Z] matches any character that isn't a letter. To match ! itself, place it after
the first character in the set, or precede it with a backslash, as in [\!].
The range notation is handy, but you shouldn't make too many assumptions
about what characters are included in a range. It's safe to use a range for
uppercase letters, lowercase letters, digits, or any subranges thereof (e.g., [f-
q], [2-6]). Don't use ranges on punctuation characters or mixed-case letters:
e.g., [a-Z] and [A-z] should not be trusted to include all of the letters and
nothing more. The problem is that such ranges are not entirely portable
between different types of computers.[9]
The process of matching expressions containing wildcards to filenames is
called wildcard expansion or globbing. This is just one of several steps the
shell takes when reading and processing a command line; another that we
have already seen is tilde expansion, where tildes are replaced with home
directories where applicable. We'll see others in later chapters, and the full
details of the process are enumerated in Chapter 7.
However, it's important to be aware that the commands that you run only
see the results of wildcard expansion. That is, they just see a list of
arguments, and they have no knowledge of how those arguments came into

being. For example, if you type ls fr* and your files are as on the previous
page, then the shell expands the command line to ls fred frank and invokes
the command ls with arguments fred and frank. If you type ls g*, then
(because there is no match) ls will be given the literal string g* and will
complain with the error message, g*: No such file or directory.[10]
Here is an example that should help make things clearer. Suppose you are a
C programmer. This means that you deal with files whose names end in .c
(programs, also known as source files), .h (header files for programs), and
.o (object code files that aren't human-readable), as well as other files. Let's
say you want to list all source, object, and header files in your working
directory. The command ls *.[cho] does the trick. The shell expands *.[cho]
to all files whose names end in a period followed by a c, h, or o and passes
the resulting list to ls as arguments. In other words, ls will see the filenames
just as if they were all typed in individually—but notice that we required no
knowledge of the actual filenames whatsoever! We let the wildcards do the
work.
The wildcard examples that we have seen so far are actually part of a more
general concept called pathname expansion. Just as it is possible to use
wildcards in the current directory, they can also be used as part of a
pathname. For example, if you wanted to list all of the files in the
directories /usr and /usr2, you could type ls /usr*. If you were only
interested in the files beginning with the letters b and e in these directories,
you could type ls /usr*/[be]* to list them.
OceanofPDF.com

Brace Expansion
A concept closely related to pathname expansion is brace expansion.
Whereas pathname expansion wildcards will expand to files and directories
that exist, brace expansion expands to an arbitrary string of a given form: an
optional preamble, followed by comma-separated strings between braces,
and followed by an optional postscript. If you type echo b{ed,olt,ar}s,
you'll see the words beds, bolts, and bars printed. Each instance of a string
inside the braces is combined with the preamble b and the postscript s.
Notice that these are not filenames—the strings produced are independent
of filenames. It is also possible to nest the braces, as in b{ar{d,n,k},ed}s.
This will result in the expansion bards, barns, barks, and beds.
You can also use a slightly different type of brace expansion for creating a
sequence of letters or numbers. If you type echo {2..5} you'll see this
expands to 2 3 4 5. Typing echo {d..h} results in the expansion d e f g h.[11]
Brace expansion can also be used with wildcard expansions. In the example
from the previous section where we listed the source, object, and header
files in the working directory, we could have used ls *.{c,h,o}.[12]
[6] Most UNIX tutorials say that root has the name /. We stand by this
alternative explanation because it is more logically consistent with the rest
of the UNIX filename conventions.
[7] Each directory also has the special directory . (single dot), which just
means "this directory." Thus, cd . effectively does nothing. Both . and .. are
actually special hidden files in each directory that point to the directory
itself and to its parent directory, respectively. root is its own parent.
[8] MS-DOS and VAX/VMS users should note that there is nothing special
about the dot (.) in UNIX filenames (aside from the leading dot, which
"hides" the file); it's just another character. For example, ls * lists all files in
the current directory; you don't need *.* as you do on other systems.
Indeed, ls *.* won't list all the files—only those that have at least one dot in
the middle of the name.

[9] Specifically, ranges depend on the character encoding scheme your
computer uses (normally ASCII, but IBM mainframes use EBCDIC) and
the character set used by the current locale (ranges in languages other than
English may not give expected results).
[10] This is different from the C shell's wildcard mechanism, which prints an
error message and doesn't execute the command at all.
[11] This form of brace expansion is not available in bash prior to Version
3.0.
[12] This differs slightly from C shell brace expansion. bash requires at least
one unquoted comma to perform an expansion; otherwise, the word is left
unchanged, e.g., b{o}lt remains as b{o}lt.
OceanofPDF.com

Input and Output
The software field—really, any scientific field—tends to advance most
quickly and impressively on those few occasions when someone (i.e., not a
committee) comes up with an idea that is small in concept yet enormous in
its implications. The standard input and output scheme of UNIX has to be
on the short list of such ideas, along with such classic innovations as the
LISP language, the relational data model, and object-oriented programming.
The UNIX I/O scheme is based on two dazzlingly simple ideas. First,
UNIX file I/O takes the form of arbitrarily long sequences of characters
(bytes). In contrast, file systems of older vintage have more complicated I/O
schemes (e.g., "block," "record," "card image," etc.). Second, everything on
the system that produces or accepts data is treated as a file; this includes
hardware devices like disk drives and terminals. Older systems treated
every device differently. Both of these ideas have made systems
programmers' lives much more pleasant.
OceanofPDF.com

Standard I/O
By convention, each UNIX program has a single way of accepting input
called standard input, a single way of producing output called standard
output, and a single way of producing error messages called standard error
output, usually shortened to standard error. Of course, a program can have
other input and output sources as well, as we will see in Chapter 7.
Standard I/O was the first scheme of its kind that was designed specifically
for interactive users at terminals, rather than the older batch style of use that
usually involved decks of punch-cards. Since the UNIX shell provides the
user interface, it should come as no surprise that standard I/O was designed
to fit in very neatly with the shell.
All shells handle standard I/O in basically the same way. Each program that
you invoke has all three standard I/O channels set to your terminal or
workstation, so that standard input is your keyboard, and standard output
and error are your screen or window. For example, the mail utility prints
messages to you on the standard output, and when you use it to send
messages to other users, it accepts your input on the standard input. This
means that you view messages on your screen and type new ones in on your
keyboard.
When necessary, you can redirect input and output to come from or go to a
file instead. If you want to send the contents of a pre-existing file to
someone as mail, you redirect mail's standard input so that it reads from that
file instead of your keyboard.
You can also hook programs together in a pipeline, in which the standard
output of one program feeds directly into the standard input of another; for
example, you could feed mail output directly to the lp program so that
messages are printed instead of shown on the screen.
This makes it possible to use UNIX utilities as building blocks for bigger
programs. Many UNIX utility programs are meant to be used in this way:
they each perform a specific type of filtering operation on input text.
Although this isn't a textbook on UNIX utilities, they are essential to

productive shell use. The more popular filtering utilities are listed in Table
1-5.
Table 1-5. Popular UNIX data filtering utilities
Utility Purpose
cat
Copy input to output
grep
Search for strings in the input
sort
Sort lines in the input
cut
Extract columns from input
sed
Perform editing operations on input
tr
Translate characters in the input to other characters
You may have used some of these before and noticed that they take names
of input files as arguments and produce output on standard output. You may
not know, however, that all of them (and most other UNIX utilities) accept
input from standard input if you omit the argument.[13]
For example, the most basic utility is cat, which simply copies its input to
its output. If you type cat with a filename argument, it will print out the
contents of that file on your screen. But if you invoke it with no arguments,
it will expect standard input and copy it to standard output. Try it: cat will
wait for you to type a line of text; when you type RETURN, cat will repeat
the text back to you. To stop the process, hit CTRL-D at the beginning of a
line. You will see ^D when you type CTRL-D. Here's what this should look
like:
$ cat
               Here is a line of text.
Here is a line of text.
This is another line of text.
This is another line of text.
^D
$
OceanofPDF.com

I/O Redirection
cat is short for "catenate," i.e., link together. It accepts multiple filename
arguments and copies them to the standard output. But let's pretend, for
now, that cat and other utilities don't accept filename arguments and accept
only standard input. As we said above, the shell lets you redirect standard
input so that it comes from a file. The notation command < filename does
this; it sets things up so that command takes standard input from a file
instead of from a terminal.
For example, if you have a file called cheshire that contains some text, then
cat < cheshire will print cheshire's contents out onto your terminal. sort <
cheshire will sort the lines in the cheshire file and print the result on your
terminal (remember: we're pretending that these utilities don't take filename
arguments).
Similarly, command > filename causes the command's standard output to be
redirected to the named file. The classic "canonical" example of this is date
> now: the date command prints the current date and time on the standard
output; the previous command saves it in a file called now.
Input and output redirectors can be combined. For example: the cp
command is normally used to copy files; if for some reason it didn't exist or
was broken, you could use cat in this way:
$ cat < 
               file1 
               > 
               file2
This would be similar to cp file1 file2.
OceanofPDF.com

Pipelines
It is also possible to redirect the output of a command into the standard
input of another command instead of a file. The construct that does this is
called the pipe, notated as |. A command line that includes two or more
commands connected with pipes is called a pipeline.
Pipes are very often used with the more command, which works just like
cat except that it prints its output screen by screen, pausing for the user to
type SPACE (next screen), RETURN (next line), or other commands. If
you're in a directory with a large number of files and you want to see details
about them, ls -l | more will give you a detailed listing a screen at a time.
Pipelines can get very complex, and they can also be combined with other
I/O directors. To see a sorted listing of the file cheshire a screen at a time,
type sort < cheshire | more. To print it instead of viewing it on your
terminal, type sort < cheshire | lp.
Here's a more complicated example. The file /etc/passwd stores information
about users' accounts on a UNIX system. Each line in the file contains a
user's login name, user ID number, encrypted password, home directory,
login shell, and other information. The first field of each line is the login
name; fields are separated by colons (:). A sample line might look like this:
cam:LM1c7GhNesD4GhF3iEHrH4FeCKB/:501:100:Cameron Newham:/home/cam:/bin/bash
To get a sorted listing of all users on the system, type:
$ cut -d: -f1 < /etc/passwd | sort
(Actually, you can omit the <, since cut accepts input filename arguments.)
The cut command extracts the first field (-f1), where fields are separated by
colons (-d:), from the input. The entire pipeline will print a list that looks
like this:
adm
bin
cam
daemon
davidqc
ftp
games
gonzo
...

If you want to send the list directly to the printer (instead of your screen),
you can extend the pipeline like this:
$ cut -d: -f1 < /etc/passwd | sort | lp
Now you should see how I/O directors and pipelines support the UNIX
building block philosophy. The notation is extremely terse and powerful.
Just as important, the pipe concept eliminates the need for messy temporary
files to store command output before it is fed into other commands.
For example, to do the same sort of thing as the above command line on
other operating systems (assuming that equivalent utilities are available...),
you need three commands. On DEC's VAX/VMS system, they might look
like this:
$ cut [etc]passwd /d=":" /f=1 /out=temp1
$ sort temp1 /out=temp2
$ print temp2
$ delete temp1 temp2
After sufficient practice, you will find yourself routinely typing in powerful
command pipelines that do in one line what it would take several
commands (and temporary files) in other operating systems to accomplish.
[13] If a particular UNIX utility doesn't accept standard input when you
leave out the filename argument, try using a dash (-) as the argument. Some
UNIX systems provide standard input as a file, so you could try providing
the file /dev/stdin as the input file argument.
OceanofPDF.com

Background Jobs
Pipes are actually a special case of a more general feature: doing more than
one thing at a time. This is a capability that many other commercial
operating systems don't have, because of the rigid limits that they tend to
impose upon users. UNIX, on the other hand, was developed in a research
lab and meant for internal use, so it does relatively little to impose limits on
the resources available to users on a computer—as usual, leaning towards
uncluttered simplicity rather than overcomplexity.
"Doing more than one thing at a time" means running more than one
program at the same time. You do this when you invoke a pipeline; you can
also do it by logging on to a UNIX system as many times simultaneously as
you wish. (If you try that on an IBM's VM/CMS system, for example, you
will get an obnoxious "already logged in" message.)
The shell also lets you run more than one command at a time during a
single login session. Normally, when you type a command and hit
RETURN, the shell will let the command have control of your terminal
until it is done; you can't type in further commands until the first one is
done. But if you want to run a command that does not require user input
and you want to do other things while the command is running, put an
ampersand (&) after the command.
This is called running the command in the background, and a command that
runs in this way is called a background job; by contrast, a job run the
normal way is called a foreground job. When you start a background job,
you get your shell prompt back immediately, enabling you to enter other
commands.
The most obvious use for background jobs is programs that take a long time
to run, such as sort or uncompress on large files. For example, assume you
just got an enormous compressed file loaded into your directory from
magnetic tape.[14] Let's say the file is gcc.tar.Z, which is a compressed
archive file that contains well over 10 MB of source code files.

Type uncompress gcc.tar & (you can omit the .Z), and the system will start
a job in the background that uncompresses the data "in place" and ends up
with the file gcc.tar. Right after you type the command, you will see a line
like this:
[1] 175
followed by your shell prompt, meaning that you can enter other
commands. Those numbers give you ways of referring to your background
job; Chapter 8 explains them in detail.
You can check on background jobs with the command jobs. For each
background job, jobs prints a line similar to the above but with an
indication of the job's status:
[1]+ Running uncompress gcc.tar &
When the job finishes, you will see a message like this right before your
shell prompt:
[1]+ Done uncompress gcc.tar
The message changes if your background job terminated with an error;
again, see Chapter 8 for details.
OceanofPDF.com

Background I/O
Jobs you put in the background should not do I/O to your terminal. Just
think about it for a moment and you'll understand why.
By definition, a background job doesn't have control over your terminal.
Among other things, this means that only the foreground process (or, if
none, the shell itself) is "listening" for input from your keyboard. If a
background job needs keyboard input, it will often just sit there doing
nothing until you do something about it (as described in Chapter 8).
If a background job produces screen output, the output will just appear on
your screen. If you are running a job in the foreground that produces output
too, then the output from the two jobs will be randomly (and often
annoyingly) interspersed.
If you want to run a job in the background that expects standard input or
produces standard output, you usually want to redirect the I/O so that it
comes from or goes to a file. Programs that produce small, one-line
messages (warnings, "done" messages, etc.) are an exception to this general
rule; you may not mind if these are interspersed with whatever other output
you are seeing at a given time.
For example, the diff utility examines two files, whose names are given as
arguments, and prints a summary of their differences on the standard
output. If the files are exactly the same, diff is silent. Usually, you invoke
diff expecting to see a few lines that are different.
diff, like sort and compress, can take a long time to run if the input files are
very large. Suppose that you have two large files that are called
warandpeace.txt and warandpeace.txt.old. The command diff
warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old [15] reveals that the author decided
to change the name "Ivan" to "Aleksandr" throughout the entire file—i.e.,
hundreds of differences, resulting in very large amounts of output.
If you type diff warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old &, then the system
will spew lots and lots of output at you, which will be difficult to stop—
even with the techniques explained in Chapter 7. However, if you type:

$ diff warandpeace.txt warandpeace.txt.old > txtdiff &
then the differences will be saved in the file txtdiff for you to examine later.
OceanofPDF.com

Background Jobs and Priorities
Background jobs can save you a lot of thumb-twiddling time. Just
remember that such jobs eat up lots of system resources like memory and
the processor (CPU). Just because you're running several jobs at once
doesn't mean that they will run faster than they would if run sequentially—
in fact, performance is usually slightly worse.
Every job on the system is assigned a priority, a number that tells the
operating system how much priority to give the job when it doles out
resources (the higher the number, the lower the priority). Commands that
you enter from the shell, whether foreground or background jobs, usually
have the same priority. The system administrator is able to run commands at
a higher priority than normal users.
Note that if you're on a multiuser system, running lots of background jobs
may eat up more than your fair share of resources, and you should consider
whether having your job run as fast as possible is really more important
than being a good citizen.
Speaking of good citizenship, there is also a UNIX command that lets you
lower the priority of any job: the aptly named nice. If you type nice
command, where command can be a complex shell command line with
pipes, redirectors, etc., then the command will run at a lower priority.[16]
You can control just how much lower by giving nice a numerical argument;
consult the nice manpage for details.[17]
[14] Compressed files are created by the compress utility, which packs files
into smaller amounts of space; they have names of the form filename.Z,
where filename is the name of the original uncompressed file.
[15] You could use diff warandpeace* as a shorthand to save typing—as
long as there are no other files with names of that form. Remember that diff
doesn't see the arguments until after the shell has expanded the wildcards.
Many people overlook this use of wildcards.

[16] Complex commands following nice should be quoted.
[17] If you are a system administrator logged in as root, then you can also
use nice to raise a job's priority.
OceanofPDF.com

Special Characters and Quoting
The characters <, >, |, and & are four examples of special characters that
have particular meanings to the shell. The wildcards we saw earlier in this
chapter (*, ?, and [...]) are also special characters.
Table 1-6 gives the meanings of all special characters within shell command
lines only. Other characters have special meanings in specific situations,
such as the regular expressions and string-handling operators that we'll see
in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4.
Table 1-6. Special characters
Character Meaning
See chapter
~
Home directory
Chapter 1
`
Command substitution (archaic) Chapter 4
#
Comment
Chapter 4
$
Variable expression
Chapter 3
&
Background job
Chapter 1
*
String wildcard
Chapter 1
(
Start subshell
Chapter 8
)
End subshell
Chapter 8
\
Quote next character
Chapter 1
|
Pipe
Chapter 1
[
Start character-set wildcard
Chapter 1
]
End character-set wildcard
Chapter 1
{
Start command block
Chapter 7
}
End command block
Chapter 7
;
Shell command separator
Chapter 3

Character Meaning
See chapter
`
Strong quote
Chapter 1
<">
Weak quote
Chapter 1
<
Input redirect
Chapter 1
>
Output redirect
Chapter 1
/
Pathname directory separator
Chapter 1
?
Single-character wildcard
Chapter 1
!
Pipeline logical NOT
Chapter 5
OceanofPDF.com

Quoting
Sometimes you will want to use special characters literally, i.e., without
their special meanings. This is called quoting. If you surround a string of
characters with single quotation marks (or quotes), you strip all characters
within the quotes of any special meaning they might have.
The most obvious situation where you might need to quote a string is with
the echo command, which just takes its arguments and prints them to the
standard output. What is the point of this? As you will see in later chapters,
the shell does quite a bit of processing on command lines—most of which
involves some of the special characters listed in Table 1-6. echo is a way of
making the result of that processing available on the standard output.
What if we want to print the string 2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality? Suppose
you type this:
$ echo 2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality.
You would get your shell prompt back, as if nothing happened! But then
there would be a new file, with the name 5, containing "2", the names of all
files in your current directory, and then the string 3 is a valid inequality.
Make sure you understand why.[18]
However, if you type:
$ echo '2 * 3 > 5 is a valid inequality.'
the result is the string, taken literally. You needn't quote the entire line, just
the portion containing special characters (or characters you think might be
special, if you just want to be sure):
$ echo '2 * 3 > 5' is a valid inequality.
This has exactly the same result.
Notice that Table 1-6 lists double quotes (") as weak quotes. A string in
double quotes is subjected to some of the steps the shell takes to process
command lines, but not all. (In other words, it treats only some special
characters as special.) You'll see in later chapters why double quotes are
sometimes preferable; Chapter 7 contains the most comprehensive
explanation of the shell's rules for quoting and other aspects of command-
line processing. For now, though, you should stick to single quotes.

OceanofPDF.com

Backslash-Escaping
Another way to change the meaning of a character is to precede it with a
backslash (\). This is called backslash-escaping the character. In most cases,
when you backslash-escape a character, you quote it. For example:
$ echo 2 \* 3 \> 5 is a valid inequality.
will produce the same results as if you surrounded the string with single
quotes. To use a literal backslash, just surround it with quotes ('\') or, even
better, backslash-escape it (\\).
Here is a more practical example of quoting special characters. A few UNIX
commands take arguments that often include wildcard characters, which
need to be escaped so the shell doesn't process them first. The most
common such command is find, which searches for files throughout entire
directory trees.
To use find, you supply the root of the tree you want to search and
arguments that describe the characteristics of the file(s) you want to find.
For example, the command find . -name string searches the directory tree
whose root is your current directory for files whose names match the string.
(Other arguments allow you to search by the file's size, owner, permissions,
date of last access, etc.)
You can use wildcards in the string, but you must quote them, so that the
find command itself can match them against names of files in each directory
it searches. The command find . -name `*.c' will match all files whose
names end in .c anywhere in your current directory, subdirectories, sub-
subdirectories, etc.
OceanofPDF.com

Quoting Quotation Marks
You can also use a backslash to include double quotes within a quoted
string. For example:
$ echo \"2 \* 3 \> 5\" is a valid inequality.
produces the following output:
"2 * 3 > 5" is a valid inequality.
However, this won't work with single quotes inside quoted expressions. For
example, echo `Hatter\'s tea party' will not give you Hatter's tea party.
You can get around this limitation in various ways. First, try eliminating the
quotes:
$ echo Hatter\'s tea party
If no other characters are special (as is the case here), this works.
Otherwise, you can use the following command:
$ echo 'Hatter'\''s tea party'
That is, `\'' (i.e., single quote, backslash, single quote, single quote) acts like
a single quote within a quoted string. Why? The first ' in `\'' ends the quoted
string we started with (`Hatter), the \' inserts a literal single quote, and the
next ' starts another quoted string that ends with the word "party". If you
understand this, then you will have no trouble resolving the other
bewildering issues that arise from the shell's often cryptic syntax.
OceanofPDF.com

Continuing Lines
A related issue is how to continue the text of a command beyond a single
line on your terminal or workstation window. The answer is conceptually
simple: just quote the RETURN key. After all, RETURN is really just
another character.
You can do this in two ways: by ending a line with a backslash, or by not
closing a quote mark (i.e., by including RETURN in a quoted string). If you
use the backslash, there must be nothing between it and the end of the line
—not even spaces or TABs.
Whether you use a backslash or a single quote, you are telling the shell to
ignore the special meaning of the RETURN character. After you press
RETURN, the shell understands that you haven't finished your command
line (i.e., since you haven't typed a "real" RETURN), so it responds with a
secondary prompt, which is > by default, and waits for you to finish the
line. You can continue a line as many times as you wish.
For example, if you want the shell to print the first sentence of of Lewis
Carroll's Alice's Adventures in Wonderland, you can type this:
$ echo The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some \
> time in silence: at last Caterpillar took the hookah out of its \
> mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.
Or you can do it this way:
$ echo 'The Caterpillar and Alice looked at each other for some
> time in silence: at last Caterpillar took the hookah out of its
> mouth, and addressed her in a languid, sleepy voice.'
OceanofPDF.com

Control Keys
Control keys—those that you type by holding down the CONTROL (or
CTRL) key and hitting another key—are another type of special character.
These normally don't print anything on your screen, but the operating
system interprets a few of them as special commands. You already know
one of them: RETURN is actually the same as CTRL-M (try it and see).
You have probably also used the BACKSPACE or DEL key to erase typos
on your command line.
Actually, many control keys have functions that don't really concern you—
yet you should know about them for future reference and in case you type
them by accident.
Perhaps the most difficult thing about control keys is that they can differ
from system to system. The usual arrangement is shown in Table 1-7, which
lists the control keys that all major modern versions of UNIX support. Note
that DEL and CTRL-? are the same character.
You can use the stty command to find out what your settings are and
change them if you wish; see Chapter 8 for details. If the version of UNIX
on your system is one of those that derive from BSD (such as SunOS and
OS X), type stty all to see your control-key settings; you will see something
like this:
erase  kill   werase rprnt  flush  lnext  susp   intr   quit   stop   eof
^?     ^U     ^W     ^R     ^O     ^V     ^Z/^Y  ^C     ^\     ^S/^Q  ^D
Table 1-7. Control keys
Control key
stty name Function description
CTRL-C
intr
Stop current command
CTRL-D
eof
End of input
CTRL-\
quit
Stop current command if CTRL-C doesn't work
CTRL-S
stop
Halt output to screen
CTRL-Q
 
Restart output to screen
DEL or CTRL-? erase
Erase last character

Control key
stty name Function description
CTRL-U
kill
Erase entire command line
CTRL-Z
susp
Suspend current command (see Chapter 8)
The ^X notation stands for CTRL-X. If your UNIX version derives from
System III or System V (this includes AIX, HP/UX, SCO, Linux, and
Xenix), type stty -a.
The resulting output will include this information:
intr = ^c; quit = ^|; erase = DEL; kill = ^u; eof = ^d; eol = ^`;
swtch = ^`; susp = ^z; dsusp <undef>;
The control key you will probably use most often is CTRL-C, sometimes
called the interrupt key. This stops—or tries to stop—the command that is
currently running. You will want to use this when you enter a command and
find that it's taking too long, you gave it the wrong arguments, you change
your mind about wanting to run it, or whatever.
Sometimes CTRL-C doesn't work; in that case, if you really want to stop a
job, try CTRL-\. But don't just type CTRL-\; always try CTRL-C first!
Chapter 8 explains why in detail. For now, suffice it to say that CTRL-C
gives the running job more of a chance to clean up before exiting, so that
files and other resources are not left in funny states.
We've already seen an example of CTRL-D. When you are running a
command that accepts standard input from your keyboard, CTRL-D tells
the process that your input is finished—as if the process were reading a file
and it reached the end of the file. mail is a utility in which this happens
often. When you are typing in a message, you end by typing CTRL-D. This
tells mail that your message is complete and ready to be sent. Most utilities
that accept standard input understand CTRL-D as the end-of-input
character, though many such programs accept commands like q, quit, exit,
etc.
CTRL-S and CTRL-Q are called flow-control characters. They represent an
antiquated way of stopping and restarting the flow of output from one
device to another (e.g., from the computer to your terminal) that was useful
when the speed of such output was low. They are rather obsolete in these
days of high-speed networks. In fact, under the latter conditions, CTRL-S
and CTRL-Q are basically a nuisance. The only thing you really need to

know about them is that if your screen output becomes "stuck," then you
may have hit CTRL-S by accident. Type CTRL-Q to restart the output; any
keys you may have hit in between will then take effect.
The final group of control characters gives you rudimentary ways to edit
your command line. DEL acts as a backspace key (in fact, some systems
use the actual BACKSPACE or CTRL-H key as "erase" instead of DEL);
CTRL-U erases the entire line and lets you start over. Again, these have
been superseded.[19] The next chapter will look at bash's editing modes,
which are among its most useful features and far more powerful than the
limited editing capabilities described here.
[18] This should also teach you something about the flexibility of placing I/O
redirectors anywhere on the command line—even in places where they
don't seem to make sense.
[19] Why are so many outmoded control keys still in use? They have nothing
to do with the shell per se; instead, they are recognized by the tty driver, an
old and hoary part of the operating system's lower depths that controls input
and output to/from your terminal.
OceanofPDF.com

Help
A feature in bash that no other shell has is an online help system. The help
command gives information on commands in bash. If you type help by
itself, you'll get a list of the built-in shell commands along with their
options.
If you provide help with a shell command name it will give you a detailed
description of the command:
$ help cd
cd: cd [-L | -P] [dir]
 Change the current directory to DIR. The variable $HOME is the
 default DIR. The variable $CDPATH defines the search path for
 the directory containing DIR. Alternative directory names in
 CDPATH are separated by a colon (:). A null directory name is
 the same as the current directory, i.e. `.'. If DIR begins with
 a slash (/), then $CDPATH is not used. If the directory is not
 found, and the shell option `cdable_vars' is set, then try the
 word as a variable name. If that variable has a value, then cd
 to the value of that variable. The -P option says to use the
 physical directory structure instead of following symbolic links;
 the -L option forces symbolic links to be followed.
You can also provide help with a partial name, in which case it will return
details on all commands matching the partial name. For example, help re
will provide details on read, readonly, and return. The partial name can
also include wildcards. You'll need to quote the name to ensure that the
wildcard is not expanded to a filename. So the last example is equivalent to
help `re*', and help `re??' will only return details on read.
Sometimes help will show more than a screenful of information and it will
scroll the screen. You can use the more command to show one screenful at a
time by typing help command | more.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2. Command-Line Editing
It's always possible to make mistakes when you type at a computer
keyboard, but perhaps even more so when you are using a UNIX shell.
UNIX shell syntax is powerful, yet terse, full of odd characters, and not
particularly mnemonic, making it possible to construct command lines that
are as cryptic as they are complex. The Bourne and C shells exacerbate this
situation by giving you extremely limited ways of editing your command
lines.
In particular, there is no way to recall a previous command line so that you
can fix a mistake. If you are an experienced Bourne shell user, undoubtedly
you know the frustration of having to retype long command lines. You can
use the BACKSPACE key to edit, but once you hit RETURN, it's gone
forever!
The C shell provided a small improvement via its history mechanism,
which provides a few very awkward ways of editing previous commands.
But there are more than a few people who have wondered, "Why can't I edit
my UNIX command lines in the same way I can edit text with an editor?"
This is exactly what bash allows you to do. It has editing modes that allow
you to edit command lines with editing commands similar to those of the
two most popular UNIX editors, vi and emacs. It also provides a much-
extended analog to the C shell history mechanism called fc (for fix
command) that, among other things, allows you to use your favorite editor
directly for editing your command lines. To round things out, bash also
provides the original C shell history mechanism.
In this chapter, we will discuss the features that are common to all of bash's
command-history facilities; after that, we will deal with each facility in
detail. If you use either vi or emacs, you may wish to read the section on the
emulation mode for only the one you use.[1] If you use neither vi nor emacs,
but are interested in learning one of the editing modes anyway, we suggest
emacs-mode, because it is more of a natural extension of the minimal
editing capability you get with the bare shell.

We should mention up front that both emacs- and vi-modes introduce the
potential for clashes with control keys set up by the UNIX terminal
interface. Recall the control keys shown in Chapter 1 in Table 1-7, and the
sample stty command output. The control keys shown there override their
functions in the editing modes.
During the rest of this chapter, we'll warn you when an editing command
clashes with the default setting of a terminal-interface control key.
OceanofPDF.com

Enabling Command-Line Editing
bash initially starts interactively with emacs-mode as the default (unless
you have started bash with the -noediting option;[2] see Chapter 10). There
are two ways to enter either editing mode while in the shell. First, you can
use the set command:
$ set -o emacs
or:
$ set -o vi
The second way of selecting the editing mode is to set a readline variable in
the file .inputrc. We will look at this method later in this chapter.
You will find that the vi- and emacs-editing modes are good at emulating
the basic commands of these editors, but not their advanced features; their
main purpose is to let you transfer "keyboard habits" from your favorite
editor to the shell. fc is quite a powerful facility; it is mainly meant to
supplant C shell history and as an "escape hatch" for users of editors other
than vi or emacs. Therefore the section on fc is mainly recommended to C
shell users and those who don't use either standard editor.
[1] You will get the most out of these sections if you are already familiar
with the editor(s) in question. Good sources for more complete information
on the editors are the O'Reilly books Learning the vi Editor, by Linda Lamb
and Arnold Robbins, and Learning GNU Emacs, by Debra Cameron, James
Elliott, and Marc Loy.
[2] -nolineediting in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

The History List
All of bash's command history facilities depend on a list that records
commands as you type them into the shell. Whenever you log in or start
another interactive shell, bash reads an initial history list from the file
.bash_history in your home directory. From that point on, every bash
interactive session maintains its own list of commands. When you exit from
a shell, it saves the list in .bash_history. You can call this file whatever you
like by setting the environment variable HISTFILE. We'll look more
closely at HISTFILE and some other related command history variables in
the next chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

emacs Editing Mode
If you are an emacs user, you will find it most useful to think of emacs
editing mode as a simplified emacs with a single, one-line window. All of
the basic commands are available for cursor motion, cut-and-paste, and
search.
OceanofPDF.com

Basic Commands
emacs-mode uses control keys for the most basic editing functions. If you
aren't familiar with emacs, you can think of these as extensions of the
rudimentary "erase" character (usually BACKSPACE or DEL) that UNIX
provides through its interface to users' terminals. For the sake of
consistency, we'll assume your erase character is DEL from now on; if it is
CTRL-H or something else, you will need to make a mental substitution.
The most basic control-key commands are shown in Table 2-1. (Important:
remember that typing CTRL-D when your command line is empty may log
you off!) The basic keyboard habits of emacs-mode are easy to learn, but
they do require that you assimilate a couple of concepts that are peculiar to
the emacs editor.
Table 2-1. Basic emacs-mode commands
Command Description
CTRL-B
Move backward one character (without deleting)
CTRL-F
Move forward one character
DEL
Delete one character backward
CTRL-D
Delete one character forward
The first of these is the use of CTRL-B and CTRL-F for backward and
forward cursor motion. These keys have the advantage of being obvious
mnemonics. You can also use the left and right cursor motion keys ("arrow"
keys), but for the rest of this discussion we will use the control keys, as they
work on all keyboards. In emacs-mode, the point (sometimes also called
dot) is an imaginary place just to the left of the character the cursor is on. In
the command descriptions in Table 2-1, some say "forward" while others
say "backward." Think of forward as "to the right of point" and backward as
"to the left of point."
For example, let's say you type in a line and, instead of typing RETURN,
you type CTRL-B and hold it down so that it repeats. The cursor will move
to the left until it is over the first character on the line, like this:

$ [f]grep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
Now the cursor is on the f, and point is at the beginning of the line, just
before the f. If you type DEL, nothing will happen because there are no
characters to the left of point. However, if you press CTRL-D (the "delete
character forward" command) you will delete the first letter:
$ [g]rep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
Point is still at the beginning of the line. If this were the desired command,
you could hit RETURN now and run it; you don't need to move the cursor
back to the end of the line. However, you could type CTRL-F repeatedly to
get there:
$ grep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland[]
At this point, typing CTRL-D wouldn't do anything, but hitting DEL would
erase the final d.
OceanofPDF.com

Word Commands
The basic commands are really all you need to get around a command line,
but a set of more advanced commands lets you do it with fewer keystrokes.
These commands operate on words rather than single characters; emacs-
mode defines a word as a sequence of one or more alphanumeric characters.
The word commands are shown in Table 2-2. The basic commands are all
single characters, whereas these consist of two keystrokes, ESC followed
by a letter. You will notice that the command ESC X, where X is any letter,
often does for a word what CTRL-X does for a single character. "Kill" is
another word for "delete"; it is the standard term used in the readline library
documentation for an "undoable" deletion.
Table 2-2. emacs-mode word commands
Command
Description
ESC-B
Move one word backward
ESC-F
Move one word forward
ESC-DEL
Kill one word backward
ESC-CTRL-H Kill one word backward
ESC-D
Kill one word forward
CTRL-Y
Retrieve ("yank") last item killed
To return to our example: if we type ESC-B, point will move back a word.
Since the underscore (_) is not an alphanumeric character, emacs-mode will
stop there:
$ grep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_[w]onderland
The cursor is on the w in wonderland, and point is between the _ and the w.
Now let's say we want to change the -l option of this command from
Duchess to Cheshire. We need to move back on the command line, so we
type ESC-B four more times. This gets us here:
$ grep -l Duchess < ~[c]am/book/alice_in_wonderland
If we type ESC-B again, we end up at the beginning of Duchess:

$ grep -l [D]uchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
Why? Remember that a word is defined as a sequence of alphanumeric
characters only. Therefore < is not a word; the next word in the backward
direction is Duchess. We are now in position to delete Duchess, so we type
ESC-D and get:
$ grep -l []< ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
Now we can type in the desired argument:
$ grep -l Cheshire[]< ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
If you want Duchess back again you can use the CTRL-Y command. The
CTRL-Y "yank" command will undelete a word if the word was the last
thing deleted. In this case, CTRL-Y would insert Duchess at the point.
OceanofPDF.com

Line Commands
There are still more efficient ways of moving around a command line in
emacs-mode. A few commands deal with the entire line; they are shown in
Table 2-3.
Table 2-3. emacs-mode line commands
Command Description
CTRL-A
Move to beginning of line
CTRL-E
Move to end of line
CTRL-K
Kill forward to end of line
Using CTRL-A, CTRL-E, and CTRL-K should be straightforward.
Remember that CTRL-Y will always undelete the last thing deleted; if you
use CTRL-K, that could be quite a few characters.
OceanofPDF.com

Moving Around in the History List
Now we know how to get around the command line efficiently and make
changes. But that doesn't address the original issue of recalling previous
commands by accessing the history list. emacs-mode has several commands
for doing this, summarized in Table 2-4.
Table 2-4. emacs-mode commands for moving through the history list
Command Description
CTRL-P
Move to previous line
CTRL-N
Move to next line
CTRL-R
Search backward
ESC-<
Move to first line of history list
ESC->
Move to last line of history list
CTRL-P and CTRL-N move you through the command history. If you have
cursor motion keys (arrow keys) you can use them instead. The up-arrow is
the same as CTRL-P and the down-arrow is the same as CTRL-N. For the
rest of this discussion, we'll stick to using the control keys because they can
be used on all keyboards.
CTRL-P is by far the one you will use most often—it's the "I made a
mistake, let me go back and fix it" key. You can use it as many times as you
wish to scroll back through the history list. If you want to get back to the
last command you entered, you can hold down CTRL-N until bash beeps at
you, or just type ESC->. As an example, you hit RETURN to run the
command above, but you get an error message telling you that your option
letter was incorrect. You want to change it without retyping the whole thing.
First, you would type CTRL-P to recall the bad command. You get it back
with point at the end:
$ grep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland[]
After CTRL-A, ESC-F, two CTRL-Fs, and CTRL-D, you have:
$ grep -[]Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland

You decide to try -s instead of -l, so you type s and hit RETURN. You get
the same error message, so you give up and look it up in the manual. You
find out that the command you want is fgrep—not grep—after all.
You sigh heavily and go back and find the fgrep command you typed in an
hour ago. To do this, you type CTRL-R; whatever was on the line will
disappear and be replaced by (reverse-i-search)`':. Then type fgrep, and
you will see this:
$ (reverse-i-search)`fgrep': fgrep -l Duchess <~cam/book/ \
   alice_in_wonderland[]
The shell dynamically searches back through the command history each
time you type a letter, looking for the current substring in the previous
commands. In this example, when you typed f the shell would have printed
the most recent command in the history with that letter in it. As you typed
more letters, the shell narrowed the search until you ended up with the line
displayed above. Of course, this may not have been the particular line you
wanted. Typing CTRL-R again makes the shell search further back in the
history list for a line with "fgrep" in it. If the shell doesn't find the substring
again, it will beep.
If you try the fgrep command by hitting RETURN, two things will happen.
First, of course, the command will run. Second, this line will be entered into
the history list at the end, and your "current line" will be at the end as well.
You will no longer be somewhere else in the command history.
Another handy trick to save typing if you have already done a search is to
type CTRL-R twice in a row. This recalls the previous search string you
typed in.[3]
CTRL-P, CTRL-N, and CTRL-R are clearly the most important emacs-
mode commands that deal with the command history. The others are less
useful but are included for compatibility with the full emacs editor.
OceanofPDF.com

Textual Completion
One of the most powerful (and typically underused) features of emacs-
mode is its textual completion facility, inspired by similar features in the
full emacs editor, the C shell, and (originally) the old DEC TOPS-20
operating system.
The premise behind textual completion is simple: you should have to type
only as much of a filename, user name, function, etc., to identify it
unambiguously. This is an excellent feature; there is an analogous one in vi-
mode. We recommend that you take the time to learn it, since it will save
you quite a bit of typing.
There are three commands in emacs-mode that relate to textual completion.
The most important is TAB.[4] When you type in a word of text followed by
TAB, bash will attempt to complete the name. Then one of four things can
happen:
1. If there is nothing whose name begins with the word, the shell will
beep and nothing further will happen.
2. If there is a command name in the search path, a function name, or a
filename that the string uniquely matches, the shell will type the rest of
it, followed by a space in case you want to type in more command
arguments. Command name completion is only attempted when the
word is in a command position (e.g., at the start of a line).
3. If there is a directory that the string uniquely matches, the shell will
complete the filename, followed by a slash.
4. If there is more than one way to complete the name, the shell will
complete out to the longest common prefix among the available
choices. Commands in the search path and functions take precedence
over filenames.
For example, assume you have a directory with the files tweedledee.c and
tweedledum.c. You want to compile the first of these by typing cc
tweedledee.c. You type cc twee followed by TAB. This is not an
unambiguous prefix, since the prefix "twee" is common to both filenames,

so the shell only completes out to cc tweedled. You need to type more
letters to distinguish between them, so you type e and hit TAB again. Then
the shell completes out to "cc tweedledee.c", leaving the extra space for
you to type in other filenames or options.
If you didn't know what options were available after trying to complete cc
twee, you could press TAB again. bash prints out the possible completions
for you and presents your input line again:
$ cc tweedled
tweedledee.c  tweedledum.c
$ cc tweedled
A related command is ESC-?, which expands the prefix to all possible
choices, listing them to standard output. Be aware that the completion
mechanism doesn't necessarily expand to a filename. If there are functions
and commands that satisfy the string you provide, the shell expands those
first and ignores any files in the current directory. As we'll see, you can
force completion to a particular type.
It is also possible to complete other environment entities. If the text being
completed is preceded by a dollar sign ($), the shell attempts to expand the
name to that of a shell variable (see Chapter 3, for a discussion of shell
variables). If the text is preceded by a tilde (~), completion to a username is
attempted; if preceded by an at sign (@), a hostname is attempted.
For example, suppose there was a username cameron on the system. If you
wanted to change to this user's home directory, you could just use tilde
notation and type the first few letters of the name, followed by a TAB:
$ cd ~ca
which would expand to:
$ cd ~cameron/
You can force the shell to complete to specific things. Table 2-5 lists the
standard keys for these.
Table 2-5. Completion command
Command Description
TAB
Attempt to perform general completion of the text
ESC-?
List the possible completions

Command Description
ESC-/
Attempt filename completion
CTRL-X /
List the possible filename completions
ESC-~
Attempt username completion
CTRL-X ~ List the possible username completions
ESC-$
Attempt variable completion
CTRL-X $
List the possible variable completions
ESC-@
Attempt hostname completion
CTRL-X @ List the possible hostname completions
ESC-!
Attempt command completion
CTRL-X !
List the possible command completions
ESC-TAB
Attempt completion from previous commands in the history list
If you find that you are interested only in completing long filenames, you
are probably better off using ESC-/ rather than TAB. This ensures that the
result will be a filename and not a function or command name.
OceanofPDF.com

Miscellaneous Commands
Several miscellaneous commands complete emacs editing mode; they are
shown in Table 2-6.
Table 2-6. emacs-mode miscellaneous commands
Command Description
CTRL-J
Same as RETURN
CTRL-L
Clears the screen, placing the current line at the top of the screen
CTRL-M
Same as RETURN
CTRL-O
Same as RETURN, then display next line in command history
CTRL-T
Transpose two characters on either side of point and move point forward by one
CTRL-U
Kills the line from the beginning to point
CTRL-V
Quoted insert
CTRL-[
Same as ESC (most keyboards)
ESC-C
Capitalize word after point
ESC-U
Change word after point to all capital letters
ESC-L
Change word after point to all lowercase letters
ESC-.
Insert last word in previous command line after point
ESC-_
Same as ESC-.
BSD-derived systems use CTRL-V and CTRL-W as default settings for the
"quote next character" and "word erase" terminal interface functions,
respectively.
A few of these miscellaneous commands are worth discussing, even though
they may not be among the most useful emacs-mode commands.
CTRL-O is useful for repeating a sequence of commands you have already
entered. Just go back to the first command in the sequence and press CTRL-
O instead of RETURN. This will execute the command and bring up the

next command in the history list. Press CTRL-O again to enter this
command and bring up the next one. Repeat this until you see the last
command in the sequence; then just hit RETURN.
Of the case-changing commands, ESC-L is useful when you hit the CAPS
LOCK key by accident and don't notice it immediately. Since all-caps
words aren't used too often in the UNIX world, you probably won't use
ESC-U very often.
CTRL-V will cause the next character you type to appear in the command
line as is; i.e., if it is an editing command (or an otherwise special character
like CTRL-D), it will be stripped of its special meaning.
If it seems like there are too many synonyms for RETURN, bear in mind
that CTRL-M is actually the same (ASCII) character as RETURN, and that
CTRL-J is actually the same as LINEFEED, which UNIX usually accepts
in lieu of RETURN anyway.
ESC-. and ESC-_ are useful if you want to run several commands on a
given file. The usual UNIX convention is that a filename is the last
argument to a command. Therefore you can save typing by just entering
each command followed by SPACE and then typing ESC-. or ESC-_. For
example, say you want to examine a file using more, so you type:
$ more myfilewithaverylongname
Then you decide you want to print it, so you type the print command lp.
You can avoid typing the very long name by typing lp followed by a space
and then ESC-. or ESC-_; bash will insert myfilewithaverylongname for
you.
[3] Not available in versions of bash prior to 2.05a.
[4] emacs users will recognize this as minibuffer completion.
OceanofPDF.com

vi Editing Mode
Like emacs-mode, vi-mode essentially creates a one-line editing window
into the history list. vi-mode is popular because vi is the most standard
UNIX editor. But the function for which vi was designed, writing C
programs, has different editing requirements from those of command
interpreters. As a result, although it is possible to do complex things in vi
with relatively few keystrokes, the relatively simple things you need to do
in bash sometimes take too many keystrokes.
Like vi, vi-mode has two modes of its own: input and control mode. The
former is for typing commands (as in normal bash use); the latter is for
moving around the command line and the history list. When you are in
input mode, you can type commands in and hit RETURN to run them. In
addition, you have minimal editing capabilities via control characters,
which are summarized in Table 2-7
Table 2-7. Editing commands in vi input mode
Command Description
DEL
Delete previous character
CTRL-W
Erase previous word (i.e., erase until a blank)
CTRL-V
Quote the next character
ESC
Enter control mode (see below)
Note that at least some of these—depending on which version of UNIX you
have—are the same as the editing commands provided by UNIX through its
terminal interface.[5] vi-mode will use your "erase" character as the "delete
previous character" key; usually it is set to DEL or CTRL-H
(BACKSPACE). CTRL-V works the same way as in emacs-mode; it causes
the next character to appear in the command line as is and lose its special
meaning.
Under normal circumstances, you just stay in input mode. But if you want
to go back and make changes to your command line, or if you want to recall

previous commands, you need to go into control mode. To do this, hit ESC.
OceanofPDF.com

Simple Control Mode Commands
A full range of vi editing commands are available to you in control mode.
The simplest of these move you around the command line and are
summarized in Table 2-8. vi-mode contains two "word" concepts. The
simplest is any sequence of non-blank characters; we'll call this a non-blank
word. The other is any sequence of only alphanumeric characters (letters
and digits) plus the underscore (_), or any sequence of only non-
alphanumeric characters; we'll just call this a word.[6]
Table 2-8. Basic vi control mode commands
Command Description
h
Move left one character
l
Move right one character
w
Move right one word
b
Move left one word
W
Move to beginning of next non-blank word
B
Move to beginning of preceding non-blank word
e
Move to end of current word
E
Move to end of current non-blank word
0
Move to beginning of line
^
Move to first non-blank character in line
$
Move to end of line
All of these commands except the last three can be preceded by a number
that acts as a repeat count. Whenever you type a number for the repeat
count, the number replaces the command prompt for the duration of the
repeat command. If your keyboard has cursor motion keys ("arrow" keys),
you can use the left and right arrows to move between characters instead of
the h and l keys. Repeat counts will work with the cursor keys as well.

The last two will be familiar to users of UNIX utilities (such as grep) that
use regular expressions, as well as to vi users.
Time for a few examples. Let's say you type in this line and, before you hit
RETURN, decide you want to change it:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland[]
As shown, your cursor is beyond the last character of the line. First, type
ESC to enter control mode; your cursor will move back one space so that it
is on the d. Then if you type h, your cursor will move back to the n. If you
type 3h from the n, you will end up at the r.
Now we will see the difference between the two "word" concepts. Go back
to the end of the line by typing $. If you type b, the word in question is
alice_in_wonderland, and the cursor will end up on the a:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/[a]lice_in_wonderland
If you type b again, the next word is the slash (it's a "sequence" of non-
alphanumeric characters), so the cursor ends up over it:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book[/]alice_in_wonderland
However, if you typed B instead of b, the non-blank word would be the
entire pathname, and the cursor would end up at the beginning of it—over
the tilde:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < [~]cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
You would have had to type b four times—or just 4b—to get the same
effect, since there are four "words" in the part of the pathname to the left of
/alice_in_wonderland: book, slash, cam, and the leading tilde.
At this point, w and W do the opposite: typing w gets you over the c, since
the tilde is a "word," while typing W brings you to the end of the line. But
whereas w and W take you to the beginning of the next word, e and E take
you to the end of the current word. Thus, if you type w with the cursor on
the tilde, you get to:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~[c]am/book/alice_in_wonderland
Then typing e gets you to:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~ca[m]/book/alice_in_wonderland
And typing an additional w gets you to:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam[/]book/alice_in_wonderland
On the other hand, E gets you to the end of the current non-blank word—in
this case, the end of the line. (If you find these commands non-mnemonic,

you're right. The only way to assimilate them is through lots of practice.)
OceanofPDF.com

Entering and Changing Text
Now that you know how to enter control mode and move around on the
command line, you need to know how to get back into input mode so you
can make changes and type in additional commands. A number of
commands take you from control mode into input mode; they are listed in
Table 2-9. All of them enter input mode a bit differently.
Table 2-9. Commands for entering vi input mode
Command Description
i
Text inserted before current character (insert)
a
Text inserted after current character (append)
I
Text inserted at beginning of line
A
Text inserted at end of line
R
Text overwrites existing text
Most likely, you will use either i or a consistently, and you may use R
occasionally. I and A are abbreviations for 0i and $a respectively. To
illustrate the difference between i, a, and R, say we start out with our
example line:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book[/]alice_in_wonderland
If you type i followed by end, you will get:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/bookend[/]alice_in_wonderland
That is, the cursor will always appear to be under the / before
alice_in_wonderland. But if you type a instead of i, you will notice the
cursor move one space to the right. Then if you type miss_, you will get:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/miss_[a]lice_in_wonderland
That is, the cursor will always be just after the last character you typed,
until you type ESC to end your input. Finally, if you go back to the first a in
alice_in_wonderland, type R instead, and then type
through_the_looking_glass, you will see:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/through_the_looking_glas[s]

In other words, you will be replacing (hence R) instead of inserting text.
Why capital R instead of lowercase r? The latter is a slightly different
command, which replaces only one character and does not enter input
mode. With r, the next single character overwrites the character under the
cursor. So if we start with the original command line and type r followed by
a semicolon, we get:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book[;]alice_in_wonderland
If you precede r with a number N, it will allow you to replace the next N
existing characters on the line—but still not enter input mode. Lowercase r
is effective for fixing erroneous option letters, I/O redirection characters,
punctuation, and so on.
OceanofPDF.com

Deletion Commands
Now that you know how to enter commands and move around the line, you
need to know how to delete. The basic deletion command in vi-mode is d
followed by one other letter. This letter determines what the unit and
direction of deletion is, and it corresponds to a motion command, as listed
previously in Table 2-8.
Table 2-10 shows some commonly used examples.
Table 2-10. Some vi-mode deletion commands
Command Description
dh
Delete one character backwards
dl
Delete one character forwards
db
Delete one word backwards
dw
Delete one word forwards
dB
Delete one non-blank word backwards
dW
Delete one non-blank word forwards
d$
Delete to end of line
d0
Delete to beginning of line
These commands have a few variations and abbreviations. If you use a c
instead of d, you will enter input mode after it does the deletion. You can
supply a numeric repeat count either before or after the d (or c). Table 2-11
lists the available abbreviations.
Table 2-11. Abbreviations for vi-mode delete commands
Command Description
D
Equivalent to d$ (delete to end of line)
dd
Equivalent to 0d$ (delete entire line)
C
Equivalent to c$ (delete to end of line, enter input mode)

Command Description
cc
Equivalent to 0c$ (delete entire line, enter input mode)
X
Equivalent to dl (delete character backwards)
x
Equivalent to dh (delete character forwards)
Most people tend to use D to delete to end of line, dd to delete an entire
line, and x (as "backspace") to delete single characters. If you aren't a
hardcore vi user, you may find it difficult to make sure the more esoteric
deletion commands are at your fingertips.
Every good editor provides "un-delete" commands as well as delete
commands, and vi-mode is no exception. vi-mode maintains a delete buffer
that stores all of the modifications to text on the current line only (note that
this is different from the full vi editor). The command u undoes previous
text modifications. If you type u, it will undo the last change. Typing it
again will undo the change before that. When there are no more undo's,
bash will beep. A related command is . (dot), which repeats the last text
modification command.
There is also a way to save text in the delete buffer without having to delete
it in the first place: just type in a delete command but use y ("yank") instead
of d. This does not modify anything, but it allows you to retrieve the yanked
text as many times as you like later on. The commands to retrieve yanked
text are p, which inserts the text on the current line to the right of the cursor,
and P, which inserts it to the left of the cursor. The y, p, and P commands
are powerful but far better suited to "real vi" tasks like making global
changes to documents or programs than to shell commands, so we doubt
you'll use them very often.
OceanofPDF.com

Moving Around in the History List
The next group of vi control mode commands we cover allows you to move
around in and search your command history. This is the all-important
functionality that lets you go back and fix an erroneous command without
retyping the entire line. These commands are summarized in Table 2-12.
Table 2-12. vi control mode commands for searching the command history
Command Description
k or -
Move backward one line
j or +
Move forward one line
G
Move to line given by repeat count
/string
Search backward for string
?string
Search forward for string
n
Repeat search in same direction as previous
N
Repeat search in opposite direction of previous
The first two can also be accomplished with the up and down cursor
movement keys if your keyboard has them. The first three can be preceded
by repeat counts (e.g., 3k or 3- moves back three lines in the command
history).
If you aren't familiar with vi and its cultural history, you may be wondering
at the wisdom of choosing such seemingly poor mnemonics as h, j, k, and l
for backward character, forward line, backward line, and forward character,
respectively. Well, there actually is a rationale for the choices—other than
that they are all together on the standard keyboard. Bill Joy originally
developed vi to run on Lear-Siegler ADM-3a terminals, which were the first
popular models with addressable cursors (meaning that a program could
send an ADM-3a command to move the cursor to a specified location on the
screen). The ADM-3a's h, j, k, and l keys had little arrows on them, so Joy
decided to use those keys for appropriate commands in vi. Another (partial)

rationale for the command choices is that CTRL-H is the traditional
backspace key, and CTRL-J denotes linefeed.
Perhaps + and - are better mnemonics than j and k, but the latter have the
advantage of being more easily accessible to touch typists. In either case,
these are the most basic commands for moving around the history list. To
see how they work, let's use the same examples from the emacs-mode
section earlier.
You enter the example command (RETURN works in both input and
control modes, as does LINEFEED or CTRL-J):
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
but you get an error message saying that your option letter was wrong. You
want to change it to -s without having to retype the entire command.
Assuming you are in control mode (you may have to type ESC to put
yourself in control mode), you type k or - to get the command back. Your
cursor will be at the beginning of the line:
$ [f]grep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
Type w to get to the -, then l to get to the l. Now you can replace it by
typing rs; press RETURN to run the command.
Now let's say you get another error message, and you finally decide to look
at the manual page for the fgrep command. You remember having done this
a while ago today, so rather than typing in the entire man command, you
search for the last one you used. To do this, type ESC to enter control mode
(if you are already in control mode, this will have no effect), then type /
followed by man or ma. To be on the safe side, you can also type ^ma; the
^ means match only lines that begin with ma.[7]
But typing /^ma doesn't give you what you want: instead, the shell gives
you:
$ make myprogram
To search for "man" again, you can type n, which does another backward
search using the last search string. Typing / again without an argument and
hitting RETURN will accomplish the same thing.
The G command retrieves the command whose number is the same as the
numeric prefix argument you supply. G depends on the command
numbering scheme described in Chapter 3 Section 3.4.2.3. Without a prefix

argument, it goes to command number 1. This may be useful to former C
shell users who still want to use command numbers.
OceanofPDF.com

Character-Finding Commands
There are some additional motion commands in vi-mode, although they are
less useful than the ones we saw earlier in the chapter. These commands
allow you to move to the position of a particular character in the line. They
are summarized in Table 2-13, in which x denotes any character.
All of these commands can be preceded by a repeat count.
Table 2-13. vi-mode character-finding commands
Command Description
fx
Move right to next occurrence of x
Fx
Move left to previous occurrence of x
tx
Move right to next occurrence of x, then back one space
Tx
Move left to previous occurrence of x, then forward one space
;
Redo last character-finding command
,
Redo last character-finding command in opposite direction
Starting with the previous example: let's say you want to change Duchess to
Duckess. Make sure that you're at the end of the line (or, in any case, to the
left of the h in Duchess); then, if you type Fh, your cursor will move to the
h:
$ fgrep -l Duc[h]ess < ~cam/book/alice_in_wonderland
At this point, you could type r to replace the h with k. But let's say you
wanted to change Duchess to Dutchess. You would need to move one space
to the right of the u. Of course, you could just type l. But, given that you're
somewhere to the right of Duchess, the fastest way to move to the c would
be to type Tu instead of Fu followed by l.
As an example of how the repeat count can be used with character-finding
commands, let's say you want to change the filename from
alice_in_wonderland to alice. In this case, assuming your cursor is still on
the D, you need to get to one character beyond the second slash. To do this,
you can type 2fa. Your cursor will then be on the a in alice_in_wonderland.

The character-finding commands also have associated delete commands.
Read the command definitions in the previous table and mentally substitute
"delete" for move. You'll get what happens when you precede the given
character-finding command with a d. The deletion includes the character
given as argument. For example, assume that your cursor is under the a in
alice_in_wonderland:
$ fgrep -l Duchess < ~cam/book/[a]lice_in_wonderland
If you want to change alice_in_wonderland to natalie_in_wonderland, one
possibility is to type dfc. This means "delete right to next occurrence of c,"
i.e., delete "alic". Then you can type i (to enter input mode) and then
"natali" to complete the change.
One final command rounds out the vi control mode commands for getting
around on the current line: you can use the pipe character (|) to move to a
specific column, whose number is given by a numeric prefix argument.
Column counts start at 1; count only your input, not the space taken up by
the prompt string. The default repeat count is 1, of course, which means that
typing | by itself is equivalent to 0 (see Table 2-8).
OceanofPDF.com

Textual Completion
Although the character-finding commands and | are not particularly useful,
vi-mode provides one additional feature that we think you will use quite
often: textual completion. This feature is not part of the real vi editor, and it
was undoubtedly inspired by similar features in emacs and, originally, in the
TOPS-20 operating system for DEC mainframes.
The rationale behind textual completion is simple: you should have to type
only as much of a filename, user name, function, etc. as is necessary.
Backslash (\) is the command that tells bash to do completion in vi-mode. If
you type in a word, hit ESC to enter control mode, and then type \, one of
four things will happen; they are the same as for TAB in emacs-mode:
1. If there is nothing whose name begins with the word, the shell will
beep and nothing further will happen.
2. If there is a command name in the search path, a function name, or a
filename that the string uniquely matches, the shell will type the rest of
it, followed by a space in case you want to type in more command
arguments. Command name completion is only attempted when the
word is in a command position (e.g., at the start of a line).
3. If there is a directory that the string uniquely matches, the shell will
complete the filename, followed by a slash.
4. If there is more than one way to complete the name, the shell will
complete out to the longest common prefix among the available
choices. Commands in the search path and functions take precedence
over filenames.
A related command is *. It behaves similarly to ESC-\, but if there is more
than one completion possibility (number four in the previous list), it lists all
of them and allows you to type further. Thus, it resembles the * shell
wildcard character.
Less useful is the command =, which does the same kind of expansion as *,
but in a different way. Instead of expanding the names onto the command
line, it prints them, then gives you your shell prompt back and retypes

whatever was on your command line before you typed =. For example, if
the files in your directory include tweedledee.c and tweedledum.c, and you
type tweedl followed by ESC and then =, you will see this:
$ cc tweedl
tweedledee.c tweedledum.c
It is also possible to expand other environment entities, as we saw in emacs-
mode. If the text being expanded is preceded by a dollar sign ($), the shell
will attempt to expand the name to that of a shell variable. If the text is
preceded by a tilde (~), expansion to a username is attempted; if preceded
by an at sign (@), a hostname.
OceanofPDF.com

Miscellaneous Commands
Several miscellaneous commands round out vi-mode; some of them are
quite esoteric. They are listed in Table 2-14.
Table 2-14. Miscellaneous vi-mode commands
Command Description
~
Invert (twiddle) case of current character(s)
-
Append last word of previous command, enter input mode
CTRL-L
Clear the screen and redraw the current line on it; good for when your screen becomes
garbled
#
Prepend # (comment character) to the line and send it to the history list; useful for
saving a command to be executed later without having to retype it[8]
[8] The line is also "executed" by the shell. However, # is the shell's comment character, so the
shell ignores it.
The first of these can be preceded by a repeat count. A repeat count of n
preceding the ~ changes the case of the next n characters. The cursor will
advance accordingly.
A repeat count preceding _ causes the nth word in the previous command to
be inserted in the current line; without the count, the last word is used.
Omitting the repeat count is useful because a filename is usually the last
thing on a UNIX command line, and because users often run several
commands in a row on the same file. With this feature, you can type all of
the commands (except the first) followed by ESC-_, and the shell will insert
the filename.
[5] In particular, versions of UNIX derived from 4.x BSD have all of these
commands built in.
[6] Neither of these definitions is the same as the definition of a word in
emacs-mode.

[7] Fans of vi and search utilities like grep should note that caret (^) for
beginning-of-line is the only context operator vi-mode provides for search
strings.
OceanofPDF.com

The fc Command
fc is a built-in shell command that provides a superset of the C shell history
mechanism. You can use it to examine the most recent commands you
entered, to edit one or more commands with your favorite "real" editor, and
to run old commands with changes without having to type the entire
command in again. We'll look at each of these uses in turn.
The -l option to fc lists previous commands. It takes arguments that refer to
commands in the history list. Arguments can be numbers or alphanumeric
strings; numbers refer to the commands in the history list, while strings
refer to the most recent command beginning with the string. fc treats
arguments in a rather complex way:
If you give two arguments, they serve as the first and last commands to
be shown.
If you specify one number argument, only the command with that
number is shown.
With a single string argument, it searches for the most recent command
starting with that string and shows you everything from that command
to the most recent command.
If you specify no arguments, you will see the last 16 commands you
entered. bash also has a built-in command for displaying the history:
history.
A few examples should make these options clearer. Let's say you logged in
and entered these commands:
            ls -l
            more myfile
            vi myfile
            wc -l myfile
            pr myfile | lp -h
If you type fc -l with no arguments, you will see the above list with
command numbers, as in:
1        ls -l
2        more myfile
3        vi myfile

4        wc -l myfile
5        pr myfile | lp -h
Adding another option, -n, suppresses the line numbers. If you want to see
only commands 2 through 4, type fc -l 2 4. If you want to see only the vi
command, type fc -l 3. To see everything from the vi command up to the
present, type fc -l v. Finally, if you want to see commands between more
and wc, you can type fc -l m w, fc -l m 4, fc -l 2 4, etc.
The other important option to fc is -e for "edit." This is useful as an "escape
hatch" from vi- and emacs-modes if you aren't used to either of those
editors. You can specify the pathname of your favorite editor and edit
commands from your history list; then when you have made the changes,
the shell will actually execute the new lines.
Let's say your favorite editor is a little home-brew gem called zed. You
could edit your commands by typing:
$ fc -e /usr/local/bin/zed
This seems like a lot of work just to fix a typo in your previous command;
fortunately, there is a better way. You can set the environment variable
FCEDIT to the pathname of the editor you want fc to use. If you put a line
in your .bash_profile or environment file saying:[9]
FCEDIT=/usr/local/bin/zed
you will get zed when you invoke fc. If FCEDIT isn't set, then bash uses
whatever the variable EDITOR is set to. If that's also not set, then bash
defaults to vi.
fc is usually used to fix a recent command. When used without options, it
handles arguments a bit differently than it does for the fc -l variation
discussed earlier:
With no arguments, fc loads the editor with the most recent command.
With a numeric argument, fc loads the editor with the command with
that number.
With a string argument, fc loads the most recent command starting
with that string.
With two arguments to fc, the arguments specify the beginning and end
of a range of commands, as above.

Remember that fc actually runs the command(s) after you edit them.
Therefore, the last-named choice can be dangerous. bash will attempt to
execute all commands in the range you specify when you exit your editor. If
you have typed in any multi-line constructs (like those we will cover in
Chapter 5), the results could be even more dangerous. Although these might
seem like valid ways of generating "instant shell programs," a far better
strategy would be to direct the output of fc -ln with the same arguments to a
file; then edit that file and execute the commands when you're satisfied with
them:
$ fc -l cp > lastcommands$ vi lastcommands$ source lastcommands
In this case, the shell will not try to execute the file when you leave the
editor!
There is one final option with fc. fc -s allows you to rerun a command. With
an argument, fc will rerun the last command starting with the given string.
Without an argument, it will rerun the previous command. The -s option
also allows you to provide a pattern and replacement. For example, if you
typed:
$ cs prog.c
You could correct it with fc -s cs=cc. This can be combined with the string
search: fc -s cs=cc cs. The last occurrence of cs will be found and replaced
with cc.
[9] See Chapter 3 for information on the bash startup file .bash_profile.
OceanofPDF.com

History Expansion
If you are a C shell user, you may be familiar with the history expansion
mechanism that it provides. bash provides a similar set of features. History
expansion is a primitive way to recall and edit commands in the history list.
The way to recall commands is by the use of event designators. Table 2-15
gives a complete list.
Table 2-15. Event designators
Command
Description
!
Start a history substitution
!!
Refers to the last command
! n
Refers to command line n
!- n
Refers to the current command line minus n
! string
Refers to the most recent command starting with string
!? string?
Refers to the most recent command containing string; the ending ? is optional
^ string1^string2 Repeat the last command, replacing string1 with string2
By far the most useful command is !!. Typing !! on the command line re-
executes the last command. If you know the command number of a specific
command, you can use the !n form, where n is the command number.
Command numbers can be determined from the history command.
Alternatively, you can re-execute the most recent command beginning with
the specified string by using ! string.
You might also find the last expansion in the table to be of some use if
you've made a typing mistake. For example, you might have typed:
$ cat through_the_loking_glass | grep Tweedledee > dee.list
Instead of moving back to the line and changing loking to looking, you
could just type ^lok^look. This will change the string lok to look and then
execute the resulting command.

It's also possible to refer to certain words in a previous command by the use
of a word designator. Table 2-16 lists available designators. Note that when
counting words, bash (like most UNIX programs) starts counting with zero,
not with one.
Table 2-16. Word designators
Designator Description
0
The zeroth (first) word in a line
n
The nth word in a line
^
The first argument (the second word)
$
The last argument in a line
%
The word matched by the most recent ?string search
x-y
A range of words from x to y. -y is synonymous with 0-y
*
All words but the zeroth (first); synonymous with 1-$.; if there is only one word on
the line, an empty string is returned
x *
Synonymous with x-$
x-
The words from x to the second to last word
The word designator follows the event designator, separated by a colon.
You could, for example, repeat the previous command with different
arguments by typing !!:0 followed by the new arguments.
Event designators may also be followed by modifiers. The modifiers follow
the word designator, if there is one. Table 2-17 lists the available modifiers.
Table 2-17. Modifiers
Modifier Description
h
Removes a trailing pathname component, leaving the head
r
Removes a trailing suffix of the form .xxx
e
Removes all but the trailing suffix
t
Removes all leading pathname components, leaving the tail
p
Prints the resulting command but doesn't execute it

Modifier Description
q
Quotes the substituted words, escaping further substitutions
x
Quotes the substituted words, breaking them into words at blanks and newlines
s/old/new/ Substitutes new for old
More than one modifier may be used with an event designator; each one is
separated by a colon.
History expansion is fine for re-executing a command quickly, but it has
been superseded by the command-line editing facilities that we looked at
earlier in this chapter. Its inclusion is really only for completeness, and we
feel you are better off mastering the techniques offered in the vi or emacs
editing modes.
OceanofPDF.com

readline
bash's command-line editing interface is readline. It is actually a library of
software developed for the GNU project that can be used by applications
requiring a text-based interface. It provides editing and text-manipulation
features to make it easier for the user to enter and edit text. Just as
importantly, it allows standardization, in terms of both key strokes and
customization methods, across all applications that use it.
readline provides default editing in either of two modes: vi or emacs. Both
modes provide a subset of the editing commands found in the full editors.
We've already looked at the command sets of these modes in the previous
sections of this chapter. We'll now look at how you can make your own
command sets.
readline gives bash added flexibility compared to other shells because it
can be customized through the use of key bindings, either from the
command line or in a special startup file. You can also set readline
variables. We'll see how you can set up readline using your own startup file
now, and then go on to examine how the binding capability can be used
from the command line.
OceanofPDF.com

The readline Startup File
The default startup file is called .inputrc and must exist in your home
directory if you wish to customize readline. You can change the default
filename by setting the environment variable INPUTRC (see Chapter 3 for
further information on environment variables).
When bash starts up, it reads the startup file (if there is one) and any
settings there come into effect. The startup file is just a sequence of lines
that bind a keyname to a macro or readline function name. You can also
place comments in the file by preceding any line with a #.
You can use either an English name or a key escape sequence for the
keyname. For example, to bind CTRL-T to the movement command for
moving to the end of the current line, you could place Control-t: end-of-
line in your .inputrc. If you wanted to use a key escape sequence you could
have put "\C-t<">: end-of-line. The \C- is the escape sequence prefix for
Control. The advantage of the key sequence is that you can specify a
sequence of keys for an action. In our example, once readline has read this
line, typing a CTRL-T will cause the cursor to move to the end of the line.
The end-of-line in the previous example is a readline function. There are
over 60 functions that allow you to control everything from cursor motions
to changing text and command completion (for a complete list, see the bash
manual page). All of the emacs and vi editing mode commands that we
looked at in this chapter have associated functions. This allows you to
customize the default modes or make up completely new ones using your
own key sequences.
Besides the readline functions, you can also bind a macro to a key
sequence. A macro is simply a sequence of keystrokes inside single or
double quotes. Typing the key sequence causes the keys in the macro to be
entered as though you had typed them. For example, we could bind some
text to CTRL-T; "\C-t<">: <">Curiouser and curiouser!<">. Hitting
CTRL-T would cause the phrase Curiouser and curiouser! to appear on
the command line.

If you want to use single or double quotes in your macros or key sequence,
you can escape them by using a backslash (\). Table 2-18 lists the common
escape sequences.
Table 2-18. Escape sequences
Sequence Description
\C-
Control key prefix
\M-
Meta (Escape) key prefix
\e
The escape character
\\
The backslash character (\)
\<">
The double quote character (<">)
\'
The single quote character (')
readline also allows simple conditionals in the .inputrc. There are three
directives: $if, $else, and $endif. The conditional of the $if can be an
editing mode, a terminal type, or an application-specific condition.
To test for an editing mode, you can use the form mode= and test for either
vi or emacs. For instance, to set up readline so that setting CTRL-T will
take place only in emacs mode, you could put the following in your
.inputrc:
$if mode=emacs
"\C-t": "Curiouser and curiouser!"
$endif
Likewise, to test for a terminal type, you can use the form term=. You must
provide the full terminal name on the right-hand side of the test. This is
useful when you need a terminal-specific key binding. You may, for
instance, want to bind the function keys of a particular terminal type to key
sequences.
If you have other applications that use readline, you might like to keep your
bash-specific bindings separate. You can do this with the last of the
conditionals. Each application that uses readline sets its own variable,
which you can test for. To test for bash specifics, you could put $if bash
into your .inputrc.

readline variables
readline has its own set of variables that you can set from within your
.inputrc. Table 2-19 lists them.[10]
Table 2-19. readline variables
Variable
Description
bell-style
If set to none, readline never rings the bell (beeps). If set to visible, readline will
attempt to use a visible bell. If set to audible, it will attempt to ring the bell. The
default is audible.
comment-begin The string to insert when the readline insert-comment command is executed. The
default is a #.
completion-
query-items
Determines when the user is asked to see further completions if the number of
completions is greater than that given. The default is 100.
convert-meta
If set to On, converts characters with the eighth bit set to an ASCII key sequence
by stripping the eighth bit and prepending an escape character. The default is On.
disable-
completion
If set to On, inhibits word completion. Completion characters will be inserted into
the line as if they had been mapped to self-insert. The default is Off.
editing-mode
Sets the editing mode to vi or emacs.
enable-keypad
If set to On, readline tries to enable the keyboard's application keypad when it is
called. Some systems need this to enable the arrow keys. The default is Off.
expand-tilde
If set to On, tilde expansion is attempted when readline attempts word
completion. The default is Off.
horizontal-
scroll-mode
Set to On means that lines will scroll horizontally if you type beyond the right-
hand side of the screen. The default is Off, which wraps the line onto a new screen
line.
input-meta
If set to On, eight-bit input will be accepted. The default is Off. This is
synonymous with meta-flag.
keymap
Sets readline's current keymap for bindings. Acceptable names are emacs, emacs-
standard, emacs-meta, emacs-ctlx, vi, vi-move, vi-command and vi-insert. The
default is emacs. Note that the value of editing-mode also affects the keymap.
mark-
directories
If set to On, completed directory names have a slash appended.
mark-
modified-lines
If set to On, displays an asterisk at the start of history lines that have been
modified. The default is Off.

Variable
Description
meta-flag
If set to On, eight-bit input will be accepted. The default is Off.
output-meta
If set to On, displays characters with the eighth bit set directly. The default is Off.
show-all-if-
ambiguous
If set to On, words with more than one possible completion are listed instead of
ringing the bell. The default is Off.
visible-stats
If set to On, a character denoting a file's type as reported by the stat system call is
appended to the filename when listing possible completions. The default is Off.
To set any of the variables, you can use the set command in your .inputrc.
For example, to set vi-mode when you start up, you could place the line set
editing-mode vi in your .inputrc. Every time bash starts it would change to
vi-mode.
OceanofPDF.com

Key Bindings Using bind
If you want to try out key bindings or you want to see what the current
settings are, you can do it from the bash command line by using the bind
command. The binding syntax is the same as that of the .inputrc file, but
you have to surround each binding in quotes so that it is taken as one
argument.
To bind a string to CTRL-T, we could type bind `"\C-t<">: <">Curiouser
and curiouser!"'. This would bind the given string to CTRL-T just as in the
.inputrc, except that the binding will apply only to the current shell and will
cease once you log out.
bind also allows you to print out the bindings currently in effect by typing
bind -P.[11] If you do so, you'll see things like:
               abort can be found on "\C-g", "\C-x\C-g", "\e\C-g".
               accept-line can be found on "\C-j", "\C-m".
               alias-expand-line is not bound to any keys
               arrow-key-prefix is not bound to any keys
               backward-char can be found on "\C-b", "\eOD", "\e[D".
               ...
If you just want to see the names of the readline functions, you can use
bind -l.
You can also unbind a function by using bind -u along with the name of the
function; all keys for that function will then be unbound. Unbinding a key
sequence can be done with bind -r followed by the sequence.
bind -x is useful if you want to bind a shell command to a key sequence.
For example, bind -x `"\C-l":ls' binds CTRL-L to the ls command. Hitting
CTRL-L would then give a directory listing.
Another option you might find useful is -p. This prints out the bindings to
standard output in a format that can be re-read by bind, or used as a .inputrc
file. So, to create a complete .inputrc file that you can then edit, you could
type bind -p > .inputrc.
To read the file back in again you can use another option, -f. This option
takes a filename as its argument and reads the key bindings from that file.

You can also use it to update the key bindings if you've just modified your
.inputrc.
[10] The variables disable-completion, enable-keypad, input-meta, mark-
directories, and visible-stats are not available in versions of bash prior to
2.0.
[11] Versions of bash prior to 2.0 use -d instead of -p, and -v instead of -P.
Also, the -r, -V, -S, -s, -u, and the new -v and -x options are not available in
these older versions.
OceanofPDF.com

Keyboard Habits
In this chapter we have seen that bash provides command-line editing with
two modes: vi and emacs. You may be wondering why these two editors
were chosen. The primary reason is because vi and emacs are the most
widely used editors for UNIX. People who have used either editor will find
familiar editing facilities.
If you are not familiar with either of these editors, you should seriously
consider adopting emacs-mode keyboard habits. Because it is based on
control keys and doesn't require you to think in terms of a "command
mode" and "insert mode," you will find emacs-mode easier to assimilate.
Although the full emacs is an extremely powerful editor, its command
structure lends itself very well to small subsetting: there are several "mini-
emacs" editors floating around for UNIX, MS-DOS, and other systems.
The same cannot be said for vi, because its command structure is really
meant for use in a full-screen editor. vi is quite powerful too, in its way, but
its power becomes evident only when it is used for purposes similar to that
for which it was designed: editing source code in C and LISP. As mentioned
earlier, a vi user has the power to move mountains in few keystrokes—but
at the cost of being unable to do anything meaningful in very few
keystrokes. Unfortunately, the latter is most desired in a command
interpreter, especially nowadays when users are spending more time within
applications and less time working with the shell. In short, if you don't
already know vi, you will probably find its commands obscure and
confusing.
Both bash editing modes have quite a few commands; you will undoubtedly
develop keyboard habits that include just a few of them. If you use emacs-
mode and you aren't familiar with the full emacs, here is a subset that is
easy to learn yet enables you to do just about anything:
For cursor motion around a command line, stick to CTRL-A and
CTRL-E for beginning and end of line, and CTRL-F and CTRL-B for
moving around.

Delete using DEL (or whatever your "erase" key is) and CTRL-D; as
with CTRL-F and CTRL-B, hold down to repeat if necessary. Use
CTRL-K to erase the entire line.
Use CTRL-P and CTRL-N (or the up and down arrow keys) to move
through the command history.
Use CTRL-R to search for a command you need to run again.
Use TAB for filename completion.
After a few hours spent learning these keystrokes, you will wonder how you
ever got along without command-line editing.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3. Customizing Your Environment
An environment is a collection of concepts that express the things a
computer system or other set of tools does in terms designed to be
understandable and coherent, and a look and feel that is comfortable. For
example, your desk at work is an environment. Concepts involved in desk
work usually include memos, phone calls, letters, forms, etc. The tools on
or in your desk that you use to deal with these things include paper, staples,
envelopes, pens, a telephone, a calculator, etc. Every one of these has a set
of characteristics that express how you use it; such characteristics range
from location on your desk or in a drawer (for simple tools) to more
sophisticated things like which numbers the memory buttons on your phone
are set to. Taken together, these characteristics make up your desk's look
and feel.
You customize the look and feel of your desk environment by putting pens
where you can most easily reach them, programming your phone buttons,
etc. In general, the more customization you have done, the more tailored to
your personal needs—and therefore the more productive—your
environment is.
Similarly, UNIX shells present you with such concepts as files, directories,
and standard input and output, while UNIX itself gives you tools to work
with these, such as file manipulation commands, text editors, and print
queues. Your UNIX environment's look and feel is determined by your
keyboard and display, of course, but also by how you set up your
directories, where you put each kind of file, and what names you give to
files, directories, and commands. There are also more sophisticated ways of
customizing your shell environment.
This chapter will look at the four most important features that bash provides
for customizing your environment.
Special files
The files .bash_profile, .bash_logout, and .bashrc that are read by bash
when you log in and out or start a new shell.
Aliases

Synonyms for commands or command strings that you can define for
convenience.
Options
Controls for various aspects of your environment that you can turn on
and off.
Variables
Changeable values that are referred to by a name. The shell and other
programs can modify their behavior according to the values stored in
the variables.
Although these features are not the only ones available, they form the basis
for doing more advanced customization. They are also the features that are
common to the various shells available on UNIX. Later chapters will cover
more advanced shell features, such as the ability to program the shell.
OceanofPDF.com

The .bash_profile, .bash_logout, and .bashrc Files
Three files in your home directory have a special meaning to bash,
providing a way for you to set up your account environment automatically
when you log in and when you invoke another bash shell, and allowing you
to perform commands when you log out. These files may already exist in
your home directory, depending on how your system administrator has set
up your account. If they don't exist, your account is using only the default
system file /etc/profile. You can easily create your own bash files using
your favorite text editor. If you are unfamiliar with text editors available
under UNIX, we suggest that you familiarize yourself with one of the
better-known ones such as vi or emacs before proceeding further with the
techniques described in this chapter.
The most important bash file, .bash_profile, is read and the commands in it
executed by bash every time you log in to the system. If you examine your
.bash_profile you will probably see lines similar to:
PATH=/sbin:/usr/sbin:/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin
SHELL=/bin/bash
MANPATH=/usr/man:/usr/X11/man
EDITOR=/usr/bin/vi
    
PS1='\h:\w\$ '
PS2='> '
export EDITOR
These lines define the basic environment for your login account. For the
moment, it is probably best to leave these lines alone until you understand
what they do. When editing your .bash_profile, just add your new lines after
the existing ones.
Note that whatever you add to your .bash_profile won't take effect until the
file is re-read by logging out and then logging in again. Alternatively, you
can also use the source command.[1] For example:
source .bash_profile
source executes the commands in the specified file, in this case
.bash_profile, including any commands that you have added.

bash allows two synonyms for .bash_profile: .bash_login, derived from the
C shell's file named .login, and .profile, derived from the Bourne shell and
Korn shell files named .profile. Only one of these three is read when you
log in. If .bash_profile doesn't exist in your home directory, then bash will
look for .bash_login. If that doesn't exist it will look for .profile.
One advantage of bash's ability to look for either synonym is that you can
retain your .profile if you have been using the Bourne shell. If you need to
add bash-specific commands, you can put them in .bash_profile followed
by the command source .profile. When you log in, all the bash-specific
commands will be executed, and bash will source .profile, executing the
remaining commands. If you decide to switch to using the Bourne shell you
don't have to modify your existing files. A similar approach was intended
for .bash_login and the C shell .login, but due to differences in the basic
syntax of the shells, this is not a good idea.
.bash_profile is read and executed only by the login shell. If you start up a
new shell (a subshell) by typing bash on the command line, it will attempt
to read commands from the file .bashrc. This scheme allows you the
flexibility to separate startup commands needed at login time from those
you might need when you run a subshell. If you need to have the same
commands run regardless of whether it is a login shell or a subshell, you
can just use the source command from within .bash_profile to execute
.bashrc. If .bashrc doesn't exist then no commands are executed when you
start up a subshell.
The file .bash_logout is read and executed every time a login shell exits. It
is provided to round out the capabilities for customizing your environment.
If you wanted to execute some commands that remove temporary files from
your account or record how much time you have spent logged in to the
system then you would place the commands in .bash_logout. This file
doesn't have to exist in your account—if it isn't there when you log out,
then no extra commands are executed.
[1] You can also use the synonymous command dot (.).
OceanofPDF.com

Aliases
If you have used UNIX for any length of time you will have noticed that
there are many commands available and that some of them have cryptic
names. Sometimes the commands you use the most have a string of options
and arguments that need to be specified. Wouldn't it be nice if there was a
feature that let you rename the commands or allowed you to type in
something simple instead of half a dozen options? Fortunately, bash
provides such a feature: the alias.[2]
Aliases can be defined on the command line, in your .bash_profile, or in
your .bashrc, using this form:
alias name=command
This syntax specifies that name is an alias for command. Whenever you
type name as a command, bash will substitute command in its place when it
executes the line. Notice that there are no spaces on either side of the equal
sign (=); this is the required syntax.
There are a few basic ways to use an alias. The first, and simplest, is as a
more mnemonic name for an existing command. Many commonly used
UNIX commands have names that are poor mnemonics and are therefore
excellent candidates for aliasing, the classic example being:
alias search=grep
grep, the UNIX file-searching utility, was named as an acronym for
something like "Generalized Regular Expression Parser."[3] This acronym
may mean something to a computer scientist, but not to the office
administrator who has to find Fred in a list of phone numbers. If you have
to find Fred and you have the word search defined as an alias for grep, you
can type:
$ search Fred phonelist
Some people who aren't particularly good typists like to use aliases for
typographical errors they make often. For example:
alias emcas=emacs
alias mali=mail
alias gerp=grep

This can be handy, but we feel you're probably better off suffering with the
error message and getting the correct spelling under your fingers. Another
common way to use an alias is as a shorthand for a longer command string.
For example, you may have a directory to which you need to go often. It's
buried deep in your directory hierarchy, so you want to set up an alias that
will allow you to cd there without typing (or even remembering) the entire
pathname:
alias cdvoy='cd sipp/demo/animation/voyager'
Notice the quotes around the full cd command; these are necessary if the
string being aliased consists of more than one word.[4]
As another example, a useful option to the ls command is -F: it puts a slash
(/) after directory files and an asterisk (*) after executable files. Since
typing a dash followed by a capital letter is inconvenient, many people
define an alias like this:
alias lf='ls -F'
A few things about aliases are important to remember. First, bash makes a
textual substitution of the alias for that which it is aliasing; it may help to
imagine bash passing your command through a text editor or word
processor and issuing a "change" or "substitute" command before
interpreting and executing it. Any special characters (such as wildcards like
* and ?) that result when the alias is expanded are interpreted properly by
the shell. [5] For example, to make it easier to print all of the files in your
directory, you could define the alias:
alias printall='pr * | lpr'
Second, keep in mind that aliases are recursive, which means that it is
possible to alias an alias. A legitimate objection to the previous example is
that the alias, while mnemonic, is too long and doesn't save enough typing.
If we want to keep this alias but add a shorter abbreviation, we could
define:
alias pa=printall
With recursive aliasing available it would seem possible to create an infinite
loop:
alias ls='ls -l'
bash ensures that this loop cannot happen, because only the first word of
the replacement text is checked for further aliasing; if that word is identical
to the alias being expanded, it is not expanded a second time. The above

command will work as expected (typing ls produces a long list with
permissions, sizes, owners, etc.), while in more meaningless situations such
as:
alias listfile=ls
alias ls=listfile
the alias listfile is ignored.
Aliases can be used only for the beginning of a command string—albeit
with certain exceptions. In the cd example above, you might want to define
an alias for the directory name alone, not for the entire command. But if
you define:
alias anim=sipp/demo/animation/voyager
and then type cd anim, bash will probably print a message like anim: No
such file or directory.
An obscure feature of bash's alias facility—one not present in the analogous
C shell feature—provides a way around this problem. If the value of an
alias (the right side of the equal sign) ends in a blank, then bash tries to do
alias substitution on the next word on the command line. To make the value
of an alias end in a blank, you need to surround it with quotes.
Here is how you would use this capability to allow aliases for directory
names, at least for use with the cd command. Just define:
alias cd='cd '
This causes bash to search for an alias for the directory name argument to
cd, which in the previous example would enable it to expand the alias anim
correctly.
Another way to define a directory variable for use with the cd command is
to use the environment variable cdable_vars, discussed later in this chapter.
Finally, there are a few useful adjuncts to the basic alias command. If you
type alias name without an equal sign (=) and value, the shell will print the
alias's value or alias name not found if it is undefined. If you type alias
without any arguments, you get a list of all the aliases you have defined.
The command unalias name removes any alias definition for its argument.
Aliases are very handy for creating a comfortable environment, but they
have essentially been superseded by shell scripts and functions, which we
will look at in the next chapter. These give you everything aliases do plus

much more, so if you become proficient at them, you may find that you
don't need aliases anymore. However, aliases are ideal for novices who find
UNIX to be a rather forbidding place, full of terseness and devoid of good
mnemonics. Chapter 4 shows the order of precedence when, for example,
an alias and a function have the same name.
[2] C shell users should note that the bash alias feature does not support
arguments in alias expansions, as C shell aliases do. This functionality is
provided by functions, which we'll look at in Chapter 4.
[3] Another theory has it that grep stands for the command "g/re/p", in the
old ed text editor, which does essentially the same thing as grep.
[4] This contrasts with C shell aliases, in which the quotes aren't required.
[5] An important corollary: wildcards and other special characters cannot be
used in the names of aliases, i.e., on the left side of the equal sign.
OceanofPDF.com

Options
While aliases let you create convenient names for commands, they don't
really let you change the shell's behavior. Options are one way of doing this.
A shell option is a setting that is either "on" or "off." While several options
relate to arcane shell features that are of interest only to programmers, those
that we will cover here are of interest to all users.
The basic commands that relate to options are set -o optionname and set +o
optionname. You can change more than one option with the one set
command by preceding each optionname with a -o or +o. The use of plus
(+) and minus (-) signs is counterintuitive: the - turns the named option on,
while the + turns it off. The reason for this incongruity is that the dash (-) is
the conventional UNIX way of specifying options to a command, while the
use of + is an afterthought.
Most options also have one-letter abbreviations that can be used in lieu of
the set -o command; for example, set -o noglob can be abbreviated set -f.
These abbreviations are carryovers from the Bourne shell. Like several
other "extra" bash features, they exist to ensure upward compatibility;
otherwise, their use is not encouraged.
Table 3-1 lists the options that are useful to general UNIX users. All of
them are off by default except as noted.
Table 3-1. Basic shell options
Option
Description
emacs
Enters emacs editing mode (on by default)
ignoreeof Doesn't allow use of a single CTRL-D to log off; use the exit command to log off
immediately (this has the same effect as setting the shell variable IGNOREEOF=10)
noclobber Doesn't allow output redirection (>) to overwrite an existing file
noglob
Doesn't expand filename wildcards like * and ? (wildcard expansion is sometimes
called globbing)
nounset
Indicates an error when trying to use a variable that is undefined

Option
Description
vi
Enters vi editing mode
There are several other options (21 in all; Appendix B lists them). To check
the status of an option, just type set -o. bash will print a list of all options
along with their settings.
OceanofPDF.com

shopt
bash 2.0 introduced a new built-in for configuring shell behaviour, shopt.
This built-in is meant as a replacement for option configuration originally
done through environment variables and the set command. [6]
The shopt -o functionality is a duplication of parts of the set command and
is provided for completeness on the part of shopt, while retaining backward
compatibility by its continued inclusion in set.
The format for this command is shopt options option-names. Table 3-2 lists
shopt's options.
Table 3-2. Options to shopt
Option Meaning
-p
Displays a list of the settable options and their current values
-s
Sets each option name
-u
Unsets each option name
-q
Suppresses normal output; the return status indicates if a variable is set or unset
-o
Allows the values of the option names to be those defined for the -o option of the set
command
The default action is to unset (turn off) the named options. If no options and
arguments are given, or the -p option is used, shopt displays a list of the
settable options and the values that they currently have. If -s or -u is also
given, the list is confined to only those options that are set or unset,
respectively.
A list of the most useful option names is given in Table 3-3. A complete list
is given in Appendix B.
Table 3-3. shopt option names
Option
Meaning
cdable_vars If set, an argument to the cd built-in command that is not a directory is assumed to be
the name of a variable whose value is the directory to change to.

Option
Meaning
checkhash
If set, bash checks that a command found in the hash table exists before trying to
execute it. If a hashed command no longer exists, a normal path search is performed.
cmdhist
If set, bash attempts to save all lines of a multiple-line command in the same history
entry.
dotglob
If set, bash includes filenames beginning with a . (dot) in the results of pathname
expansion.
execfail
If set, a non-interactive shell will not exit if it cannot execute the file specified as an
argument to the exec command. An interactive shell does not exit if exec fails.
histappend
If set, the history list is appended to the file named by the value of the HISTFILE
variable when the shell exits, rather than overwriting the file.
lithist
If set, and the cmdhist option is enabled, multiline commands are saved to the history
with embedded newlines, rather than using semicolon separators where possible.
mailwarn
If set, and a file that bash is checking for mail has been accessed since the last time it
was checked, the message "The mail in mailfile has been read" is displayed.
We'll look at the use of the various options later in this chapter.
[6] Appendix B provides a complete list of shopt shell options and the
corresponding environment variables in earlier versions of the shell.
OceanofPDF.com

Shell Variables
There are several characteristics of your environment that you may want to
customize but that cannot be expressed as an on/off choice. Characteristics
of this type are specified in shell variables. Shell variables can specify
everything from your prompt string to how often the shell checks for new
mail.
Like an alias, a shell variable is a name that has a value associated with it.
bash keeps track of several built-in shell variables; shell programmers can
add their own. By convention, built-in variables should have names in all
capital letters. bash does, however, have two exceptions.[7] The syntax for
defining variables is somewhat similar to the syntax for aliases:
            varname=value
There must be no space on either side of the equal sign, and if the value is
more than one word, it must be surrounded by quotes. To use the value of a
variable in a command, precede its name by a dollar sign ($).
You can delete a variable with the command unset varname. Normally this
isn't useful, since all variables that don't exist are assumed to be null, i.e.,
equal to the empty string "". But if you use the set option nounset, which
causes the shell to indicate an error when it encounters an undefined
variable, then you may be interested in unset.
The easiest way to check a variable's value is to use the echo built-in
command. All echo does is print its arguments, but not until the shell has
evaluated them. This includes—among other things that will be discussed
later—taking the values of variables and expanding filename wildcards. So,
if the variable wonderland has the value alice, typing:
$ echo "$wonderland"
will cause the shell to simply print alice. If the variable is undefined, the
shell will print a blank line. A more verbose way to do this is:
$ echo "The value of \$
            varname 
            is \"$
            varname
            \"."

The first dollar sign and the inner double quotes are backslash-escaped (i.e.,
preceded with \ so the shell doesn't try to interpret them—see Chapter 1) so
they appear literally in the output, which for the above example would be:
The value of $wonderland is "alice".
OceanofPDF.com

Variables and Quoting
Notice that we used double quotes around variables (and strings containing
them) in these echo examples. In Chapter 1, we said that some special
characters inside double quotes are still interpreted, while none are
interpreted inside single quotes.
A special character that "survives" double quotes is the dollar sign—
meaning that variables are evaluated. It's possible to do without the double
quotes in some cases; for example, we could have written the above echo
command this way:
$ echo The value of \$
               varname 
               is \"$
               varname\".
But double quotes are more generally correct. Here's why. Suppose we did
this:
$ fred='Four spaces between these words.'
Then if we entered the command echo $fred, the result would be:
Four spaces between these words.
What happened to the extra spaces? Without the double quotes, the shell
splits the string into words after substituting the variable's value, as it
normally does when it processes command lines. The double quotes
circumvent this part of the process (by making the shell think that the whole
quoted string is a single word).
Therefore the command echo "$fred" prints this:
Four spaces between these    words.
The distinction between single and double quotes becomes particularly
important when we start dealing with variables that contain user or file
input later on.
Double quotes also allow other special characters to work, as we'll see in
Chapter 4, Chapter 6, and Chapter 7. But for now, we'll revise the "When in
doubt, use single quotes" rule in Chapter 1 by adding, "...unless a string
contains a variable, in which case you should use double quotes."

OceanofPDF.com

Built-In Variables
As with options, some built-in shell variables are meaningful to general
UNIX users, while others are arcana for hackers. We'll look at the more
generally useful ones here, and we'll save some of the more obscure ones
for later chapters. Again, Appendix B contains a complete list.
Editing mode variables
Several shell variables relate to the command-line editing modes that we
saw in the previous chapter. These are listed in Table 3-4.
Table 3-4. Editing mode variables
Variable
Meaning
HISTCMD
The history number of the current command.
HISTCONTROL
A list of patterns, separated by colons (:), which can have the following
values. ignorespace: lines beginning with a space are not entered into the
history list. ignoredups: lines matching the last history line are not entered.
erasedups: all previous lines matching the current line are removed from the
history list before the line is saved. ignoreboth: enables both ignorespace
and ignoredups. [8]
HISTIGNORE
A list of patterns, separated by colons (:), used to decide which command
lines to save in the history list. Patterns are considered to start at the
beginning of the command line and must fully specify the line, i.e., no
wildcard (*) is implicitly appended. The patterns are checked against the
line after HISTCONTROL is applied. An ampersand (&) matches the
previous line. An explicit & may be generated by escaping it with a
backslash.[9]
HISTFILE
Name of history file in which the command history is saved. The default is
~/.bash_history.
HISTFILESIZE
The maximum number of lines to store in the history file. The default is
500. When this variable is assigned a value, the history file is truncated, if
necessary, to the given number of lines.
HISTSIZE
The maximum number of commands to remember in the command history.
The default is 500.

Variable
Meaning
HISTTIMEFORMAT
If it is set and not null, its value is used as a format string for strftime(3) to
print the time stamp associated with each history entry displayed by the
history command. Time stamps are written to the history file so they may
be preserved across shell sessions.[10]
FCEDIT
Pathname of the editor to use with the fc command.
[8] history_control is synonymous with HISTCONTROL in versions of bash prior to 2.0. Versions
prior to 1.14 only define history_control. ignoreboth is not available in bash versions prior to
1.14. HISTCONTROL is a colon-separated list, and erasedups has been added in bash 3.0 and
later.
[9] This variable is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
[10] This variable is not available in versions of bash prior to 3.0.
In the previous chapter, we saw how bash numbers commands. To find out
the current command number in an interactive shell, you can use the
HISTCMD. Note that if you unset HISTCMD, it will lose its special
meaning, even if you subsequently set it again.
We also saw in the last chapter how bash keeps the history list in memory
and saves it to a file when you exit a shell session. The variables
HISTFILESIZE and HISTSIZE allow you to set the maximum number of
lines that the shell saves in the history file, and the maximum number of
lines to "remember" in the history list, i.e., the lines that it displays with the
history command.
Suppose you wanted to maintain a small history file in your home directory.
By setting HISTFILESIZE to 100, you immediately cause the history file
to allow a maximum of 100 lines. If it is already larger than the size you
specify, it will be truncated.
HISTSIZE works in the same way, but only on the history that the current
shell has in memory. When you exit an interactive shell, HISTSIZE will be
the maximum number of lines saved in your history file. If you have
already set HISTFILESIZE to be less than HISTSIZE, the saved list will
be truncated.
You can also cut down on the size of your history file and history list by use
of the HISTCONTROL variable. This is a colon-separated list of values. If

it includes ignorespace, any commands that you type that start with a space
won't appear in the history. Even more useful is the ignoredups option.
This discards consecutive entries from the history list that are duplicated.
Suppose you want to monitor the size of a file with ls as it is being created.
Normally, every time you type ls it will appear in your history. By setting
HISTCONTROL to ignoredups, only the first ls will appear in the history.
The variable HISTIGNORE allows you to specify a list of patterns which
the command line is checked against. If the command line matches one of
the patterns, it is not entered into the history list. You can also request that it
ignore duplicates by using the pattern &.
For example, suppose you didn't want any command starting with l, nor any
duplicates, to appear in the history. Setting HISTIGNORE to l*:& will do
just that. Just as with other pattern matching we have seen, the wildcard
after the l will match any command line starting with that letter.
Another useful variable is HISTTIMEFORMAT, which prepends a time
stamp to each history entry showing when the command was executed. If it
is unset or the value is null then no time stamp is written. If a format is
given then time stamps are inserted using the specified format as part of the
history and are shown with the history command.
The time stamp formats are shown in Table 3-5. Some of the results will be
displayed using the particular format for the underlying locale, e.g.,
weekday names will be translated into the language being used on the
system.
Table 3-5. Time stamp formats
Format Replaced by
%a
The locale's abbreviated weekday name
%A
The locale's full weekday name
%b
The locale's abbreviated month name
%B
The locale's full month name
%c
The locale's appropriate date and time representation
%C
The century number (the year divided by 100 and truncated to an integer) as a decimal
number [00-99]

Format Replaced by
%d
The day of the month as a decimal number [01-31]
%D
The date in American format; the same value as %m/%d/%y.
%e
The day of the month as a decimal number [1-31]; a single digit is preceded by a space
%h
The same as %b
%H
The hour (24-hour clock) as a decimal number [00-23]
%I
The hour (12-hour clock) as a decimal number [01-12]
%j
The day of the year as a decimal number [001-366]
%m
The month as a decimal number [01-12]
%M
The minute as a decimal number [00-59]
%n
A newline character
%p
The locale's equivalent of either a.m. or p.m
%r
The time in a.m. and p.m. notation; in the POSIX locale this is equivalent to %I:%M:%S
%p
%R
The time in 24-hour notation (%H:%M)
%S
The second as a decimal number [00-61]
%t
A tab character
%T
The time (%H:%M:%S)
%u
The weekday as a decimal number [1-7], with 1 representing Monday
%U
The week number of the year (Sunday as the first day of the week) as a decimal number
[00-53]
%V
The week number of the year (Monday as the first day of the week) as a decimal number
[01-53]; if the week containing 1 January has four or more days in the new year, then it is
considered week 1—otherwise, it is the last week of the previous year, and the next week
is week 1
%w
The weekday as a decimal number [0-6], with 0 representing Sunday
%W
The week number of the year (Monday as the first day of the week) as a decimal number
[00-53]; all days in a new year preceding the first Monday are considered to be in week 0
%x
The locale's appropriate date representation

Format Replaced by
%X
The locale's appropriate time representation
%y
The year without century as a decimal number [00-99]
%Y
The year with century as a decimal number
%Z
The timezone name or abbreviation, or by nothing if no timezone information exists
%%
%
If you wanted to have the date and time with each history entry, you could
put:
HISTTIMEFORMAT="%y/%m/%d %T "
then the output of the history command would look something like:
...
78 04/11/26 17:14:05 HISTTIMEFORMAT="%y/%m/%d %T "
79 04/11/26 17:14:08 ls -l
80 04/11/26 17:14:09 history
If the history has never had a date format set before then all of the entries
prior to setting the variable will get the time stamp of the time the variable
was set. If you set HISTTIMEFORMAT to null and then set it to a format,
the previous time stamps are retained and displayed in the new format.
Mail variables
Since the mail program is not running all the time, there is no way for it to
inform you when you get new mail; therefore the shell does this instead.[11]
The shell can't actually check for incoming mail, but it can look at your
mail file periodically and determine whether the file has been modified
since the last check. The variables listed in Table 3-6 let you control how
this works.
Table 3-6. Mail variables
Variable
Meaning
MAIL
Name of file to check for incoming mail
MAILCHECK How often, in seconds, to check for new mail (default 60 seconds)

Variable
Meaning
MAILPATH
List of filenames, separated by colons (:), to check for incoming mail
Under the simplest scenario, you use the standard UNIX mail program, and
your mail file is /usr/mail/yourname or something similar. In this case, you
would just set the variable MAIL to this filename if you want your mail
checked:
MAIL=/usr/mail/yourname
If your system administrator hasn't already done it for you, put a line like
this in your .bash_profile.
However, some people use nonstandard mailers that use multiple mail files;
MAILPATH was designed to accommodate this. bash will use the value of
MAIL as the name of the file to check, unless MAILPATH is set; in which
case, the shell will check each file in the MAILPATH list for new mail.
You can use this mechanism to have the shell print a different message for
each mail file: for each mail filename in MAILPATH, append a question
mark followed by the message you want printed.
For example, let's say you have a mail system that automatically sorts your
mail into files according to the username of the sender. You have mail files
called /usr/mail/you/martin, /usr/mail/you/geoffm, /usr/mail/you/paulr, etc.
You define your MAILPATH as follows:
MAILPATH=/usr/mail/you/martin:/usr/mail/you/geoffm:\
/usr/mail/you/paulr
If you get mail from Martin Lee, the file /usr/mail/you/martin will change.
bash will notice the change within one minute and print the message:
You have new mail in /usr/mail/you/martin
If you are in the middle of running a command, the shell will wait until the
command finishes (or is suspended) to print the message. To customize this
further, you could define MAILPATH to be:
MAILPATH="\
/usr/mail/you/martin?You have mail from Martin.:\
/usr/mail/you/geoffm?Mail from Geoff has arrived.:\
/usr/mail/you/paulr?There is new mail from Paul."
The backslashes at the end of each line allow you to continue your
command on the next line. But be careful: you can't indent subsequent lines.
Now, if you get mail from Martin, the shell will print:

You have mail from Martin.
You can also use the variable $_ in the message to print the name of the
current mail file. For example:
MAILPATH='/usr/mail/you?You have some new mail in $_'
When new mail arrives, this will print the line:
You have some new mail in /usr/mail/you
The ability to receive notification of mail can be switched on and off by
using the mailwarn option to the shopt command.
Prompting variables
If you have seen enough experienced UNIX users at work, you may already
have realized that the shell's prompt is not engraved in stone. Many of these
users have all kinds of things encoded in their prompts. It is possible to put
useful information into the prompt, including the date and the current
directory. We'll give you some of the information you need to modify your
own here; the rest will come in the next chapter.
Actually , bash uses four prompt strings. They are stored in the variables
PS1, PS2, PS3, and PS4. The first of these is called the primary prompt
string; it is your usual shell prompt, and its default value is "\s-\v\$ ".[12]
Many people like to set their primary prompt string to something containing
their login name. Here is one way to do this:
PS1="\u--> "
The \u tells bash to insert the name of the current user into the prompt
string. If your user name is alice, your prompt string will be "alice—>". If
you are a C shell user and, like many such people, are used to having a
history number in your prompt string, bash can do this similarly to the C
shell: if the sequence \! is used in the prompt string, it will substitute the
history number. Thus, if you define your prompt string to be:
PS1="\u \!--> "
then your prompts will be like alice 1—>, alice 2—>, and so on.
But perhaps the most useful way to set up your prompt string is so that it
always contains your current directory. This way, you needn't type pwd to
remember where you are. Here's how:
PS1="\w--> "

Table 3-7 lists the prompt customizations that are available.[13]
Table 3-7. Prompt string customizations
Command Meaning
\a
The ASCII bell character (007)
\A
The current time in 24-hour HH:MM format
\d
The date in "Weekday Month Day" format
\D
{format}
The format is passed to strftime(3) and the result is inserted into the prompt string; an
empty format results in a locale-specific time representation; the braces are required
\e
The ASCII escape character (033)
\H
The hostname
\h
The hostname up to the first "."
\j
The number of jobs currently managed by the shell
\l
The basename of the shell's terminal device name
\n
A carriage return and line feed
\r
A carriage return
\s
The name of the shell
\T
The current time in 12-hour HH:MM:SS format
\t
The current time in HH:MM:SS format
\@
The current time in 12-hour a.m./p.m. format
\u
The username of the current user
\v
The version of bash (e.g., 2.00)
\V
The release of bash; the version and patchlevel (e.g., 2.00.0)
\w
The current working directory
\W
The basename of the current working directory
\#
The command number of the current command
\!
The history number of the current command

Command Meaning
\$
If the effective UID is 0, print a #, otherwise print a $
\nnn
Character code in octal
\\
Print a backslash
\[
Begin a sequence of non-printing characters, such as terminal control sequences
\]
End a sequence of non-printing characters
PS2 is called the secondary prompt string; its default value is >. It is used
when you type an incomplete line and hit RETURN, as an indication that
you must finish your command. For example, assume that you start a
quoted string but don't close the quote. Then if you hit RETURN, the shell
will print > and wait for you to finish the string:
$ echo "This is a long line, 
                  # PS1 for the command
> which is terminated down here" 
                  # PS2 for the continuation
                  $                                  
                  # PS1 for the next command
PS3 and PS4 relate to shell programming and debugging. They will be
explained in Chapter 5, and Chapter 9.
Command search path
Another important variable is PATH, which helps the shell find the
commands you enter.
As you probably know, every command you use is actually a file that
contains code for your machine to run.[14] These files are called executable
files or just executables for short. They are stored in various directories.
Some directories, like /bin or /usr/bin, are standard on all UNIX systems;
some depend on the particular version of UNIX you are using; some are
unique to your machine; if you are a programmer, some may even be your
own. In any case, there is no reason why you should have to know where a
command's executable file is in order to run it.

That is where PATH comes in. Its value is a list of directories that the shell
searches every time you enter a command;[15] the directory names are
separated by colons (:), just like the files in MAILPATH.
For example, if you type echo $PATH, you will see something like this:
/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/X386/bin
Why should you care about your path? There are two main reasons. First,
once you have read the later chapters of this book and you try writing your
own shell programs, you will want to test them and eventually set aside a
directory for them. Second, your system may be set up so that certain
restricted commands' executable files are kept in directories that are not
listed in PATH. For example, there may be a directory /usr/games in which
there are executables that are verboten during regular working hours.
Therefore you may want to add directories to your PATH. Let's say you
have created a bin directory under your login directory, which is /home/you,
for your own shell scripts and programs. To add this directory to your
PATH so that it is there every time you log in, put this line in your
.bash_profile:
PATH=$PATH":/home/you/bin"
This line sets PATH to whatever it was before, followed immediately by a
colon and /home/you/bin.
This is the safe way of doing it. When you enter a command, the shell
searches directories in the order they appear in PATH until it finds an
executable file. Therefore, if you have a shell script or program whose name
is the same as an existing command, the shell will use the existing
command—unless you type in the command's full pathname to make it
clear. For example, if you have created your own version of the more
command in the above directory and your PATH is set up as in the last
example, you will need to type /home/you/bin/more (or just ~/bin/more)
to get your version.
The more reckless way of resetting your path is to put your own directory
before the other directories:
PATH="/home/you/bin:"$PATH
This is unsafe because you are trusting that your own version of the more
command works properly. But it is also risky for a more important reason:
system security. If your PATH is set up in this way, you leave open a "hole"

that is well known to computer crackers and mischief makers: they can
install "Trojan horses" and do other things to steal files or do damage. (See
Chapter 10 for more details.) Therefore, unless you have complete control
of (and confidence in) everyone who uses your system, use the first of the
two methods of adding your own command directory.
If you need to know which directory a command comes from, you need not
look at directories in your PATH until you find it. The shell built-in
command type prints the full pathname of the command you give it as
argument, or just the command's name and its type if it's a built-in
command itself (like cd), an alias, or a function (as we'll see in Chapter 4).
Command hashing
You may be thinking that having to go and find a command in a large list of
possible places would take a long time, and you'd be right. To speed things
up, bash uses what is known as a hash table.
Every time the shell goes and finds a command in the search path, it enters
it in the hash table. If you then use the command again, bash first checks
the hash table to see if the command is listed. If it is, it uses the path given
in the table and executes the command; otherwise, it just has to go and look
for the command in the search path.
You can see what is currently in the hash table with the command hash:
$ hash
hits    command
   2    /bin/cat
   1    /usr/bin/stat
   2    /usr/bin/less
   1    /usr/bin/man
   2    /usr/bin/apropos
   2    /bin/more
   1    /bin/ln
   3    /bin/ls
   1    /bin/ps
   2    /bin/vi
This not only shows the hashed commands, but how many times they have
been executed (the hits) during the current login session.

Supplying a command name to hash forces the shell to look up the
command in the search path and enter it in the hash table. You can also
make bash "forget" what is in the hash table by using hash -r to remove
everything in the table or hash -d name to remove the specified name.[16]
Another option, -p, allows you to enter a command into the hash table, even
if the command doesn't exist.[17]
Command hashing can be turned on and off with the hashall option to set.
In general use, there shouldn't be any need to turn it off.
Don't be too concerned about the details of hashing. The command hashing
and lookup is all done by bash without you knowing it's taking place.
Directory search path and variables
CDPATH is a variable whose value, like that of PATH, is a list of
directories separated by colons. Its purpose is to augment the functionality
of the cd built-in command.
By default, CDPATH isn't set (meaning that it is null), and when you type
cd dirname, the shell will look in the current directory for a subdirectory
that is called dirname.[18] If you set CDPATH, you give the shell a list of
places to look for dirname; the list may or may not include the current
directory.
Here is an example. Consider the alias for the long cd command from
earlier in this chapter:
alias cdvoy='cd sipp/demo/animation/voyager'
Now suppose there were a few directories under this directory to which you
need to go often; they are called src, bin, and doc. You define your
CDPATH like this:
CDPATH=:~/sipp/demo/animation/voyager
In other words, you define your CDPATH to be the empty string (meaning
the current directory) followed by ~/sipp/demo/animation/voyager.
With this setup, if you type cd doc, then the shell will look in the current
directory for a (sub)directory called doc. Assuming that it doesn't find one,

it looks in the directory ~/sipp/demo/animation/voyager. The shell finds the
doc directory there, so you go directly there.
If you often find yourself going to a specific group of directories as you
work on a particular project, you can use CDPATH to get there quickly.
Note that this feature will only be useful if you update it whenever your
work habits change.
bash provides another shorthand mechanism for referring to directories; if
you set the shell option cdable_vars using shopt,[19] any argument supplied
to the cd command that is not a directory is assumed to be a variable.
We might define the variable anim to be ~/sipp/demo/animation/voyager. If
we set cdable_vars and then type:
cd anim
the current directory will become ~/sipp/demo/animation/voyager.
Miscellaneous variables
We have covered the shell variables that are important from the standpoint
of customization. There are also several that serve as status indicators and
for various other miscellaneous purposes. Their meanings are relatively
straightforward; the more basic ones are summarized in Table 3-8.
Table 3-8. Status variables
Variable
Meaning
HOME
Name of your home (login) directory
SECONDS
Number of seconds since the shell was invoked
BASH
Pathname of this instance of the shell you are running
BASH_VERSION
The version number of the shell you are running
BASH_VERSINFO An array of version information for the shell you are running
PWD
Current directory
OLDPWD
Previous directory before the last cd command

The shell sets the values of these variables, except HOME (which is set by
the login process: login, rshd, etc.). The first five are set at login time, the
last two whenever you change directories. Although you can also set their
values, just like any other variables, it is difficult to imagine any situation
where you would want to. In the case of SECONDS, if you set it to a new
value it will start counting from the value you give it, but if you unset
SECONDS it will lose its special meaning, even if you subsequently set it
again.
[7] Versions prior to 2.0 have many more lowercase built-in variables. Most
of these are now obsolete, the functionality having been moved to the shopt
command.
[11] BSD UNIX users should note that the biff command on those systems
does a better job of informing you about new mail; while bash only prints
"you have new mail" messages right before it prints command prompts, biff
can do so at any time.
[12] In versions of bash prior to 2.0, the default is "bash\$ ".
[13] \a, \e, \H, \T, \@, \v, and \V are not available in versions prior to 2.0. \D
was introduced in bash 2.05b.
[14] Unless it's a built-in command (one of those shown in boldface, like cd
and echo), in which case the code is simply part of the executable file for
the entire shell.
[15] Unless the command name contains a slash (/), in which case the search
does not take place.
[16] The -d option is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.05b.
[17] The -p option is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
[18] This search is disabled when dirname starts with a slash. It is also
disabled when dirname starts with ./ or ../.
[19] In versions of bash prior to 2.0, cdable_vars is a shell variable that you
can set and unset.

OceanofPDF.com

Customization and Subprocesses
Some of the variables discussed above are used by commands you may run
—as opposed to the shell itself—so that they can determine certain aspects
of your environment. The majority, however, are not even known outside
the shell.
This dichotomy begs an important question: which shell "things" are known
outside the shell, and which are only internal? This question is at the heart
of many misunderstandings about the shell and shell programming. Before
we answer, we'll ask it again in a more precise way: which shell "things" are
known to subprocesses? Remember that whenever you enter a command,
you are telling the shell to run that command in a subprocess; furthermore,
some complex programs may start their own subprocesses.
Now for the answer, which (like many UNIX concepts) is unfortunately not
as simple as you might like. A few things are known to subprocesses, but
the reverse is not true: subprocesses can never make these things known to
the processes that created them.
Which things are known depends on whether the subprocess in question is a
bash program (see Chapter 4) or an interactive shell. If the subprocess is a
bash program, then it's possible to propagate nearly every type of thing
we've seen in this chapter—options and variables—plus a few we'll see
later.
OceanofPDF.com

Environment Variables
By default, only one kind of thing is known to all kinds of subprocesses: a
special class of shell variables called environment variables. Some of the
built-in variables we have seen are actually environment variables: HOME,
MAIL, PATH, and PWD.
It should be clear why these and other variables need to be known by
subprocesses. For example, text editors like vi and emacs need to know
what kind of terminal you are using; the environment variable TERM is
their way of determining this. As another example, most UNIX mail
programs allow you to edit a message with your favorite text editor. How
does mail know which editor to use? The value of EDITOR (or sometimes
VISUAL).
Any variable can become an environment variable. First it must be defined
as usual; then it must be exported with the command:[20]
export varnames
(varnames can be a list of variable names separated by blanks). You can
combine variable assignment and the export into one statement:
export wonderland=alice
It is also possible to define variables to be in the environment of a particular
subprocess (command) only, by preceding the command with the variable
assignment, like this:
               varname=value command
You can put as many assignments before the command as you want.[21] For
example, assume that you're using the emacs editor. You are having
problems getting it to work with your terminal, so you're experimenting
with different values of TERM. You can do this most easily by entering
commands that look like:
TERM=trythisone 
               emacs 
               filename
emacs will have trythisone defined as its value of TERM, yet the
environment variable in your shell will keep whatever value (if any) it had

before. This syntax is surprisingly useful, but not very widely used; we
won't see it much throughout the remainder of this book.
Nevertheless, environment variables are important. Most .bash_profile files
include definitions of environment variables; the sample built-in
.bash_profile earlier in this chapter contained six such definitions:
PATH=/sbin:/usr/sbin:/bin:/usr/bin:/usr/local/bin
SHELL=/bin/bash
MANPATH=/usr/man:/usr/X11/man
EDITOR=/usr/bin/vi
PS1='\h:\w\$ '
PS2='> '
export EDITOR
You can find out which variables are environment variables and what their
values are by typing export without arguments or by using the -p option to
the command.
Some environment variable names have been used by so many applications
that they have become standard across many shell environments. These
variables are not built into bash, although some shells, such as the Korn
shell, have them as built-ins. Table 3-9 lists the ones you are most likely to
come across.
Table 3-9. Standard variables
Variable
Meaning
COLUMNS
The number of columns your display has[22]
EDITOR
Pathname of your text editor
LINES
The number of lines your display has
SHELL
Pathname of the shell you are running
TERM
The type of terminal that you are using
[22] Note that bash will set COLUMNS and LINES during certain situations, such as when the
window the shell is in changes in size.
You may well find that some of these already exist in your own
environment, most likely set from the system /etc/profile file (see Chapter
10). You can define them yourself in your .bash_profile and export them, as
we did earlier.

Terminal types
The variable TERM is vitally important for any program that uses your
entire screen or window, like a text editor. Such programs include all screen
editors (such as vi and emacs), more, and countless third-party applications.
Because users are spending more and more time within programs, and less
and less using the shell itself, it is extremely important that your TERM is
set correctly. It's really your system administrator's job to help you do this
(or to do it for you), but in case you need to do it yourself, here are a few
guidelines.
The value of TERM must be a short character string with lowercase letters
that appears as a filename in the terminfo database.[23] This database is a
two-tiered directory of files under the root directory /usr/lib/terminfo. This
directory contains subdirectories with single-character names; these in turn
contain files of terminal information for all terminals whose names begin
with that character. Each file describes how to tell the terminal in question
to do certain common things like position the cursor on the screen, go into
reverse video, scroll, insert text, and so on. The descriptions are in binary
form (i.e., not readable by humans).
Names of terminal description files are the same as that of the terminal
being described; sometimes an abbreviation is used. For example, the DEC
VT100 has a description in the file /usr/lib/terminfo/v/vt100. An xterm
terminal window under the X Window System has a description in
/usr/lib/terminfo/x/xterm.
Sometimes your UNIX software will set up TERM incorrectly; this usually
happens for X terminals and PC-based UNIX systems. Therefore, you
should check the value of TERM by typing echo $TERM before going any
further. If you find that your UNIX system isn't setting the right value for
you (especially likely if your terminal is of a different make from that of
your computer), you need to find the appropriate value of TERM yourself.
The best way to find the TERM value—if you can't find a local guru to do
it for you—is to guess the terminfo name and search for a file of that name
under /usr/lib/terminfo by using ls. For example, if your terminal is a
Hewlett-Packard 70092, you could try:

$ cd /usr/lib/terminfo
$ ls 7/7*
If you are successful, you will see something like this:
70092   70092A  70092a
In this case, the three names are likely to be synonyms for (links to) the
same terminal description, so you could use any one as a value of TERM.
In other words, you could put any of these three lines in your .bash_profile:
TERM=70092
TERM=70092A
TERM=70092a
If you aren't successful, ls will print an error message, and you will have to
make another guess and try again. If you find that terminfo contains nothing
that resembles your terminal, all is not lost. Consult your terminal's manual
to see if the terminal can emulate a more popular model; nowadays the odds
for this are excellent.
Conversely, terminfo may have several entries that relate to your terminal,
for submodels, special modes, etc. If you have a choice of which entry to
use as your value of TERM, we suggest you test each one out with your
text editor or any other screen-oriented programs you use and see which
one works best.
The process is much simpler if you are using a windowing system, in which
your "terminals" are logical portions of the screen rather than physical
devices. In this case, operating system-dependent software was written to
control your terminal window(s), so the odds are very good that if it knows
how to handle window resizing and complex cursor motion, then it is
capable of dealing with simple things like TERM. The X Window System,
for example, automatically sets xterm as its value for TERM in an xterm
terminal window.
Other common variables
Some programs, such as mail, need to know what type of editor you would
like to use. In most cases they will default to a common editor like ed
unless you set the EDITOR variable to the path of your favorite editor and
export it in your .bash_profile.

Some programs run shells as subprocesses within themselves (e.g., many
mail programs and the emacs editor's shell mode); by convention they use
the SHELL variable to determine which shell to use. SHELL is usually set
by the process that invokes the login shell; usually login or something like
rshd if you are logged in remotely. bash sets it only if it hasn't already been
set.
You may have noticed that the value of SHELL looks the same as BASH.
These two variables serve slightly different purposes. BASH is set to the
pathname of the current shell, whether it is an interactive shell or not.
SHELL, on the other hand, is set to the name of your login shell, which
may be a completely different shell.
COLUMNS and LINES are used by screen-oriented editors like vi. In most
cases a default is used if they are undefined, but if you are having display
problems with screen-oriented applications then you should check these
variables to see if they are correct.
OceanofPDF.com

The Environment File
Although environment variables will always be known to subprocesses, the
shell must be explicitly told which other variables, options, aliases, and so
on, are to be communicated to subprocesses. The way to do this is to put all
such definitions into the environment file. bash's default environment file is
the .bashrc file that we touched on briefly at the beginning of this chapter.
Remember, if you take your definitions out of .bash_profile and put them in
.bashrc, you will have to have the line source .bashrc at the end of your
.bash_profile so that the definitions become available to the login shell.
The idea of the environment file comes from the C shell's .cshrc file. This is
reflected in the choice of the name .bashrc. The rc suffix for initialization
files is practically universal throughout the UNIX world.[24]
As a general rule, you should put as few definitions as possible in
.bash_profile and as many as possible in your environment file. Because
definitions add to rather than take away from an environment, there is little
chance that they will cause something in a subprocess not to work properly.
(An exception might be name clashes if you go overboard with aliases.)
The only things that really need to be in .bash_profile are environment
variables and their exports and commands that aren't definitions but actually
run or produce output when you log in. Option and alias definitions should
go into the environment file. In fact, there are many bash users who have
tiny .bash_profile files, e.g.:
stty stop ^S intr ^C erase ^?
date
source .bashrc
Although this is a small .bash_profile, this user's environment file could be
huge.
[20] Unless automatic exporting has been turned on by set -a or set -o
allexport, in which case all variables that are assigned to will be exported.

[21] There is an obscure option, set -k, that lets you put this type of
environment variable definition anywhere on the command line, not just at
the beginning.
[23] Note that most modern UNIX systems now use a database rather than a
flat file for the terminal descriptions.
[24] According to the folklore, it stands for "run commands" and has its
origins in old DEC operating systems.
OceanofPDF.com

Customization Hints
You should feel free to try any of the techniques presented in this chapter.
The best strategy is to test something out by typing it into the shell during
your login session; then if you decide you want to make it a permanent part
of your environment, add it to your .bash_profile.
A nice, painless way to add to your .bash_profile without going into a text
editor makes use of the echo command and one of bash's editing modes. If
you type a customization command in and later decide to add it to your
.bash_profile, you can recall it via CTRL-P or CTRL-R (in emacs-mode) or
j, -, or ? (vi-mode). Let's say the line is:
PS1="\u \!--> "
After you recall it, edit the line so that it is preceded by an echo command,
surrounded by single quotes, and followed by an I/O redirector that (as you
will see in Chapter 7) appends the output to ~/.bash_profile:
$ echo 'PS1="\u \!--> " ' >> ~/.bash_profile
Remember that the single quotes are important because they prevent the
shell from trying to interpret things like dollar signs, double quotes, and
exclamation points. Also make sure that you use a double right-caret (>>).
A single one will overwrite the file rather than appending to it.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4. Basic Shell Programming
If you have become familiar with the customization techniques we
presented in the previous chapter, you have probably run into various
modifications to your environment that you want to make but can't—yet.
Shell programming makes these possible.
bash has some of the most advanced programming capabilities of any
command interpreter of its type. Although its syntax is nowhere near as
elegant or consistent as that of most conventional programming languages,
its power and flexibility are comparable. In fact, bash can be used as a
complete environment for writing software prototypes.
Some aspects of bash programming are really extensions of the
customization techniques we have already seen, while others resemble
traditional programming language features. We have structured this chapter
so that if you aren't a programmer, you can read this chapter and do quite a
bit more than you could with the information in the previous chapter.
Experience with a conventional programming language like Pascal or C is
helpful (though not strictly necessary) for subsequent chapters. Throughout
the rest of the book, we will encounter occasional programming problems,
called tasks, whose solutions make use of the concepts we cover.
OceanofPDF.com

Shell Scripts and Functions
A script (a file that contains shell commands) is a shell program. Your
.bash_profile and environment files, discussed in the previous chapter, are
shell scripts.
You can create a script using the text editor of your choice. Once you have
created one, there are two ways to run it. One, which we have already
covered, is to type source scriptname. This causes the commands in the
script to be read and run as if you typed them in.
The second way to run a script is simply to type its name and hit RETURN,
just as if you were invoking a built-in command. This, of course, is the
more convenient way. This method makes the script look just like any other
UNIX command, and in fact several "regular" commands are implemented
as shell scripts (i.e., not as programs originally written in C or some other
language), including spell, man on some systems, and various commands
for system administrators. The resulting lack of distinction between "user
command files" and "built-in commands" is one factor in UNIX's
extensibility and, hence, its favored status among programmers.
You can run a script by typing its name only if the directory where the script
is located is in your command search path, or . (the current directory) is part
of your command search path, i.e., the script's directory path (as discussed
in Chapter 3). If these aren't in your path, you must type ./scriptname,
which is really the same thing as typing the script's absolute pathname (see
Chapter 1).
Before you can invoke the shell script by name, you must also give it
"execute" permission. If you are familiar with the UNIX filesystem, you
know that files have three types of permissions (read, write, and execute)
and that those permissions apply to three categories of user (the file's
owner, a group of users, and everyone else). Normally, when you create a
file with a text editor, the file is set up with read and write permission for
you and read-only permission for everyone else.

Therefore you must give your script execute permission explicitly, by using
the chmod command. The simplest way to do this is to type:
            $ chmod +x 
            scriptname
Your text editor will preserve this permission if you make subsequent
changes to your script. If you don't add execute permission to the script and
you try to invoke it, the shell will print the message:
            scriptname: Permission denied
But there is a more important difference between the two ways of running
shell scripts. While using source causes the commands in the script to be
run as if they were part of your login session, the "just the name" method
causes the shell to do a series of things. First, it runs another copy of the
shell as a subprocess; this is called a subshell. The subshell then takes
commands from the script, runs them, and terminates, handing control back
to the parent shell.
Figure 4-1 shows how the shell executes scripts. Assume you have a simple
shell script called alice that contains the commands hatter and gryphon. In
.a, typing source alice causes the two commands to run in the same shell,
just as if you had typed them in by hand. .b shows what happens when you
type just alice: the commands run in the subshell while the parent shell
waits for the subshell to finish.
You may find it interesting to compare this with the situation in .c, which
shows what happens when you type alice &. As you will recall from
Chapter 1, the & makes the command run in the background, which is
really just another term for "subprocess." It turns out that the only
significant difference between .c and .b is that you have control of your
terminal or workstation while the command runs—you need not wait until it
finishes before you can enter further commands.

Figure 4-1. Ways to run a shell script
There are many ramifications to using subshells. An important one is that
the exported environment variables that we saw in the last chapter (e.g.,
TERM, EDITOR, PWD) are known in subshells, whereas other shell
variables (such as any that you define in your .bash_profile without an
export statement) are not.
Other issues involving subshells are too complex to go into now; see
Chapter 7 and Chapter 8 for more details about subshell I/O and process
characteristics, respectively. For now, just bear in mind that a script
normally runs in a subshell.
OceanofPDF.com

Functions
bash's function feature is an expanded version of a similar facility in the
System V Bourne shell and a few other shells. A function is sort of a script-
within-a-script; you use it to define some shell code by name and store it in
the shell's memory, to be invoked and run later.
Functions improve the shell's programmability significantly, for two main
reasons. First, when you invoke a function, it is already in the shell's
memory; therefore a function runs faster. Modern computers have plenty of
memory, so there is no need to worry about the amount of space a typical
function takes up. For this reason, most people define as many commonly
used functions as possible rather than keep lots of scripts around.
The other advantage of functions is that they are ideal for organizing long
shell scripts into modular "chunks" of code that are easier to develop and
maintain. If you aren't a programmer, ask one what life would be like
without functions ( also called procedures or subroutines in other
languages) and you'll probably get an earful.
To define a function, you can use either one of two forms:
function functname
               {
               shell commands
               }
or:
               functname 
               ( )
{
    shell commands
               }
There is no functional difference between the two. We will use both forms
in this book. You can also delete a function definition with the command
unset -f functname.
When you define a function, you tell the shell to store its name and
definition (i.e., the shell commands it contains) in memory. If you want to
run the function later, just type in its name followed by any arguments, as if
it were a shell script.

You can find out what functions are defined in your login session by typing
declare -f. The shell will print not just the names but the definitions of all
functions, in alphabetical order by function name. Since this may result in
long output, you might want to pipe the output through more or redirect it to
a file for examination with a text editor. If you just want to see the names of
the functions, you can use declare -F.[1] We will look at declare in more
detail in Chapter 6.
Apart from the advantages, there are two important differences between
functions and scripts. First, functions do not run in separate processes, as
scripts do when you invoke them by name; the "semantics" of running a
function are more like those of your .bash_profile when you log in or any
script when invoked with the source command. Second, if a function has
the same name as a script or executable program, the function takes
precedence.
This is a good time to show the order of precedence for the various sources
of commands when you type a command to the shell:
1. Aliases
2. Keywords such as function and several others, like if and for, which
we will see in Chapter 5
3. Functions
4. Built-ins like cd and type
5. Scripts and executable programs, for which the shell searches in the
directories listed in the PATH environment variable
Thus, an alias takes precedence over a function or a script with the same
name. You can, however, change the order of precedence by using the built-
ins command, builtin, and enable. This allows you to define functions,
aliases, and script files with the same names, and select which one you want
to execute. We'll examine this process in more detail in the section on
command-line processing in Chapter 7.
If you need to know the exact source of a command, there are options to the
type built-in command that we saw in Chapter 3. type by itself will print
how bash would interpret the command, based on the search locations listed
above. If you supply more than one argument to type, it will print the
information for each command in turn. If you had a shell script, a function,

and an alias all called dodo, type would tell you that dodo, as an alias,
would be used if you typed dodo.
type has several options that allow you to find specific details of a
command. If you want to find out all of the definitions for dodo you can use
type -a. This will produce output similar to the following:
$ type -all dodo
dodo is aliased to `echo "Everybody has won, and all must have prizes"'
dodo is a function
dodo ( )
{
    echo "Everybody has won, and all must have prizes"
}
dodo is ./dodo
It is also possible to restrict the search to commands that are executable
files or shell scripts by using the -p option. If the command as typed to bash
executes a file or shell script, the path name of the file is returned;
otherwise, nothing is printed.
The -P option forces type to look for executable files or shell scripts even if
the result of -t would not return file.
A further option, -f, suppresses shell function lookup, i.e., only keywords,
files and aliases will be returned.[2]
The default output from type is verbose; it will give you the full definition
for an alias or function. By using the -t option, you can restrict this to a
single word descriptor: alias, keyword, function, builtin, or file. For
example:
$ type -t bash
file
$ type -t if
keyword
The -t option can also be used with all other options.
We will refer mainly to scripts throughout the remainder of this book, but
unless we note otherwise, you should assume that whatever we say applies
equally to functions.
[1] The -F option is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.

[2] The options -f and -P are not available in versions of bash prior to 2.05b.
OceanofPDF.com

Shell Variables
bash derives much of its programming functionality from shell variables.
We've already seen the basics of variables. To recap briefly: they are named
places to store data, usually in the form of character strings, and their values
can be obtained by preceding their names with dollar signs ($). Certain
variables, called environment variables, are conventionally named in all
capital letters, and their values are made known (with the export statement)
to subprocesses.
If you are a programmer, you already know that just about every major
programming language uses variables in some way; in fact, an important
way of characterizing differences between languages is comparing their
facilities for variables.
The chief difference between bash's variable schema and those of
conventional languages is that bash's places heavy emphasis on character
strings. (Thus it has more in common with a special-purpose language like
SNOBOL than a general-purpose one like Pascal.) This is also true of the
Bourne shell and the C shell, but bash goes beyond them by having
additional mechanisms for handling integers explicitly.
OceanofPDF.com

Positional Parameters
As we have already seen, you can define values for variables with
statements of the form varname=value, e.g.:
$ hatter=mad
$ echo "$hatter"
mad
The shell predefines some environment variables when you log in. There
are other built-in variables that are vital to shell programming. We will look
at a few of them now and save the others for later.
The most important special, built-in variables are called positional
parameters. These hold the command-line arguments to scripts when they
are invoked. Positional parameters have the names 1, 2, 3, etc., meaning
that their values are denoted by $1, $2, $3, etc. There is also a positional
parameter 0, whose value is the name of the script (i.e., the command typed
in to invoke it).
Two special variables contain all of the positional parameters (except
positional parameter 0): * and @. The difference between them is subtle but
important, and it's apparent only when they are within double quotes.
"$*" is a single string that consists of all of the positional parameters,
separated by the first character in the value of the environment variable IFS
(internal field separator), which is a space, TAB, and NEWLINE by default.
On the other hand, "$@" is equal to "$1" "$2"... "$ N", where N is the
number of positional parameters. That is, it's equal to N separate double-
quoted strings, which are separated by spaces. If there are no positional
parameters, "$@" expands to nothing. We'll explore the ramifications of
this difference in a little while.
The variable # holds the number of positional parameters (as a character
string). All of these variables are "read-only," meaning that you can't assign
new values to them within scripts.
For example, assume that you have the following simple shell script:
echo "alice: $@"
echo "$0: $1 $2 $3 $4"
echo "$# arguments"

Assume further that the script is called alice. Then if you type alice in
wonderland, you will see the following output:
alice: in wonderland
alice: in wonderland
2 arguments
In this case, $3 and $4 are unset, which means that the shell will substitute
the empty (or null) string for them.[3]
Positional parameters in functions
Shell functions use positional parameters and special variables like * and #
in exactly the same way as shell scripts do. If you wanted to define alice as
a function, you could put the following in your .bash_profile or
environment file:
function alice
{
    echo "alice: $*"
    echo "$0: $1 $2 $3 $4"
    echo "$# arguments"
}
You will get the same result if you type alice in wonderland.
Typically, several shell functions are defined within a single shell script.
Therefore each function will need to handle its own arguments, which in
turn means that each function needs to keep track of positional parameters
separately. Sure enough, each function has its own copies of these variables
(even though functions don't run in their own subshells, as scripts do); we
say that such variables are local to the function.
However, other variables defined within functions are not local (they are
global), meaning that their values are known throughout the entire shell
script. For example, assume that you have a shell script called ascript that
contains this:
function afunc
{
  echo in function: $0 $1 $2
  var1="in function"
  echo var1: $var1
}
    
var1="outside function"

echo var1: $var1
echo $0: $1 $2
afunc funcarg1 funcarg2
echo var1: $var1
echo $0: $1 $2
If you invoke this script by typing ascript arg1 arg2, you will see this
output:
var1: outside function
ascript: arg1 arg2
in function: ascript funcarg1 funcarg2
var1: in function
var1: in function
ascript: arg1 arg2
In other words, the function afunc changes the value of the variable var1
from "outside function" to "in function," and that change is known outside
the function, while $1 and $2 have different values in the function and the
main script. Notice that $0 doesn't change because the function executes in
the environment of the shell script and $0 takes the name of the script.
Figure 4-2 shows the scope of each variable graphically.
Figure 4-2. Functions have their own positional parameters
OceanofPDF.com

Local Variables in Functions
A local statement inside a function definition makes the variables involved
all become local to that function. The ability to define variables that are
local to "subprogram" units (procedures, functions, subroutines, etc.) is
necessary for writing large programs, because it helps keep subprograms
independent of the main program and of each other.
Here is the function from our last example with the variable var1 made
local:
function afunc
{
  local var1
  echo in function: $0 $1 $2
    
  var1="in function"
  echo var1: $var1
}
Now the result of running ascript arg1 arg2 is:
var1: outside function
ascript: arg1 arg2
in function: ascript funcarg1 funcarg2
var1: in function
var1: outside function
ascript: arg1 arg2
Figure 4-3 shows the scope of each variable in our new script. Note that
afunc now has its own, local copy of var1, although the original var1
would still be used by any other functions that ascript invokes.

Figure 4-3. Functions can have local variables
OceanofPDF.com

Quoting with $@ and $*
Now that we have this background, let's take a closer look at "$@" and
"$*". These variables are two of the shell's greatest idiosyncracies, so we'll
discuss some of the most common sources of confusion.
Why are the elements of "$*" separated by the first character of IFS
instead of just spaces? To give you output flexibility. As a simple
example, let's say you want to print a list of positional parameters
separated by commas. This script would do it:
IFS=,
echo "$*"
Changing IFS in a script is risky, but it's probably OK as long as
nothing else in the script depends on it. If this script were called
arglist, then the command arglist alice dormouse hatter would
produce the output alice,dormouse,hatter. Chapter 5 and Chapter 10
contain other examples of changing IFS.
Why does "$@" act like N separate double-quoted strings? To allow
you to use them again as separate values. For example, say you want to
call a function within your script with the same list of positional
parameters, like this:
function countargs
{
    echo "$# args."
}
Assume your script is called with the same arguments as arglist above.
Then if it contains the command countargs "$*", the function will
print 1 args. But if the command is countargs "$@", the function will
print 3 args.
OceanofPDF.com

More on Variable Syntax
Before we show the many things you can do with shell variables, we have
to point out a simplification we have been making: the syntax of $varname
for taking the value of a variable is actually the simple form of the more
general syntax, ${varname}.
Why two syntaxes? For one thing, the more general syntax is necessary if
your code refers to more than nine positional parameters: you must use
${10} for the tenth instead of $10. Aside from that, consider the following
case where you would like to place an underscore after your user ID:
echo $UID_
The shell will try to use UID_ as the name of the variable. Unless, by
chance, $UID_ already exists, this won't print anything (the value being
null or the empty string, ""). To obtain the desired result, you need to
enclose the shell variable in curly brackets:
echo ${UID}_
It is safe to omit the curly brackets ({}) if the variable name is followed by a
character that isn't a letter, digit, or underscore.
[3] Unless the option nounset is turned on, in which case the shell will
return an error message.
OceanofPDF.com

String Operators
The curly-bracket syntax allows for the shell's string operators. String
operators allow you to manipulate values of variables in various useful
ways without having to write full-blown programs or resort to external
UNIX utilities. You can do a lot with string-handling operators even if you
haven't yet mastered the programming features we'll see in later chapters.
In particular, string operators let you do the following:
Ensure that variables exist (i.e., are defined and have non-null values)
Set default values for variables
Catch errors that result from variables not being set
Remove portions of variables' values that match patterns
OceanofPDF.com

Syntax of String Operators
The basic idea behind the syntax of string operators is that special
characters that denote operations are inserted between the variable's name
and the right curly bracket. Any argument that the operator may need is
inserted to the operator's right.
The first group of string-handling operators tests for the existence of
variables and allows substitutions of default values under certain
conditions. These are listed in Table 4-1.[4]
Table 4-1. Substitution operators
Operator
Substitution
${ varname :- word }
If varname exists and isn't null, return its value; otherwise return word.
Purpose: Returning a default value if the variable is undefined.
Example: ${count:-0} evaluates to 0 if count is undefined.
${ varname := word}
If varname exists and isn't null, return its value; otherwise set it to word and
then return its value. Positional and special parameters cannot be assigned
this way.
Purpose: Setting a variable to a default value if it is undefined.
Example: ${count:=0} sets count to 0 if it is undefined.
${ varname :?
message }
If varname exists and isn't null, return its value; otherwise print varname:
followed by message, and abort the current command or script (non-
interactive shells only). Omitting message produces the default message
parameter null or not set.
Purpose: Catching errors that result from variables being undefined.
Example: {count:?"undefined!"} prints "count: undefined!" and exits if
count is undefined.
${ varname:+word }
If varname exists and isn't null, return word; otherwise return null.
Purpose: Testing for the existence of a variable.
Example: ${count:+1} returns 1 (which could mean "true") if count is
defined.
${
varname:offset:length Performs substring expansion.[5] It returns the substring of $varname
starting at offset and up to length characters. The first character in

Operator
Substitution
}
$varname is position 0. If length is omitted, the substring starts at offset and
continues to the end of $varname. If offset is less than 0 then the position is
taken from the end of $varname. If varname is @, the length is the number
of positional parameters starting at parameter offset.
Purpose: Returning parts of a string (substrings or slices).
Example: If count is set to frogfootman, ${count:4} returns footman.
${count:4:4} returns foot.
[5] The substring expansion operator is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
The first of these operators is ideal for setting defaults for command-line
arguments in case the user omits them. We'll use this technique in our first
programming task.
Task 4-1
You have a large album collection, and you want to write some software to keep track of it. Assume that you have a file of data on
how many albums you have by each artist. Lines in the file look like this:
5        Depeche Mode
2        Split Enz
3        Simple Minds
1        Vivaldi, Antonio
Write a program that prints the N highest lines, i.e., the N artists by whom you have the most albums. The default for N should be
10. The program should take one argument for the name of the input file and an optional second argument for how many lines to
print.
By far the best approach to this type of script is to use built-in UNIX
utilities, combining them with I/O redirectors and pipes. This is the classic
"building-block" philosophy of UNIX that is another reason for its great
popularity with programmers. The building-block technique lets us write a
first version of the script that is only one line long:
sort -nr $1 | head -${2:-10}
Here is how this works: the sort program sorts the data in the file whose
name is given as the first argument ($1). The -n option tells sort to interpret
the first word on each line as a number (instead of as a character string); the
-r tells it to reverse the comparisons, so as to sort in descending order.
The output of sort is piped into the head utility, which, when given the
argument - N, prints the first N lines of its input on the standard output. The

expression -${2:-10} evaluates to a dash (-) followed by the second
argument if it is given, or to -10 if it's not; notice that the variable in this
expression is 2, which is the second positional parameter.
Assume the script we want to write is called highest. Then if the user types
highest myfile, the line that actually runs is:
sort -nr myfile | head -10
Or if the user types highest myfile 22, the line that runs is:
sort -nr myfile | head -22
Make sure you understand how the :- string operator provides a default
value.
This is a perfectly good, runnable script—but it has a few problems. First,
its one line is a bit cryptic. While this isn't much of a problem for such a
tiny script, it's not wise to write long, elaborate scripts in this manner. A few
minor changes will make the code more readable.
First, we can add comments to the code; anything between # and the end of
a line is a comment. At a minimum, the script should start with a few
comment lines that indicate what the script does and what arguments it
accepts. Second, we can improve the variable names by assigning the
values of the positional parameters to regular variables with mnemonic
names. Finally, we can add blank lines to space things out; blank lines, like
comments, are ignored. Here is a more readable version:
#
#        highest filename [howmany]
#
#        Print howmany highest-numbered lines in file filename.
#        The input file is assumed to have lines that start with
#        numbers.  Default for howmany is 10.
#
    
filename=$1
howmany=${2:-10}
    
sort -nr $filename | head -$howmany
The square brackets around howmany in the comments adhere to the
convention in UNIX documentation that square brackets denote optional
arguments.
The changes we just made improve the code's readability but not how it
runs. What if the user were to invoke the script without any arguments?

Remember that positional parameters default to null if they aren't defined. If
there are no arguments, then $1 and $2 are both null. The variable
howmany ($2) is set up to default to 10, but there is no default for filename
($1). The result would be that this command runs:
sort -nr | head -10
As it happens, if sort is called without a filename argument, it expects input
to come from standard input, e.g., a pipe (|) or a user's terminal. Since it
doesn't have the pipe, it will expect the terminal. This means that the script
will appear to hang! Although you could always hit CTRL-D or CTRL-C to
get out of the script, a naive user might not know this.
Therefore we need to make sure that the user supplies at least one argument.
There are a few ways of doing this; one of them involves another string
operator. We'll replace the line:
filename=$1
with:
filename=${1:?"filename missing."}
This will cause two things to happen if a user invokes the script without any
arguments: first the shell will print the somewhat unfortunate message:
highest: 1: filename missing.
to the standard error output. Second, the script will exit without running the
remaining code. With a somewhat "kludgy" modification, we can get a
slightly better error message.
Consider this code:
filename=$1
filename=${filename:?"missing."}
This results in the message:
highest: filename: missing.
(Make sure you understand why.) Of course, there are ways of printing
whatever message is desired; we'll find out how in Chapter 5.
Before we move on, we'll look more closely at the three remaining
operators in Table 4-1 and see how we can incorporate them into our task
solution. The := operator does roughly the same thing as :-, except that it
has the "side effect" of setting the value of the variable to the given word if
the variable doesn't exist.

Therefore we would like to use := in our script in place of :-, but we can't;
we'd be trying to set the value of a positional parameter, which is not
allowed. But if we replaced:
howmany=${2:-10}
with just:
howmany=$2
and moved the substitution down to the actual command line (as we did at
the start), then we could use the := operator:
sort -nr $filename | head -${howmany:=10}
The operator :+ substitutes a value if the given variable exists and isn't null.
Here is how we can use it in our example: let's say we want to give the user
the option of adding a header line to the script's output. If she types the
option -h, then the output will be preceded by the line:
ALBUMS  ARTIST
Assume further that this option ends up in the variable header, i.e.,
$header is -h if the option is set or null if not. (Later we will see how to do
this without disturbing the other positional parameters.)
The following expression yields null if the variable header is null, or
ALBUMSARTIST\n if it is non-null:
${header:+"ALBUMSARTIST\n"}
This means that we can put the line:
echo -e -n ${header:+"ALBUMSARTIST\n"}
right before the command line that does the actual work. The -n option to
echo causes it not to print a LINEFEED after printing its arguments.
Therefore this echo statement will print nothing—not even a blank line—if
header is null; otherwise it will print the header line and a LINEFEED (\n).
The -e option makes echo interpret the \n as a LINEFEED rather than
literally.
The final operator, substring expansion, returns sections of a string. We can
use it to "pick out" parts of a string that are of interest. Assume that our
script is able to assign lines of the sorted list, one at a time, to the variable
album_line. If we want to print out just the album name and ignore the
number of albums, we can use substring expansion:
echo ${album_line:8}

This prints everything from character position 8, which is the start of each
album name, onwards.
If we just want to print the numbers and not the album names, we can do so
by supplying the length of the substring:
echo ${album_line:0:7}
Although this example may seem rather useless, it should give you a feel
for how to use substrings. When combined with some of the programming
features discussed later in the book, substrings can be extremely useful.
OceanofPDF.com

Patterns and Pattern Matching
We'll continue refining our solution to Task 4-1 later in this chapter. The
next type of string operator is used to match portions of a variable's string
value against patterns. Patterns, as we saw in Chapter 1, are strings that can
contain wildcard characters (*, ?, and [] for character sets and ranges).
Table 4-2 lists bash's pattern-matching operators.
Table 4-2. Pattern-matching operators
Operator
Meaning
${variable #pattern}
If the pattern matches the beginning of the variable's value, delete the
shortest part that matches and return the rest.
${variable ##pattern}
If the pattern matches the beginning of the variable's value, delete the
longest part that matches and return the rest.
${variable %pattern}
If the pattern matches the end of the variable's value, delete the shortest
part that matches and return the rest.
${variable %%pattern} If the pattern matches the end of the variable's value, delete the longest
part that matches and return the rest.
${variable/ pattern/
string}${variable//
pattern/ string}
The longest match to pattern in variable is replaced by string. In the first
form, only the first match is replaced. In the second form, all matches are
replaced. If the pattern begins with a #, it must match at the start of the
variable. If it begins with a %, it must match with the end of the variable.
If string is null, the matches are deleted. If variable is @ or *, the
operation is applied to each positional parameter in turn and the
expansion is the resultant list.[6]
[6] The pattern-matching and replacement operator is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
These can be hard to remember; here's a handy mnemonic device: #
matches the front because number signs precede numbers; % matches the
rear because percent signs follow numbers.
The classic use for pattern-matching operators is in stripping off
components of pathnames, such as directory prefixes and filename suffixes.
With that in mind, here is an example that shows how all of the operators

work. Assume that the variable path has the value
/home/cam/book/long.file.name; then:
Expression                   Result
${path##/*/}                      long.file.name
${path#/*/}              cam/book/long.file.name
$path              /home/cam/book/long.file.name
${path%.*}         /home/cam/book/long.file
${path%%.*}        /home/cam/book/long
The two patterns used here are /*/, which matches anything between two
slashes, and .*, which matches a dot followed by anything.
The longest and shortest pattern-matching operators produce the same
output unless they are used with the * wildcard operator. As an example, if
filename had the value alicece, then both ${filename%ce} and
${filename%%ce} would produce the result alice. This is because ce is an
exact match; for a match to occur, the string ce must appear on the end
$filename. Both the short and long matches will then match the last
grouping of ce and delete it. If, however, we had used the * wildcard, then
${filename%ce*} would produce alice because it matches the shortest
occurrence of ce followed by anything else. ${filename%%ce*} would
return ali because it matches the longest occurrence of ce followed by
anything else; in this case the first and second ce.
The next task will incorporate one of these pattern-matching operators.
Task 4-2
You are writing a graphics file conversion utility for use in creating a web page. You want to be able to take a PCX file and
convert it to a JPEG file for use on the web page.[7]
Graphics file conversion utilities are quite common because of the plethora
of different graphics formats and file types. They allow you to specify an
input file, usually from a range of different formats, and convert it to an
output file of a different format. In this case, we want to take a PCX file,
which can't be displayed with a web browser, and convert it to a JPEG
which can be displayed by nearly all browsers. Part of this process is taking
the filename of the PCX file, which ends in .pcx, and changing it to one
ending in .jpg for the output file. In essence, you want to take the original

filename and strip off the .pcx, then append .jpg. A single shell statement
will do this:
outfile=${filename%.pcx}.jpg
The shell takes the filename and looks for .pcx on the end of the string. If it
is found, .pcx is stripped off and the rest of the string is returned. For
example, if filename had the value alice.pcx, the expression
${filename%.pcx} would return alice. The .jpg is appended to form the
desired alice.jpg, which is then stored in the variable outfile.
If filename had an inappropriate value (without the .pcx) such as
alice.xpm, the above expression would evaluate to alice.xpm.jpg: since
there was no match, nothing is deleted from the value of filename, and .jpg
is appended anyway. Note, however, that if filename contained more than
one dot (e.g., if it were alice.1.pcx—the expression would still produce the
desired value alice.1.jpg).
The next task uses the longest pattern-matching operator.
Task 4-3
You are implementing a filter that prepares a text file for printer output. You want to put the file's name—without any directory
prefix—on the "banner" page. Assume that, in your script, you have the pathname of the file to be printed stored in the variable
pathname.
Clearly, the objective is to remove the directory prefix from the pathname.
The following line will do it:
bannername=${pathname##*/}
This solution is similar to the first line in the examples shown before. If
pathname were just a filename, the pattern */ (anything followed by a
slash) would not match and the value of the expression would be pathname
untouched. If pathname were something like book/wonderland, the prefix
book/ would match the pattern and be deleted, leaving just wonderland as
the expression's value. The same thing would happen if pathname were
something like /home/cam/ book/wonderland: since the ## deletes the
longest match, it deletes the entire /home/cam/book/.
If we used #*/ instead of ##*/, the expression would have the incorrect
value home/cam/book/wonderland, because the shortest instance of

"anything followed by a slash" at the beginning of the string is just a slash
(/).
The construct ${ variable ##*/} is actually equivalent to the UNIX utility
basename. basename takes a pathname as argument and returns the
filename only; it is meant to be used with the shell's command substitution
mechanism (see the following explanation). basename is less efficient than
${ variable ##*/} because it runs in its own separate process rather than
within the shell. Another utility, dirname, does essentially the opposite of
basename: it returns the directory prefix only. It is equivalent to the bash
expression ${ variable %/*} and is less efficient for the same reason.
The last operator in the table matches patterns and performs substitutions.
Task 4-4 is a simple task where it comes in useful.
Task 4-4
The directories in PATH can be hard to distinguish when printed out as one line with colon delimiters. You want a simple way to
display them, one to a line.
As directory names are separated by colons, the easiest way would be to
replace each colon with a LINEFEED:
$ echo -e ${PATH//:/'\n'}
/home/cam/bin
/usr/local/bin
/bin
/usr/bin
/usr/X11R6/bin
Each occurrence of the colon is replaced by \n. As we saw earlier, the -e
option allows echo to interpret \n as a LINEFEED. In this case we used the
second of the two substitution forms. If we'd used the first form, only the
first colon would have been replaced with a \n.
OceanofPDF.com

Length Operator
There is one remaining operator on variables. It is ${# varname }, which
returns the length of the value of the variable as a character string. (In
Chapter 6, we will see how to treat this and similar values as actual
numbers so they can be used in arithmetic expressions.) For example, if
filename has the value alice.c, then ${#filename} would have the value 7.
OceanofPDF.com

Extended Pattern Matching
Bash provides a further set of pattern matching operators if the shopt option
extglob is switched on. Each operator takes one or more patterns, normally
strings, separated by the vertical bar ( | ). The extended pattern matching
operators are given in Table 4-3.[8]
Table 4-3. Pattern-matching operators
Operator
Meaning
*(patternlist)
Matches zero or more occurrences of the given patterns.
+(patternlist) Matches one or more occurrences of the given patterns.
?(patternlist)
Matches zero or one occurrences of the given patterns.
@(patternlist) Matches exactly one of the given patterns.
!(patternlist)
Matches anything except one of the given patterns.
Some examples of these include:
*(alice|hatter|hare) would match zero or more occurrences of alice,
hatter, and hare. So it would match the null string, alice, alicehatter,
etc.
+(alice|hatter|hare) would do the same except not match the null
string.
?(alice|hatter|hare) would only match the null string, alice, hatter, or
hare.
@(alice|hatter|hare) would only match alice, hatter, or hare.
!(alice|hatter|hare) matches everything except alice, hatter, and hare.
The values provided can contain shell wildcards too. So, for example, +([0-
9]) matches a number of one or more digits. The patterns can also be nested,
so you could remove all files except those beginning with vt followed by a
number by doing rm !(vt+([0-9])).

[4] The colon (:) in all but the last of these operators is actually optional. If
the colon is omitted, then change "exists and isn't null" to "exists" in each
definition, i.e., the operator tests for existence only.
[7] PCX is a popular graphics file format under Microsoft Windows. JPEG
(Joint Photographic Expert Group) is a common graphics format on the
Internet and is used to a great extent on web pages.
[8] Be aware that these are not available in early releases of bash 2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

Command Substitution
From the discussion so far, we've seen two ways of getting values into
variables: by assignment statements and by the user supplying them as
command-line arguments (positional parameters). There is another way:
command substitution, which allows you to use the standard output of a
command as if it were the value of a variable. You will soon see how
powerful this feature is.
The syntax of command substitution is:[9]
$(UNIX command)
The command inside the parentheses is run, and anything the command
writes to standard output is returned as the value of the expression. These
constructs can be nested, i.e., the UNIX command can contain command
substitutions.
Here are some simple examples:
The value of $(pwd) is the current directory (same as the environment
variable $PWD).
The value of $(ls $HOME) is the names of all files in your home
directory.
The value of $(ls $(pwd)) is the names of all files in the current
directory.
The value of $(< alice) is the contents of the file alice with any trailing
newlines removed.[10]
To find out detailed information about a command if you don't know
where its file resides, type ls -l $(type -path -all command-name). The
-all option forces type to do a pathname look-up and -path causes it to
ignore keywords, built-ins, etc.
If you want to edit (with vi) every chapter of your book on bash that
has the phrase "command substitution," assuming that your chapter
files all begin with ch, you could type:
                  vi $(grep -l 'command substitution' ch*)

The -l option to grep prints only the names of files that contain
matches.
Command substitution, like variable and tilde expansion, is done within
double quotes. Therefore, our rule in Chapter 1 and Chapter 3 about using
single quotes for strings unless they contain variables will now be extended:
"When in doubt, use single quotes, unless the string contains variables or
command substitutions, in which case use double quotes."
Command substitution helps us with the solution to the next programming
task, which relates to the album database in Task 4-1.
Task 4-5
The file used in Task 4-1 is actually a report derived from a bigger table of data about albums. This table consists of several
columns, or fields, to which a user refers by names like "artist," "title," "year," etc. The columns are separated by vertical bars (|,
the same as the UNIX pipe character). To deal with individual columns in the table, field names need to be converted to field
numbers.
Suppose there is a shell function called getfield that takes the field name as argument and writes the corresponding field (or
column) number on the standard output. Use this routine to help extract a column from the data table.
The cut utility is a natural for this task. cut is a data filter: it extracts
columns from tabular data. If you supply the numbers of columns you want
to extract from the input, cut will print only those columns on the standard
output. Columns can be character positions or—relevant in this example—
fields that are separated by TAB characters or other delimiters.[11] Assume
that the data table in our task is a file called albums and that it looks like
this:
Depeche Mode|Speak and Spell|Mute Records|1981
Depeche Mode|Some Great Reward|Mute Records|1984
Depeche Mode|101|Mute Records|1989
Depeche Mode|Violator|Mute Records|1990
Depeche Mode|Songs of Faith and Devotion|Mute Records|1993
...
Here is how we would use cut to extract the fourth (year) column:
cut -f4 -d\| albums
The -d argument is used to specify the character used as field delimiter
(TAB is the default). The vertical bar must be backslash-escaped so that the
shell doesn't try to interpret it as a pipe.

From this line of code and the getfield routine, we can easily derive the
solution to the task. Assume that the first argument to getfield is the name of
the field the user wants to extract. Then the solution is:
fieldname=$1
cut -f$(getfield $fieldname) -d\| albums
If we called this script with the argument year, the output would be:
1981
1984
1989
1990
1993
...
Task 4-6 shows another small task that makes use of cut.
Task 4-6
Send a mail message to everyone who is currently logged in.
The command who tells you who is logged in (as well as which terminal
they're on and when they logged in). Its output looks like this:
root     tty1         Oct 13 12:05
michael  tty5         Oct 13 12:58
cam      tty23        Oct 13 11:51
kilrath  tty25        Oct 13 11:58
The fields are separated by spaces, not TABs. Since we need the first field,
we can get away with using a space as the field separator in the cut
command. (Otherwise we'd have to use the option to cut that uses character
columns instead of fields.) To provide a space character as an argument on a
command line, you can surround it by quotes:
$ who | cut -d' ' -f1
With the above who output, this command's output would look like this:
root
michael
cam
kilrath
This leads directly to a solution to the task. Just type:
$ mail $(who | cut -d' ' -f1)

The command mail root michael cam kilrath will run and then you can
type your message.
Task 4-7 is another task that shows how useful command pipelines can be
in command substitution.
Task 4-7
The ls command gives you pattern-matching capability with wildcards, but it doesn't allow you to select files by modification date.
Devise a mechanism that lets you do this.
Here is a function that allows you to list all files that were last modified on
the date you give as argument. Once again, we choose a function for speed
reasons. No pun is intended by the function's name:
function lsd
{
    date=$1
    ls -l | grep -i "^.\{42\}$date" | cut -c55-
}
This function depends on the column layout of the ls -l command. In
particular, it depends on dates starting in column 42 and filenames starting
in column 55. If this isn't the case in your version of UNIX, you will need
to adjust the column numbers.[12]
We use the grep search utility to match the date given as argument (in the
form Mon DD, e.g., Jan 15 or Oct 6, the latter having two spaces) to the
output of ls -l. This gives us a long listing of only those files whose dates
match the argument. The -i option to grep allows you to use all lowercase
letters in the month name, while the rather fancy argument means, "Match
any line that contains 41 characters followed by the function argument." For
example, typing lsd `jan 15' causes grep to search for lines that match any
41 characters followed by jan 15 (or Jan 15).[13]
The output of grep is piped through our ubiquitous friend cut to retrieve the
filenames only. The argument to cut tells it to extract characters in column
55 through the end of the line.
With command substitution, you can use this function with any command
that accepts filename arguments. For example, if you want to print all files

in your current directory that were last modified today, and today is January
15th, you could type:
$ lp $(lsd 'jan 15')
The output of lsd is on multiple lines (one for each filename), but
LINEFEEDs are legal field separators for the lp command, because the
environment variable IFS (see earlier in this chapter) contains LINEFEED
by default.
[9] Bourne and C shell users should note that the command substitution
syntax of those shells, `UNIX command ` (with backward quotes, or grave
accents), is also supported by bash for backward compatibility reasons.
However, it is harder to read and less conducive to nesting.
[10] Not available in versions of bash prior to 2.02.
[11] Some older BSD-derived systems don't have cut, but you can use awk
instead. Whenever you see a command of the form: cut -f N -d C
filename, use this instead: awk -F C '{print $ N }' filename.
[12] For example, ls -l on SunOS 4.1.x has dates starting in column 33 and
filenames starting in column 46.
[13] Some older BSD-derived versions of UNIX (without System V
extensions) do not support the \{ N \} option. For this example, use 42
periods in a row instead of .\{42\}.
OceanofPDF.com

Advanced Examples: pushd and popd
We will conclude this chapter with a couple of functions that are already
built into bash but are useful in demonstrating some of the concepts we
have covered in this chapter.[14]
Task 4-8
The functions pushd and popd implement a stack of directories that enable you to move to another directory temporarily and have
the shell remember where you were. Implement them as shell functions.
We will start by implementing a significant subset of their capabilities and
finish the implementation in Chapter 6.
Think of a stack as a spring-loaded dish receptacle in a cafeteria. When you
place dishes on the receptacle, the spring compresses so that the top stays at
roughly the same level. The dish most recently placed on the stack is the
first to be taken when someone wants food; thus, the stack is known as a
"last-in, first-out" or LIFO structure. Putting something onto a stack is
known in computer science parlance as pushing, and taking something off
the top is called popping.
A stack is very handy for remembering directories, as we will see; it can
"hold your place" up to an arbitrary number of times. The cd - form of the
cd command does this, but only to one level. For example: if you are in
firstdir and then you change to seconddir, you can type cd - to go back. But
if you start out in firstdir, then change to seconddir, and then go to thirddir,
you can use cd - only to go back to seconddir. If you type cd - again, you
will be back in thirddir, because it is the previous directory.[15]
If you want the "nested" remember-and-change functionality that will take
you back to firstdir, you need a stack of directories along with the pushd
and popd commands. Here is how these work:
The first time pushd dir is called, pushd pushes the current directory
onto the stack, then cds to dir and pushes it onto the stack.

Subsequent calls to pushd dir cd to dir and push dir only onto the
stack.
popd removes the top directory off the stack, revealing a new top.
Then it cds to the new top directory.
For example, consider the series of events in Table 4-4. Assume that you
have just logged in, and that you are in your home directory (/home/you).
Table 4-4. pushd/popd example
Command
Stack contents
Result directory
pushd lizard /home/you/lizard /home/you
/home/you/lizard
pushd /etc
/etc /home/you/lizard /home/you /etc
popd
/home/you/lizard /home/you
/home/you/lizard
popd
/home/you
/home/you
popd
<empty>
(error)
We will implement a stack as an environment variable containing a list of
directories separated by spaces.[16]
Your directory stack should be initialized to the null string when you log in.
To do this, put this in your .bash_profile:
DIR_STACK=""
export DIR_STACK
Do not put this in your environment file if you have one. The export
statement guarantees that DIR_STACK is known to all subprocesses; you
want to initialize it only once. If you put this code in an environment file, it
will get reinitialized in every subshell, which you probably don't want.
Next, we need to implement pushd and popd as functions. Here are our
initial versions:
pushd ( )
{
    dirname=$1
    DIR_STACK="$dirname ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD' '}"
    cd ${dirname:?"missing directory name."}
    echo "$DIR_STACK"
}
  
popd ( )
{

    DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
    cd ${DIR_STACK%% *}
    echo "$PWD"
}
Notice that there isn't much code! Let's go through the two functions and
see how they work, starting with pushd. The first line merely saves the first
argument in the variable dirname for readability reasons.
The second line of the function pushes the new directory onto the stack. The
expression ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD` '} evaluates to $DIR_STACK if it is
non-null or $PWD'' (the current directory and a space) if it is null. The
expression within double quotes, then, consists of the argument given,
followed by a single space, followed by DIR_STACK or the current
directory and a space. The trailing space on the current directory is required
for pattern matching in the popd function; each directory in the stack is
considered to be of the form "dirname".
The double quotes in the assignment ensure that all of this is packaged into
a single string for assignment back to DIR_STACK. Thus, this line of code
handles the special initial case (when the stack is empty) as well as the
more usual case (when it's not empty).
The third line's main purpose is to change to the new directory. We use the
:? operator to handle the error when the argument is missing: if the
argument is given, then the expression ${dirname:?"missing directory
name."} evaluates to $dirname, but if it is not given, the shell will print the
message pushd: dirname: missing directory name and exit from the
function.
The last line merely prints the contents of the stack, with the implication
that the leftmost directory is both the current directory and at the top of the
stack. (This is why we chose spaces to separate directories, rather than the
more customary colons as in PATH and MAILPATH.)
The popd function makes yet another use of the shell's pattern-matching
operators. Its first line uses the # operator, which tries to delete the shortest
match of the pattern "* " (anything followed by a space) from the value of
DIR_STACK. The result is that the top directory and the space following it
are deleted from the stack. This is why we need the space on the end of the
first directory pushed onto the stack.

The second line of popd uses the pattern-matching operator %% to delete
the longest match to the pattern "*" (a space followed by anything) from
DIR_STACK. This extracts the top directory as an argument to cd, but it
doesn't affect the value of DIR_STACK because there is no assignment.
The final line just prints a confirmation message.
This code is deficient in four ways. First, it has no provision for errors. For
example:
What if the user tries to push a directory that doesn't exist or is invalid?
What if the user tries popd and the stack is empty?
Test your understanding of the code by figuring out how it would respond
to these error conditions. The second problem is that if you use pushd in a
shell script, it will exit everything if no argument is given; ${ varname :?
message } always exits from non-interactive shells. It won't, however, exit
an interactive shell from which the function is called. The third deficiency
is that it implements only some of the functionality of bash's pushd and
popd commands—albeit the most useful parts. In the next chapter, we will
see how to overcome all of these deficiencies.
The fourth problem with the code is that it will not work if, for some
reason, a directory name contains a space. The code will treat the space as a
separator character. We'll accept this deficiency for now, but you might like
to think about how to overcome it in the next few chapters.
[14] Your copy of bash may not have pushd and popd, since it can be
configured without these built-ins.
[15] Think of cd - as a synonym for cd $OLDPWD; see the previous
chapter.
[16] bash also maintains a directory stack for the pushd and popd built-ins,
accessible through the environment variable DIRSTACK. Unlike our
version, however, it is implemented as an array (see Chapter 6 for details
on arrays).
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5. Flow Control
If you are a programmer, you may have read the last chapter—with its
claim at the outset that bash has an advanced set of programming
capabilities—and wondered where many of the features from conventional
languages were. Perhaps the most glaringly obvious "hole" in our coverage
thus far concerns flow control constructs like if, for, while, and so on.
Flow control gives a programmer the power to specify that only certain
portions of a program run, or that certain portions run repeatedly, according
to conditions such as the values of variables, whether or not commands
execute properly, and others. We call this the ability to control the flow of a
program's execution.
Almost every shell script or function that's been shown thus far has had no
flow control—they have just been lists of commands to be run! Yet bash,
like the C and Bourne shells, has all of the flow control abilities you would
expect and more; we will examine them in this chapter. We'll use them to
enhance the solutions to some of the programming tasks we saw in the last
chapter and to solve tasks that we will introduce here.
Although we have attempted to explain flow control so that
nonprogrammers can understand it, we also sympathize with programmers
who dread having to slog through yet another tabula rasa explanation. For
this reason, some of our discussions relate bash's flow-control mechanisms
to those that programmers should know already. Therefore you will be in a
better position to understand this chapter if you already have a basic
knowledge of flow control concepts.
bash supports the following flow control constructs:
if/else
Execute a list of statements if a certain condition is/is not true
for
Execute a list of statements a fixed number of times
while
Execute a list of statements repeatedly while a certain condition holds
true

until
Execute a list of statements repeatedly until a certain condition holds
true
case
Execute one of several lists of statements depending on the value of a
variable
In addition, bash provides a new type of flow-control construct:
select
Allow the user to select one of a list of possibilities from a menu
We will now cover each of these in detail.
OceanofPDF.com

if/else
The simplest type of flow control construct is the conditional, embodied in
bash's if statement. You use a conditional when you want to choose whether
or not to do something, or to choose among a small number of things to do,
according to the truth or falsehood of conditions. Conditions test values of
shell variables, characteristics of files, whether or not commands run
successfully, and other factors. The shell has a large set of built-in tests that
are relevant to the task of shell programming.
The if construct has the following syntax:
if condition
then
    statements
[elif condition
    then statements...]
[else
 statements]
fi
The simplest form (without the elif and else parts, or clauses) executes the
statements only if the condition is true. If you add an else clause, you get
the ability to execute one set of statements if a condition is true or another
set of statements if the condition is false. You can use as many elif (a
contraction of "else if") clauses as you wish; they introduce more
conditions, and thus more choices for which set of statements to execute. If
you use one or more elifs, you can think of the else clause as the "if all else
fails" part.
OceanofPDF.com

Exit Status
Perhaps the only aspect of this syntax that differs from that of conventional
languages like C and Pascal is that the "condition" is really a list of
statements rather than the more usual Boolean (true or false) expression.
How is the truth or falsehood of the condition determined? It has to do with
a general UNIX concept that we haven't covered yet: the exit status of
commands.
Every UNIX command, whether it comes from source code in C, some
other language, or a shell script/function, returns an integer code to its
calling process—the shell in this case—when it finishes. This is called the
exit status. 0 is usually the OK exit status, while anything else (1 to 255)
usually denotes an error. [1]
if checks the exit status of the last statement in the list following the if
keyword. The list is usually just a single statement. If the status is 0, the
condition evaluates to true; if it is anything else, the condition is considered
false. The same is true for each condition attached to an elif statement (if
any).
This enables us to write code of the form:
if command ran successfully
then
   normal processing
else
   error processing
fi
More specifically, we can now improve on the pushd function that we saw
in the last chapter:
pushd ( )
{
    dirname=$1
    DIR_STACK="$dirname ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD' '}"
    cd ${dirname:?"missing directory name."}
    echo $DIR_STACK
}
This function requires a valid directory as its argument. Let's look at how it
handles error conditions: if no argument is given, the third line of code

prints an error message and exits. This is fine.
However, the function reacts deceptively when an argument is given that
isn't a valid directory. In case you didn't figure it out when reading the last
chapter, here is what happens: the cd fails, leaving you in the same
directory you were in. This is also appropriate. But the second line of code
has pushed the bad directory onto the stack anyway, and the last line prints
a message that leads you to believe that the push was successful. Even
placing the cd before the stack assignment won't help because it doesn't exit
the function if there is an error.
We need to prevent the bad directory from being pushed and to print an
error message. Here is how we can do this:
pushd ( )
{
  dirname=$1
  if cd ${dirname:?"missing directory name."}    # if cd was successful
  then
      DIR_STACK="$dirname ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD' '}" # push the directory        
      echo $DIR_STACK
  else
      echo still in $PWD.                        # else do nothing
  fi
}
The call to cd is now inside an if construct. If cd is successful, it will return
0; the next two lines of code are run, finishing the pushd operation. But if
the cd fails, it returns with exit status 1, and pushd will print a message
saying that you haven't gone anywhere.
Notice that in providing the check for a bad directory, we have slightly
altered the way pushd functions. The stack will now always start out with
two copies of the first directory pushed onto it. That is because $PWD is
expanded after the new directory has been changed to. We'll fix this in the
next section.
You can usually rely on built-in commands and standard UNIX utilities to
return appropriate exit statuses, but what about your own shell scripts and
functions? For example, what if you wrote a cd function that overrides the
built-in command?
Let's say you have the following code in your .bash_profile.
cd ( )
{

    builtin cd "$@"
    echo "$OLDPWD --> $PWD"
}
The function cd simply changes directories and prints a message saying
where you were and where you are now. Because functions have higher
priority than most built-in commands in the shell's order of command look-
up, we need to make sure that the built-in cd is called, otherwise the shell
will enter an endless loop of calling the function, known as infinite
recursion.
The builtin command allows us to do this. builtin tells the shell to use the
built-in command and ignore any function of that name. Using builtin is
easy; you just give it the name of the built-in you want to execute and any
parameters you want to pass. If you pass in the name of something which
isn't a built-in command, builtin will display an appropriate message. For
example: builtin: alice: not a shell builtin.
We want this function to return the same exit status that the built-in cd
returns. The problem is that the exit status is reset by every command, so it
"disappears" if you don't save it immediately. In this function, the built-in
cd's exit status disappears when the echo statement runs (and sets its own
exit status).
Therefore, we need to save the status that cd sets and use it as the entire
function's exit status. Two shell features we haven't seen yet provide the
way. First is the special shell variable ?, whose value ($?) is the exit status
of the last command that ran. For example:
cd baddir
echo $?
causes the shell to print 1, while the following command causes it to print 0:
cd gooddir
echo $?
So, to save the exit status we need to assign the value of ? to a variable with
the line es=$? right after the cd is done.
OceanofPDF.com

Return
The second feature we need is the statement return N, which causes the
surrounding function to exit with exit status N. N is actually optional; it
defaults to the exit status of the last command. Functions that finish without
a return statement (i.e., every one we have seen so far) return whatever the
last statement returns. return can only be used inside functions, and shell
scripts that have been executed with source. In contrast, the statement exit
N exits the entire script, no matter how deeply you are nested in functions.
Getting back to our example: if the call to the built-in cd were last in our cd
function, it would behave properly. Unfortunately, we really need the
assignment statement where it is. Therefore we need to save cd's exit status
and return it as the function's exit status. Here is how to do it:
cd ( )
{
    builtin cd "$@"
    es=$?
    echo "$OLDPWD --> $PWD"
    return $es
}
The second line saves the exit status of cd in the variable es; the fourth
returns it as the function's exit status. We'll see a substantial cd "wrapper" in
Chapter 7.
Exit statuses aren't very useful for anything other than their intended
purpose. In particular, you may be tempted to use them as "return values" of
functions, as you would with functions in C or Pascal. That won't work; you
should use variables or command substitution instead to simulate this effect.
OceanofPDF.com

Combinations of Exit Statuses
One of the more obscure parts of bash syntax allows you to combine exit
statuses logically, so that you can test more than one thing at a time.
The syntax statement1 && statement2 means, "execute statement1, and if
its exit status is 0, execute statement2." The syntax statement1 || statement2
is the converse: it means, "execute statement1, and if its exit status is not 0,
execute statement2." At first, these look like "if/then" and "if not/then"
constructs, respectively. But they are really intended for use within
conditions of if constructs—as C programmers will readily understand.
It's much more useful to think of these constructs as "and" and "or,"
respectively. Consider this:
if statement1 && statement2
then
    ...
fi
In this case, statement1 is executed. If it returns a 0 status, then presumably
it ran without error. Then statement2 runs. The then clause is executed if
statement2 returns a 0 status. Conversely, if statement1 fails (returns a non-
zero exit status), then statement2 doesn't even run; the last statement that
actually ran was statement1, which failed—so the then clause doesn't run,
either. Taken all together, it's fair to conclude that the then clause runs if
statement1 and statement2 both succeeded.
Similarly, consider this:
if statement1 || statement2
then
    ...
fi
If statement1 succeeds, then statement2 does not run. This makes
statement1 the last statement, which means that the then clause runs. On
the other hand, if statement1 fails, then statement2 runs, and whether the
then clause runs or not depends on the success of statement2. The upshot is
that the then clause runs if statement1 or statement2 succeeds.

bash also allows you to reverse the return status of a statement with the use
of !, the logical "not". Preceding a statement with ! will cause it to return 0
if it fails and 1 if it succeeds. We'll see an example of this at the end of this
chapter.
As a simple example of testing exit statuses, assume that we need to write a
script that checks a file for the presence of two words and just prints a
message saying whether either word is in the file or not. We can use grep
for this: it returns exit status 0 if it found the given string in its input, non-
zero if not:
filename=$1
word1=$2
word2=$3
    
if grep $word1 $filename || grep $word2 $filename
then
    echo "$word1 or $word2 is in $filename."
fi
The then clause of this code runs if either grep statement succeeds. Now
assume that we want the script to say whether the input file contains both
words. Here's how to do it:
filename=$1
word1=$2
word2=$3
    
if grep $word1 $filename && grep $word2 $filename
then
    echo "$word1 and $word2 are both in $filename."
fi
We'll see more examples of these logical operators later in this chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

Condition Tests
Exit statuses are the only things an if construct can test. But that doesn't
mean you can check only whether commands ran properly. The shell
provides two ways of testing a variety of conditions. The first is with the
[...] construct, which is available in many different versions of the Bourne
shell.[2] The second is by using the newer [[...]] construct.[3] The second
version is identical to the first except that word splitting and pathname
expansion are not performed on the words within the brackets. For the
examples in this chapter we will use the first form of the construct.
You can use the construct to check many different attributes of a file
(whether it exists, what type of file it is, what its permissions and ownership
are, etc.), compare two files to see which is newer, and do comparisons on
strings.
[ condition ] is actually a statement just like any other, except that the only
thing it does is return an exit status that tells whether condition is true. (The
spaces after the opening bracket "[" and before the closing bracket "]" are
required.) Thus it fits within the if construct's syntax.
String comparisons
The square brackets ([]) surround expressions that include various types of
operators. We will start with the string comparison operators, listed in Table
5-1. (Notice that there are no operators for "greater than or equal" or "less
than or equal" comparisons.) In the table, str1 and str2 refer to expressions
with a string value.
Table 5-1. String comparison operators
Operator
True if...
str1 = str2[4]
str1 matches str2
str1 != str2
str1 does not match str2

Operator
True if...
str1 < str2
str1 is less than str2
str1 > str2
str1 is greater than str2
-n str1
str1 is not null (has length greater than 0)
-z str1
str1 is null (has length 0)
[4] Note that there is only one equal sign (=). This is a common source of error.
We can use one of these operators to improve our popd function, which
reacts badly if you try to pop and the stack is empty. Recall that the code for
popd is:
popd ( )
{
    DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
    cd ${DIR_STACK%% *}
    echo "$PWD"
}
If the stack is empty, then $DIR_STACK is the null string, as is the
expression ${DIR_STACK%% }. This means that you will change to your
home directory; instead, we want popd to print an error message and do
nothing.
To accomplish this, we need to test for an empty stack, i.e., whether
$DIR_STACK is null or not. Here is one way to do it:
popd ( )
{
    if [ -n "$DIR_STACK" ]; then
        DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
        cd ${DIR_STACK%% *}
        echo "$PWD"
    else
        echo "stack empty, still in $PWD."
    fi
}
In the condition, we have placed the $DIR_STACK in double quotes, so
that when it is expanded it is treated as a single word. If you don't do this,
the shell will expand $DIR_STACK to individual words and the test will
complain that it was given too many arguments.

There is another reason for placing $DIR_STACK in double quotes, which
will become important later on: sometimes the variable being tested will
expand to nothing, and in this example the test will become [ -n ], which
returns true. Surrounding the variable in double quotes ensures that even if
it expands to nothing, there will be an empty string as an argument (i.e., [ -n
"" ]).
Also notice that instead of putting then on a separate line, we put it on the
same line as the if after a semicolon, which is the shell's standard statement
separator character.
We could have used operators other than -n. For example, we could have
used -z and switched the code in the then and else clauses.
While we're cleaning up code we wrote in the last chapter, let's fix up the
error handling in the highest script (Task 4-1). The code for that script was:
filename=${1:?"filename missing."}
howmany=${2:-10}
sort -nr $filename | head -$howmany
Recall that if you omit the first argument (the filename), the shell prints the
message highest: 1: filename missing. We can make this better by
substituting a more standard "usage" message. While we are at it, we can
also make the command more in line with conventional UNIX commands
by requiring a dash before the optional argument.
if [ -z "$1" ]; then
    echo 'usage: highest filename [-N]'
else
  filename=$1
  howmany=${2:--10}
  sort -nr $filename | head $howmany
fi
Notice that we have moved the dash in front of $howmany inside the
parameter expansion ${2:—10}.
It is considered better programming style to enclose all of the code in the if-
then-else, but such code can get confusing if you are writing a long script in
which you need to check for errors and bail out at several points along the
way. Therefore, a more usual style for shell programming follows.
if [ -z "$1" ]; then
    echo 'usage: highest filename [-N]'
    exit 1
fi

    
filename=$1
howmany=${2:--10}
sort -nr $filename | head $howmany
The exit statement informs any calling program whether it ran successfully
or not.
As an example of the = operator, we can add to the graphics utility that we
touched on in Task 4-2. Recall that we were given a filename ending in .pcx
(the original graphics file), and we needed to construct a filename that was
the same but ended in .jpg (the output file). It would be nice to be able to
convert several other types of formats to JPEG files so that we could use
them on a web page. Some common types we might want to convert
besides PCX include XPM (X PixMap), TGA (Targa), TIFF (Tagged Image
File Format), and GIF.
We won't attempt to perform the actual manipulations needed to convert
one graphics format to another ourselves. Instead we'll use some tools that
are freely available on the Internet, graphics conversion utilities from the
NetPBM archive. [5]
Don't worry about the details of how these utilities work; all we want to do
is create a shell frontend that processes the filenames and calls the correct
conversion utilities. At this point it is sufficient to know that each
conversion utility takes a filename as an argument and sends the results of
the conversion to standard output. To reduce the number of conversion
programs necessary to convert between the 30 or so different graphics
formats it supports, NetPBM has its own set of internal formats. These are
called Portable Anymap files (also called PNMs) with extensions .ppm
(Portable Pix Map) for color images, .pgm (Portable Gray Map) for
grayscale images, and .pbm (Portable Bit Map) for black and white images.
Each graphics format has a utility to convert to and from this "central"
PNM format.
The frontend script we are developing should first choose the correct
conversion utility based on the filename extension, and then convert the
resulting PNM file into a JPEG:
filename=$1
extension=${filename##*.}
pnmfile=${filename%.*}.pnm
outfile=${filename%.*}.jpg

if [ -z $filename ]; then
    echo "procfile: No file specified"
    exit 1
fi
if [ $extension = jpg ]; then
    exit 0
elif [ $extension = tga ]; then
    tgatoppm $filename > $pnmfile
elif [ $extension = xpm ]; then
    xpmtoppm $filename > $pnmfile
elif [ $extension = pcx ]; then
    pcxtoppm $filename > $pnmfile
elif [ $extension = tif ]; then
    tifftopnm $filename > $pnmfile
elif [ $extension = gif ]; then
    giftopnm $filename > $pnmfile
else
    echo "procfile: $filename is an unknown graphics file."
    exit 1
fi
pnmtojpeg $pnmfile > $outfile
rm $pnmfile
Recall from the previous chapter that the expression ${filename%.*}
deletes the extension from filename; ${filename##*.} deletes the basename
and keeps the extension.
Once the correct conversion is chosen, the script runs the utility and writes
the output to a temporary file. The second to last line takes the temporary
file and converts it to a JPEG. The temporary file is then removed. Notice
that if the original file was a JPEG we just exit without having to do any
processing.
This script has a few problems. We'll look at improving it later in this
chapter.
File attribute checking
The other kind of operator that can be used in conditional expressions
checks a file for certain properties. There are 24 such operators. We will
cover those of most general interest here; the rest refer to arcana like sticky

bits, sockets, and file descriptors, and thus are of interest only to systems
hackers. Refer to Appendix B for the complete list. Table 5-2 lists those that
we will examine.
Table 5-2. File attribute operators
Operator
True if...
-a file
file exists
-d file
file exists and is a directory
-e file
file exists; same as - a
-f file
file exists and is a regular file (i.e., not a directory or other special type of file)
-r file
You have read permission on file
-s file
file exists and is not empty
-w file
You have write permission on file
-x file
You have execute permission on file, or directory search permission if it is a
directory
-N file
file was modified since it was last read
-O file
You own file
-G file
file 's group ID matches yours (or one of yours, if you are in multiple groups)
file1 -nt
file2
file1 is newer than file2 [6]
file1 -ot file2 file1 is older than file2
[6] Specifically, the -nt and -ot operators compare modification times of two files.
Before we get to an example, you should know that conditional expressions
inside [ and ] can also be combined using the logical operators && and ||,
just as we saw with plain shell commands, in the previous section entitled
Section 5.1.3 ." For example:
if [ condition ] && [ condition ]; then
It's also possible to combine shell commands with conditional expressions
using logical operators, like this:
if command && [ condition ]; then
    ...

You can also negate the truth value of a conditional expression by preceding
it with an exclamation point (!), so that ! expr evaluates to true only if expr
is false. Furthermore, you can make complex logical expressions of
conditional operators by grouping them with parentheses (which must be
"escaped" with backslashes to prevent the shell from treating them
specially), and by using two logical operators we haven't seen yet: -a
(AND) and -o (OR).
The -a and -o operators are similar to the && and || operators used with exit
statuses. However, unlike those operators, -a and -o are only available
inside a test conditional expression.
Here is how we would use two of the file operators, a logical operator, and a
string operator to fix the problem of duplicate stack entries in our pushd
function. Instead of having cd determine whether the argument given is a
valid directory—i.e., by returning with a bad exit status if it's not—we can
do the checking ourselves. Here is the code:
pushd ( )
{
    dirname=$1
    if [ -n "$dirname" ] && [ \( -d "$dirname" \) -a \
            \( -x "$dirname" \) ]; then
        DIR_STACK="$dirname ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD' '}"
        cd $dirname
        echo "$DIR_STACK"
    else
        echo "still in $PWD."
    fi
}
The conditional expression evaluates to true only if the argument $1 is not
null (-n), a directory (-d) and the user has permission to change to it (-x).[7]
Notice that this conditional handles the case where the argument is missing
($dirname is null) first; if it is, the rest of the condition is not executed.
This is important because, if we had just put:
if [ \( -n "$dirname"\) -a  \( -d "$dirname" \) -a \
         \( -x "$dirname" \) ]; then
the second condition, if null, would cause test to complain and the function
would exit prematurely.
Here is a more comprehensive example of the use of file operators.

Task 5-1
Write a script that prints essentially the same information as ls -l but in a more user-friendly way.
Although the code for this task looks at first sight quite complicated, it is a
straightforward application of many of the file operators:
if [ ! -e "$1" ]; then
    echo "file $1 does not exist."
    exit 1
fi
if [ -d "$1" ]; then
    echo -n "$1 is a directory that you may "
    if [ ! -x "$1" ]; then
        echo -n "not "
    fi
    echo "search."
elif [ -f "$1" ]; then
    echo "$1 is a regular file."
else
    echo "$1 is a special type of file."
fi
if [ -O "$1" ]; then
    echo 'you own the file.'
else
    echo 'you do not own the file.'
fi
if [ -r "$1" ]; then
    echo 'you have read permission on the file.'
fi
if [ -w "$1" ]; then
    echo 'you have write permission on the file.'
fi
if [ -x "$1" -a ! -d "$1" ]; then
    echo 'you have execute permission on the file.'
fi
We'll call this script fileinfo. Here's how it works:
The first conditional tests if the file given as argument does not exist
(the exclamation point is the "not" operator; the spaces around it are
required). If the file does not exist, the script prints an error message
and exits with error status.
The second conditional tests if the file is a directory. If so, the first
echo prints part of a message; remember that the -n option tells echo
not to print a LINEFEED at the end. The inner conditional checks if

you do not have search permission on the directory. If you don't have
search permission, the word "not" is added to the partial message.
Then, the message is completed with "search." and a LINEFEED.
The elif clause checks if the file is a regular file; if so, it prints a
message.
The else clause accounts for the various special file types on recent
UNIX systems, such as sockets, devices, FIFO files, etc. We assume
that the casual user isn't interested in details of these.
The next conditional tests to see if the file is owned by you (i.e., if its
owner ID is the same as your login ID). If so, it prints a message
saying that you own it.
The next two conditionals test for your read and write permission on
the file.
The last conditional checks if you can execute the file. It checks to see
if you have execute permission and that the file is not a directory. (If
the file were a directory, execute permission would really mean
directory search permission.) In this test we haven't used any brackets
to group the tests and have relied on operator precedence. Simply put,
operator precedence is the order in which the shell processes the
operators. This is exactly the same concept as arithmetic precedence in
mathematics, where multiply and divide are done before addition and
subtraction. In our case, [ -x "$1" -a ! -d "$1" ] is equivalent to [\( -x
"$1" \) -a \( ! -d "$1" \) ]. The file tests are done first, followed by
any negations (!) and followed by the AND and OR tests.
As an example of fileinfo's output, assume that you do an ls -l of your
current directory and it contains these lines:
-rwxr-xr-x   1 cam      users        2987 Jan 10 20:43 adventure
-rw-r--r--   1 cam      users          30 Jan 10 21:45 alice
-r--r--r--   1 root     root        58379 Jan 11 21:30 core
drwxr-xr-x   2 cam      users        1024 Jan 10 21:41 dodo
alice and core are regular files, dodo is a directory, and adventure is a shell
script. Typing fileinfo adventure produces this output:
adventure is a regular file.
you own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
you have write permission on the file.
you have execute permission on the file.
Typing fileinfo alice results in this:

alice is a regular file.
you own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
you have write permission on the file.
Finally, typing fileinfo dodo results in this:
dodo is a directory that you may search.
you own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
you have write permission on the file.
Typing fileinfo core produces this:
core is a regular file.
you do not own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
OceanofPDF.com

Integer Conditionals
The shell also provides a set of arithmetic tests. These are different from
character string comparisons like < and >, which compare lexicographic
values of strings,[8] not numeric values. For example, "6" is greater than
"57" lexicographically, just as "p" is greater than "ox," but of course the
opposite is true when they're compared as integers.
The integer comparison operators are summarized in Table 5-3.
Table 5-3. Arithmetic test operators
Test Comparison
-lt
Less than
-le
Less than or equal
-eq
Equal
-ge
Greater than or equal
-gt
Greater than
-ne
Not equal
You'll find these to be of the most use in the context of the integer variables
we'll see in the next chapter. They're necessary if you want to combine
integer tests with other types of tests within the same conditional
expression.
However, the shell has a separate syntax for conditional expressions that
involve integers only. It's considerably more efficient, so you should use it
in preference to the arithmetic test operators listed above. Again, we'll cover
the shell's integer conditionals in the next chapter.
[1] Because this is a convention and not a "law," there are exceptions. For
example, diff (find differences between two files) returns 0 for "no
differences," 1 for "differences found," or 2 for an error such as an invalid
filename argument.

[2] The built-in command test is synonymous with [...]. For example, to test
the equivalence of two strings you can either put [ string1 = string2 ] or test
string1 = string2.
[3] [[...]] is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.05.
[5] NetPBM is a free, portable graphics conversion utility package. Further
details can be found on the NetPBM homepage
http://netpbm.sourceforge.net/
[7] Remember that the same permission flag that determines execute
permission on a regular file determines search permission on a directory.
This is why the -x operator checks both things depending on file type.
[8] "Lexicographic order" is really just "dictionary order."
OceanofPDF.com

for
The most obvious enhancement to make the previous script is the ability to
report on multiple files instead of just one. Tests like -e and -d take only
single arguments, so we need a way of calling the code once for each file
given on the command line.
The way to do this—indeed, the way to do many things with bash—is with
a looping construct. The simplest and most widely applicable of the shell's
looping constructs is the for loop. We'll use for to enhance fileinfo soon.
The for loop allows you to repeat a section of code a fixed number of times.
During each time through the code (known as an iteration), a special
variable called a loop variable is set to a different value; this way each
iteration can do something slightly different.
The for loop is somewhat, but not entirely, similar to its counterparts in
conventional languages like C and Pascal. The chief difference is that the
shell's standard for loop doesn't let you specify a number of times to iterate
or a range of values over which to iterate; instead, it only lets you give a
fixed list of values. In other words, you can't do anything like this Pascal-
type code, which executes statements 10 times:
for x := 1 to 10 do
begin
    statements...
end
However, the for loop is ideal for working with arguments on the command
line and with sets of files (e.g., all files in a given directory). We'll look at
an example of each of these. But first, we'll show the syntax for the for
construct:
for name [in list]
do
    statements that can use
            $name...
done
The list is a list of names. (If in list is omitted, the list defaults to "$@", i.e.,
the quoted list of command-line arguments, but we'll always supply the in

list for the sake of clarity.) In our solutions to the following task, we'll show
two simple ways to specify lists.
Task 5-2
Task 4-4 used pattern matching and substitution to list the directories in PATH, one to a line. Unfortunately, old versions of bash
don't have that particular pattern operator. Write a general shell script, listpath, that prints each directory in PATH, one per line. In
addition, have it print out information about each directory, such as the permissions and the modification times.
The easiest way to do this is by changing the IFS variable we saw in
Chapter 4:
IFS=:
    
for dir in $PATH
do
    ls -ld $dir
done
This sets the IFS to be a colon, which is the separator used in PATH. The
for loop loops through, setting dir to each of the colon delimited fields in
PATH. ls is used to print out the directory name and associated information.
The -l parameter specifies the "long" format and the -d tells ls to show only
the directory itself and not its contents.
In using this you might see an error generated by ls saying, for example, ls:
/usr/TeX/bin: No such file or directory. It indicates that a directory in
PATH doesn't exist. We can modify the listpath script to check the PATH
variable for nonexistent directories by adding some of the tests we saw
earlier:
IFS=:
    
for dir in $PATH; do
    if [ -z "$dir" ]; then dir=.; fi
    
    if ! [ -e "$dir" ]; then
        echo "$dir doesn't exist"
    elif ! [ -d "$dir" ]; then
        echo "$dir isn't a directory"
    else
        ls -ld $dir
    fi
done

This time, as the script loops, we first check to see if the length of $dir is
zero (caused by having a value of :: in the PATH). If it is, we set it to the
current directory, then check to see if the directory doesn't exist. If it
doesn't, we print out an appropriate message. Otherwise, we check to see if
the file is not a directory. If it isn't, we say so.
The foregoing illustrated a simple use of for, but it's much more common to
use for to iterate through a list of command-line arguments. To show this,
we can enhance the fileinfo script above to accept multiple arguments. First,
we write a bit of "wrapper" code that does the iteration:
for filename in "$@" ; do
    finfo "$filename"
    echo
done
Next, we make the original script into a function called finfo:[9]
finfo ( )
{
    if [ ! -e "$1" ]; then
        print "file $1 does not exist."
        return 1
    fi
    ...
}
The complete script consists of the for loop code and the above function, in
either order; good programming style dictates that the function definition
should go first.
The fileinfo script works as follows: in the for statement, "$@" is a list of
all positional parameters. For each argument, the body of the loop is run
with filename set to that argument. In other words, the function finfo is
called once for each value of $filename as its first argument ($1). The call
to echo after the call to finfo merely prints a blank line between sets of
information about each file.
Given a directory with the same files as the earlier example, typing
fileinfo* would produce the following output:
adventure is a regular file.
you own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
you have write permission on the file.
you have execute permission on the file.
    
alice is a regular file.

you own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
you have write permission on the file.
    
core is a regular file.
you do not own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
    
dodo is a directory that you may search.
you own the file.
you have read permission on the file.
you have write permission on the file.
Here is a programming task that exploits the other major use of for.
Task 5-3
It is possible to print out all of the directories below a given one by using the -R option of ls. Unfortunately, this doesn't give much
idea about the directory structure because it prints all the files and directories line by line. Write a script that performs a recursive
directory listing and produces output that gives an idea of the structure for a small number of subdirectories.
We'll probably want output that looks something like this:
.
        adventure
                aaiw
                        dodo
                        duchess
                        hatter
                        march_hare
                        queen
                        tarts
                biog
                ttlg
                        red_queen
                        tweedledee
                        tweedledum
        lewis.carroll
Each column represents a directory level. Entries below and to the right of
an entry are files and directories under that directory. Files are just listed
with no entries to their right. This example shows that the directory
adventure and the file lewis.carroll are in the current directory; the
directories aaiw and ttlg, and the file biog are under adventure, etc. To make
life simple, we'll use TABs to line the columns up and ignore any "bleed
over" of filenames from one column into an adjacent one.

We need to be able to traverse the directory hierarchy. To do this easily we'll
use a programming technique known as recursion. Recursion is simply
referencing something from itself; in our case, calling a piece of code from
itself. For example, consider this script, tracedir, in your home directory:
file=$1
echo $file
    
if [ -d "$file" ]; then
    cd $file
    ~/tracedir $(ls)
    cd ..
fi
First we copy and print the first argument. Then we test to see if it is a
directory. If it is, we cd to it and call the script again with an argument of
the files in that directory. This script is recursive; when the first argument is
a directory, a new shell is invoked and a new script is run on the new
directory. The old script waits until the new script returns, then the old
script executes a cd back up one level and exits. This happens in each
invocation of the tracedir script. The recursion will stop only when the first
argument isn't a directory.
Running this on the directory structure listed above with the argument
adventure will produce:
adventure
aaiw
dodo
dodo is a file and the script exits.
This script has a few problems, but it is the basis for the solution to this
task. One major problem with the script is that it is very inefficient. Each
time the script is called, a new shell is created. We can improve on this by
making the script into a function, because (as you probably remember from
Chapter 4) functions are part of the shell they are started from. We also need
a way to set up the TAB spacing. The easiest way is to have an initializing
script or function and call the recursive routine from that. Let's look at this
routine.
recls ( )
{
    singletab="\t"
    
    for tryfile in "$@"; do
        echo $tryfile

        if [ -d "$tryfile" ]; then
            thisfile=$tryfile
            recdir $(command ls $tryfile)
        fi
    done
    
    unset dir singletab tab
}
First, we set up a variable to hold the TAB character for the echo command
(Chapter 7 explains all of the options and formatting commands you can
use with echo). Then we loop through each argument supplied to the
function and print it out. If it is a directory, we call our recursive routine,
supplying the list of files with ls. We have introduced a new command at
this point: command. command is a shell built-in that disables function
and alias look-up. In this case, it is used to make sure that the ls command
is one from your command search path, PATH, and not a function (for
further information on command see Chapter 7). After it's all over, we
clean up by unsetting the variables we have used.
Now we can expand on our earlier shell script.
recdir ( )
{
    tab=$tab$singletab
    
    for file in "$@"; do
        echo -e $tab$file
        thisfile=$thisfile/$file
    
        if [ -d "$thisfile" ]; then
            recdir $(command ls $thisfile)
        fi
    
        thisfile=${thisfile%/*}
    done
    
    tab=${tab%"$singletab"}
}
Each time it is called, recdir loops through the files it is given as arguments.
For each one it prints the filename and then, if the file is a directory, calls
itself with arguments set to the contents of the directory. There are two
details that have to be taken care of: the number of TABs to use, and the
pathname of the "current" directory in the recursion.

Each time we go down a level in the directory hierarchy we want to add a
TAB character, so we append a TAB to the variable tab every time we enter
recdir. Likewise, when we exit recdir we are moving up a directory level,
so we remove the TAB when we leave the function. Initially, tab is not set,
so the first time recdir is called, tab will be set to one TAB. If we recurse
into a lower directory, recdir will be called again and another TAB will be
appended. Remember that tab is a global variable, so it will grow and
shrink in TABs for every entry and exit of recdir. The -e option to echo tells
it to recognize escaped formatting characters, in our case the TAB character,
\t.
In this version of the recursive routine we haven't used cd to move between
directories. That means that an ls of a directory will have to be supplied
with a relative path to files further down in the hierarchy. To do this, we
need to keep track of the directory we are currently examining. The
initialization routine sets the variable thisfile to the directory name each
time a directory is found while looping. This variable is then used in the
recursive routine to keep the relative pathname of the current file being
examined. On each iteration of the loop, thisfile has the current filename
appended to it, and at the end of the loop the filename is removed.
You might like to think of ways to modify the behavior and improve the
output of this code. Here are some programming challenges:
1. In the current version, there is no way to determine if biog is a file or a
directory. An empty directory looks no different to a file in the listing.
Change the output so it appends a / to each directory name when it
displays it.
2. Modify the code so that it only recurses down a maximum of eight
subdirectories (which is about the maximum before the lines overflow
the right-hand side of the screen). Hint: think about how TABs have
been implemented.
3. Change the output so it includes dashed lines and adds a blank line
after each directory, thus:
.
|
|-------adventure
|       |
|       |-------aaiw
|       |       |

|       |       |-------dodo
|       |       |-------duchess
|       |       |-------hatter
|       |       |-------march_hare
|       |       |-------queen
|       |       |-------tarts
|       |
|       |-------biog
...
4. Hint: you need at least two other variables that contain the characters
"|" and "-".
At the start of this section we pointed out that the for loop in its standard
form wasn't capable of iterating over a specified range of values as can be
done in most programming languages. bash 2.0 introduced a new style of
for loop which caters for this task; the arithmetic for loop. Well come back
to it in the next chapter when we look at arithmetic operations.
[9] A function can have the same name as a script; however, this isn't good
programming practice.
OceanofPDF.com

case
The next flow-control construct we will cover is case. While the case
statement in Pascal and the similar switch statement in Java and C can be
used to test simple values like integers and characters, bash's case construct
lets you test strings against patterns that can contain wildcard characters.
Like its conventional-language counterparts, case lets you express a series
of if-then-else type statements in a concise way.
The syntax of case is as follows:
case expression 
            in
            pattern1 
            )
            statements ;;
             pattern2 
            )
            statements ;;
             ...
            esac
Any of the patterns can actually be several patterns separated by pipe
characters (|). If expression matches one of the patterns, its corresponding
statements are executed. If there are several patterns separated by pipe
characters, the expression can match any of them in order for the associated
statements to be run. The patterns are checked in order until a match is
found; if none is found, nothing happens.
This construct should become clearer with an example. Let's revisit our
solution to Task 4-2 and the additions to it presented earlier in this chapter
(our graphics utility). Remember that we wrote some code that processed
input files according to their suffixes ( .pcx for PCX format, .gif for GIF
format, etc.).
We can improve upon this solution in two ways. Firstly, we can use a for
loop to allow multiple files to be processed one at a time; secondly, we can
use the case construct to streamline the code:
for filename in "$@"; do
    pnmfile=${filename%.*}.ppm
    case $filename in

        *.jpg ) exit 0 ;;
        *.tga ) tgatoppm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.xpm ) xpmtoppm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.pcx ) pcxtoppm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.tif ) tifftopnm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.gif ) giftopnm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
            * ) echo "procfile: $filename is an unknown graphics file."
                exit 1 ;;
    esac
    outfile=${pnmfile%.ppm}.new.jpg
    pnmtojpeg $pnmfile > $outfile
    rm $pnmfile
done
The case construct in this code does the same thing as the if statements that
we saw in the earlier version. It is, however, clearer and easier to follow.
The first six patterns in the case statement match the various file extensions
that we wish to process. The last pattern matches anything that hasn't
already been matched by the previous statements. It is essentially a catchall
and is analogous to the default case in C.
There is another slight difference to the previous version; we have moved
the pattern matching and replacement inside the added for loop that
processes all of the command-line arguments. Each time we pass through
the loop, we want to create a temporary and final file with a name based on
the name in the current command-line argument.
We'll return to this example in Chapter 6, when we further develop the
script and discuss how to handle dash options on the command line. In the
meantime, here is a task that requires that we use case.
Task 5-4

Write a function that implements the Korn shell's cd old new. cd takes the pathname of the current directory and tries to find the
string old. If it finds it, it substitutes new and attempts to change to the resulting directory.
We can implement this by using a case statement to check the number of
arguments and the built-in cd command to do the actual change of
directory.
Here is the code:[10]
cd( )
{
    case "$#" in
        0 | 1)  builtin cd $1 ;;
        2    ) newdir=${PWD//$1/$2}
                case "$newdir" in
                    $PWD)   echo "bash: cd: bad substitution" >&2 ;
                        return 1 ;;
                    *   )   builtin cd "$newdir" ;;
                esac ;;
        *    )  echo "bash: cd: wrong arg count" 1>&2 ; return 1 ;;
    esac
}
The case statement in this task tests the number of arguments to our cd
command against three alternatives.
For zero or one arguments, we want our cd to work just like the built-in
one. The first alternative in the case statement does this. It includes
something we haven't used so far; the pipe symbol between the 0 and 1
means that either pattern is an acceptable match. If the number of
arguments is either of these, the built-in cd is executed.
The next alternative is for two arguments, which is where we'll add the new
functionality to cd. The first thing that has to be done is finding and
replacing the old string with the new one. We use the pattern matching and
replacement that we saw in the last chapter, the result being assigned to
newdir. If the substitution didn't take place, the pathname will be
unchanged. We'll use this fact in the next few lines.
Another case statement chooses between performing the cd or reporting an
error because the new directory is unchanged. The * alternative is a catchall
for anything other than the current pathname (caught by the first
alternative).
You might notice one small problem with this code: if your old and new
strings are the same you'll get bash:: cd: bad substitution. It should just

leave you in the same directory with no error message, but because the
directory path doesn't change, it uses the first alternative in the inner case
statement. The problem lies in knowing if sed has performed a substitution
or not. You might like to think about ways to fix this problem (hint: you
could use grep to check whether the pathname has the old string in it).
The last alternative in the outer case statement prints an error message if
there are more than two arguments.
[10] To make the function a little clearer, we've used some advanced I/O
redirection. I/O redirection is covered in Chapter 7.
OceanofPDF.com

select
All of the flow-control constructs we have seen so far are also available in
the Bourne shell, and the C shell has equivalents with different syntax. Our
next construct, select, is available only in the Korn shell and bash;[11]
moreover, it has no analogy in conventional programming languages.
select allows you to generate simple menus easily. It has concise syntax, but
it does quite a lot of work. The syntax is:
select name 
            [in 
            list
            ]
do
    statements that can use
            $name...
done
This is the same syntax as for except for the keyword select. And like for,
you can omit the in list and it will default to "$@", i.e., the list of quoted
command-line arguments. Here is what select does:
1. Generates a menu of each item in list, formatted with numbers for each
choice
2. Prompts the user for a number
3. Stores the selected choice in the variable name and the selected
number in the built-in variable REPLY
4. Executes the statements in the body
5. Repeats the process forever (but see below for how to exit)
Here is a task that adds another command to our pushd and popd utilities.
Task 5-5
Write a function that allows the user to select a directory from a list of directories currently in the pushd directory stack. The
selected directory is moved to the front of the stack and becomes the current working directory.

The display and selection of directories is best handled by using select. We
can start off with something along the lines of:[12]
selectd ( )
{
    PS3='directory? '
    select selection in $DIR_STACK; do
        if [ $selection ]; then
            #statements that manipulate the stack...
            break
        else
            echo 'invalid selection.'
        fi
    done
}
If you type DIR_STACK="/usr /home /bin" and execute this function,
you'll see:
1) /usr
2) /home
3) /bin
directory?
The built-in shell variable PS3 contains the prompt string that select uses;
its default value is the not particularly useful "#?". So the first line of the
above code sets it to a more relevant value.
The select statement constructs the menu from the list of choices. If the user
enters a valid number (from 1 to the number of directories), then the
variable selection is set to the corresponding value; otherwise it is null. (If
the user just presses RETURN, the shell prints the menu again.)
The code in the loop body checks if selection is non-null. If so, it executes
the statements we will add in a short while; then the break statement exits
the select loop. If selection is null, the code prints an error message and
repeats the menu and prompt.
The break statement is the usual way of exiting a select loop. Actually (like
its analog in Java and C), it can be used to exit any surrounding control
structure we've seen so far (except case, where the double semicolons act
like break) as well as the while and until we will see soon. We haven't
introduced break until now because it is considered bad coding style to use
it to exit a loop. However, it can make code easier to read if used
judiciously. break is necessary for exiting select when the user makes a
valid choice. [13]

Now we'll add the missing pieces to the code:
selectd ( )
{
    PS3='directory? '
    dirstack=" $DIR_STACK "
    
    select selection in $dirstack; do
        if [ $selection ]; then
            DIR_STACK="$selection${dirstack%% $selection *}"
            DIR_STACK="$DIR_STACK ${dirstack##* $selection }"
            DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK% }
            cd $selection
            break
        else
            echo 'invalid selection.'
        fi
    done
}
The first two lines initialize environment variables. dirstack is a copy of
DIR_STACK with spaces appended at the beginning and end so that each
directory in the list is of the form space directory space. This form
simplifies the code when we come to manipulating the directory stack.
The select and if statements are the same as in our initial function. The new
code inside the if uses bash's pattern-matching capability to manipulate the
directory stack.
The first statement sets DIR_STACK to selection, followed by dirstack
with everything from selection to the end of the list removed. The second
statement adds everything in the list from the directory following selection
to the end of DIR_STACK. The next line removes the trailing space that
was appended at the start. To complete the operation, a cd is performed to
the new directory, followed by a break to exit the select code.
As an example of the list manipulation performed in this function, consider
a DIR_STACK set to /home /bin /usr2. In this case, dirstack would
become /home /bin /usr2. Typing selectd would result in:
$ selectd
1) /home
2) /bin
3) /usr2
directory?
After selecting /bin from the list, the first statement inside the if section sets
DIR_STACK to /bin followed by dirstack with everything from /bin

onwards removed, i.e., /home.
The second statement then takes DIR_STACK and appends everything in
dirstack following /bin (i.e., /usr2) to it. The value of DIR_STACK
becomes /bin /home /usr2. The trailing space is removed in the next line.
[11] select is not available in bash versions prior to 1.14.
[12] Versions of bash prior to 1.14.3 have a serious bug with select. These
versions will crash if the select list is empty. In this case, surround selects
with a test for a null list.
[13] A user can also type CTRL-D (for end-of-input) to get out of a select
loop. This gives the user a uniform way of exiting, but it doesn't help the
shell programmer much.
OceanofPDF.com

while and until
The remaining two flow control constructs bash provides are while and
until. These are similar; they both allow a section of code to be run
repetitively while (or until) a certain condition becomes true. They also
resemble analogous constructs in Pascal (while/do and repeat/until) and C
(while and do/until).
while and until are actually most useful when combined with features we
will see in the next chapter, such as integer arithmetic, input/output of
variables, and command-line processing. Yet we can show a useful example
even with what we have covered so far.
The syntax for while is:
while condition
            do
            statements...
            done
For until, just substitute until for while in the above example. As with if,
the condition is really a list of statements that are run; the exit status of the
last one is used as the value of the condition. You can use a conditional with
test here, just as you can with if.
Note that the only difference between while and until is the way the
condition is handled. In while, the loop executes as long as the condition is
true; in until, it runs as long as the condition is false. The until condition is
checked at the top of the loop, not at the bottom as it is in analogous
constructs in C and Pascal.
The result is that you can convert any until into a while by simply negating
the condition. The only place where until might be more meaningful is
something like this:
until command
            ; do
            statements...
            done
The meaning of this is essentially, "Do statements until command runs
correctly." This is not a likely contingency.

Here is an earlier task that can be rewritten using a while.
Task 5-6
Reimplement Task 5-2 without the use of the IFS variable.
We can use the while construct and pattern matching to traverse the PATH
list:
path=$PATH:
    
while [ $path ]; do
    ls -ld ${path%%:*}
    path=${path#*:}
done
The first line copies PATH to a temporary copy, path, and appends a colon
to it. Normally colons are used only between directories in PATH; adding
one to the end makes the code simple.
Inside the while loop we display the directory with ls as we did in Task 5-2.
path is then updated by removing the first directory pathname and colon
(which is why we needed to append the colon in the first line of the script).
The while will keep looping until $path expands to nothing (the empty
string ""), which occurs once the last directory in path has been listed.
Here is another task that is a good candidate for until.
Task 5-7
Write a script that attempts to copy a file to a directory and, if it fails, waits five seconds, then tries again, continuing until it
succeeds.
Here is the code:
until cp $1 $2; do
    echo 'Attempt to copy failed. waiting...'
    sleep 5
done
This is a fairly simple use of until. First, we use the cp command to
perform the copy for us. If it can't perform the copy for any reason, it will

return with a non-zero exit code. We set our until loop so that if the result
of the copy is not 0 then the script prints a message and waits five seconds.
As we said earlier, an until loop can be converted to a while by the use of
the ! operator:
while ! cp $1 $2; do
    echo 'Attempt to copy failed. waiting...'
    sleep 5
done
In our opinion, you'll seldom need to use until; therefore, we'll use while
throughout the rest of this book. We'll see further use of the while construct
in Chapter 7.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 6. Command-Line Options and Typed
Variables
You should have a healthy grasp of shell programming techniques now that
you have gone through the previous chapters. What you have learned up to
this point enables you to write many non-trivial, useful shell scripts and
functions.
Still, you may have noticed some remaining gaps in the knowledge you
need to write shell code that behaves like the UNIX commands you are
used to. In particular, if you are an experienced UNIX user, it might have
occurred to you that none of the example scripts shown so far have the
ability to handle options preceded by a dash (-) on the command line. And if
you program in a conventional language like C or Pascal, you will have
noticed that the only type of data that we have seen in shell variables is
character strings; we haven't seen how to do arithmetic, for example.
These capabilities are certainly crucial to the shell's ability to function as a
useful UNIX programming language. In this chapter, we will show how
bash supports these and related features.
OceanofPDF.com

Command-Line Options
We have already seen many examples of the positional parameters
(variables called 1, 2, 3, etc.) that the shell uses to store the command-line
arguments to a shell script or function when it runs. We have also seen
related variables like * (for the string of all arguments) and # (for the
number of arguments).
Indeed, these variables hold all of the information on the user's command-
line. But consider what happens when options are involved. Typical UNIX
commands have the form command [-options]args, meaning that there can
be 0 or more options. If a shell script processes the command teatime alice
hatter, then $1 is "alice" and $2 is "hatter". But if the command is teatime
-o alice hatter, then $1 is -o, $2 is "alice", and $3 is "hatter".
You might think you could write code like this to handle it:
if [ $1 = -o ]; then
    code that processes the -o option
    1=$2
    2=$3
fi
    
normal processing of $1 and $2...
But this code has several problems. First, assignments like 1=$2 are illegal
because positional parameters are read-only. Even if they were legal,
another problem is that this kind of code imposes limitations on how many
arguments the script can handle—which is very unwise. Furthermore, if this
command had several possible options, the code to handle all of them
would get very messy very quickly.
OceanofPDF.com

shift
Luckily, the shell provides a way around this problem. The command shift
performs the function of:
1=$2
2=$3
...
for every argument, regardless of how many there are. If you supply a
numeric argument to shift, it will shift the arguments that many times over;
for example, shift 3 has this effect:
1=$4
2=$5
...
This leads immediately to some code that handles a single option (call it -o)
and arbitrarily many arguments:
if [ $1 = -o ]; then
    process the -o option  
    shift
fi
normal processing of arguments...
After the if construct, $1, $2, etc., are set to the correct arguments.
We can use shift together with the programming features we have seen so
far to implement simple option schemes. However, we will need additional
help when things get more complex. The getopts built-in command, which
we will introduce later, provides this help.
shift by itself gives us enough power to implement the - N option to the
highest script we saw in Chapter 4 (Task 4-1). Recall that this script takes
an input file that lists artists and the number of albums you have by them. It
sorts the list and prints out the N highest numbers, in descending order. The
code that does the actual data processing is:
filename=$1
howmany=${2:-10}
sort -nr $filename | head -$howmany
Our original syntax for calling this script was highest filename [- N ], where
N defaults to 10 if omitted. Let's change this to a more conventional UNIX

syntax, in which options are given before arguments: highest [- N ]
filename. Here is how we would write the script with this syntax:
if [ -n "$(echo $1 | grep '^-[0-9][0-9]*$')" ]; then
    howmany=$1
    shift
elif [ -n "$(echo $1 | grep '^-')" ]; then
    print 'usage: highest [-N] filename'
    exit 1
else
    howmany="-10"
fi
    
filename=$1
sort -nr $filename | head $howmany
This uses the grep search utility to test if $1 matches the appropriate
pattern. To do this we provide the regular expression ^-[0-9][0-9]*$ to grep,
which is interpreted as "an initial dash followed by a digit, optionally
followed by one or more digits." If a match is found then grep will return
the match and the test will be true, otherwise grep will return nothing and
processing will pass to the elif test. Notice that we have enclosed the
regular expression in single quotes to stop the shell from interpreting the $
and *, and pass them through to grep unmodified.
If $1 doesn't match, we test to see if it's an option at all, i.e., if it matches
the pattern - followed by anything else. If it does, then it's invalid; we print
an error message and exit with error status. If we reach the final (else) case,
we assume that $1 is a filename and treat it as such in the ensuing code. The
rest of the script processes the data as before.
We can extend what we have learned so far to a general technique for
handling multiple options. For the sake of concreteness, assume that our
script is called alice and we want to handle the options -a, -b, and -c:
while [ -n "$(echo $1 | grep '-')" ]; do
    case $1 in
        -a ) process option -a 
               ;;
        -b ) process option -b 
               ;;
        -c ) process option -c 
               ;;
        *  ) echo 'usage: alice [-a] [-b] [-c] args...'
             exit 1
    esac
    shift

done
normal processing of arguments...
This code checks $1 repeatedly as long as it starts with a dash (-). Then the
case construct runs the appropriate code depending on which option $1 is.
If the option is invalid—i.e., if it starts with a dash but isn't -a, -b, or -c—
then the script prints a usage message and returns with an error exit status.
After each option is processed, the arguments are shifted over. The result is
that the positional parameters are set to the actual arguments when the
while loop finishes.
Notice that this code is capable of handling options of arbitrary length, not
just one letter (e.g., -adventure instead of -a).
OceanofPDF.com

Options with Arguments
We need to add one more ingredient to make option processing really
useful. Recall that many commands have options that take their own
arguments. For example, the cut command, on which we relied heavily in
Chapter 4, accepts the option -d with an argument that determines the field
delimiter (if it is not the default TAB). To handle this type of option, we just
use another shift when we are processing the option.
Assume that, in our alice script, the option -b requires its own argument.
Here is the modified code that will process it:
while [ -n "$(echo $1 | grep '-')" ]; do
    case $1 in
        -a ) process option -a ;;
        -b ) process option -b 
               $2 is the option's argument
             shift ;;
        -c ) process option -c ;;
        *  ) echo 'usage: alice [-a] [-b barg] [-c] args...'
             exit 1
    esac
    shift
done
    
normal processing of arguments...
OceanofPDF.com

getopts
So far, we have a complete, but constrained, way of handling command-line
options. The above code does not allow a user to combine arguments with a
single dash, e.g., -abc instead of -a -b -c. It also doesn't allow one to specify
arguments to options without a space in between, e.g., -barg in addition to -
b arg.[1]
The shell provides a built-in way to deal with multiple complex options
without these constraints. The built-in command getopts [2] can be used as
the condition of the while in an option-processing loop. Given a
specification of which options are valid and which require their own
arguments, it sets up the body of the loop to process each option in turn.
getopts takes two arguments. The first is a string that can contain letters and
colons. Each letter is a valid option; if a letter is followed by a colon, the
option requires an argument. getopts picks options off the command line
and assigns each one (without the leading dash) to a variable whose name is
getopts's second argument. As long as there are options left to process,
getopts will return exit status 0; when the options are exhausted, it returns
exit status 1, causing the while loop to exit.
getopts does a few other things that make option processing easier; we'll
encounter them as we examine how to use getopts in this example:
while getopts ":ab:c" opt; do
    case $opt in
        a  ) process option -a 
               ;;
        b  ) process option -b 
               $OPTARG is the option's argument 
               ;;
        c  ) process option -c 
               ;;
        \? ) echo 'usage: alice [-a] [-b barg] [-c] args...'
             exit 1
    esac
done
shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
normal processing of arguments...

The call to getopts in the while condition sets up the loop to accept the
options -a, -b, and -c, and specifies that -b takes an argument. (We will
explain the : that starts the option string in a moment.) Each time the loop
body is executed, it will have the latest option available, without a dash (-),
in the variable opt.
If the user types an invalid option, getopts normally prints an unfortunate
error message (of the form cmd: getopts: illegal option — o) and sets opt
to ?. However if you begin the option letter string with a colon, getopts
won't print the message.[3] We recommend that you specify the colon and
provide your own error message in a case that handles ?, as above.
We have modified the code in the case construct to reflect what getopts
does. But notice that there are no more shift statements inside the while
loop: getopts does not rely on shifts to keep track of where it is. It is
unnecessary to shift arguments over until getopts is finished, i.e., until the
while loop exits.
If an option has an argument, getopts stores it in the variable OPTARG,
which can be used in the code that processes the option.
The one shift statement left is after the while loop. getopts stores in the
variable OPTIND the number of the next argument to be processed; in this
case, that's the number of the first (non-option) command-line argument.
For example, if the command line were alice -ab rabbit, then $OPTIND
would be "3". If it were alice -a -b rabbit, then $OPTIND would be "4".
The expression $(($OPTIND - 1)) is an arithmetic expression (as we'll see
later in this chapter) equal to $OPTIND minus 1. This value is used as the
argument to shift. The result is that the correct number of arguments are
shifted out of the way, leaving the "real" arguments as $1, $2, etc.
Before we continue, now is a good time to summarize everything getopts
does:
1. Its first argument is a string containing all valid option letters. If an
option requires an argument, a colon follows its letter in the string. An
initial colon causes getopts not to print an error message when the user
gives an invalid option.

2. Its second argument is the name of a variable that will hold each
option letter (without any leading dash) as it is processed.
3. If an option takes an argument, the argument is stored in the variable
OPTARG.
4. The variable OPTIND contains a number equal to the next command-
line argument to be processed. After getopts is done, it equals the
number of the first "real" argument.
The advantages of getopts are that it minimizes extra code necessary to
process options and fully supports the standard UNIX option syntax (as
specified in intro of the User's Manual).
As a more concrete example, let's return to our graphics utility (Task 4-2).
So far, we have given our script the ability to process various types of
graphics files such as PCX files (ending with .pcx), GIF files (.gif), XPM
files (.xpm), etc. As a reminder, here is what we have coded in the script so
far:
filename=$1
    
if [ -z $filename ]; then
    echo "procfile: No file specified"
    exit 1
fi
    
for filename in "$@"; do
    pnmfile=${filename%.*}.ppm
    case $filename in
        *.jpg ) exit 0 ;;
        *.tga ) tgatoppm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.xpm ) xpmtoppm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.pcx ) pcxtoppm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.tif ) tifftopnm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
        *.gif ) giftopnm $filename > $pnmfile ;;
            * ) echo "procfile: $filename is an unknown graphics file."
                exit 1 ;;
    esac
    outfile=${pnmfile%.ppm}.new.jpg

    pnmtojpeg $pnmfile > $outfile
    rm $pnmfile
done
This script works quite well, in that it will convert the various different
graphics files that we have lying around into JPEG files suitable for our
web page. However, NetPBM has a whole range of useful utilities besides
file converters that we could use on the images. It would be nice to be able
to select some of them from our script.
Things we might wish to do to modify the images include changing the size
and placing a border around them. We want to make the script as flexible as
possible; we will want to change the size of the resulting images and we
might not want a border around every one of them, so we need to be able to
specify to the script what it should do. This is where the command-line
option processing will come in useful.
We can change the size of an image by using the NetPBM utility pnmscale.
You'll recall from the last chapter that the NetPBM package has its own
format called PNM, the Portable Anymap. The fancy utilities we'll be using
to change the size and add borders work on PNMs. Fortunately, our script
already converts the various formats we give it into PNMs. Besides a PNM
file, pnmscale also requires some arguments telling it how to scale the
image.[4] There are various different ways to do this, but the one we'll
choose is -xysize which takes a horizontal and a vertical size in pixels for
the final image.[5]
The other utility we need is pnmmargin, which places a colored border
around an image. Its arguments are the width of the border in pixels and the
color of the border.
Our graphics utility will need some options to reflect the ones we have just
seen. -s size will specify a size into which the final image will fit (minus
any border), -w width will specify the width of the border around the image,
and -c color-name will specify the color of the border.
Here is the code for the script procimage that includes the option
processing:
# Set up the defaults
size=320
width=1

colour="-color black"
usage="Usage: $0 [-s N] [-w N] [-c S] imagefile..."
while getopts ":s:w:c:" opt; do
    case $opt in
      s  ) size=$OPTARG ;;
      w  ) width=$OPTARG ;;
      c  ) colour="-color $OPTARG" ;;
      \? ) echo $usage
           exit 1 ;;
    esac
done
shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
if [ -z "$@" ]; then
    echo $usage
    exit 1
fi
# Process the input files
for filename in "$*"; do
    ppmfile=${filename%.*}.ppm
    case $filename in
        *.gif ) giftopnm $filename > $ppmfile ;;
        *.tga ) tgatoppm $filename > $ppmfile ;;
        *.xpm ) xpmtoppm $filename > $ppmfile ;;
        *.pcx ) pcxtoppm $filename > $ppmfile ;;
        *.tif ) tifftopnm $filename > $ppmfile ;;
        *.jpg ) jpegtopnm -quiet $filename > $ppmfile ;;
            * ) echo "$0: Unknown filetype '${filename##*.}'"
                exit 1;;
    esac
    outfile=${ppmfile%.ppm}.new.jpg
    pnmscale -quiet -xysize $size $size $ppmfile |
        pnmmargin $colour $width |
        pnmtojpeg > $outfile
    rm $ppmfile
done

The first several lines of this script initialize variables with default settings.
The defaults set the image size to 320 pixels and a black border of width 1
pixel.
The while, getopts, and case constructs process the options in the same
way as in the previous example. The code for the first three options assigns
the respective argument to a variable (replacing the default value). The last
option is a catchall for any invalid options.
The rest of the code works in much the same way as in the previous
example except we have added the pnmscale and pnmmargin utilities in a
processing pipeline at the end.
The script also now generates a different filename; it appends .new.jpg to
the basename. This allows us to process a JPEG file as input, applying
scaling and borders, and write it out without destroying the original file.
This version doesn't address every issue, e.g., what if we don't want any
scaling to be performed? We'll return to this script and develop it further in
the next chapter.
[1] Although most UNIX commands allow this, it is actually contrary to the
Command Syntax Standard Rules in intro of the User's Manual.
[2] getopts replaces the external command getopt, used in Bourne shell
programming; getopts is better integrated into the shell's syntax and runs
more efficiently. C programmers will recognize getopts as very similar to
the standard library routine getopt.
[3] You can also turn off the getopts messages by setting the environment
variable OPTERR to 0. We will continue to use the colon method in this
book.
[4] We'll also need the -quiet option, which suppresses diagnostic output
from some NetPBM utilities.
[5] Actually, -xysize fits the image into a box defined by its arguments
without changing the aspect ratio of the image, i.e., without stretching the
image horizontally or vertically. For example, if you had an image of size

200 by 100 pixels and you processed it with pnmscale -xysize 100 100,
you'd end up with an image of size 100 by 50 pixels.
OceanofPDF.com

Typed Variables
So far we've seen how bash variables can be assigned textual values.
Variables can also have other attributes, including being read only and
being of type integer.
You can set variable attributes with the declare built-in. [6] Table 6-1
summarizes the available options with declare.[7] A - turns the option on,
while + turns it off.
Table 6-1. Declare options
Option Meaning
-a
The variables are treated as arrays
-f
Use function names only
-F
Display function names without definitions
-i
The variables are treated as integers
-r
Makes the variables read-only
-x
Marks the variables for export via the environment
Typing declare on its own displays the values of all variables in the
environment. The -f option limits this display to the function names and
definitions currently in the environment. -F limits it further by displaying
only the function names.
The -a option declares arrays—a variable type that we haven't seen yet, but
will be discussed shortly.
The -i option is used to create an integer variable, one that holds numeric
values and can be used in and modified by arithmetic operations. Consider
this example:
$ val1=12 val2=5
$ result1=val*val2
$ echo $result1
val1*val2
$

$ declare -i val3=12 val4=5
$ declare -i result2
$ result2=val3*val4
$ echo $result2
60
In the first example, the variables are ordinary shell variables and the result
is just the string "val1*val2". In the second example, all of the variables
have been declared as type integer. The variable result contains the result
of the arithmetic computation twelve multiplied by five. Actually, we didn't
need to declare val3 and val4 as type integer. Anything being assigned to
result2 is interpreted as an arithmetic statement and evaluation is
attempted.
The -x option to declare operates in the same way as the export built-in
that we saw in Chapter 3. It allows the listed variables to be exported
outside the current shell environment.
The -r option creates a read-only variable, one that cannot have its value
changed by subsequent assignment statements and cannot be unset.
A related built-in is readonly name ... which operates in exactly the same
way as declare -r. readonly has three options: -f, which makes readonly
interpret the name arguments as function names rather than variable names,
-p, which makes the built-in print a list of all read-only names, and -a,
which interprets the name arguments as arrays.
Lastly, variables declared in a function are local to that function, just like
using local to declare them.
[6] The typeset built-in is synonymous with declare but is considered
obsolete.
[7] The -a and -F options are not available in bash prior to version 2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

Integer Variables and Arithmetic
The expression $(($OPTIND - 1)) in the last graphics utility example
shows another way that the shell can do integer arithmetic. As you might
guess, the shell interprets words surrounded by $(( and )) as arithmetic
expressions.[8] Variables in arithmetic expressions do not need to be
preceded by dollar signs, though it is not wrong to do so.
Arithmetic expressions are evaluated inside double quotes, like tildes,
variables, and command substitutions. We're finally in a position to state the
definitive rule about quoting strings: when in doubt, enclose a string in
single quotes, unless it contains tildes or any expression involving a dollar
sign, in which case you should use double quotes.
For example, the date command on modern versions of UNIX accepts
arguments that tell it how to format its output. The argument +%j tells it to
print the day of the year, i.e., the number of days since December 31st of
the previous year.
We can use +%j to print a little holiday anticipation message:
echo "Only $(( (365-$(date +%j)) / 7 )) weeks until the New Year"
We'll show where this fits in the overall scheme of command-line
processing in Chapter 7.
The arithmetic expression feature is built into bash's syntax, and was
available in the Bourne shell (most versions) only through the external
command expr. Thus it is yet another example of a desirable feature
provided by an external command being better integrated into the shell.
getopts, as we have already seen, is another example of this design trend.
bash arithmetic expressions are equivalent to their counterparts in the Java
and C languages.[9] Precedence and associativity are the same as in C. Table
6-2 shows the arithmetic operators that are supported. Although some of
these are (or contain) special characters, there is no need to backslash-
escape them, because they are within the $((...)) syntax.
Table 6-2. Arithmetic operators

Operator Meaning
++
Increment by one (prefix and postfix)
—
Decrement by one (prefix and postfix)
+
Plus
-
Minus
*
Multiplication
/
Division (with truncation)
%
Remainder
**
Exponentiation[10]
<<
Bit-shift left
>>
Bit-shift right
&
Bitwise and
|
Bitwise or
~
Bitwise not
!
Logical not
^
Bitwise exclusive or
,
Sequential evaluation
[10] Note that ** is not in the C language.
The ++ and - operators are useful when you want to increment or decrement
a value by one.[11] They work the same as in Java and C, e.g., value++
increments value by 1. This is called post-increment; there is also a pre-
increment: ++value. The difference becomes evident with an example:
$ i=0
$ echo $i
0
$ echo $((i++))
0
$ echo $i
1
$ echo $((++i))

2
$ echo $i
2
In both cases the value has been incremented by one. However, in the first
case (post-increment) the value of the variable was passed to echo and then
the variable was incremented. In the second case (pre-increment) the
increment was performed and then the variable passed to echo.
Parentheses can be used to group subexpressions. The arithmetic expression
syntax also (as in C) supports relational operators as "truth values" of 1 for
true and 0 for false. Table 6-3 shows the relational operators and the logical
operators that can be used to combine relational expressions.
Table 6-3. Relational operators
Operator Meaning
<
Less than
>
Greater than
<=
Less than or equal to
>=
Greater than or equal to
==
Equal to
!=
Not equal to
&&
Logical and
||
Logical or
For example, $((3 > 2)) has the value 1; $(( (3 > 2) || (4 <= 1) )) also has the
value 1, since at least one of the two subexpressions is true.
The shell also supports base N numbers, where N can be from 2 to 36. The
notation B # N means "N base B". Of course, if you omit the B #, the base
defaults to 10.
OceanofPDF.com

Arithmetic Conditionals
In Chapter 5, we saw how to compare strings by the use of [...] notation (or
with the test built-in). Arithmetic conditions can also be tested in this way.
However, the tests have to be carried out with their own operators. These
are shown in Table 6-4.
Table 6-4. Test relational operators
Operator Meaning
-lt
Less than
-gt
Greater than
-le
Less than or equal to
-ge
Greater than or equal to
-eq
Equal to
-ne
Not equal to
And as with string comparisons, the arithmetic test returns a result of true or
false; 0 if true, 1 otherwise. So, for example, [ 3 -gt 2 ] produces exit status
0, as does [ \( 3 -gt 2 \) || \( 4 -le 1 \) ], but [ \( 3 -gt 2 \) && \( 4 -le 1 \) ]
has exit status 1 since the second subexpression isn't true.
In these examples we have had to escape the parentheses and pass them to
test as separate arguments. As you can see, the result can look rather
unreadable if there are many parentheses.
Another way to make arithmetic tests is to use the $((...)) form to
encapsulate the condition. For example: [ $(((3 > 2) && (4 <= 1))) = 1 ].
This evaluates the conditionals and then compares the resulting value to 1
(true).[12]
There is an even neater and more efficient way of performing an arithmetic
test: by using the ((...)) construct.[13] This returns an exit status of 0 if the
expression is true, and 1 otherwise.

The above expression using this construct becomes (( (3 > 2) && (4 <= 1)
)). This example returns with an exit status of 1 because, as we said, the
second subexpression is false.
OceanofPDF.com

Arithmetic Variables and Assignment
As we saw earlier, you can define integer variables by using declare. You
can also evaluate arithmetic expressions and assign them to variables with
the use of let. The syntax is:
let intvar=expression
It is not necessary (because it's actually redundant) to surround the
expression with $(( and )) in a let statement. let doesn't create a variable of
type integer; it only causes the expression following the assignment to be
interpreted as an arithmetic one. As with any variable assignment, there
must not be any space on either side of the equal sign (=). It is good practice
to surround expressions with quotes, since many characters are treated as
special by the shell (e.g., *, #, and parentheses); furthermore, you must
quote expressions that include whitespace (spaces or TABs). See Table 6-5
for examples.
Table 6-5. Sample integer expression assignments
Assignment Value
let x=
$x
1+4
5
`1 + 4'
5
`(2+3) * 5'
25
`2 + 3 * 5'
17
`17 / 3'
5
`17 % 3'
2
`1<<4'
16
`48>>3'
6
`17 & 3'
1
`17 | 3'
19
`17 ^ 3'
18

Task 6-1
Here is a small task that makes use of integer arithmetic. Write a script called ndu that prints a summary of the disk space usage
for each directory argument (and any subdirectories), both in terms of bytes, and kilobytes or megabytes (whichever is
appropriate).
Here is the code:
for dir in ${*:-.}; do
    if [ -e $dir ]; then
        result=$(du -s $dir | cut -f 1)
        let total=$result*1024
    
        echo -n "Total for $dir = $total bytes"
    
        if [ $total -ge 1048576 ]; then
              echo " ($((total/1048576)) Mb)"
        elif [ $total -ge 1024 ]; then
              echo " ($((total/1024)) Kb)"
        fi
    fi
done
To obtain the disk usage of files and directories, we can use the UNIX
utility du. The default output of du is a list of directories with the amount of
space each one uses, and looks something like this:
6       ./toc
3       ./figlist
6       ./tablist
1       ./exlist
1       ./index/idx
22      ./index
39      .
If you don't specify a directory to du, it will use the current directory (.).
Each directory and subdirectory is listed along with the amount of space it
uses. The grand total is given in the last line.
The amount of space used by each directory and all the files in it is listed in
terms of blocks. Depending on the UNIX system you are running on, one
block can represent 512 or 1024 bytes. Each file and directory uses at least
one block. Even if a file or directory is empty, it is still allocated a block of
space in the filesystem.

In our case, we are only interested in the total usage, given on the last line
of du's output. To obtain only this line, we can use the -s option of du. Once
we have the line, we want only the number of blocks and can throw away
the directory name. For this we use our old friend cut to extract the first
field.
Once we have the total, we can multiply it by the number of bytes in a
block (1024 in this case) and print the result in terms of bytes. We then test
to see if the total is greater than the number of bytes in one megabyte
(1048576 bytes, which is 1024 x 1024) and if it is, we can print how many
megabytes it is by dividing the total by this large number. If not, we see if it
can be expressed in kilobytes, otherwise nothing is printed.
We need to make sure that any specified directories exist, otherwise du will
print an error message and the script will fail. We do this by using the test
for file or directory existence (-e) that we saw in Chapter 5 before calling
du.
To round out this script, it would be nice to imitate du as closely as possible
by providing for multiple arguments. To do this, we wrap the code in a for
loop. Notice how parameter substitution has been used to specify the
current directory if no arguments are given.
As a bigger example of integer arithmetic, we will complete our emulation
of the pushd and popd functions (Task 4-8). Remember that these functions
operate on DIR_STACK, a stack of directories represented as a string with
the directory names separated by spaces. bash's pushd and popd take
additional types of arguments, which are:
pushd +n takes the nth directory in the stack (starting with 0), rotates
it to the top, and cds to it.
pushd without arguments, instead of complaining, swaps the two top
directories on the stack and cds to the new top.
popd +n takes the nth directory in the stack and just deletes it.
The most useful of these features is the ability to get at the nth directory in
the stack. Here are the latest versions of both functions:
.ps 8
pushd ( )
{
    dirname=$1   if [ -n $dirname ] && [ \( -d $dirname \) -a

           \( -x $dirname \) ]; then
        DIR_STACK="$dirname ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD' '}"
        cd $dirname
        echo "$DIR_STACK"
    else
        echo "still in $PWD."
    fi
}
    
popd ( )
{
    if [ -n "$DIR_STACK" ]; then
        DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
    
        cd ${DIR_STACK%% *}
        echo "$PWD"
    else
        echo "stack empty, still in $PWD."
    fi
}
To get at the nth directory, we use a while loop that transfers the top
directory to a temporary copy of the stack n times. We'll put the loop into a
function called getNdirs that looks like this:
getNdirs ( )
{
    stackfront=''
    let count=0
    while [ $count -le $1 ]; do
        target=${DIR_STACK%${DIR_STACK#* }}
        stackfront="$stackfront$target"
        DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#$target}
        let count=count+1
    done
    
    stackfront=${stackfront%$target}
}
The argument passed to getNdirs is the n in question. The variable target
contains the directory currently being moved from DIR_STACK to a
temporary stack, stackfront. target will contain the nth directory and
stackfront will have all of the directories above (and including) target
when the loop finishes. stackfront starts as null; count, which counts the
number of loop iterations, starts as 0.
The first line of the loop body copies the first directory on the stack to
target. The next line appends target to stackfront and the following line

removes target from the stack ${DIR_STACK#$target}. The last line
increments the counter for the next iteration. The entire loop executes n+1
times, for values of count from 0 to N.
When the loop finishes, the directory in $target is the nth directory. The
expression ${stackfront%$target} removes this directory from stackfront
so that stackfront will contain the first n-1 directories. Furthermore,
DIR_STACK now contains the "back" of the stack, i.e., the stack without
the first n directories. With this in mind, we can now write the code for the
improved versions of pushd and popd:
pushd ( )
{
    if [ $(echo $1 | grep '^+[0-9][0-9]*$') ]; then
    
        # case of pushd +n: rotate n-th directory to top
        let num=${1#+}
        getNdirs $num
    
    
        DIR_STACK="$target$stackfront$DIR_STACK"
        cd $target
        echo "$DIR_STACK"
 
    elif [ -z "$1" ]; then
        # case of pushd without args; swap top two directories
        firstdir=${DIR_STACK%% *}
        DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
        seconddir=${DIR_STACK%% *}
        DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
        DIR_STACK="$seconddir $firstdir $DIR_STACK"
        cd $seconddir
    
    else
        # normal case of pushd dirname
        dirname=$1
        if [ \( -d $dirname \) -a \( -x $dirname \) ]; then
            DIR_STACK="$dirname ${DIR_STACK:-$PWD" "}"
            cd $dirname
            echo "$DIR_STACK"
        else
            echo still in "$PWD."
        fi
    fi
}
    
popd ( )
{
    if [ $(echo $1 | grep '^+[0-9][0-9]*$') ]; then

    
        # case of popd +n: delete n-th directory from stack
        let num=${1#+}
        getNdirs $num
        DIR_STACK="$stackfront$DIR_STACK"
        cd ${DIR_STACK%% *}
        echo "$PWD"
    
    else
    
        # normal case of popd without argument
        if [ -n "$DIR_STACK" ]; then
            DIR_STACK=${DIR_STACK#* }
            cd ${DIR_STACK%% *}
            echo "$PWD"
        else
            echo "stack empty, still in $PWD."
        fi
    fi
}
These functions have grown rather large; let's look at them in turn. The if at
the beginning of pushd checks if the first argument is an option of the form
+ N. If so, the first body of code is run. The first let simply strips the plus
sign (+) from the argument and assigns the result—as an integer—to the
variable num. This, in turn, is passed to the getNdirs function.
The next assignment statement sets DIR_STACK to the new ordering of
the list. Then the function cds to the new directory and prints the current
directory stack.
The elif clause tests for no argument, in which case pushd should swap the
top two directories on the stack. The first four lines of this clause assign the
top two directories to firstdir and seconddir, and delete these from the
stack. Then, as above, the code puts the stack back together in the new
order and cds to the new top directory.
The else clause corresponds to the usual case, where the user supplies a
directory name as argument.
popd works similarly. The if clause checks for the + N option, which in this
case means "delete the nth directory." A let extracts the N as an integer; the
getNdirs function puts the first n directories into stackfront. Finally, the
stack is put back together with the nth directory missing, and a cd is
performed in case the deleted directory was the first in the list.

The else clause covers the usual case, where the user doesn't supply an
argument.
Before we leave this subject, here are a few exercises that should test your
understanding of this code:
1. Implement bash's dirs command and the options +n and -l. dirs by
itself displays the list of currently remembered directories (those in the
stack). The +n option prints out the nth directory (starting at 0) and the
-l option produces a long listing; any tildes (~) are replaced by the full
pathname.
2. Modify the getNdirs function so that it checks for N exceeding the
number of directories in the stack and exits with an appropriate error
message if true.
3. Modify pushd, popd, and getNdirs so that they use variables of type
integer in the arithmetic expressions.
4. Change getNdirs so that it uses cut (with command substitution),
instead of the while loop, to extract the first N directories. This uses
less code but runs more slowly because of the extra processes
generated.
5. bash's versions of pushd and popd also have a -N option. In both cases
-N causes the nth directory from the right-hand side of the list to have
the operation performed on it. As with +N, it starts at 0. Add this
functionality.
6. Use getNdirs to reimplement the selectd function from the last chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

Arithmetic for Loops
Chapter 5 introduced the for loop and briefly mentioned another type of for
loop, more akin to the construct found in many programming languages like
Java and C. This type of for loop is called an arithmetic for loop.[14]
The form of an arithmetic for loop is very similar to those found in Java and
C:
for (( initialisation ; ending condition ; update ))
do
        statements...
done
There are four sections to the loop, the first three being arithmetic
expressions and the last being a set of statements just as in the standard loop
that we saw in the last chapter.
The first expression, initialisation, is something that is done once at the
start of the loop and if it evaluates to true the loop continues its process;
otherwise, it skips the loop and continues with the next statement. When
initialisation is true the loop then evaluates ending condition. If this is true
then it executes statements, evaluates update and repeats the cycle again by
evaluation ending condition. The loop continues until ending condition
becomes false or the loop is exited via one of the statements.
Usually initialisation is used to set an arithmetic variable to some initial
value, update updates that variable, and ending condition tests the variable.
Any of the values may be left out in which case they automatically evaluate
to true. The following simple example:
for ((;;))
do
        read var
        if [ "$var" = "." ]; then
                break
        fi
done
loops forever reading lines until a line consisting of a . is found. We'll look
at using the expressions in an arithmetic for loop in our next task.

Task 6-2
Write a script that uses for loops to print out a multiplication table for the numbers 1 to 12.
This task is best accomplished using nested for loops:
for (( i=1; i <= 12 ; i++ ))
do
        for (( j=1 ; j <= 12 ; j++ ))
        do
                echo -ne "$(( j * i ))\t"
        done
        echo
done
The script begins with a for loop using a variable i; the initialisation clause
sets i to 1, the ending condition clause tests i against the limit (12 in our
case), and the update clause adds 1 to i each time around the loop. The body
of the loop is another for loop, this time with a variable called j. This is
identical to the i for loop except that j is being updated.
The body of the j loop has an echo statement where the two variables are
multiplied together and printed along with a trailing tab. We deliberately
don't print a newline (with the -n option to echo) so that the numbers appear
on one line. Once the inner loop has finished a newline is printed so that the
set of numbers starts on the next line.
Arithmetic for loops are useful when dealing with arrays, which we'll now
look at.
[8] You can also use the older form $[...], but we don't recommend this
because it will be phased out in future versions of bash.
[9] The assignment forms of these operators are also permitted. For example,
$((x += 2)) adds 2 to x and stores the result back in x.
[11] ++ and - are not available in versions of bash prior to 2.04.
[12] Note that the truth values returned by $((...)) are 1 for true, 0 for false—
the reverse of the test and exit statuses.

[13] ((...)) is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
[14] Versions of bash prior to 2.04 do not have this type of loop.
OceanofPDF.com

Arrays
The pushd and popd functions use a string variable to hold a list of
directories and manipulate the list with the string pattern-matching
operators. Although this is quite efficient for adding or retrieving items at
the beginning or end of the string, it becomes cumbersome when attempting
to access items that are anywhere else, e.g., obtaining item N with the
getNdirs function. It would be nice to be able to specify the number, or
index, of the item and retrieve it. Arrays allow us to do this.[15]
An array is like a series of slots that hold values. Each slot is known as an
element, and each element can be accessed via a numerical index. An array
element can contain a string or a number, and you can use it just like any
other variable. The indices for arrays start at 0 and continue up to a very
large number.[16] So, for example, the fifth element of array names would
be names[4]. Indices can be any valid arithmetic expression that evaluates
to a number greater than or equal to 0.
There are several ways to assign values to arrays. The most straightforward
way is with an assignment, just like any other variable:
names[2]=alice
names[0]=hatter
names[1]=duchess
This assigns hatter to element 0, duchess to element 1, and alice to
element 2 of the array names.
Another way to assign values is with a compound assignment:
names=([2]=alice [0]=hatter [1]=duchess)
This is equivalent to the first example and is convenient for initializing an
array with a set of values. Notice that we didn't have to specify the indices
in numerical order. In fact, we don't even have to supply the indices if we
reorder our values slightly:
names=(hatter duchess alice)
bash automatically assigns the values to consecutive elements starting at 0.
If we provide an index at some point in the compound assignment, the
values get assigned consecutively from that point on, so:

names=(hatter [5]=duchess alice)
assigns hatter to element 0, duchess to element 5, and alice to element 6.
An array is created automatically by any assignment of these forms. To
explicitly create an empty array, you can use the -a option to declare. Any
attributes that you set for the array with declare (e.g., the read-only
attribute) apply to the entire array. For example, the statement declare -ar
names would create a read-only array called names. Every element of the
array would be read-only.
An element in an array may be referenced with the syntax ${ array[i]}. So,
from our last example above, the statement echo ${names[5]} would print
the string "duchess". If no index is supplied, array element 0 is assumed.
You can also use the special indices @ and *. These return all of the values
in the array and work in the same way as for the positional parameters;
when the array reference is within double quotes, using * expands the
reference to one word consisting of all the values in the array separated by
the first character of the IFS variable, while @ expands the values in the
array to separate words. When unquoted, both of them expand the values of
the array to separate words. Just as with positional parameters, this is useful
for iterating through the values with a for loop:
for i in "${names[@]}"; do
    echo $i
done
Any array elements which are unassigned don't exist; they default to null
strings if you explicitly reference them. Therefore, the previous looping
example will print out only the assigned elements in the array names. If
there were three values at indexes 1, 45, and 1005, only those three values
would be printed.
If you want to know what indices currently have values in an array then you
can use ${!array[@]}. In the last example this would return 1 45 1005.[17]
A useful operator that you can use with arrays is #, the length operator that
we saw in Chapter 4. To find out the length of any element in the array, you
can use ${#array[i]}. Similarly, to find out how many values there are in
the array, use * or @ as the index. So, for names=(hatter [5]=duchess
alice), ${#names[5]} has the value 7, and ${#names[@]} has the value 3.

Reassigning to an existing array with a compound array statement replaces
the old array with the new one. All of the old values are lost, even if they
were at different indices to the new elements. For example, if we reassigned
names to be ([100]=tweedledee tweedledum), the values hatter, duchess,
and alice would disappear.
You can destroy any element or the entire array by using the unset built-in.
If you specify an index, that particular element will be unset. unset
names[100], for instance, would remove the value at index 100;
tweedledee in the example above. However, unlike assignment, if you don't
specify an index the entire array is unset, not just element 0. You can
explicitly specify unsetting the entire array by using * or @ as the index.
Let's now look at a simple example that uses arrays to match user IDs to
account names on the system. The code takes a user ID as an argument and
prints the name of the account plus the number of accounts currently on the
system:
for i in $(cut -f 1,3 -d: /etc/passwd) ; do
   array[${i#*:}]=${i%:*}
done
    
echo "User ID $1 is ${array[$1]}."
echo "There are currently ${#array[@]} user accounts on the system."
We use cut to create a list from fields 1 and 3 in the /etc/passwd file. Field 1
is the account name and field 3 is the user ID for the account. The script
loops through this list using the user ID as an index for each array element
and assigns each account name to that element. The script then uses the
supplied argument as an index into the array, prints out the value at that
index, and prints the number of existing array values.
We'll now look at combining our knowledge of arrays with arithmetic for
loops in the next task:
Task 6-3
Write a selection sort script that takes numbers in an array and sorts them.
Selection sort is a common algorithm for quickly sorting a set of elements.
While it isn't the quickest sorting algorithm available, it is easy to

understand and implement.
It works by selecting the smallest element in the set and moving it to the
head of the set. It then repeats the process for the remainder of the set until
the end of the set is reached.
For example, to sort the set 21543 it would start at 2 and then move down
the set. 1 is less than 2 (and the other elements) so 1 is moved to the start:
12543. Then looking at 2 and moving down the list it finds nothing less
than 2 so it moves to the next element, 5. Moving down the list 4 is less
than 5, but 3 is less than 4, so 3 is moved: 12354. The next element is 5, and
4 is less than this so 4 is moved: 12345. Five is the last element so the sort
is finished.
The code for this is as follows:
values=(39 5 36 12 9 3 2 30 4 18 22 1 28 25)
numvalues=${#values[@]}
for (( i=0; i < numvalues; i++ )); do
  lowest=$i
  for (( j=i; j < numvalues; j++ )); do
    if [ ${values[j]} -le ${values[$lowest]}; then
      lowest=$j
    fi
  done
  temp=${values[i]}
  values[i]=${values[lowest]}
  values[lowest]=$temp
done
for (( i=0; i < numvalues; i++ )); do
  echo -ne "${values[$i]}\t"
done
echo
At the start of the script we set up an array of randomly ordered values and
a variable to hold the number of array elements as a convenience.
The outer i for loop is for looping over the entire array and pointing to the
current "head" (where we put any value we need to swap). The variable
lowest is set to this index.

The inner j loop is for looping over the remainder of the array. It compares
the remaining elements with the value at lowest; if a value is less then
lowest is set to the index of that element.
Once the inner loop is finished the values of the "head" (i) element and
lowest are swapped by using a temporary variable temp.
On completing the outer loop, the script prints out the sorted array
elements.
Note that some of the environment variables in bash are arrays;
DIRSTACK functions as a stack for the pushd and popd built-ins,
BASH_VERSINFO is an array of version information for the current
instance of the shell, and PIPESTATUS is an array of exit status values for
the last foreground pipe that was executed.
We'll see a further use of arrays when we build a bash debugger in Chapter
9.
To end this chapter, here are some problems relating to what we've just
covered:
1. Improve the account ID script so that it checks whether the argument is
a number. Also, add a test to print an appropriate message if the user
ID doesn't exist.
2. Make the script print out the username (field 5) as well. Hint: this isn't
as easy as it sounds. A username can have spaces in it, causing the for
loop to iterate on each part of the name.
3. As mentioned earlier, the built-in versions of pushd and popd use an
array to implement the stack. Change the pushd, popd, and getNdirs
code that we developed in this chapter so that it uses arrays.
4. Change the selection sort in the last task into a bubble sort. A bubble
sort works by iterating over the list comparing pairs of elements and
swapping them if they are in incorrect order. It then repeats the process
from the start of the list and continues until the list is traversed with no
swaps.
[15] Support for arrays is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.

[16] Actually, up to 599147937791. That's almost six hundred billion, so yes,
it's pretty large.
[17] This is not available in versions of bash prior to 3.0.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 7. Input/Output and Command-Line
Processing
The past few chapters have gone into detail about various shell
programming techniques, mostly focused on the flow of data and control
through shell programs. In this chapter, we switch the focus to two related
topics. The first is the shell's mechanisms for doing file-oriented input and
output. We present information that expands on what you already know
about the shell's basic I/O redirectors.
Second, we'll "zoom in" and talk about I/O at the line and word level. This
is a fundamentally different topic, since it involves moving information
between the domains of files/terminals and shell variables. echo and
command substitution are two ways of doing this that we've seen so far.
Our discussion of line and word I/O will lead into a more detailed
explanation of how the shell processes command lines. This information is
necessary so that you can understand exactly how the shell deals with
quotation, and so that you can appreciate the power of an advanced
command called eval, which we will cover at the end of the chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

I/O Redirectors
In Chapter 1, you learned about the shell's basic I/O redirectors: >, <, and |.
Although these are enough to get you through 95% of your UNIX life, you
should know that bash supports many other redirectors. Table 7-1 lists
them, including the three we've already seen. Although some of the rest are
broadly useful, others are mainly for systems programmers.
Table 7-1. I/O redirectors
Redirector Function
cmd1 |
cmd2
Pipe; take standard output of cmd1 as standard input to cmd2.
> file
Direct standard output to file.
< file
Take standard input from file.
>> file
Direct standard output to file; append to file if it already exists.
>| file
Force standard output to file even if noclobber is set.
n>| file
Force output to file from file descriptor n even if noclobber is set.
<> file
Use file as both standard input and standard output.
n<> file
Use file as both input and output for file descriptor n.
<< label
Here-document; see text.
n > file
Direct file descriptor n to file.
n < file
Take file descriptor n from file.
n >> file
Direct file descriptor n to file; append to file if it already exists.
n>&
Duplicate standard output to file descriptor n.
n<&
Duplicate standard input from file descriptor n.
n>&m
File descriptor n is made to be a copy of the output file descriptor.
n<&m
File descriptor n is made to be a copy of the input file descriptor.
&>file
Directs standard output and standard error to file.

Redirector Function
<&-
Close the standard input.
>&-
Close the standard output.
n>&-
Close the output from file descriptor n.
n<&-
Close the input from file descriptor n.
n>&word
If n is not specified, the standard output (file descriptor 1) is used. If the digits in word
do not specify a file descriptor open for output, a redirection error occurs. As a special
case, if n is omitted, and word does not expand to one or more digits, the standard
output and standard error are redirected as described previously.
n<&word
If word expands to one or more digits, the file descriptor denoted by n is made to be a
copy of that file descriptor. If the digits in word do not specify a file descriptor open
for input, a redirection error occurs. If word evaluates to -, file descriptor n is closed.
If n is not specified, the standard input (file descriptor 0) is used.
n>&digit-
Moves the file descriptor digit to file descriptor n, or the standard output (file
descriptor 1) if n is not specified.
n<&digit-
Moves the file descriptor digit to file descriptor n, or the standard input (file descriptor
0) if n is not specified. digit is closed after being duplicated to n.
Notice that some of the redirectors in Table 7-1 contain a digit n, and that
their descriptions contain the term file descriptor; we'll cover that in a little
while.
The first two new redirectors, >> and >|, are simple variations on the
standard output redirector >. The >> appends to the output file (instead of
overwriting it) if it already exists; otherwise it acts exactly like >. A
common use of >> is for adding a line to an initialization file (such as
.bashrc or .mailrc) when you don't want to bother with a text editor. For
example:
$ cat >> .bashrc
  alias cdmnt='mount -t iso9660 /dev/sbpcd /cdrom'
  ^D
As we saw in Chapter 1, cat without an argument uses standard input as its
input. This allows you to type the input and end it with CTRL-D on its own
line. The alias line will be appended to the file .bashrc if it already exists; if
it doesn't, the file is created with that one line.

Recall from Chapter 3, that you can prevent the shell from overwriting a
file with > file by typing set -o noclobber. >| overrides noclobber—it's the
"Do it anyway, dammit!" redirector.
The redirector <> is mainly meant for use with device files (in the /dev
directory), i.e., files that correspond to hardware devices such as terminals
and communication lines. Low-level systems programmers can use it to test
device drivers; otherwise, it's not very useful.
The rest of the redirectors will only be useful in special situations and you
are unlikely to need them most of the time.
OceanofPDF.com

Here-documents
The << label redirector essentially forces the input to a command to be the
shell's standard input, which is read until there is a line that contains only
label. The input in between is called a here-document. Here-documents
aren't very interesting when used from the command prompt. In fact, it's the
same as the normal use of standard input except for the label. We could use
a here-document to simulate the mail facility. When you send a message to
someone with the mail utility, you end the message with a dot (.). The body
of the message is saved in a file, msgfile:
$ cat >> msgfile << .
  > this is the text of
  > our message.
  > .
Here-documents are meant to be used from within shell scripts; they let you
specify "batch" input to programs. A common use of here-documents is
with simple text editors like ed. Task 7-1 is a programming task that uses a
here-document in this way.
Task 7-1
The s file command in mail saves the current message in file. If the message came over a network (such as the Internet), then it has
several header lines prepended that give information about network routing. Write a shell script that deletes the header lines from
the file.
We can use ed to delete the header lines. To do this, we need to know
something about the syntax of mail messages; specifically, that there is
always a blank line between the header lines and the message text. The ed
command 1,/^[]*$/d does the trick: it means, "Delete from line 1 until the
first blank line." We also need the ed commands w (write the changed file)
and q (quit). Here is the code that solves the task:
ed $1 << EOF
1,/^[ ]*$/d
w
q
EOF

The shell does parameter (variable) substitution and command substitution
on text in a here-document, meaning that you can use shell variables and
commands to customize the text. A good example of this is the bashbug
script, which sends a bug report to the bash maintainer (see Chapter 11).
Here is a stripped-down version:
MACHINE="i586"
OS="linux-gnu"
CC="gcc"
CFLAGS=" -DPROGRAM='bash' -DHOSTTYPE='i586' -DOSTYPE='linux-gnu' \
    -DMACHTYPE='i586-pc-linux-gnu' -DSHELL -DHAVE_CONFIG_H   -I. \
    -I. -I./lib -g -O2"
RELEASE="2.01"
PATCHLEVEL="0"
RELSTATUS="release"
MACHTYPE="i586-pc-linux-gnu"
    
TEMP=/tmp/bbug.$$
    
case "$RELSTATUS" in
alpha*|beta*)   BUGBASH=chet@po.cwru.edu ;;
*)              BUGBASH=bug-bash@prep.ai.mit.edu ;;
esac
    
BUGADDR="${1-$BUGBASH}"
    
UN=
if (uname) >/dev/null 2>&1; then
        UN=`uname -a`
fi
    
cat > $TEMP <<EOF
From: ${USER}
To: ${BUGADDR}
Subject: [50 character or so descriptive subject here (for reference)]
    
Configuration Information [Automatically generated, do not change]:
Machine: $MACHINE
OS: $OS
Compiler: $CC
Compilation CFLAGS: $CFLAGS
uname output: $UN
Machine Type: $MACHTYPE
    
bash Version: $RELEASE
Patch Level: $PATCHLEVEL
Release Status: $RELSTATUS
    
Description:
        [Detailed description of the problem, suggestion, or complaint.]

    
Repeat-By:
        [Describe the sequence of events that causes the problem
        to occur.]
    
Fix:
        [Description of how to fix the problem.  If you don't know a
        fix for the problem, don't include this section.]
EOF
    
vi $TEMP
    
mail $BUGADDR < $TEMP
The first eight lines are generated when bashbug is installed. The shell will
then substitute the appropriate values for the variables in the text whenever
the script is run.
The redirector << has two variations. First, you can prevent the shell from
doing parameter and command substitution by surrounding the label in
single or double quotes. In the above example, if you used the line cat >
$TEMP <<`EOF', then text like $USER and $MACHINE would remain
untouched (defeating the purpose of this particular script).
The second variation is <<-, which deletes leading TABs (but not blanks)
from the here-document and the label line. This allows you to indent the
here-document's text, making the shell script more readable:
cat > $TEMP <<-EOF
        From: ${USER}
        To: ${BUGADDR}
        Subject: [50 character or so descriptive subject here]
    
        Configuration Information [Automatically generated,
            do not change]:
        Machine: $MACHINE
        OS: $OS
        Compiler: $CC
        Compilation CFLAGS: $CFLAGS
        ...
EOF
Make sure you are careful when choosing your label so that it doesn't
appear as an actual input line.
A slight variation on this is provided by the here string. It takes the form
<<<word; the word is expanded and supplied on the standard input.

OceanofPDF.com

File Descriptors
The next few redirectors in Table 7-1 depend on the notion of a file
descriptor. Like the device files used with <>, this is a low-level UNIX I/O
concept that is of interest only to systems programmers—and then only
occasionally. You can get by with a few basic facts about them; for the
whole story, look at the entries for read( ), write( ), fcntl( ), and others in
Section 2 of the UNIX manual. You might wish to refer to UNIX Power
Tools by Shelley Powers, Jerry Peek, Tim O'Reilly, and Mike Loukides
(O'Reilly).
File descriptors are integers starting at 0 that refer to particular streams of
data associated with a process. When a process starts, it usually has three
file descriptors open. These correspond to the three standards: standard
input (file descriptor 0), standard output (1), and standard error (2). If a
process opens additional files for input or output, they are assigned to the
next available file descriptors, starting with 3.
By far the most common use of file descriptors with bash is in saving
standard error in a file. For example, if you want to save the error messages
from a long job in a file so that they don't scroll off the screen, append 2>
file to your command. If you also want to save standard output, append >
file1 2> file2.
This leads to another programming task.
Task 7-2
You want to start a long job in the background (so that your terminal is freed up) and save both standard output and standard error
in a single log file. Write a script that does this.
We'll call this script start. The code is very terse:
"$@" > logfile 2>&1 &
This line executes whatever command and parameters follow start. (The
command cannot contain pipes or output redirectors.) It sends the
command's standard output to logfile.

Then, the redirector 2>&1 says, "send standard error (file descriptor 2) to
the same place as standard output (file descriptor 1)." Since standard output
is redirected to logfile, standard error will go there too. The final & puts the
job in the background so that you get your shell prompt back.
As a small variation on this theme, we can send both standard output and
standard error into a pipe instead of a file: command 2>&1 | ... does this.
(Make sure you understand why.) Here is a script that sends both standard
output and standard error to the logfile (as above) and to the terminal:
"$@" 2>&1 | tee logfile &
The command tee takes its standard input and copies it to standard output
and the file given as argument.
These scripts have one shortcoming: you must remain logged in until the
job completes. Although you can always type jobs (see Chapter 1) to check
on progress, you can't leave your terminal until the job finishes, unless you
want to risk a breach of security.[1] We'll see how to solve this problem in
the next chapter.
The other file-descriptor-oriented redirectors (e.g., <& n) are usually used
for reading input from (or writing output to) more than one file at the same
time. We'll see an example later in this chapter. Otherwise, they're mainly
meant for systems programmers, as are <&- (force standard input to close)
and >&- (force standard output to close).
Before we leave this topic, we should just note that 1> is the same as >, and
0< is the same as <. If you understand this, then you probably know all you
need to know about file descriptors.
[1] Don't put it past people to come up to your unattended terminal and
cause mischief!
OceanofPDF.com

String I/O
Now we'll zoom back in to the string I/O level and examine the echo and
read statements, which give the shell I/O capabilities that are more
analogous to those of conventional programming languages.
OceanofPDF.com

echo
As we've seen countless times in this book, echo simply prints its
arguments to standard output. Now we'll explore the command in greater
detail.
Options to echo
echo accepts a few dash options, listed in Table 7-2.
Table 7-2. echo options
Option Function
-e
Turns on the interpretation of backslash-escaped characters
-E
Turns off the interpretation of backslash-escaped characters on systems where this mode is
the default
-n
Omits the final newline (same as the \c escape sequence)
echo escape sequences
echo accepts a number of escape sequences that start with a backslash.[2]
They are listed in Table 7-3.
These sequences exhibit fairly predictable behavior, except for \f: on some
displays, it causes a screen clear, while on others it causes a line feed. It
ejects the page on most printers. \v is somewhat obsolete; it usually causes a
line feed.
Table 7-3. echo escape sequences
Sequence Character printed
\a
ALERT or CTRL-G (bell)
\b
BACKSPACE or CTRL-H

Sequence Character printed
\c
Omit final NEWLINE
\e
Escape character (same as \E)
\E
Escape character[3]
\f
FORMFEED or CTRL-L
\n
NEWLINE (not at end of command) or CTRL-J
\r
RETURN (ENTER) or CTRL-M
\t
TAB or CTRL-I
\v
VERTICAL TAB or CTRL-K
\ n
ASCII character with octal (base-8) value n, where n is 1 to 3 digits
\0nnn
The eight-bit character whose value is the octal (base-8) value nnn where nnn is 1 to 3
digits
\xHH
The eight-bit character whose value is the hexadecimal (base-16) value HH (one or two
digits)
\\
Single backslash
[3] Not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
The \n, \0, and \x sequences are even more device-dependent and can be
used for complex I/O, such as cursor control and special graphics
characters.
OceanofPDF.com

printf
bash 's echo command is quite powerful and for most cases entirely
adequate. However, there are occasions where a more powerful and flexible
approach is needed for printing information, especially when the
information needs to be formatted. bash provides this by giving access to a
powerful system-level printing library known as printf.[4]
The printf command can output a string similar to the echo command:
printf "hello world"
Unlike the echo command, printf does not automatically provide a
newline. If we want to make it do the exactly same as a standard echo then
we must provide one by adding \n to the end:
printf "hello world\n"
You may ask why this is any better than echo. The printf command has two
parts, which is what makes it so powerful.
printf format-string [arguments]
The first part is a string that describes the format specifications; this is best
supplied as a string constant in quotes. The second part is an argument list,
such as a list of strings or variable values that correspond to the format
specifications. (The format is reused as necessary to use up all of the
arguments. If the format requires more arguments than are supplied, the
extra format specifications behave as if a zero value or null string, as
appropriate, had been supplied). A format specification is preceded by a
percent sign (%), and the specifier is one of the characters described below.
Two of the main format specifiers are %s for strings and %d for decimal
integers.
This sounds complicated but we can begin by re-casting the last example:
printf "%s %s\n" hello world
This prints hello world on a line of its own, just as the previous example
did. The word hello has been assigned to the first format specification, %s.
Likewise, world has been assigned to the second %s. printf then prints
these two strings followed by the newline.

We could also achieve the same result by making hello an explicit part of
the format string:
$ printf "hello %s\n" world
hello world
The allowed specifiers are shown in Table 7-4.
Table 7-4. printf format specifiers
Specifier Description
%c
ASCII character (prints first character of corresponding argument)
%d
Decimal integer
%i
Same as %d
%e
Floating-point format ([-]d.precisione[+-]dd) (see following text for meaning of
precision)
%E
Floating-point format ([-]d.precisionE[+-]dd)
%f
Floating-point format ([-]ddd.precision)
%g
%e or %f conversion, whichever is shorter, with trailing zeros removed
%G
%E or %f conversion, whichever is shortest, with trailing zeros removed
%o
Unsigned octal value
%s
String
%u
Unsigned decimal value
%x
Unsigned hexadecimal number; uses a-f for 10 to 15
%X
Unsigned hexadecimal number; uses A-F for 10 to 15
%%
Literal %
The printf command can be used to specify the width and alignment of
output fields. A format expression can take three optional modifiers
following % and preceding the format specifier:
               %flags width.precision format-specifier
The width of the output field is a numeric value. When you specify a field
width, the contents of the field are right-justified by default. You must
specify a flag of "-" to get left-justification. (The rest of the flags are
discussed shortly.) Thus, "%-20s" outputs a left-justified string in a field 20

characters wide. If the string is less than 20 characters, the field is padded
with whitespace to fill. In the following examples, a | is output to indicate
the actual width of the field. The first example right-justifies the text:
printf "|%10s|\n" hello
It produces:
|     hello|
The next example left-justifies the text:
printf "|%-10s|\n" hello
It produces:
|hello     |
The precision modifier, used for decimal or floating-point values, controls
the number of digits that appear in the result. For string values, it controls
the maximum number of characters from the string that will be printed.
You can specify both the width and precision dynamically, via values in the
printf argument list. You do this by specifying asterisks, instead of literal
values.
$ myvar=42.123456
$ printf "|%*.*G|\n" 5 6 $myvar
|42.1235|
In this example, the width is 5, the precision is 6, and the value to print
comes from the value of myvar.
The precision is optional. Its exact meaning varies by control letter, as
shown in Table 7-5.
Table 7-5. Meaning of precision
Conversion
Precision means
%d, %I, %o, %u,
%x, %X
The minimum number of digits to print. When the value has fewer digits, it is
padded with leading zeros. The default precision is 1.
%e, %E
The minimum number of digits to print. When the value has fewer digits, it is
padded with zeros after the decimal point. The default precision is 10. A
precision of 0 inhibits printing of the decimal point.
%f
The number of digits to the right of the decimal point.
%g, %G
The maximum number of significant digits.
%s
The maximum number of characters to print.

Finally, one or more flags may precede the field width and the precision.
We've already seen the "-" flag for left-justification. The rest of the flags are
shown in Table 7-6.
Table 7-6. Flags for printf
Character Description
-
Left-justify the formatted value within the field.
space
Prefix positive values with a space and negative values with a minus.
+
Always prefix numeric values with a sign, even if the value is positive.
#
Use an alternate form: %o has a preceding 0; %x and %X are prefixed with 0x and 0X,
respectively; %e, %E and %f always have a decimal point in the result; and %g and
%G do not have trailing zeros removed.
0
Pad output with zeros, not spaces. This only happens when the field width is wider
than the converted result. In the C language, this flag applies to all output formats,
even non-numeric ones. For bash, it only applies to the numeric formats.
If printf cannot perform a format conversion, it returns a non-zero exit
status.
Additional bash printf specifiers
Besides the standard specifiers just described, the bash shell (and other
POSIX compliant shells) accepts two additional specifiers. These provide
useful features at the expense of nonportability to versions of the printf
command found in some other shells and in other places in UNIX:
%b
When used instead of %s, expands echo-style escape sequences in the
argument string. For example:
$ printf "%s\n" 'hello\nworld'
hello\nworld
$ printf "%b\n" 'hello\nworld'
hello
world
%q
When used instead of %s, prints the string argument in such a way that
it can be used for shell input. For example:

$ printf "%q\n" "greetings to the world"
greetings\ to\ the\ world
OceanofPDF.com

read
The other half of the shell's string I/O facilities is the read command, which
allows you to read values into shell variables. The basic syntax is:
read var1 var2...
This statement takes a line from the standard input and breaks it down into
words delimited by any of the characters in the value of the environment
variable IFS (see Chapter 4; these are usually a space, a TAB, and
NEWLINE). The words are assigned to variables var1, var2, etc. For
example:
$ read character1 character2alice duchess$ echo $character1alice
$ echo $character2duchess
If there are more words than variables, then excess words are assigned to
the last variable. If you omit the variables altogether, the entire line of input
is assigned to the variable REPLY.
You may have identified this as the "missing ingredient" in the shell
programming capabilities we have seen thus far. It resembles input
statements in conventional languages, like its namesake in Pascal. So why
did we wait this long to introduce it?
Actually, read is sort of an "escape hatch" from traditional shell
programming philosophy, which dictates that the most important unit of
data to process is a text file, and that UNIX utilities such as cut, grep, sort,
etc., should be used as building blocks for writing programs.
read, on the other hand, implies line-by-line processing. You could use it to
write a shell script that does what a pipeline of utilities would normally do,
but such a script would inevitably look like:
while (read a line) do
    process the line
    print the processed line
end
This type of script is usually much slower than a pipeline; furthermore, it
has the same form as a program someone might write in C (or some similar
language) that does the same thing much faster. In other words, if you are

going to write it in this line-by-line way, there is little point in writing a
shell script.
Reading lines from files
Nevertheless, shell scripts with read are useful for certain kinds of tasks.
One is when you are reading data from a file small enough so that
efficiency isn't a concern (say a few hundred lines or less), and it's really
necessary to get bits of input into shell variables.
Consider the case of a UNIX machine that has terminals that are hardwired
to the terminal lines of the machine. It would be nice if the TERM
environment variable was set to the correct terminal type when a user
logged in.
One way to do this would be to have some code that sets the terminal
information when a user logs in. This code would presumably reside in
/etc/profile, the system-wide initialization file that bash runs before running
a user's .bash_profile. If the terminals on the system change over time—as
surely they must—then the code would have to be changed. It would be
better to store the information in a file and change just the file instead.
Assume we put the information in a file whose format is typical of such
UNIX "system configuration" files: each line contains a device name, a
TAB, and a TERM value.
We'll call the file /etc/terms, and it would typically look something like this:
console        console
tty01        wy60
tty03        vt100
tty04        vt100
tty07        wy85
tty08        vt100
The values on the left are terminal lines and those on the right are the
terminal types that TERM can be set to. The terminals connected to this
system are a Wyse 60 (wy60), three VT100s (vt100), and a Wyse 85
(wy85). The machines' master terminal is the console, which has a TERM
value of console.

We can use read to get the data from this file, but first we need to know
how to test for the end-of-file condition. Simple: read's exit status is 1 (i.e.,
non-zero) when there is nothing to read. This leads to a clean while loop:
TERM=vt100       # assume this as a default
line=$(tty)
while read dev termtype; do
    if [ $dev = $line ]; then
        TERM=$termtype
        echo "TERM set to $TERM."
        break
    fi
done
The while loop reads each line of the input into the variables dev and
termtype. In each pass through the loop, the if looks for a match between
$dev and the user's tty ($line, obtained by command substitution from the
tty command). If a match is found, TERM is set, a message is printed, and
the loop exits; otherwise TERM remains at the default setting of vt100.
We are not quite done, though: this code reads from the standard input, not
from /etc/terms! We need to know how to redirect input to multiple
commands. It turns out that there are a few ways of doing this.
I/O redirection and multiple commands
One way to solve the problem is with a subshell, as we'll see in the next
chapter. This involves creating a separate process to do the reading.
However, it is usually more efficient to do it in the same process; bash gives
us four ways of doing this.
The first, which we have seen already, is with a function:
findterm ( ) {
    TERM=vt100       # assume this as a default
    line=$(tty)
    while read dev termtype; do
        if [ $dev = $line ]; then
            TERM=$termtype
            echo "TERM set to $TERM."
            break;
        fi
    done
}
    
findterm < /etc/terms

A function acts like a script in that it has its own set of standard I/O
descriptors, which can be redirected in the line of code that calls the
function. In other words, you can think of this code as if findterm were a
script and you typed findterm < /etc/terms on the command line. The read
statement takes input from /etc/terms a line at a time, and the function runs
correctly.
The second way is to simplify this slightly by placing the redirection at the
end of the function:
findterm ( ) {
    TERM=vt100       # assume this as a default
    line=$(tty)
    while read dev termtype; do
        if [ $dev = $line ]; then
            TERM=$termtype
            echo "TERM set to $TERM."
            break;
        fi
    done
} < /etc/terms
Whenever findterm is called, it takes its input from /etc/terms.
The third way is by putting the I/O redirector at the end of the loop, like
this:
TERM=vt100       # assume this as a default
line=$(tty)
while read dev termtype; do
    if [ $dev = $line ]; then
        TERM=$termtype
        echo "TERM set to $TERM."
        break;
    fi
done < /etc/terms
You can use this technique with any flow-control construct, including if...fi,
case...esac, select...done, and until...done. This makes sense because these
are all compound statements that the shell treats as single commands for
these purposes. This technique works fine—the read command reads a line
at a time—as long as all of the input is done within the compound
statement.
Command blocks

But if you want to redirect I/O to or from an arbitrary group of commands
without creating a separate process, you need to use a construct that we
haven't seen yet. If you surround some code with { and }, the code will
behave like a function that has no name. This is another type of compound
statement. In accordance with the equivalent concept in the C language,
we'll call this a command block.
What good is a block? In this case, it means that the code within the curly
brackets ({}) will take standard I/O descriptors just as we described in the
last block of code. This construct is appropriate for the current example
because the code needs to be called only once, and the entire script is not
really large enough to merit breaking down into functions. Here is how we
use a block in the example:
{
    TERM=vt100       # assume this as a default
    line=$(tty)
    while read dev termtype; do
        if [ $dev = $line ]; then
            TERM=$termtype
            echo "TERM set to $TERM."
            break;
        fi
    done
} < /etc/terms
To help you understand how this works, think of the curly brackets and the
code inside them as if they were one command, i.e.:
{ TERM=vt100; line=$(tty); while ... } < /etc/terms;
Configuration files for system administration tasks like this one are actually
fairly common; a prominent example is /etc/hosts, which lists machines that
are accessible in a TCP/IP network. We can make /etc/terms more like these
standard files by allowing comment lines in the file that start with #, just as
in shell scripts. This way /etc/terms can look like this:
#
# System Console is console
console        console
#
# Cameron's line has a Wyse 60
tty01        wy60
...
We can handle comment lines by modifying the while loop so that it
ignores lines beginning with #. We can place a grep in the test:

if [ -z "$(echo $dev | grep ^#)" ]  && [ $dev = $line ]; then
    ...
As we saw in Chapter 5, the && combines the two conditions so that both
must be true for the entire condition to be true.
As another example of command blocks, consider the case of creating a
standard algebraic notation frontend to the dc command. dc is a UNIX
utility that simulates a Reverse Polish Notation (RPN) calculator:[5]
{ while read line; do
    echo "$(alg2rpn $line)"
  done
} | dc
We'll assume that the actual conversion from one notation to the other is
handled by a function called alg2rpn. It takes a line of standard algebraic
notation as an argument and prints the RPN equivalent on the standard
output. The while loop reads lines and passes them through the conversion
function, until an EOF is typed. Everything is executed inside the command
block and the output is piped to the dc command for evaluation.
Reading user input
The other type of task to which read is suited is prompting a user for input.
Think about it: we have hardly seen any such scripts so far in this book. In
fact, the only ones were the modified solutions to Task 5-4, which involved
select.
As you've probably figured out, read can be used to get user input into shell
variables.
We can use echo to prompt the user, like this:
echo -n 'terminal? '
read TERM
echo "TERM is $TERM"
Here is what this looks like when it runs:
terminal? wy60TERM is wy60
However, shell convention dictates that prompts should go to standard
error, not standard output. (Recall that select prompts to standard error.) We
could just use file descriptor 2 with the output redirector we saw earlier in
this chapter:

echo -n 'terminal? ' >&2
read TERM
echo TERM is $TERM
We'll now look at a more complex example by showing how Task 5-5
would be done if select didn't exist. Compare this with the code in Chapter
5:
echo 'Select a directory:'
done=false
    
while [ $done = false ]; do
    do=true
    num=1
    for direc in $DIR_STACK; do
        echo $num) $direc
        num=$((num+1))
    done
    echo -n 'directory? '
    read REPLY
    
    if [ $REPLY -lt $num ] && [ $REPLY -gt 0 ]; then
        set - $DIR_STACK
    
        #statements that manipulate the stack...
    
        break
    else
        echo 'invalid selection.'
    fi
done
The while loop is necessary so that the code repeats if the user makes an
invalid choice. select includes the ability to construct multicolumn menus if
there are many choices, and better handling of null user input.
Before leaving read, we should note that it has eight options: -a, -d, -e, -n, -
p, -r, -t, and -s.[6] The first of these options allows you to read values into
an array. Each successive item read in is assigned to the given array starting
at index 0. For example:
$ read -a people
alice duchess dodo
$ echo ${people[2]}
dodo
$
In this case, the array people now contains the items alice, duchess, and
dodo.

A delimiter can be specified with the -d option. This will read a line up until
the first character of the delimiter is reached. For example:
$ read -s stop aline
alice duches$
$ echo $aline
alice duche
$
The option -e can be used only with scripts run from interactive shells. It
causes readline to be used to gather the input line, which means that you
can use any of the readline editing features that we looked at in Chapter 2.
The -n option specifies how many characters will be read by read. For
example, if we specify that it should read only ten characters in then it will
return after reading that many:
$ read -n 10 aline
abcdefghij$
$ echo $aline
abcdefghij
$
The -p option followed by a string argument prints the string before reading
input. We could have used this in the earlier examples of read, where we
printed out a prompt before doing the read. For example, the directory
selection script could have used read -p `directory?' REPLY.
read lets you input lines that are longer than the width of your display by
providing a backslash (\) as a continuation character, just as in shell scripts.
The -r option overrides this, in case your script reads from a file that may
contain lines that happen to end in backslashes. read -r also preserves any
other escape sequences the input might contain. For example, if the file
hatter contains this line:
A line with a\n escape sequence
Then read -r aline will include the backslash in the variable aline, whereas
without the -r, read will "eat" the backslash. As a result:
$ read -r aline < hatter$ echo -e "$aline"
A line with a
 escape sequence
$
However:
$ read aline < hatter$ echo -e "$aline"
A line with an escape sequence
$

The -s option forces read to not echo the characters that are typed to the
terminal. This can be useful in cases where a shell may want to take single
keystroke commands without displaying the typed characters on the
terminal (e.g., moving something around with the arrow keys). In this case
it could be combined with the -n option to read a single character each time
in a loop: read -s -n1 key
The last option, -t, allows a time in seconds to be specified. read will wait
the specified time for input and then finish. This is useful if you want a
script to wait for input but continue processing if nothing is supplied.
[2] You must use a double backslash if you don't surround the string that
contains them with quotes; otherwise, the shell itself "steals" a backslash
before passing the arguments to echo.
[4] printf is not available in versions of bash prior to version 2.02.
[5] If you have ever owned a Hewlett-Packard calculator you will be familiar
with RPN. We'll discuss RPN further in one of the exercises at the end of
this chapter.
[6] -a, -d, -e, -n, -p, -t and -s are not available in versions of bash prior to
2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

Command-Line Processing
We've seen how the shell uses read to process input lines: it deals with
single quotes (`'), double quotes (""), and backslashes (\); it separates lines
into words, according to delimiters in the environment variable IFS; and it
assigns the words to shell variables. We can think of this process as a subset
of the things the shell does when processing command lines.
We've touched upon command-line processing throughout this book; now is
a good time to make the whole thing explicit. Each line that the shell reads
from the standard input or a script is called a pipeline; it contains one or
more commands separated by zero or more pipe characters (|). For each
pipeline it reads, the shell breaks it up into commands, sets up the I/O for
the pipeline, then does the following for each command (Figure 7-1):

Figure 7-1. Steps in command-line processing
1. Splits the command into tokens that are separated by the fixed set of
metacharacters: SPACE, TAB, NEWLINE, ;, (, ), <, >, |, and &. Types
of tokens include words, keywords, I/O redirectors, and semicolons.
2. Checks the first token of each command to see if it is a keyword with
no quotes or backslashes. If it's an opening keyword, such as if and

other control-structure openers, function, {, or (, then the command is
actually a compound command. The shell sets things up internally for
the compound command, reads the next command, and starts the
process again. If the keyword isn't a compound command opener (e.g.,
is a control-structure "middle" like then, else, or do, an "end" like fi or
done, or a logical operator), the shell signals a syntax error.
3. Checks the first word of each command against the list of aliases. If a
match is found, it substitutes the alias's definition and goes back to
Step 1; otherwise, it goes on to Step 4. This scheme allows recursive
aliases (see Chapter 3). It also allows aliases for keywords to be
defined, e.g., alias aslongas=while or alias procedure=function.
4. Performs brace expansion. For example, a{b,c} becomes ab ac.
5. Substitutes the user's home directory ($HOME) for tilde if it is at the
beginning of a word. Substitutes user's home directory for ~user.[7]
6. Performs parameter (variable) substitution for any expression that
starts with a dollar sign ($).
7. Does command substitution for any expression of the form $(string).
8. Evaluates arithmetic expressions of the form $((string)).
9. Takes the parts of the line that resulted from parameter, command, and
arithmetic substitution and splits them into words again. This time it
uses the characters in $IFS as delimiters instead of the set of
metacharacters in Step 1.
10. Performs pathname expansion, a.k.a. wildcard expansion, for any
occurrences of *, ?, and [/] pairs.
11. Uses the first word as a command by looking up its source according
to the rest of the list in Chapter 4, i.e., as a function command, then as
a built-in, then as a file in any of the directories in $PATH.
12. Runs the command after setting up I/O redirection and other such
things.
That's a lot of steps—and it's not even the whole story! But before we go
on, an example should make this process clearer. Assume that the following
command has been run:
alias ll="ls -l"
Further assume that a file exists called .hist537 in user alice's home
directory, which is /home/alice, and that there is a double-dollar-sign

variable $$ whose value is 2537 (we'll see what this special variable is in
the next chapter).
Now let's see how the shell processes the following command:
ll $(type -path cc) ~alice/.*$(($$%1000))
Here is what happens to this line:
1. ll $(type -path cc) ~alice/.*$(($$%1000)) splits the input into
words.
2. ll is not a keyword, so Step 2 does nothing.
3. ls -l $(type -path cc) ~alice/.*$(($$%1000)) substitutes ls -l for
its alias "ll". The shell then repeats Steps 1 through 3; Step 2 splits the
ls -l into two words.
4. ls -l $(type -path cc) ~alice/.*$(($$%1000)) does nothing.
5. ls -l $(type -path cc) /home/alice/.*$(($$%1000)) expands
~alice into /home/alice.
6. ls -l $(type -path cc) /home/alice/.*$((2537%1000)) substitutes
2537 for $$.
7. ls -l /usr/bin/cc /home/alice/.*$((2537%1000)) does command
substitution on "type -path cc".
8. ls -l /usr/bin/cc /home/alice/.*537 evaluates the arithmetic
expression 2537%1000.
9. ls -l /usr/bin/cc /home/alice/.*537 does nothing.
10. ls -l /usr/bin/cc /home/alice/.hist537 substitutes the filename
for the wildcard expression .*537.
11. The command ls is found in /usr/bin.
12. /usr/bin/ls is run with the option -l and the two arguments.
Although this list of steps is fairly straightforward, it is not the whole story.
There are still five ways to modify the process: quoting; using command,
builtin, or enable; and using the advanced command eval.
OceanofPDF.com

Quoting
You can think of quoting as a way of getting the shell to skip some of the 12
steps above. In particular:
Single quotes (`') bypass everything through Step 10—including
aliasing. All characters inside a pair of single quotes are untouched.
You can't have single quotes inside single quotes—not even if you
precede them with backslashes.[8]
Double quotes ("") bypass Steps 1 through 4, plus steps 9 and 10. That
is, they ignore pipe characters, aliases, tilde substitution, wildcard
expansion, and splitting into words via delimiters (e.g., blanks) inside
the double quotes. Single quotes inside double quotes have no effect.
But double quotes do allow parameter substitution, command
substitution, and arithmetic expression evaluation. You can include a
double quote inside a double-quoted string by preceding it with a
backslash (\). You must also backslash-escape $, ` (the archaic
command substitution delimiter), and \ itself.
Table 7-7 has simple examples to show how these work; they assume the
statement person=hatter was run and user alice's home directory is
/home/alice.
If you are wondering whether to use single or double quotes in a particular
shell programming situation, it is safest to use single quotes unless you
specifically need parameter, command, or arithmetic substitution.
Table 7-7. Examples of quoting rules
Expression Value
$person
hatter
"$person"
hatter
\$person
$person
`$person'
$person

Expression Value
"'$person'" 'hatter'
~alice
/home/alice
"~alice"
~alice
`~alice'
~alice
OceanofPDF.com

command, builtin, and enable
Before moving on to the last part of the command-line processing cycle,
we'll take a look at the command lookup order that we touched on in
Chapter 4 and how it can be altered with several shell built-ins.
The default order for command lookup is functions, followed by built-ins,
with scripts and executables last. There are three built-ins that you can use
to override this order: command, builtin, and enable.
command removes alias and function lookup.[9] Only built-ins and
commands found in the search path are executed. This is useful if you want
to create functions that have the same name as a shell built-in or a
command in the search path and you need to call the original command
from the function. For instance, we might want to create a function called
cd that replaces the standard cd command with one that does some fancy
things and then executes the built-in cd:
cd ( )
{
    #Some fancy things
    command cd
}
In this case we avoid plunging the function into a recursive loop by placing
command in front of cd. This ensures that the built-in cd is called and not
the function.
command has some options, listed in Table 7-8.
Table 7-8. command options
Option Description
-p
Uses a default value for PATH
-v
Prints the command or pathname used to invoke the command
-V
A more verbose description than with -v
-
Turns off further option checking

The -p option is a default path which guarantees that the command lookup
will find all of the standard UNIX utilities. In this case, command will
ignore the directories in your PATH.[10]
builtin is very similar to command but is more restrictive. It looks up only
built-in commands, ignoring functions and commands found in PATH. We
could have replaced command with builtin in the cd example above.
The last command enables and disables shell built-ins—it is called enable.
Disabling a built-in allows a shell script or executable of the same name to
be run without giving a full pathname. Consider the problem many
beginning UNIX shell programmers have when they name a script test.
Much to their surprise, executing test usually results in nothing, because the
shell is executing the built-in test, rather than the shell script. Disabling the
built-in with enable overcomes this.[11]
Table 7-9 lists the options available with enable.[12] Some options are for
working with dynamically loadable built-ins. See Appendix C for details on
these options, and how to create and load your own built-in commands.
Table 7-9. enable options
Option
Description
-a
Displays every built-in and whether it is enabled or not
-d
Deletes a built-in loaded with -f
-f filename Loads a new built-in from the shared-object filename
-n
Disables a built-in or displays a list of disabled built-ins
-p
Displays a list of all of the built-ins
-s
Restricts the output to POSIX "special" built-ins
Of these options, -n is the most useful; it is used to disable a built-in.
enable without an option enables a built-in. More than one built-in can be
given as arguments to enable, so enable -n pushd popd dirs would disable
the pushd, popd, and dirs built-ins.[13]
You can find out what built-ins are currently enabled and disabled by using
the command on its own, or with the -p option; enable or enable -p will list

all enabled built-ins, and enable -n will list all disabled built-ins. To get a
complete list with their current status, you can use enable -a.
The -s option restricts the output to POSIX `special' built-ins. These are :, .,
source, break, continue, eval, exec, exit, export, readonly, return, set,
shift, trap, and unset.
OceanofPDF.com

eval
We have seen that quoting lets you skip steps in command-line processing.
Then there's the eval command, which lets you go through the process
again. Performing command-line processing twice may seem strange, but
it's actually very powerful: it lets you write scripts that create command
strings on the fly and then pass them to the shell for execution. This means
that you can give scripts "intelligence" to modify their own behavior as they
are running.
The eval statement tells the shell to take eval's arguments and run them
through the command-line processing steps all over again. To help you
understand the implications of eval, we'll start with a trivial example and
work our way up to a situation in which we're constructing and running
commands on the fly.
eval ls passes the string ls to the shell to execute; the shell prints a list of
files in the current directory. Very simple; there is nothing about the string ls
that needs to be sent through the command-processing steps twice. But
consider this:
listpage="ls | more"
$listpage
Instead of producing a paginated file listing, the shell will treat | and more
as arguments to ls, and ls will complain that no files of those names exist.
Why? Because the pipe character "appears" in Step 6 when the shell
evaluates the variable, after it has actually looked for pipe characters. The
variable's expansion isn't even parsed until Step 9. As a result, the shell will
treat | and more as arguments to ls, so that ls will try to find files called |
and more in the current directory!
Now consider eval $listpage instead of just $listpage. When the shell gets
to the last step, it will run the command eval with arguments ls, |, and
more. This causes the shell to go back to Step 1 with a line that consists of
these arguments. It finds | in Step 2 and splits the line into two commands,
ls and more. Each command is processed in the normal (and in both cases
trivial) way. The result is a paginated list of the files in your current
directory.

Now you may start to see how powerful eval can be. It is an advanced
feature that requires considerable programming cleverness to be used most
effectively. It even has a bit of the flavor of artificial intelligence, in that it
enables you to write programs that can "write" and execute other programs.
[14] You probably won't use eval for everyday shell programming, but it's
worth taking the time to understand what it can do.
As a more interesting example, we'll revisit Task 4-1, the very first task in
the book. In it, we constructed a simple pipeline that sorts a file and prints
out the first N lines, where N defaults to 10. The resulting pipeline was:
sort -nr $1 | head -${2:-10}
The first argument specified the file to sort; $2 is the number of lines to
print.
Now suppose we change the task just a bit so that the default is to print the
entire file instead of 10 lines. This means that we don't want to use head at
all in the default case. We could do this in the following way:
if [ -n "$2" ]; then
    sort -nr $1 | head -$2
else
    sort -nr $1
fi
In other words, we decide which pipeline to run according to whether $2 is
null. But here is a more compact solution:
eval sort -nr \$1 ${2:+"| head -\$2"}
The last expression in this line evaluates to the string | head -\$2 if $2 exists
(is not null); if $2 is null, then the expression is null too. We backslash-
escape dollar signs (\$) before variable names to prevent unpredictable
results if the variables' values contain special characters like > or |. The
backslash effectively puts off the variables' evaluation until the eval
command itself runs. So the entire line is either:
eval sort -nr \$1 | head -\$2
if $2 is given, or:
eval sort -nr \$1
if $2 is null. Once again, we can't just run this command without eval
because the pipe is "uncovered" after the shell tries to break the line up into
commands. eval causes the shell to run the correct pipeline when $2 is
given.

Next, we'll revisit Task 7-2 from earlier in this chapter, the start script that
lets you start a command in the background and save its standard output and
standard error in a logfile. Recall that the one-line solution to this task had
the restriction that the command could not contain output redirectors or
pipes. Although the former doesn't make sense when you think about it, you
certainly would want the ability to start a pipeline in this way.
eval is the obvious way to solve this problem:
eval "$@" > logfile 2>&1 &
The only restriction that this imposes on the user is that pipes and other
such special characters be quoted (surrounded by quotes or preceded by
backslashes).
Here's a way to apply eval in conjunction with various other interesting
shell programming concepts.
Task 7-3
Implement the core of the make utility as a shell script.
make is known primarily as a programmer's tool, but it seems as though
someone finds a new use for it every day. Without going into too much
extraneous detail, make basically keeps track of multiple files in a particular
project, some of which depend on others (e.g., a document depends on its
word processor input file(s)). It makes sure that when you change a file, all
of the other files that depend on it are processed.
For example, assume you're using the troff word processor to write a book.
You have files for the book's chapters called ch1.t, ch2.t, and so on; the troff
output for these files are ch1.out, ch2.out, etc. You run commands like troff
ch N .t > ch N .out to do the processing. While you're working on the book,
you tend to make changes to several files at a time.
In this situation, you can use make to keep track of which files need to be
reprocessed, so that all you need to do is type make, and it will figure out
what needs to be done. You don't need to remember to reprocess the files
that have changed.

How does make do this? Simple: it compares the modification times of the
input and output files (called sources and targets in make terminology), and
if the input file is newer, then make reprocesses it.
You tell make which files to check by building a file called makefile that has
constructs like this:
               target : source1 source2 ...
                 commands to make target
This essentially says, "For target to be up to date, it must be newer than all
of the sources. If it's not, run the commands to bring it up to date." The
commands are on one or more lines that must start with TABs: e.g., to make
ch7.out:
ch7.out : ch7.t
          troff ch7.t > ch7.out
Now suppose that we write a shell function called makecmd that reads and
executes a single construct of this form. Assume that the makefile is read
from standard input. The function would look like the following code.
makecmd ( )
{
    read target colon sources
    for src in $sources; do
        if [ $src -nt $target ]; then
            while read cmd && [ $(grep \t* $cmd) ]; do
                echo "$cmd"
                eval ${cmd#\t}
            done
            break
        fi
    done
}
This function reads the line with the target and sources; the variable colon
is just a placeholder for the :. Then it checks each source to see if it's newer
than the target, using the -nt file attribute test operator that we saw in
Chapter 5. If the source is newer, it reads, prints, and executes the
commands until it finds a line that doesn't start with a TAB or it reaches
end-of-file. (The real make does more than this; see the exercises at the end
of this chapter.) After running the commands (which are stripped of the
initial TAB), it breaks out of the for loop, so that it doesn't run the
commands more than once.

As a final example of eval, we'll look again at procimage, the graphics
utility that we developed in the last three chapters. Recall that one of the
problems with the script as it stands is that it performs the process of
scaling and bordering regardless of whether you want them. If no
command-line options are present, a default size, border width, and border
color are used. Rather than invent some if then logic to get around this,
we'll look at how you can dynamically build a pipeline of commands in the
script; those commands that aren't needed simply disappear when the time
comes to execute them. As an added bonus, we'll add another capability to
our script: image enhancement.
Looking at the procimage script you'll notice that the NetPBM commands
form a nice pipeline; the output of one operation becomes the input to the
next, until we end up with the final image. If it weren't for having to use a
particular conversion utility, we could reduce the script to the following
pipeline (ignoring options for now):
cat $filename | convertimage | pnmscale | pnmmargin |\
    pnmtojpeg > $outfile
Or, better yet:
convertimage $filename | pnmscale | pnmmargin | pnmtojpeg \
    > $outfile
As we've already seen, this is equivalent to:
eval convertimage $filename | pnmscale | pnmmargin |\
 pnmtojpeg > $outfile
And knowing what we do about how eval operates, we can transform this
into:
eval "convertimage" $filename " | pnmscale" " | pnmmargin" \
    " | pnmtojpeg " > $outfile
And thence to:
convert='convertimage'
scale=' | pnmscale'
border=' | pnmmargin'
standardise=' | pnmtojpeg
    
eval $convert $filename $scale $border $standardise > $outfile
Now consider what happens when we don't want to scale the image. We do
this:
scale=""
    
while getopts ":s:w:c:" opt; do

    case $opt in
      s  ) scale=' | pnmscale' ;;
    
 ...
    
eval $convert $filename $scale $border $standardise > $outfile
In this code fragment, scale is set to a default of the empty string. If -s is not
given on the command line, then the final line evaluates with $scale as the
empty string and the pipeline will "collapse" into:
$convert $filename $border $standardise > $outfile
Using this principle, we can modify the previous version of the procimage
script and produce a pipeline version. For each input file we need to
construct and run a pipeline based upon the options given on the command
line. Here is the new version:
# Set up the defaults
width=1
colour='-color grey'
usage="Usage: $0 [-s N] [-w N] [-c S] imagefile..."
# Initialise the pipeline components
standardise=' | pnmtojpeg -quiet'
while getopts ":s:w:c:" opt; do
    case $opt in
      s  ) size=$OPTARG
           scale=' | pnmscale -quiet -xysize $size $size' ;;
      w  ) width=$OPTARG
           border=' | pnmmargin $colour $width' ;;
      c  ) colour="-color $OPTARG"
           border=' | pnmmargin $colour $width' ;;
      \? ) echo $usage
           exit 1 ;;
    esac
done
shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
if [ -z "$@" ]; then
    echo $usage
    exit 1
fi
# Process the input files
for filename in "$@"; do
    case $filename in
        *.gif ) convert='giftopnm'  ;;

        *.tga ) convert='tgatoppm'  ;;
        *.xpm ) convert='xpmtoppm'  ;;
        *.pcx ) convert='pcxtoppm'  ;;
        *.tif ) convert='tifftopnm'  ;;
        *.jpg ) convert='jpegtopnm -quiet' ;;
            * ) echo "$0: Unknown filetype '${filename##*.}'"
                exit 1;;
    esac
    outfile=${filename%.*}.new.jpg
    eval $convert $filename $scale $border $standardise > $outfile
done
This version has been simplified somewhat from the previous one in that it
no longer needs a temporary file to hold the converted file. It is also a lot
easier to read and understand. To show how easy it is to add further
processing to the script, we'll now add one more NetPBM utility.
NetPBM provides a utility to enhance an image and make it sharper:
pnmnlfilt. This utility is an image filter that samples the image and can
enhance edges in the image (it can also smooth the image if given the
appropriate values). It takes two parameters that tell it how much to
enhance the image. For the purposes of our script, we'll just choose some
optimal values and provide an option to switch enhancement on and off in
the script.
To put the new capability in place all we have to do is add the new option (-
S) to the getopts case statement, update the usage line, and add a new
variable to the pipeline. Here is the new code:
# Set up the defaults
width=1
colour='-color grey'
usage="Usage: $0 [-S] [-s N] [-w N] [-c S] imagefile..."
# Initialise the pipeline components
standardise=' | pnmtojpeg -quiet'
while getopts ":Ss:w:c:" opt; do
    case $opt in
      S  ) sharpness=' | pnmnlfilt -0.7 0.45' ;;

      s  ) size=$OPTARG
           scale=' | pnmscale -quiet -xysize $size $size' ;;
      w  ) width=$OPTARG
           border=' | pnmmargin $colour $width' ;;
      c  ) colour="-color $OPTARG"
           border=' | pnmmargin $colour $width' ;;
      \? ) echo $usage
           exit 1 ;;
    esac
done
shift $(($OPTIND - 1))
if [ -z "$@" ]; then
    echo $usage
    exit 1
fi
# Process the input files
for filename in "$@"; do
    case $filename in
        *.gif ) convert='giftopnm'  ;;
        *.tga ) convert='tgatoppm'  ;;
        *.xpm ) convert='xpmtoppm'  ;;
        *.pcx ) convert='pcxtoppm'  ;;
        *.tif ) convert='tifftopnm'  ;;
        *.jpg ) convert='jpegtopnm -quiet' ;;
            * ) echo "$0: Unknown filetype '${filename##*.}'"
                exit 1;;
    esac
    outfile=${filename%.*}.new.jpg
    eval $convert $filename $scale $border $sharpness $standardise > $outfile
done
We could go on forever with increasingly complex examples of eval, but
we'll settle for concluding the chapter with a few exercises. The questions in
Exercise 3 are really more like items on the menu of food for thought.
1. Here are a couple of ways to enhance procimage, the graphics utility:

1. Add an option, -q, that allows the user to turn on and off the
printing of diagnostic information from the NetPBM utilities.
You'll need to map -q to the -quiet option of the utilities. Also,
add your own diagnostic output for those utilities that don't print
anything, e.g., the format conversions.
2. Add an option that allows the user to specify the order that the
NetPBM processes take place, i.e., whether enhancing the image
comes before bordering, or bordering comes before resizing.
Rather than using an if construct to make the choice amongst
hard-coded orders, construct a string dynamically which will look
similar to this:
"eval $convert $filename $scale $border $sharpness
    $standardise > $outfile"
3. You'll then need eval to evaluate this string.
2. The function makecmd in the solution to Task 7-3 represents an
oversimplification of the real make's functionality. make actually
checks file dependencies recursively, meaning that a source on one line
in a makefile can be a target on another line. For example, the book
chapters in the example could themselves depend on some figures in
separate files that were made with a graphics package.
1. Write a function called readtargets that goes through the
makefile and stores all of the targets in a variable or temporary
file.
2. makecmd merely checks to see if any of the sources are newer
than the given target. It should really be a recursive routine that
looks like this:
function makecmd ( )
{
    target=$1
    get sources for $target
    for each source src; do
        if $src is also a target in this makefile then
            makecmd $src
        fi
        if [ $src -nt $target ]; then
            run commands to make target
            return
        fi
    done
}
3. Implement this.

4. Write the "driver" script that turns the makecmd function into a
full make program. This should make the target given as
argument, or if none is given, the first target listed in the
makefile.
5. The above makecmd still doesn't do one important thing that the
real make does: allow for "symbolic" targets that aren't files.
These give make much of the power that makes it applicable to
such an incredible variety of situations. Symbolic targets always
have a modification time of 0, so that make always runs the
commands to make them. Modify makecmd so that it allows for
symbolic targets. (Hint: the crux of this problem is to figure out
how to get a file's modification time. This is quite difficult.)
3. Here are some problems that really test your knowledge of eval and
the shell's command-line processing rules. Solve these and you're a
true bash hacker!
1. Advanced shell programmers sometimes use a little trick that
includes eval: using the value of a variable as the name of another
variable. In other words, you can give a shell script control over
the names of variables to which it assigns values. The latest
version of bash has this built in in the form of ${! varname},
where varname contains the name of another variable that will be
the target of the operation. This is known as indirect expansion.
How would you do this only using eval? (Hint: if $object equals
"person", and $person is "alice", then you might think that you
could type echo $$object and get the response alice. This doesn't
actually work, but it's on the right track.)
2. You could use the above technique together with other eval tricks
to implement new control structures for the shell. For example,
see if you can write a script that emulates the behavior of a for
loop in a conventional language like C or Pascal, i.e., a loop that
iterates a fixed number of times, with a loop variable that steps
from 1 to the number of iterations (or, for C fans, 0 to iterations-
1). Call your script loop to avoid clashes with the keywords for
and do.
3. The pushd, popd, and dirs functions that we built up in previous
chapters can't handle directories with spaces in their names
(because DIR_STACK uses a space as a delimiter). Use eval to

overcome this limitation. (Hint: use eval to implement an array.
Each array element is called array1, array2, ... arrayn, and each
array element contains a directory name.)
4. (The following doesn't have that much to do with the material in
this chapter per se, but it is a classic programming exercise:)
Write the function alg2rpn used in the section on command
blocks. Here's how to do this: Arithmetic expressions in algebraic
notation have the form expr op expr, where each expr is either a
number or another expression (perhaps in parentheses), and op is
+, -, x, /, or % (remainder). In RPN, expressions have the form
expr expr op. For example: the algebraic expression 2+3 is 2 3 +
in RPN; the RPN equivalent of (2+3) x (9-5) is 2 3 + 9 5 - x. The
main advantage of RPN is that it obviates the need for
parentheses and operator precedence rules (e.g., x is evaluated
before +). The dc program accepts standard RPN, but each
expression should have "p" appended to it, which tells dc to print
its result; e.g., the first example above should be given to dc as 2
3 + p.
5. You need to write a routine that converts algebraic notation to
RPN. This should be (or include) a function that calls itself (a
recursive function) whenever it encounters a subexpression. It is
especially important that this function keep track of where it is in
the input string and how much of the string it "eats up" during its
processing. (Hint: make use of the pattern-matching operators
discussed in Chapter 4 to ease the task of parsing input strings.)
To make your life easier, don't worry about operator precedence
for now; just convert to RPN from left to right: e.g., treat 3+4x5
as (3+4)x5 and 3x4+5 as (3x4)+5. This makes it possible for you
to convert the input string on the fly, i.e., without having to read
in the whole thing before doing any processing.
6. Enhance your solution to the previous exercise so that it supports
operator precedence in the "usual" order: x, /, % (remainder) +, -.
For example, treat 3+4x5 as 3+(4x5) and 3x4+5 as (3x4)+5.
7. Here is something else to really test your skills; write a graphics
utility script, index, that takes a list of image files, reduces them
in size and creates an "index" image. An index image is
comprised of thumbnail-sized versions of the original images,

placed neatly in columns and rows, and with a caption underneath
(usually the name of the original file). Besides the list of files,
you'll need some options, including the number of columns to
create and the size of the thumbnail images. You might also like
to include an option to specify the gap between each image. The
new NetPBM utilities you'll need are pbmtext and pnmcat. You'll
also need pnmscale and one or more of the conversion utilities,
depending upon whether you decide to take in various formats (as
we did for procimage) and what output format you decide on.
pbmtext takes as an argument some text and converts the text into
a PNM bitmap. pnmcat is a little more complex. Like cat, it
concatenates things; in this case, images. You can specify as many
PNM files as you like as arguments and pnmcat will put them
together into one long image. By using the -lr and -tb options,
you can specify whether you want the images to be placed one
after the other going from left to right, or from top to bottom. The
first option to pnmcat is the background color. It can be either -
black for a black background, or -white for a white background.
We suggest -white to match the pbmtext black text on a white
background. You'll need to take each file, run the filename
through pbmtext, and use pnmcat to place it underneath a scaled
down version of the original image. Then you'll need to continue
doing this for each file and use pnmcat to connect them together.
In addition, you'll have to keep tabs on how many columns you
have completed and when to start a new row. Note that you'll
need to build up the rows individually and use pnmcat to connect
them together. pnmcat won't do this for you automatically.
[7] Two obscure variations on this: the shell substitutes the current directory
($PWD) for ~+ and the previous directory ($OLDPWD) for ~-. In bash 2.0
there are two more: ~N+ and ~N-. These are replaced by the corresponding
element in the directory stack as given by the dirs command.
[8] However, as we saw in Chapter 1, `\'' (i.e., single quote, backslash, single
quote, single quote) acts pretty much like a single quote in the middle of a
single-quoted string; e.g., `abc`\'`def' evaluates to abc`def.

[9] command removes alias lookup as a side effect. Because the first
argument of command is no longer the first word that bash parses, it is not
subjected to alias lookup.
[10] Unless bash has been compiled with a brain-dead value for the default.
See Chapter 11 for how to change the default value.
[11] Note that the wrong test may still be run. If your current directory is the
last in PATH you'll probably execute the system file test. test is not a good
name for a program.
[12] The -d, -f, -p, and -s options are not available in versions of bash prior
to 2.0.
[13] Be careful—it is possible to disable enable (enable -n enable). There is
a compile-time option that allows builtin to act as an escape-hatch. For
more details, see Chapter 11.
[14] You could actually do this without eval, by echoing commands to a
temporary file and then "sourcing" that file with . filename. But that is much
less efficient.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 8. Process Handling
The UNIX operating system built its reputation on a small number of
concepts, all of which are simple yet powerful. We've seen most of them by
now: standard input/output, pipes, text-filtering utilities, the tree-structured
file system, and so on. UNIX also gained notoriety as the first small-
computer operating system to give each user control over more than one
process. We call this capability user-controlled multitasking.
You may not think that multitasking is a big deal. You're probably used to
the idea of running a process in the background by putting an ampersand
(&) at the end of the command line. You have also seen the idea of a
subshell in Chapter 4, when we showed how shell scripts run.
In this chapter, we will cover most of bash's features that relate to
multitasking and process handling in general. We say "most" because some
of these features are, like the file descriptors we saw in the previous chapter,
of interest only to low-level systems programmers.
We'll start out by looking at certain important primitives for identifying
processes and for controlling them during login sessions and within shell
scripts. Then we will move out to a higher-level perspective, looking at
ways to get processes to communicate with each other. We'll look in more
detail at concepts we've already seen, like pipes and subshells.
Don't worry about getting bogged down in low-level technical details about
UNIX. We will provide only the technical information that is necessary to
explain higher-level features, plus a few other tidbits designed to pique your
curiosity. If you are interested in finding out more about these areas, refer to
your UNIX Programmer's Manual or a book on UNIX internals that
pertains to your version of UNIX. You might also find UNIX Power Tools
of value.
We strongly recommend that you try out the examples in this chapter. The
behavior of code that involves multiple processes is not as easy to
understand on paper as most of the other examples in this book.
OceanofPDF.com

Process IDs and Job Numbers
UNIX gives all processes numbers, called process IDs, when they are
created. You will notice that when you run a command in the background
by appending & to it, the shell responds with a line that looks like this:
$ alice &[1] 93
In this example, 93 is the process ID for the alice process. The [1] is a job
number assigned by the shell (not the operating system). What's the
difference? Job numbers refer to background processes that are currently
running under your shell, while process IDs refer to all processes currently
running on the entire system, for all users. The term job basically refers to a
command line that was invoked from your shell.
If you start up additional background jobs while the first one is still
running, the shell will number them 2, 3, etc. For example:
$ duchess &[2] 102
$ hatter &[3] 104
Clearly, 1, 2, and 3 are easier to remember than 93, 102, and 104!
The shell includes job numbers in messages it prints when a background job
completes:[1]
[1]+  Done                    alice
We'll explain what the plus sign means soon. If the job exits with non-zero
status (see Chapter 5), the shell will indicate the exit status:[2]
[1]+  Exit 1                  alice
The shell prints other types of messages when certain abnormal things
happen to background jobs; we'll see these later in this chapter.
[1] The messages are, by default, printed before the next prompt is displayed
so as not to interrupt any output on the display. You can make the
notification messages display immediately by using set -b.
[2] In POSIX mode, the message is slightly different: "[1]+ Done(1) alice".
The number in parentheses is the exit status of the job. POSIX mode can be

selected via the set command or by starting bash in POSIX mode. For
further information, see Table 2-1 and Table 2-5
OceanofPDF.com

Job Control
Why should you care about process IDs or job numbers? Actually, you
could probably get along fine through your UNIX life without ever
referring to process IDs (unless you use a windowing workstation—as we'll
see soon). Job numbers are more important, however: you can use them
with the shell commands for job control.[3]
You already know the most obvious way of controlling a job: create one in
the background with &. Once a job is running in the background, you can
let it run to completion, bring it into the foreground, or send it a message
called a signal.
OceanofPDF.com

Foreground and Background
The built-in command fg brings a background job into the foreground.
Normally this means that the job will have control of your terminal or
window and therefore will be able to accept your input. In other words, the
job will begin to act as if you typed its command without the &.
If you have only one background job running, you can use fg without
arguments, and the shell will bring that job into the foreground. But if you
have several jobs running in the background, the shell will pick the one that
you put into the background most recently. If you want some other job put
into the foreground, you need to use the job's command name, preceded by
a percent sign (%), or you can use its job number, also preceded by %, or its
process ID without a percent sign. If you don't remember which jobs are
running, you can use the command jobs to list them.
A few examples should make this clearer. Let's say you created three
background jobs as above. Then if you type jobs, you will see this:
[1]   Running                 alice &
[2]-  Running                 duchess &
[3]+  Running                 hatter &
jobs has a few interesting options. jobs -l also lists process IDs:
[1]     93 Running                 alice &
[2]-   102 Running                 duchess &
[3]+   104 Running                 hatter &
The -p option tells jobs to list only process IDs:
93
102
104
(This could be useful with command substitution; see Task 8-1.) The -n
option lists only those jobs whose status has changed since the shell last
reported it—whether with a jobs command or otherwise. -r restricts the list
to jobs that are running, while -s restricts the list to those jobs which are
stopped, e.g., waiting for input from the keyboard.[4] Finally, you can use
the -x option to execute a command. Any job number provided to the
command will be substituted with the process ID of the job. For example, if

alice is running in the background, then executing jobs -x echo %1 will
print the process ID of alice.
If you type fg without an argument, the shell will put hatter in the
foreground, because it was put in the background most recently. But if you
type fg %duchess (or fg %2), duchess will go in the foreground.
You can also refer to the job most recently put in the background by %+.
Similarly, %- refers to the next-most-recently backgrounded job (duchess
in this case). That explains the plus and minus signs in the above: the plus
sign shows the most recent job whose status has changed; the minus sign
shows the next-most-recently invoked job.[5]
If more than one background job has the same command, then % command
will distinguish between them by choosing the most recently invoked job
(as you'd expect). If this isn't what you want, you need to use the job
number instead of the command name. However, if the commands have
different arguments, you can use %? string instead of % command. %?
string refers to the job whose command contains the string. For example,
assume you started these background jobs:
$ hatter mad &[1]     189
$ hatter teatime &[2]     190
$
Then you can use %?mad and %?teatime to refer to each of them,
although actually %?ma and %?tea are sufficient to uniquely identify
them.
Table 8-1 lists all of the ways to refer to background jobs. Given how
infrequently people use job control commands, job numbers or command
names are sufficient, and the other ways are superfluous.
Table 8-1. Ways to refer to background jobs
Reference Background job
%N
Job number N
%string
Job whose command begins with string
%?string
Job whose command contains string
%+
Most recently invoked background job

Reference Background job
%%
Same as above
%-
Second most recently invoked background job
OceanofPDF.com

Suspending a Job
Just as you can put background jobs into the foreground with fg, you can
also put a foreground job into the background. This involves suspending a
job, so that the shell regains control of your terminal.
To suspend a job, type CTRL-Z while it is running.[6] This is analogous to
typing CTRL-C (or whatever your interrupt key is), except that you can
resume the job after you have stopped it. When you type CTRL-Z, the shell
responds with a message like this:
[1]+  Stopped                 command
Then it gives you your prompt back. To resume a suspended job so that it
continues to run in the foreground, just type fg. If, for some reason, you put
other jobs in the background after you typed CTRL-Z, use fg with a job
name or number.
For example:
alice is running...CTRL-Z[1]+  Stopped                 alice
$ hatter &[2] 145
$ fg %alicealice resumes in the foreground...
The ability to suspend jobs and resume them in the foreground comes in
very handy when you have a conventional terminal (as opposed to a
windowing workstation) and you are using a text editor like vi on a file that
needs to be processed. For example, if you are editing a file for the troff text
processor, you can do the following:
$ vi myfileedit the file... CTRL-ZStopped [1] vi
$ troff myfiletroff reports an error$ fgvi comes back up in the same place in your
file
Programmers often use the same technique when debugging source code.
You will probably also find it useful to suspend a job and resume it in the
background instead of the foreground. You may start a command in the
foreground (i.e., normally) and find that it takes much longer than you
expected—for example, a grep, sort, or database query. You need the
command to finish, but you would also like control of your terminal back so
that you can do other work. If you type CTRL-Z followed by bg, you will
move the job to the background.[7]

You can also suspend a job with CTRL-Y. This is slightly different from
CTRL-Z in that the process is only stopped when it attempts to read input
from the terminal.
[3] If you have an older version of UNIX, it is possible that your system
does not support job control. This is particularly true for many systems
derived from Xenix, System III, or early versions of System V. On such
systems, bash does not have the fg and bg commands, job number
arguments to kill and wait, typing CTRL-Z to suspend a job, or the TSTP
signal.
[4] Options -r and -s are not available in bash prior to version 2.0.
[5] This is analogous to ~+ and ~- as references to the current and previous
directory; see the footnote in Chapter 7. Also: %% is a synonym for %+.
[6] This assumes that the CTRL-Z key is set up as your suspend key; just as
with CTRL-C and interrupts, this is conventional but by no means required.
[7] Be warned, however, that not all commands are "well-behaved" when
you do this. Be especially careful with commands that run over a network
on a remote machine; you may end up confusing the remote program.
OceanofPDF.com

Signals
We mentioned earlier that typing CTRL-Z to suspend a job is similar to
typing CTRL-C to stop a job, except that you can resume the job later. They
are actually similar in a deeper way: both are particular cases of the act of
sending a signal to a process.
A signal is a message that one process sends to another when some
abnormal event takes place or when it wants the other process to do
something. Most of the time, a process sends a signal to a subprocess it
created. You're undoubtedly already comfortable with the idea that one
process can communicate with another through an I/O pipeline; think of a
signal as another way for processes to communicate with each other. (In
fact, any textbook on operating systems will tell you that both are examples
of the general concept of interprocess communication, or IPC.[8])
Depending on the version of UNIX, there are two or three dozen types of
signals, including a few that can be used for whatever purpose a
programmer wishes. Signals have numbers (from 1 to the number of signals
the system supports) and names; we'll use the latter. You can get a list of all
the signals on your system, by name and number, by typing kill -l. Bear in
mind, when you write shell code involving signals, that signal names are
more portable to other versions of UNIX than signal numbers.
OceanofPDF.com

Control-Key Signals
When you type CTRL-C, you tell the shell to send the INT (for "interrupt")
signal to the current job; CTRL-Z sends TSTP (on most systems, for
"terminal stop"). You can also send the current job a QUIT signal by typing
CTRL-\ (control-backslash); this is sort of like a "stronger" version of
CTRL-C.[9] You would normally use CTRL-\ when (and only when) CTRL-
C doesn't work.
As we'll see soon, there is also a "panic" signal called KILL that you can
send to a process when even CTRL-\ doesn't work. But it isn't attached to
any control key, which means that you can't use it to stop the currently
running process. INT, TSTP, and QUIT are the only signals you can use
with control keys.[10]
You can customize the control keys used to send signals with options of the
stty command. These vary from system to system—consult your manpage
for the command—but the usual syntax is stty signame char. signame is a
name for the signal that, unfortunately, is often not the same as the names
we use here. Table 1-7 in Chapter 1 lists stty names for signals found on all
versions of UNIX. char is the control character, which you can give using
the convention that ^(circumflex) represents "control." For example, to set
your INT key to CTRL-X on most systems, use:
stty intr ^X
Now that we've told you how to do this, we should add that we don't
recommend it. Changing your signal keys could lead to trouble if someone
else has to stop a runaway process on your machine.
Most of the other signals are used by the operating system to advise
processes of error conditions, like a bad machine code instruction, bad
memory address, or division by zero, or "interesting" events such as a timer
("alarm") going off. The remaining signals are used for esoteric error
conditions of interest only to low-level systems programmers; newer
versions of UNIX have even more signal types.
OceanofPDF.com

kill
You can use the built-in shell command kill to send a signal to any process
you created—not just the currently running job. kill takes as an argument
the process ID, job number, or command name of the process to which you
want to send the signal. By default, kill sends the TERM ("terminate")
signal, which usually has the same effect as the INT signal you send with
CTRL-C. But you can specify a different signal by using the signal name
(or number) as an option, preceded by a dash.
kill is so named because of the nature of the default TERM signal, but there
is another reason, which has to do with the way UNIX handles signals in
general. The full details are too complex to go into here, but the following
explanation should suffice.
Most signals cause a process that receives them to die; therefore, if you
send any one of these signals, you "kill" the process that receives it.
However, programs can be set up to Section 8.4 specific signals and take
some other action. For example, a text editor would do well to save the file
being edited before terminating when it receives a signal such as INT,
TERM, or QUIT. Determining what to do when various signals come in is
part of the fun of UNIX systems programming.
Here is an example of kill. Say you have an alice process in the
background, with process ID 150 and job number 1, which needs to be
stopped. You would start with this command:
$ kill %1
If you were successful, you would see a message like this:
[1]+  Terminated              alice
If you don't see this, then the TERM signal failed to terminate the job. The
next step would be to try QUIT:
$ kill -QUIT %1
If that worked, you would see this message:
[1]+  Exit 131                alice
The 131 is the exit status returned by alice.[11] But if even QUIT doesn't
work, the "last-ditch" method would be to use KILL:

$ kill -KILL %1
This produces the message:
[1]+  Killed                  alice
It is impossible for a process to Section 8.4 a KILL signal—the operating
system should terminate the process immediately and unconditionally. If it
doesn't, then either your process is in one of the "funny states" we'll see
later in this chapter, or (far less likely) there's a bug in your version of
UNIX.
Here's another example.
Task 8-1
Write a script called killalljobs that kills all background jobs.
The solution to this task is simple, relying on jobs -p:
kill "$@" $(jobs -p)
You may be tempted to use the KILL signal immediately, instead of trying
TERM (the default) and QUIT first. Don't do this. TERM and QUIT are
designed to give a process the chance to "clean up" before exiting, whereas
KILL will stop the process, wherever it may be in its computation. Use
KILL only as a last resort!
You can use the kill command with any process you create, not just jobs in
the background of your current shell. For example, if you use a windowing
system, then you may have several terminal windows, each of which runs
its own shell. If one shell is running a process that you want to stop, you
can kill it from another window—but you can't refer to it with a job number
because it's running under a different shell. You must instead use its process
ID.
OceanofPDF.com

ps
This is probably the only situation in which a casual user would need to
know the ID of a process. The command ps gives you this information;
however, it can give you lots of extra information as well.
ps is a complex command. It takes several options, some of which differ
from one version of UNIX to another. To add to the confusion, you may
need different options on different UNIX versions to get the same
information! We will use options available on the two major types of UNIX
systems, those derived from System V (such as many of the versions for
Intel Pentium PCs, as well as IBM's AIX and Hewlett-Packard's HP/UX)
and BSD (Mac OS X, SunOS, BSD/OS). If you aren't sure which kind of
UNIX version you have, try the System V options first.
You can invoke ps in its simplest form without any options. In this case, it
will print a line of information about the current login shell and any
processes running under it (i.e., background jobs). For example, if you were
to invoke three background jobs, as we saw earlier in the chapter, the ps
command on System V-derived versions of UNIX would produce output
that looks something like this:
   PID TTY      TIME COMD
   146 pts/10   0:03 -bash
  2349 pts/10   0:03 alice
  2367 pts/10   0:17 hatter
  2389 pts/10   0:09 duchess
  2390 pts/10   0:00 ps
The output on BSD-derived systems looks like this:
   PID TT STAT  TIME COMMAND
   146 10 S     0:03 /bin/bash
  2349 10 R     0:03 alice
  2367 10 D     0:17 hatter teatime
  2389 10 R     0:09 duchess
  2390 10 R     0:00 ps
(You can ignore the STAT column.) This is a bit like the jobs command.
PID is the process ID; TTY (or TT) is the terminal (or pseudo-terminal, if
you are using a windowing system) the process was invoked from; TIME is
the amount of processor time (not real or "wall clock" time) the process has

used so far; COMD (or COMMAND) is the command. Notice that the BSD
version includes the command's arguments, if any; also notice that the first
line reports on the parent shell process, and in the last line, ps reports on
itself.
ps without arguments lists all processes started from the current terminal or
pseudo-terminal. But since ps is not a shell command, it doesn't correlate
process IDs with the shell's job numbers. It also doesn't help you find the ID
of the runaway process in another shell window.
To get this information, use ps -a (for "all"); this lists information on a
different set of processes, depending on your UNIX version.
System V
Instead of listing all processes that were started under a specific terminal, ps
-a on System V-derived systems lists all processes associated with any
terminal that aren't group leaders. For our purposes, a "group leader" is the
parent shell of a terminal or window. Therefore, if you are using a
windowing system, ps -a lists all jobs started in all windows (by all users),
but not their parent shells.
Assume that, in the previous example, you have only one terminal or
window. Then ps -a will print the same output as plain ps except for the
first line, since that's the parent shell. This doesn't seem to be very useful.
But consider what happens when you have multiple windows open. Let's
say you have three windows, all running terminal emulators like xterm for
the X Window System. You start background jobs alice, duchess, and
hatter in windows with pseudo-terminal numbers 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
This situation is shown in Figure 8-1.

Figure 8-1. Background jobs in multiple windows
Assume you are in the uppermost window. If you type ps, you will see
something like this:
 PID TTY      TIME COMD
 146 pts/1    0:03 bash
2349 pts/1    0:03 alice
2390 pts/1    0:00 ps
But if you type ps -a, you will see this:
 PID TTY      TIME COMD
 146 pts/1    0:03 bash
2349 pts/1    0:03 alice
2367 pts/2    0:17 duchess
2389 pts/3    0:09 hatter
2390 pts/1    0:00 ps
Now you should see how ps -a can help you track down a runaway process.
If it's hatter, you can type kill 2389. If that doesn't work, try kill -QUIT
2389, or in the worst case, kill -KILL 2389.
BSD
On BSD-derived systems, ps -a lists all jobs that were started on any
terminal; in other words, it's a bit like concatenating the results of plain ps
for every user on the system. Given the above scenario, ps -a will show you
all processes that the System V version shows, plus the group leaders
(parent shells).
Unfortunately, ps -a (on any version of UNIX) will not report processes that
are in certain conditions where they "forget" things like what shell invoked

them and what terminal they belong to. Such processes are known as
"zombies" or "orphans." If you have a serious runaway process problem, it's
possible that the process has entered one of these states.
Let's not worry about why or how a process gets this way. All you need to
understand is that the process doesn't show up when you type ps -a. You
need another option to ps to see it: on System V, it's ps -e ("everything"),
whereas on BSD, it's ps -ax.
These options tell ps to list processes that either weren't started from
terminals or "forgot" what terminal they were started from. The former
category includes lots of processes that you probably didn't even know
existed: these include basic processes that run the system and so-called
daemons (pronounced "demons") that handle system services like mail,
printing, network filesystems, etc.
In fact, the output of ps -e or ps -ax is an excellent source of education
about UNIX system internals, if you're curious about them. Run the
command on your system and, for each line of the listing that looks
interesting, invoke man on the process name or look it up in the UNIX
Programmer's Manual for your system.
User shells and processes are listed at the very bottom of ps -e or ps -ax
output; this is where you should look for runaway processes. Notice that
many processes in the listing have ? instead of a terminal. Either these
aren't supposed to have one (such as the basic daemons) or they're
runaways. Therefore it's likely that if ps -a doesn't find a process you're
trying to kill, ps -e (or ps -ax) will list it with ? in the TTY (or TT) column.
You can determine which process you want by looking at the COMD (or
COMMAND) column.
[8] Pipes and signals were the only IPC mechanisms in early versions of
UNIX. More modern versions like System V and BSD have additional
mechanisms, such as sockets, named pipes, and shared memory. Named
pipes are accessible to shell programmers through the mknod(1) command,
which is beyond the scope of this book.
[9] CTRL-\ can also cause the shell to leave a file called core in your current
directory. This file contains an image of the process to which you sent the

signal; a programmer could use it to help debug the program that was
running. The file's name is a (very) old-fashioned term for a computer's
memory. Other signals leave these "core dumps" as well; unless you require
them, or someone else does, just delete them.
[10] Some BSD-derived systems have additional control-key signals.
[11] When a shell script is sent a signal, it exits with status 128+N, where N
is the number of the signal it received. In this case, alice is a shell script,
and QUIT happens to be signal number 3.
OceanofPDF.com

trap
We've been discussing how signals affect the casual user; now let's talk a bit
about how shell programmers can use them. We won't go into too much
depth about this, because it's really the domain of systems programmers.
We mentioned above that programs in general can be set up to Section 8.4
specific signals and process them in their own way. The trap built-in
command lets you do this from within a shell script. trap is most important
for "bullet-proofing" large shell programs so that they react appropriately to
abnormal events—just as programs in any language should guard against
invalid input. It's also important for certain systems programming tasks, as
we'll see in the next chapter.
The syntax of trap is:
            trap cmd sig1 sig2 ...
That is, when any of sig1, sig2, etc., are received, run cmd, then resume
execution. After cmd finishes, the script resumes execution just after the
command that was interrupted.[12]
Of course, cmd can be a script or function. The sigs can be specified by
name or by number. You can also invoke trap without arguments, in which
case the shell will print a list of any traps that have been set, using symbolic
names for the signals.
Here's a simple example that shows how trap works. Suppose we have a
shell script called loop with this code:
while true; do
    sleep 60
done
This will just pause for 60 seconds (the sleep command) and repeat
indefinitely. true is a "do-nothing" command whose exit status is always 0.
[13] Try typing in this script. Invoke it, let it run for a little while, then type
CTRL-C (assuming that is your interrupt key). It should stop, and you
should get your shell prompt back.
Now insert this line at the beginning of the script:
trap "echo 'You hit control-C!'" INT

Invoke the script again. Now hit CTRL-C. The odds are overwhelming that
you are interrupting the sleep command (as opposed to true). You should
see the message "You hit control-C!", and the script will not stop running;
instead, the sleep command will abort, and it will loop around and start
another sleep. Hit CTRL-Z to get it to stop and then type kill %1.
Next, run the script in the background by typing loop &. Type kill %loop
(i.e., send it the TERM signal); the script will terminate. Add TERM to the
trap command, so that it looks like this:
trap "echo 'You hit control-C!'" INT TERM
Now repeat the process: run it in the background and type kill %loop. As
before, you will see the message and the process will keep on running. Type
kill -KILL %loop to stop it.
Notice that the message isn't really appropriate when you use kill. We'll
change the script so it prints a better message in the kill case:
trap "echo 'You hit control-C!'" INT
trap "echo 'You tried to kill me!'" TERM
    
while true; do
    sleep 60
done
Now try it both ways: in the foreground with CTRL-C and in the
background with kill. You'll see different messages.
OceanofPDF.com

Traps and Functions
The relationship between traps and shell functions is straightforward, but it
has certain nuances that are worth discussing. The most important thing to
understand is that functions are considered part of the shell that invokes
them. This means that traps defined in the invoking shell will be recognized
inside the function, and more importantly, any traps defined in the function
will be recognized by the invoking shell once the function has been called.
Consider this code:
settrap ( ) {
    trap "echo 'You hit control-C!'" INT
}
    
settrap
while true; do
    sleep 60
done
If you invoke this script and hit your interrupt key, it will print "You hit
control-C!" In this case the trap defined in settrap still exists when the
function exits.
Now consider:
loop ( ) {
    trap "echo 'How dare you!'" INT
    while true; do
        sleep 60
    done
}
    
trap "echo 'You hit control-C!'" INT
loop
When you run this script and hit your interrupt key, it will print "How dare
you!" In this case the trap is defined in the calling script, but when the
function is called the trap is redefined. The first definition is lost. A similar
thing happens with:
loop ( ) {
    trap "echo 'How dare you!'" INT
}
    
trap "echo 'You hit control-C!'" INT
loop

while true; do
    sleep 60
done
Once again, the trap is redefined in the function; this is the definition used
once the loop is entered.
We'll now show a more practical example of traps.
Task 8-2
As part of an electronic mail system, write the shell code that lets a user compose a message.
The basic idea is to use cat to create the message in a temporary file and
then hand the file's name off to a program that actually sends the message to
its destination. The code to create the file is very simple:
msgfile=/tmp/msg$$
cat > $msgfile
Since cat without an argument reads from the standard input, this will just
wait for the user to type a message and end it with the end-of-text character
CTRL-D.
OceanofPDF.com

Process ID Variables and Temporary Files
The only thing new about this script is $$ in the filename expression. This
is a special shell variable whose value is the process ID of the current shell.
To see how $$ works, type ps and note the process ID of your shell process
(bash). Then type echo "$$"; the shell will respond with that same number.
Now type bash to start a subshell, and when you get a prompt, repeat the
process. You should see a different number, probably slightly higher than
the last one.
A related built-in shell variable is ! (i.e., its value is $!), which contains the
process ID of the most recently invoked background job. To see how this
works, invoke any job in the background and note the process ID printed by
the shell next to [1]. Then type echo "$!"; you should see the same number.
To return to our mail example: since all processes on the system must have
unique process IDs, $$ is excellent for constructing names of temporary
files.
The directory /tmp is conventionally used for temporary files. Many
systems also have another directory, /var/tmp, for the same purpose.
Nevertheless, a program should clean up such files before it exits, to avoid
taking up unnecessary disk space. We could do this in our code very easily
by adding the line rm $msgfile after the code that actually sends the
message. But what if the program receives a signal during execution? For
example, what if a user changes her mind about sending the message and
hits CTRL-C to stop the process? We would need to clean up before exiting.
We'll emulate the actual UNIX mail system by saving the message being
written in a file called dead.letter in the current directory. We can do this by
using trap with a command string that includes an exit command:
trap 'mv $msgfile dead.letter; exit' INT TERM
msgfile=/tmp/msg$$
cat > $msgfile
# send the contents of $msgfile to the specified mail address...
rm $msgfile
When the script receives an INT or TERM signal, it will remove the temp
file and then exit. Note that the command string isn't evaluated until it

needs to be run, so $msgfile will contain the correct value; that's why we
surround the string in single quotes.
But what if the script receives a signal before msgfile is created—unlikely
though that may be? Then mv will try to rename a file that doesn't exist. To
fix this, we need to test for the existence of the file $msgfile before trying
to delete it. The code for this is a bit unwieldy to put in a single command
string, so we'll use a function instead:
function cleanup {
    if [ -e $msgfile ]; then
          mv $msgfile dead.letter
    fi
    exit
}
    
trap cleanup INT TERM
    
msgfile=/tmp/msg$$
cat > $msgfile
# send the contents of $msgfile to the specified mail address...
rm $msgfile
OceanofPDF.com

Ignoring Signals
Sometimes a signal comes in that you don't want to do anything about. If
you give the null string ("" or `') as the command argument to trap, then the
shell will effectively ignore that signal. The classic example of a signal you
may want to ignore is HUP (hangup). This can occur on some UNIX
systems when a hangup (disconnection while using a modem—literally
"hanging up") or some other network outage takes place.
HUP has the usual default behavior: it will kill the process that receives it.
But there are bound to be times when you don't want a background job to
terminate when it receives a hangup signal.
To do this, you could write a simple function that looks like this:
function ignorehup {
    trap "" HUP
    eval "$@"
}
We write this as a function instead of a script for reasons that will become
clearer when we look in detail at subshells at the end of this chapter.
Actually, there is a UNIX command called nohup that does precisely this.
The start script from the last chapter could include nohup:
eval nohup "$@" > logfile 2>&1 &
This prevents HUP from terminating your command and saves its standard
and error output in a file. Actually, the following is just as good:
nohup "$@" > logfile 2>&1 &
If you understand why eval is essentially redundant when you use nohup in
this case, then you have a firm grasp on the material in the previous chapter.
Note that if you don't specify a redirection for any output from the
command, nohup places it in a file called nohup.out.
OceanofPDF.com

disown
Another way to ignore the HUP signal is with the disown built-in.[14]
disown takes as an argument a job specification, such as the process ID or
job ID, and removes the process from the list of jobs. The process is
effectively "disowned" by the shell from that point on, i.e., you can only
refer to it by its process ID since it is no longer in the job table.
disown's -h option performs the same function as nohup; it specifies that
the shell should stop the hangup signal from reaching the process under
certain circumstances. Unlike nohup, it is up to you to specify where the
output from the process is to go.
disown also provides two options which can be of use. -a with no other
arguments applies the operation to all jobs owned by the shell. The -r
option with does the same but only for currently running jobs.
OceanofPDF.com

Resetting Traps
Another "special case" of the trap command occurs when you give a dash
(-) as the command argument. This resets the action taken when the signal
is received to the default, which usually is termination of the process.
As an example of this, let's return to Task 8-2, our mail program. After the
user has finished sending the message, the temporary file is erased. At that
point, since there is no longer any need to clean up, we can reset the signal
trap to its default state. The code for this, apart from function definitions, is:
trap abortmsg INT
trap cleanup TERM
    
msgfile=/tmp/msg$$
cat > $msgfile
# send the contents of $msgfile to the specified mail address...
rm $msgfile
    
trap - INT TERM
The last line of this code resets the handlers for the INT and TERM signals.
At this point you may be thinking that you could get seriously carried away
with signal handling in a shell script. It is true that "industrial strength"
programs devote considerable amounts of code to dealing with signals. But
these programs are almost always large enough so that the signal-handling
code is a tiny fraction of the whole thing. For example, you can bet that the
real UNIX mail system is pretty darn bullet-proof.
However, you will probably never write a shell script that is complex
enough, and that needs to be robust enough, to merit lots of signal handling.
You may write a prototype for a program as large as mail in shell code, but
prototypes by definition do not need to be bullet-proofed.
Therefore, you shouldn't worry about putting signal-handling code in every
20-line shell script you write. Our advice is to determine if there are any
situations in which a signal could cause your program to do something
seriously bad and add code to deal with those contingencies. What is
"seriously bad"? Well, with respect to the above examples, we'd say that the

case where HUP causes your job to terminate is seriously bad, while the
temporary file situation in our mail program is not.
[12] This is what usually happens. Sometimes the command currently
running will abort (sleep acts like this, as we'll see soon); at other times it
will finish running. Further details are beyond the scope of this book.
[13] This command is the same as the built-in shell no-op command ":".
[14] disown is not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

Coroutines
We've spent the last several pages on almost microscopic details of process
behavior. Rather than continue our descent into the murky depths, we'll
revert to a higher-level view of processes.
Earlier in this chapter, we covered ways of controlling multiple
simultaneous jobs within an interactive login session; now we'll consider
multiple process control within shell programs. When two (or more)
processes are explicitly programmed to run simultaneously and possibly
communicate with each other, we call them coroutines.
This is actually nothing new: a pipeline is an example of coroutines. The
shell's pipeline construct encapsulates a fairly sophisticated set of rules
about how processes interact with each other. If we take a closer look at
these rules, we'll be better able to understand other ways of handling
coroutines—most of which turn out to be simpler than pipelines.
When you invoke a simple pipeline—say, ls | more—the shell invokes a
series of UNIX primitive operations, or system calls. In effect, the shell tells
UNIX to do the following things; in case you're interested, we include in
parentheses the actual system call used at each step:
1. Create two subprocesses, which we'll call P1 and P2 (the fork system
call).
2. Set up I/O between the processes so that P1's standard output feeds
into P2's standard input (pipe).
3. Start /bin/ls in process P1 (exec).
4. Start /bin/more in process P2 (exec).
5. Wait for both processes to finish (wait).
You can probably imagine how the above steps change when the pipeline
involves more than two processes.
Now let's make things simpler. We'll see how to get multiple processes to
run at the same time if the processes do not need to communicate. For

example, we want the processes alice and hatter to run as coroutines,
without communication, in a shell script. Our initial solution would be this:
alice &
hatter
Assume for the moment that hatter is the last command in the script. The
above will work—but only if alice finishes first. If alice is still running
when the script finishes, then it becomes an orphan, i.e., it enters one of the
"funny states" we mentioned earlier in this chapter. Never mind the details
of orphanhood; just believe that you don't want this to happen, and if it
does, you may need to use the "runaway process" method of stopping it,
discussed earlier in this chapter.
OceanofPDF.com

wait
There is a way of making sure the script doesn't finish before alice does: the
built-in command wait. Without arguments, wait simply waits until all
background jobs have finished. So to make sure the above code behaves
properly, we would add wait, like this:
alice &
hatter
wait
Here, if hatter finishes first, the parent shell will wait for alice to finish
before finishing itself.
If your script has more than one background job and you need to wait for
specific ones to finish, you can give wait the process ID of the job.
However, you will probably find that wait without arguments suffices for
all coroutines you will ever program. Situations in which you would need to
wait for specific background jobs are quite complex and beyond the scope
of this book.
OceanofPDF.com

Advantages and Disadvantages of Coroutines
In fact, you may be wondering why you would ever need to program
coroutines that don't communicate with each other. For example, why not
just run hatter after alice in the usual way? What advantage is there in
running the two jobs simultaneously?
Even if you are running on a computer with only one processor (CPU), then
there may be a performance advantage.
Roughly speaking, you can characterize a process in terms of how it uses
system resources in three ways: whether it is CPU-intensive (e.g., does lots
of number crunching), I/O-intensive (does a lot of reading or writing to the
disk), or interactive (requires user intervention).
We already know from Chapter 1 that it makes no sense to run an
interactive job in the background. But apart from that, the more two or more
processes differ with respect to these three criteria, the more advantage
there is in running them simultaneously. For example, a number-crunching
statistical calculation would do well when running at the same time as a
long, I/O-intensive database query.
On the other hand, if two processes use resources in similar ways, it may
even be less efficient to run them at the same time as it would be to run
them sequentially. Why? Basically, because under such circumstances, the
operating system often has to "time-slice" the resource(s) in contention.
For example, if both processes are "disk hogs," the operating system may
enter a mode where it constantly switches control of the disk back and forth
between the two competing processes; the system ends up spending at least
as much time doing the switching as it does on the processes themselves.
This phenomenon is known as thrashing; at its most severe, it can cause a
system to come to a virtual standstill. Thrashing is a common problem;
system administrators and operating system designers both spend lots of
time trying to minimize it.
OceanofPDF.com

Parallelization
If you have a computer with multiple CPUs you should be less concerned
about thrashing. Furthermore, coroutines can provide dramatic increases in
speed on this type of machine, which is often called a parallel computer;
analogously, breaking up a process into coroutines is sometimes called
parallelizing the job.
Normally, when you start a background job on a multiple-CPU machine, the
computer will assign it to the next available processor. This means that the
two jobs are actually—not just metaphorically—running at the same time.
In this case, the running time of the coroutines is essentially equal to that of
the longest-running job plus a bit of overhead, instead of the sum of the
runtimes of all processes (although if the CPUs all share a common disk
drive, the possibility of I/O-related thrashing still exists). In the best case—
all jobs having the same runtime and no I/O contention—you get a speedup
factor equal to the number of CPUs.
Parallelizing a program is often not easy; there are several subtle issues
involved and there's plenty of room for error. Nevertheless, it's worthwhile
to know how to parallelize a shell script whether or not you have a parallel
machine, especially since such machines are becoming more and more
common.
We'll show how to do this—and give you an idea of some problems
involved—by means of a simple task whose solution is amenable to
parallelization.
Task 8-3
Write a utility that allows you to make multiple copies of a file at the same time.
We'll call this script mcp. The command mcp filename dest1 dest2 ... should
copy filename to all of the destinations given. The code for this should be
fairly obvious:

file=$1
shift
for dest in "$@"; do
    cp $file $dest
done
Now let's say we have a parallel computer and we want this command to
run as fast as possible. To parallelize this script, it's a simple matter of firing
off the cp commands in the background and adding a wait at the end:
file=$1
shift
for dest in "$@"; do
    cp $file $dest &
done
wait
Simple, right? Well, there is one little problem: what happens if the user
specifies duplicate destinations? If you're lucky, the file just gets copied to
the same place twice. Otherwise, the identical cp commands will interfere
with each other, possibly resulting in a file that contains two interspersed
copies of the original file. In contrast, if you give the regular cp command
two arguments that point to the same file, it will print an error message and
do nothing.
To fix this problem, we would have to write code that checks the argument
list for duplicates. Although this isn't too hard to do (see the exercises at the
end of this chapter), the time it takes that code to run might offset any gain
in speed from parallelization; furthermore, the code that does the checking
detracts from the simple elegance of the script.
As you can see, even a seemingly trivial parallelization task has problems
resulting from multiple processes that have concurrent access to a given
system resource (a file in this case). Such problems, known as concurrency
control issues, become much more difficult as the complexity of the
application increases. Complex concurrent programs often have much more
code for handling the special cases than for the actual job the program is
supposed to do!
Therefore, it shouldn't surprise you that much research has been and is
being done on parallelization, the ultimate goal being to devise a tool that
parallelizes code automatically. (Such tools do exist; they usually work in
the confines of some narrow subset of the problem.) Even if you don't have
access to a multiple-CPU machine, parallelizing a shell script is an

interesting exercise that should acquaint you with some of the issues that
surround coroutines.
OceanofPDF.com

Subshells
To conclude this chapter, we will look at a simple type of interprocess
relationship: that of a subshell with its parent shell. We saw in Chapter 3
that whenever you run a shell script, you actually invoke another copy of
the shell that is a subprocess of the main, or parent, shell process. Now let's
look at subshells in more detail.
OceanofPDF.com

Subshell Inheritance
The most important things you need to know about subshells are what
characteristics they get, or inherit, from their parents. These are as follows:
The current directory
Environment variables
Standard input, output, and error, plus any other open file descriptors
Signals that are ignored
Just as important are the things that a subshell does not inherit from its
parent:
Shell variables, except environment variables and those defined in the
environment file (usually .bashrc)
Handling of signals that are not ignored
We covered some of this in Chapter 3, but these points are common sources
of confusion, so they bear repeating.
OceanofPDF.com

Nested Subshells
Subshells need not be in separate scripts; you can also start a subshell
within the same script (or function) as the parent. You do this in a manner
very similar to the command blocks we saw in the last chapter. Just
surround some shell code with parentheses (instead of curly brackets), and
that code will run in a subshell. We'll call this a nested subshell.
For example, here is the calculator program from the last chapter, with a
subshell instead of a command block:
( while read line; do
      echo "$(alg2rpn $line)"
  done
) | dc
The code inside the parentheses will run as a separate process. This is
usually less efficient than a command block. The differences in
functionality between subshells and command blocks are very few; they
primarily pertain to issues of scope, i.e., the domains in which definitions of
things like shell variables and signal traps are known. First, code inside a
nested subshell obeys the above rules of subshell inheritance, except that it
knows about variables defined in the surrounding shell; in contrast, think of
blocks as code units that inherit everything from the outer shell. Second,
variables and traps defined inside a command block are known to the shell
code after the block, whereas those defined in a subshell are not.
For example, consider this code:
{
    hatter=mad
    trap "echo 'You hit CTRL-C!'" INT
}
while true; do
    echo "\$hatter is $hatter"
    sleep 60
done
If you run this code, you will see the message $hatter is mad every 60
seconds, and if you hit CTRL-C, you will see the message, You hit CTRL-
C!. You will need to hit CTRL-Z to stop it (don't forget to kill it with kill
%+). Now let's change it to a nested subshell:

(
    hatter=mad
    trap "echo 'You hit CTRL-C!'" INT
)
while true; do
    echo "\$hatter is $hatter"
    sleep 60
done
If you run this, you will see the message $hatter is; the outer shell doesn't
know about the subshell's definition of hatter and therefore thinks it's null.
Furthermore, the outer shell doesn't know about the subshell's trap of the
INT signal, so if you hit CTRL-C, the script will terminate.
If a language supports code nesting, then it's considered desirable that
definitions inside a nested unit have a scope limited to that nested unit. In
other words, nested subshells give you better control than command blocks
over the scope of variables and signal traps. Therefore, we feel that you
should use subshells instead of command blocks if they are to contain
variable definitions or signal traps—unless efficiency is a concern.
OceanofPDF.com

Process Substitution
A unique but rarely used feature of bash is process substitution. Let's say
that you had two versions of a program that produced large quantities of
output. You want to see the differences between the output from each
version. You could run the two programs, redirecting their output to files,
and then use the cmp utility to see what the differences were.
Another way would be to use process substitution. There are two forms of
this substitution. One is for input to a process: >(list); the other is for output
from a process: <(list). list is a process that has its input or output connected
to something via a named pipe. A named pipe is simply a temporary file that
acts like a pipe with a name.
In our case, we could connect the outputs of the two programs to the input
of cmp via named pipes:
cmp <(prog1) <(prog2)
prog1 and prog2 are run concurrently and connect their outputs to named
pipes. cmp reads from each of the pipes and compares the information,
printing any differences as it does so.
This chapter has covered a lot of territory. Here are some exercises that
should help you make sure you have a firm grasp on the material. Don't
worry if you have trouble with the last one; it's especially difficult.
1. Write a shell script called pinfo that combines the jobs and ps
commands by printing a list of jobs with their job numbers,
corresponding process IDs, running times, and full commands.
2. Take a non-trivial shell script and "bullet-proof" it with signal traps.
3. Take a non-trivial shell script and parallelize it as much as possible.
4. Write the code that checks for duplicate arguments to the mcp script.
Bear in mind that different pathnames can point to the same file. (Hint:
if $i is "1", then eval `echo \${$i}' prints the first command-line
argument. Make sure you understand why.)
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 9. Debugging Shell Programs
We hope that we have convinced you that bash can be used as a serious
UNIX programming environment. It certainly has enough features, control
structures, etc. But another essential part of a programming environment is
a set of powerful, integrated support tools. For example, there is a wide
assortment of screen editors, compilers, debuggers, profilers, cross-
referencers, etc., for languages like C and C++. If you program in one of
these languages, you probably take such tools for granted, and you would
undoubtedly cringe at the thought of having to develop code with, say, the
ed editor and the adb machine-language debugger.
But what about programming support tools for bash? Of course, you can
use any editor you like, including vi and emacs. And because the shell is an
interpreted language, you don't need a compiler.[1] But there are no other
tools available.
This chapter looks at some useful features that you can use to debug shell
programs. We'll look at how you can utilize them in the first part of this
chapter. We'll then look at some powerful new features of bash, not present
in most Bourne shell workalikes, which will help in building a shell script
debugging tool. At the end of the chapter, we'll show step by step how to
build a debugger for bash. The debugger, called bashdb, is a basic yet
functional program that will not only serve as an extended example of
various shell programming techniques, but will also provide you with a
useful tool for examining the workings of your own shell scripts.
OceanofPDF.com

Basic Debugging Aids
What sort of functionality do you need to debug a program? At the most
empirical level, you need a way of determining what is causing your
program to behave badly, and where the problem is in the code. You usually
start with an obvious what (such as an error message, inappropriate output,
infinite loop, etc.), try to work backwards until you find a what that is closer
to the actual problem (e.g., a variable with a bad value, a bad option to a
command), and eventually arrive at the exact where in your program. Then
you can worry about how to fix it.
Notice that these steps represent a process of starting with obvious
information and ending up with often obscure facts gleaned through
deduction and intuition. Debugging aids make it easier to deduce and intuit
by providing relevant information easily or even automatically, preferably
without modifying your code.
The simplest debugging aid (for any language) is the output statement,
echo, in the shell's case. Indeed, old-time programmers debugged their
FORTRAN code by inserting WRITE cards into their decks. You can
debug by putting lots of echo statements in your code (and removing them
later), but you will have to spend lots of time narrowing down not only
what exact information you want but also where you need to see it. You will
also probably have to wade through lots and lots of output to find the
information you really want.
OceanofPDF.com

Set Options
Luckily, the shell has a few basic features that give you debugging
functionality beyond that of echo. The most basic of these are options to the
set -o command (as covered in Chapter 3). These options can also be used
on the command line when running a script, as Table 9-1 shows.
Table 9-1. Debugging options
set -o option Command-line option Action
noexec
-n
Don't run commands; check for syntax errors only
verbose
-v
Echo commands before running them
xtrace
-x
Echo commands after command-line processing
The verbose option simply echoes (to standard error) whatever input the
shell gets. It is useful for finding the exact point at which a script is
bombing. For example, assume your script looks like this:
alice
hatter
march
teatime
treacle
well
None of these commands is a standard UNIX program, and each does its
work silently. Say the script crashes with a cryptic message like
"segmentation violation." This tells you nothing about which command
caused the error. If you type bash -v scriptname, you might see this:
alice
hatter
march
segmentation violation
teatime
treacle
well
Now you know that march is the probable culprit—though it is also
possible that march bombed because of something it expected alice or
hatter to do (e.g., create an input file) that they did incorrectly.

The xtrace option is more powerful: it echoes command lines after they
have been through parameter substitution, command substitution, and the
other steps of command-line processing (as listed in Chapter 7). For
example:
.ps 8
$ set -o xtrace$ alice=girl+ alice=girl
$ echo "$alice"+ echo girl
girl
$ ls -l $(type -path vi)++ type -path vi
+ ls -F -l /usr/bin/vi
lrwxrwxrwx   1 root     root      5 Jul 26 20:59 /usr/bin/vi -> elvis*
$
As you can see, xtrace starts each line it prints with + (each + representing
a level of expansion). This is actually customizable: it's the value of the
built-in shell variable PS4. So if you set PS4 to "xtrace—>" (e.g., in your
.bash_profile or .bashrc), then you'll get xtrace listings that look like this:
.ps 8
$ ls -l $(type -path vi)xxtrace--> type -path vi
xtrace--> ls -l /usr/bin/vi
lrwxrwxrwx   1 root     root      5 Jul 26 20:59 /usr/bin/vi -> elvis*
$
Notice that for multiple levels of expansion, only the first character of PS4
is printed. This makes the output more readable.
An even better way of customizing PS4 is to use a built-in variable we
haven't seen yet: LINENO, which holds the number of the currently
running line in a shell script.[2] Put this line in your .bash_profile or
environment file:
PS4='line $LINENO: '
We use the same technique as we did with PS1 in Chapter 3: using single
quotes to postpone the evaluation of the string until each time the shell
prints the prompt. This will print messages of the form line N: in your trace
output. You could even include the name of the shell script you're
debugging in this prompt by using the positional parameter $0:
PS4='$0 line $LINENO: '
As another example, say you are trying to track down a bug in a script
called alice that contains this code:
dbfmq=$1.fmq
...
fndrs=$(cut -f3 -d' ' $dfbmq)

You type alice teatime to run it in the normal way, and it hangs. Then you
type bash -x alice teatime, and you see this:
+ dbfmq=teatime.fmq
...
+ + cut -f3 -d
It hangs again at this point. You notice that cut doesn't have a filename
argument, which means that there must be something wrong with the
variable dbfmq. But it has executed the assignment statement
dbfmq=teatime.fmq properly... ah-hah! You made a typo in the variable
name inside the command substitution construct.[3] You fix it, and the script
works properly.
The last option is noexec, which reads in the shell script and checks for
syntax errors, but doesn't execute anything. It's worth using if your script is
syntactically complex (lots of loops, command blocks, string operators,
etc.) and the bug has side effects (like creating a large file or hanging up the
system).
You can turn on these options with set -o option in your shell scripts, and,
as explained in Chapter 3, turn them off with set +o option. For example, if
you're debugging a chunk of code, you can precede it with set -o xtrace to
print out the executed commands, and end the chunk with set +o xtrace.
Note, however, that once you have turned noexec on, you won't be able to
turn it off; a set +o noexec will never be executed.
OceanofPDF.com

Fake Signals
Fake signals are more sophisticated set of debugging aids. They can be
used in trap statements to get the shell to act under certain conditions.
Recall from the previous chapter that trap allows you to install some code
that runs when a particular signal is sent to your script.
Fake signals work in the same way, but they are generated by the shell
itself, as opposed to the other signals which are generated externally. They
represent runtime events that are likely to be of interest to debuggers—both
human ones and software tools—and can be treated just like real signals
within shell scripts. Table 9-2 lists the four fake signals available in bash.
Table 9-2. Fake signals
Fake signal Sent when
EXIT
The shell exits from script
ERR
A command returning a non-zero exit status
DEBUG
The shell has executed a statement[4]
RETURN
A shell function or a script executed with the . or source builtins finishes executing[5]
[4] The DEBUG signal is not available in bash versions prior to 2.0.
[5] The RETURN signal is not available in bash versions prior to 3.0.
EXIT
The EXIT trap, when set, will run its code whenever the script within which
it was set exits.[6]
Here's a simple example:
trap 'echo exiting from the script' EXIT
echo 'start of the script'
If you run this script, you will see this output:

start of the script
exiting from the script
In other words, the script starts by setting the trap for its own exit, then
prints a message. The script then exits, which causes the shell to generate
the signal EXIT, which in turn runs the code echo exiting from the script.
An EXIT trap occurs no matter how the script exits—whether normally (by
finishing the last statement), by an explicit exit or return statement, or by
receiving a "real" signal such as INT or TERM. Consider this inane
number-guessing program:
trap 'echo Thank you for playing!' EXIT
    
magicnum=$(($RANDOM%10+1))
echo 'Guess a number between 1 and 10:'
while read -p 'Guess: ' guess ; do
    sleep 4
    if [ "$guess" = $magicnum ]; then
        echo 'Right!'
        exit
    fi
    echo 'Wrong!'
done
This program picks a number between 1 and 10 by getting a random
number (the built-in variable RANDOM), extracting the last digit (the
remainder when divided by 10), and adding 1. Then it prompts you for a
guess, and after 4 seconds, it will tell you if you guessed right.
If you did, the program will exit with the message, "Thank you for
playing!", i.e., it will run the EXIT trap code. If you were wrong, it will
prompt you again and repeat the process until you get it right. If you get
bored with this little game and hit CTRL-C or CTRL-D while waiting for it
to tell you whether you were right, you will also see the message.
The EXIT trap is especially useful when you want to print out the values of
variables at the point that your script exits. For example, by printing the
value of loop counter variables, you can find the most appropriate places in
a complicated script, with many nested for loops, to enable xtrace or place
debug output.
ERR

The fake signal ERR enables you to run code whenever a command in the
surrounding script or function exits with non-zero status. Trap code for
ERR can take advantage of the built-in variable ?, which holds the exit
status of the previous command. It survives the trap and is accessible at the
beginning of the trap-handling code.
A simple but effective use of this is to put the following code into a script
you want to debug:
function errtrap {
    es=$?
    echo "ERROR: Command exited with status $es."
}
trap errtrap ERR
The first line saves the nonzero exit status in the local variable es.
For example, if the shell can't find a command, it returns status 127. If you
put the code in a script with a line of gibberish (like "nhbdeuje"), the shell
responds with:
scriptname: line N: nhbdeuje:  command not found
ERROR: command exited with status 127.
N is the number of the line in the script that contains the bad command. In
this case, the shell prints the line number as part of its own error-reporting
mechanism, since the error was a command that the shell could not find.
But if the nonzero exit status comes from another program, the shell doesn't
report the line number. For example:
function errtrap {
    es=$?
    echo "ERROR: Command exited with status $es."
}
trap errtrap ERR
function bad {
    return 17
}
bad
This only prints ERROR: Command exited with status 17.
It would obviously be an improvement to include the line number in this
error message. The built-in variable LINENO exists, but if you use it inside
a function, it evaluates to the line number in the function, not in the overall

file. In other words, if you used $LINENO in the echo statement in the
errtrap routine, it would always evaluate to 2.
To get around this problem, we simply pass $LINENO as an argument to
the trap handler, surrounding it in single quotes so that it doesn't get
evaluated until the fake signal actually comes in:
function errtrap {
    es=$?
    echo "ERROR line $1: Command exited with status $es."
}
trap 'errtrap $LINENO' ERR
...
If you use this with the above example, the result is the message, ERROR
line 12: Command exited with status 17. This is much more useful. We'll
see a variation on this technique shortly.
This simple code is actually not a bad all-purpose debugging mechanism. It
takes into account that a nonzero exit status does not necessarily indicate an
undesirable condition or event: remember that every control construct with
a conditional (if, while, etc.) uses a nonzero exit status to mean "false."
Accordingly, the shell doesn't generate ERR traps when statements or
expressions in the "condition" parts of control structures produce nonzero
exit statuses. Also, an ERR trap is not inherited by shell functions,
command substitutions, and commands executed in a subshell. However
this inheritance behaviour can be turned on by using set -o errtrace (or set
-E).[7]
One disadvantage is that exit statuses are not as uniform (or even as
meaningful) as they should be, as we explained in Chapter 5. A particular
exit status need not say anything about the nature of the error or even that
there was an error.
DEBUG
Another fake signal, DEBUG, causes the trap code to be executed before
every statement in a function or script.[8] This has two main uses. First is
the use for humans, as a sort of "brute force" method of tracking a certain
element of a program's state that you notice has gone awry.

For example, you notice the value of a particular variable is running amok.
The naive approach is to put in a lot of echo statements to check the
variable's value at several points. The DEBUG trap makes this easier by
letting you do this:
function dbgtrap
{
    echo "badvar 
                  is 
                  $badvar"
}
    
trap dbgtrap DEBUG
...section of code in which the problem occurs...
trap - DEBUG    # turn off the DEBUG trap
This code will print the value of the wayward variable before every
statement between the two traps.
One important point to remember when using DEBUG is that it is not
inherited by functions called from the shell in which it is set. In other
words, if your shell sets a DEBUG trap and then calls a function, the
statements within the function will not execute the trap. There are three
ways around this. Firstly you can set a trap for DEBUG explicitly within
the function. Alternately you can declare the function with the -t option
which turns on debug inheritance in functions and allows a function to
inherit a DEBUG trap from the caller. Lastly you can use set -o functrace
(or set -T) which does the same thing as declare but applies to all
functions.[9]
The second use of the DEBUG signal is as a primitive for implementing a
bash debugger. We'll look at doing just that shortly.
RETURN
A RETURN trap is executed each time a shell function or a script executed
with the . or source commands finishes executing.
As with DEBUG, the RETURN trap is not inherited by functions. You
again have the options of setting the trap for RETURN within the function,
declare the function with the -t option so that that function inherits the trap,
or use set -o functrace to turn on the inheritance for all functions.

Here is a simple example of a RETURN trap:
function returntrap {
    echo "A return occurred"
}
trap returntrap RETURN
function hello {
    echo "hello world"
}
hello
When the script is executed it executes the hello function and then runs the
trap:
$ ./returndemo
hello world
A return occurred
$
Notice that it didn't trap when the script itself finished. The trap would only
have run at the end of the script if we'd sourced the script. Normally, to trap
at the exiting of the script we'd also need to define a trap for the EXIT
signal that we looked at earlier.
In addition to these fake signals, bash 3.0 added some other features to help
with writing a full-scale debugger for bash. The first of these is the
extdebug option to the shopt command, which switches on certain things
that are useful for a debugger. These include:
The -F option to declare displays the source filename and line number
corresponding to each function name supplied as an argument.
If the command that is run by the DEBUG trap returns a non-zero
value, the next command is skipped and not executed.
If the command run by the DEBUG trap returns a value of 2, and the
shell is executing in a subroutine (a shell function or a shell script
executed by the . or source commands), a call to return is simulated.
The shell also has a new option, —debugger, which switches on both the
extdebug and functrace functionality.
OceanofPDF.com

Debugging Variables
Bash 3.0 added some useful environment variables to aid in writing a
debugger. These include BASH_SOURCE, which contains an array of
filenames that correspond to what is currently executing; BASH_LINENO,
which is an array of line numbers that correspond to function calls that have
been made; BASH_ARGC and BASH_ARGV array variables, the first
holding the number of parameters in each frame and the second the
parameters themselves.
We'll now look at writing a debugger, although we'll keep things simple and
avoid using these variables. This also means the debugger will work with
earlier versions of bash.
[1] Actually, if you are really concerned about efficiency, there are shell
code compilers on the market; they convert shell scripts to C code that often
runs quite a bit faster.
[2] In versions of bash prior to 2.0, LINENO won't give you the current line
in a function. LINENO, instead, gives an approximation of the number of
simple commands executed so far in the current function.
[3] We should admit that if you had turned on the nounset option at the top
of this script, the shell would have flagged this error.
[6] You can use this signal only for the exiting of a script. Functions don't
generate the EXIT signal, as they are part of the current shell invocation.
[7] Inheritance of the ERR trap is not available in versions of bash prior to
3.0.
[8] Warning: the DEBUG trap was run after statements in versions of bash
prior to 2.05b. The debugger in this chapter has been written for the current
version of bash where the trap is run before each statement.
[9] Inheritance of the DEBUG trap, declare -t, set -o functrace, and set -T
are not available in bash prior to version 3.0.

OceanofPDF.com

A bash Debugger
In this section we'll develop a very basic debugger for bash.[10] Most
debuggers have numerous sophisticated features that help a programmer in
dissecting a program, but just about all of them include the ability to step
through a running program, stop it at selected places, and examine the
values of variables. These simple features are what we will concentrate on
providing in our debugger. Specifically, we'll provide the ability to:
Specify places in the program at which to stop execution. These are
called breakpoints.
Execute a specified number of statements in the program. This is
called stepping.
Examine and change the state of the program during its execution. This
includes being able to print out the values of variables and change
them when the program is stopped at a breakpoint or after stepping.
Print out the source code we are debugging along with indications of
where breakpoints are and what line in the program we are currently
executing.
Provide the debugging capability without having to change the original
source code of the program we wish to debug in any way.
As you will see, the capability to do all of these things (and more) is easily
provided by the constructs and methods we have seen in previous chapters.
OceanofPDF.com

Structure of the Debugger
The bashdb debugger works by taking a shell script and turning it into a
debugger for itself. It does this by concatenating debugger functionality and
the target script, which we'll call the guinea pig script, and storing it in
another file that then gets executed. The process is transparent to users—
they will be unaware that the code that is executing is actually a modified
copy of their script.
The bash debugger has three main sections: the driver, the preamble, and
the debugger functions.
The driver script
The driver script is responsible for setting everything up. It is a script called
bashdb and looks like this:
# bashdb - a bash debugger
# Driver Script: concatenates the preamble and the target script
# and then executes the new script.
    
echo 'bash Debugger version 1.0'
    
_dbname=${0##*/}
    
if (( $# < 1 )) ; then
  echo "$_dbname: Usage: $_dbname filename" >&2
  exit 1
fi
    
_guineapig=$1
    
if [ ! -r $1 ]; then
  echo "$_dbname: Cannot read file '$_guineapig'." >&2
  exit 1
fi
    
shift
    
_tmpdir=/tmp
_libdir=.
_debugfile=$_tmpdir/bashdb.$$  # temporary file for script that is

     being debugged
cat $_libdir/bashdb.pre $_guineapig > $_debugfile
exec bash $_debugfile $_guineapig $_tmpdir $_libdir "$@"
bashdb takes as the first argument the name of guinea pig file. Any
subsequent arguments are passed on to the guinea pig as its positional
parameters.
If no arguments are given, bashdb prints out a usage line and exits with an
error status. Otherwise, it checks to see if the file exists. If it doesn't, exist
then bashdb prints a message and exits with an error status. If all is in order,
bashdb constructs a temporary file in the way we saw in the last chapter. If
you don't have (or don't have access to) /tmp on your system, then you can
substitute a different directory for _tmpdir.[11] The variable _libdir is the
name of the directory that contains files needed by bashdb (bashdb.pre and
bashdb.fns). If you are installing bashdb on your system for everyone to
use, you might want to place them in /usr/lib.
The cat statement builds the modified copy of the guinea pig file: it
contains the script found in bashdb.pre (which we'll look at shortly)
followed by a copy of the guinea pig.
exec
The last line runs the newly created script with exec, a statement we haven't
discussed yet. We've chosen to wait until now to introduce it because—as
we think you'll agree—it can be dangerous. exec takes its arguments as a
command line and runs the command in place of the current program, in the
same process. In other words, a shell that runs exec will terminate
immediately and be replaced by exec's arguments.[12]
In our script, exec just runs the newly constructed shell script, i.e., the
guinea pig with its debugger, in another shell. It passes the new script three
arguments—the name of the original guinea pig file ($_guineapig), the
name of the temporary directory ($_tmpdir), and the name of the library
directory ($_libdir)—followed by the user's positional parameters, if any.
OceanofPDF.com

The Preamble
Now we'll look at the code that gets prepended to the guinea pig script; we
call this the preamble. It's kept in the file bashdb.pre and looks like this:
# bashdb preamble
# This file gets prepended to the shell script being debugged.
# Arguments:
# $1 = the name of the original guinea pig script
# $2 = the directory where temporary files are stored
# $3 = the directory where bashdb.pre and bashdb.fns are stored
    
_debugfile=$0
_guineapig=$1
    
_tmpdir=$2
_libdir=$3
    
shift 3
    
source $_libdir/bashdb.fns
_linebp=
let _trace=0
let _i=1
    
while read; do
  _lines[$_i]=$REPLY
  let _i=$_i+1
done < $_guineapig
    
trap _cleanup EXIT
let _steps=1
trap '_steptrap $(( $LINENO -29 ))' DEBUG
The first few lines save the three fixed arguments in variables and shift
them out of the way, so that the positional parameters (if any) are those that
the user supplied on the command line as arguments to the guinea pig.
Then, the preamble reads in another file, bashdb.fns, which contains all of
the functions necessary for the operation of the debugger itself. We put this
code in a separate file to minimize the size of the temporary file. We'll
examine bashdb.fns shortly.
Next, bashdb.pre initializes a breakpoint array to empty and execution
tracing to off (see the following discussion), then reads the original guinea

pig script into an array of lines. We need the source lines from the original
script for two reasons: to allow the debugger to print out the script showing
where the breakpoints are, and to print out the lines of code as they execute
if tracing is turned on. You'll notice that we assign the script lines to _lines
from the environment variable $REPLY rather than reading them into the
array directly. This is because $REPLY preserves any leading whitespace
in the lines, i.e., it preserves the indentation and layout of the original script.
The last five lines of code set up the conditions necessary for the debugger
to begin working. The first trap command sets up a clean-up routine that
runs when the fake signal EXIT occurs. The clean-up routine, normally
called when the debugger and guinea pig script finish, just erases the
temporary file. The next line sets the variable _steps to 1 so that when the
debugger is first entered, it will stop after the first line.
The next line sets up the routine _steptrap to run when the fake signal
DEBUG occurs.
The built-in variable LINENO, which we saw earlier in the chapter, is used
to provide line numbers in the debugger. However, if we just used
LINENO as is, we'd get line numbers above 30 because LINENO would
be including the lines in the preamble. To get around this, we can pass
LINENO minus the number of lines in the preamble to the trap.[13]
OceanofPDF.com

Debugger Functions
The function _steptrap is the entry point into the debugger; it is defined in
the file bashdb.fns. Here is _steptrap:
# After each line of the test script is executed the shell traps to
# this function.
    
function _steptrap
{
    _curline=$1        # the number of the line that just ran
    
    (( $_trace )) && _msg "$PS4 line $_curline: ${_lines[$_curline]}"
  
    if (( $_steps >= 0 )); then
        let _steps="$_steps - 1"
    fi
    
    # First check to see if a line number breakpoint was reached.
    # If it was, then enter the debugger.
    if _at_linenumbp ; then
        _msg "Reached breakpoint at line $_curline"
        _cmdloop
    
    # It wasn't, so check whether a break condition exists and is true.
    # If it is, then enter the debugger.
    elif [ -n "$_brcond" ] && eval $_brcond; then
        _msg "Break condition $_brcond true at line $_curline"
        _cmdloop
    
    # It wasn't, so check if we are in step mode and the number of steps
    # is up. If it is then enter the debugger.
    elif (( $_steps == 0 )); then
        _msg "Stopped at line $_curline"
        _cmdloop
    fi
}
_steptrap starts by setting _curline to the number of the guinea pig line
that just ran. If execution tracing is on, it prints the PS4 execution trace
prompt (like the shell's xtrace mode), line number, and line of code itself. It
then decrements the number of steps if the number of steps still left is
greater than or equal to zero.

Then it does one of two things: it enters the debugger via _cmdloop, or it
returns so the shell can execute the next statement. It chooses the former if a
breakpoint or break condition has been reached, or if the user stepped into
this statement.
Commands
We will explain shortly how _steptrap determines these things; now we
will look at _cmdloop. It's a simple combination of the case statements we
saw in Chapter 5, and the calculator loop we saw in the previous chapter.
# The Debugger Command Loop
    
function _cmdloop {
    local cmd args
    
    while read -e -p "bashdb> " cmd args; do
        case $cmd in
            \? | h  ) _menu ;;      # print command menu
            bc ) _setbc $args ;;    # set a break condition
            bp ) _setbp $args ;;    # set a breakpoint at the given
                                    # line
            cb ) _clearbp $args ;;  # clear one or all breakpoints
            ds ) _displayscript ;;  # list the script and show the
                                    # breakpoints
            g  ) return ;;          # "go": start/resume execution of
                                    # the script
            q  ) exit ;;            # quit
    
            s  ) let _steps=${args:-1}  # single step N times
                                        # (default = 1)
                 return ;;
            x  ) _xtrace ;;             # toggle execution trace
            !* ) eval ${cmd#!} $args ;; # pass to the shell
            *  ) _msg "Invalid command: '$cmd'" ;;
        esac
    done
}
At each iteration, _cmdloop prints a prompt, reads a command, and
processes it. We use read -e so that the user can take advantage of the
readline command-line editing. The commands are all one- or two-letter
abbreviations; quick for typing, but terse in the UNIX style.[14]
Table 9-3 summarizes the debugger commands.

Table 9-3. bashdb commands
Command Action
bp N
Set breakpoint at line N
bp
List breakpoints and break condition
bc string
Set break condition to string
bc
Clear break condition
cb N
Clear breakpoint at line N
cb
Clear all breakpoints
ds
Display the test script and breakpoints
g
Start/resume execution
s [N]
Execute N statements (default 1)
x
Toggle execution trace on/off
h, ?
Print the help menu
! string
Pass string to a shell
q
Quit
Before looking at the individual commands, it is important that you
understand how control passes through _steptrap, the command loop, and
the guinea pig.
_steptrap runs after every statement in the guinea pig as a result of the trap
on DEBUG in the preamble. If a breakpoint has been reached or the user
previously typed in a step command(s), _steptrap calls the command loop.
In doing so, it effectively "interrupts" the shell that is running the guinea pig
to hand control over to the user.
The user can invoke debugger commands as well as shell commands that
run in the same shell as the guinea pig. This means that you can use shell
commands to check values of variables, signal traps, and any other
information local to the script being debugged. The command loop
continues to run, and the user stays in control, until he types g, q, or s. We'll
now look in detail at what happens in each of these cases.

Typing g has the effect of running the guinea pig uninterrupted until it
finishes or hits a breakpoint. It simply exits the command loop and returns
to _steptrap, which exits as well. The shell then regains control and runs
the next statement in the guinea pig script. Another DEBUG signal occurs
and the shell traps to _steptrap again. If there are no breakpoints then
_steptrap will just exit. This process will repeat until a breakpoint is
reached or the guinea pig finishes.
The q command calls the function _cleanup, which erases the temporary
file and exits the program.
Stepping
When the user types s, the command loop code sets the variable _steps to
the number of steps the user wants to execute, i.e., to the argument given.
Assume at first that the user omits the argument, meaning that _steps is set
to 1. Then the command loop exits and returns control to _steptrap, which
(as above) exits and hands control back to the shell. The shell runs the next
statement and returns to _steptrap, which then decrements _steps to 0.
Then the second elif conditional becomes true because _steps is 0 and
prints a "stopped" message and then calls the command loop.
Now assume that the user supplies an argument to s, say 3. _steps is set to
3. Then the following happens:
1. After the next statement runs, _steptrap is called again. It enters the
first if clause, since _steps is greater than 0. _steptrap decrements
_steps to 2 and exits, returning control to the shell.
2. This process repeats, another step in the guinea pig is run, and _steps
becomes 1.
3. A third statement is run and we're back in _steptrap. _steps is
decremented to 0, the second elif clause is run, and _steptrap breaks
out to the command loop again.
The overall effect is that the three steps run and then the debugger takes
over again.

All of the other debugger commands cause the shell to stay in the command
loop, meaning that the user prolongs the "interruption" of the shell.
Breakpoints
Now we'll examine the breakpoint-related commands and the breakpoint
mechanism in general. The bp command calls the function _setbp, which
can do two things, depending on whether an argument is supplied or not.
Here is the code for _setbp:
# Set a breakpoint at the given line number or list breakpoints
function _setbp
{
    local i
    
    if [ -z "$1" ]; then
        _listbp
    elif [ $(echo $1 | grep '^[0-9]*')  ]; then
        if [ -n "${_lines[$1]}" ]; then
            _linebp=($(echo $( (for i in ${_linebp[*]} $1; do
                    echo $i; done) | sort -n) ))
            _msg "Breakpoint set at line $1"
        else
            _msg "Breakpoints can only be set on non-blank lines"
        fi
    else
        _msg "Please specify a numeric line number"
    fi
}
If no argument is supplied, _setbp calls _listbp, which prints the line
numbers that have breakpoints set. If anything other than a number is
supplied as an argument, an error message is printed and control returns to
the command loop. Providing a number as the argument allows us to set a
breakpoint; however, we have to do another test before doing so.
What happens if the user decides to set a breakpoint at a nonsensical point:
a blank line, or at line 1,000 of a 10-line program? If the breakpoint is set
well beyond the end of the program, it will never be reached and will cause
no problem. If, however, a breakpoint is set at a blank line, it will cause
problems. The reason is that the DEBUG trap only occurs after each
executed simple command in a script, not each line. Blank lines never
generate the DEBUG signal. The user could set a breakpoint on a blank

line, in which case continuing execution with the g command would never
break back out to the debugger.
We can fix both of these problems by making sure that breakpoints are set
only on lines with text.[15] After making the tests, we can add the breakpoint
to the breakpoint array, _linebp. This is a little more complex than it
sounds. In order to make the code in other sections of the debugger simpler,
we should maintain a sorted array of breakpoints. To do this, we echo all of
the line numbers currently in the array, along with the new number, in a
subshell and pipe them into the UNIX sort command. sort -n sorts a list
into numerically ascending order. The result of this is a list of ordered
numbers which we then assign back to the _linebp array with a compound
assignment.
To complement the user's ability to add breakpoints, we also allow the user
to delete them. The cb command allows the user to clear single breakpoints
or all breakpoints, depending on whether a line number argument is
supplied or not. For example, cb 12 clears a breakpoint at line 12 (if a
breakpoint was set at that line). cb on its own would clear all of the
breakpoints that have been set. It is useful to look briefly at how this works;
here is the code for the function that is called with the cb command,
_clearbp:
function _clearbp
{
    local i
    
    if [ -z "$1" ]; then
        unset _linebp[*]
        _msg "All breakpoints have been cleared"
    elif [ $(echo $1 | grep '^[0-9]*')  ]; then
        _linebp=($(echo $(for i in ${_linebp[*]}; do
              if (( $1 != $i )); then echo $i; fi; done) ))
        _msg "Breakpoint cleared at line $1"
    else
        _msg "Please specify a numeric line number"
    fi
}
The structure of the code is similar to that used for setting the breakpoints.
If no argument was supplied to the command, the breakpoint array is unset,
effectively deleting all the breakpoints. If an argument was supplied and is
not a number, we print out an error message and exit.

A numeric argument to the cb command means the code has to search the
list of breakpoints and delete the specified one. We can easily make the
deletion by following a procedure similar to the one we used when we
added a breakpoint in _setbp. We execute a loop in a subshell, printing out
the line numbers in the breakpoints list and ignoring any that match the
provided argument. The echoed values once again form a compound
statement, which can then be assigned to an array variable.[16]
The function _at_linenumbp is called by _steptrap after every statement;
it checks whether the shell has arrived at a line number breakpoint. The
code for the function is:
# See if this line number has a breakpoint
function _at_linenumbp
{
    local i=0
    
  if [ "$_linebp" ]; then
    while (( $i < ${#_linebp[@]} )); do
      if (( ${_linebp[$i]} == $_curline )); then
        return 0
      fi
      let i=$i+1
    done
  fi
  return 1
}
The function simply loops through the breakpoint array and checks the
current line number against each one. If a match is found, it returns true
(i.e., returns 0). Otherwise, it continues looping, looking for a match until
the end of the array is reached. It then returns false.
It is possible to find out exactly what line the debugger is up to and where
the breakpoints have been set in the guinea pig by using the ds command.
We'll see an example of the output later, when we run a sample bashdb
debugging session. The code for this function is fairly straightforward:
# Print out the shell script and mark the location of breakpoints
# and the current line
function _displayscript
{
    local i=1 j=0 bp cl
    
    ( while (( $i < ${#_lines[@]} )); do
          if [ ${_linebp[$j]} ] && (( ${_linebp[$j]} == $i )); then
              bp='*'

              let j=$j+1
          else
              bp=' '
          fi
    
          if (( $_curline == $i )); then
              cl=">"
          else
              cl=" "
          fi
    
          echo "$i:$bp $cl  ${_lines[$i]}"
          let i=$i+1
      done
    ) | more
}
This function contains a subshell, the output of which is piped to the UNIX
more command. We have done this for user-friendly reasons; a long script
would scroll up the screen quickly and the users may not have displays that
allow them to scroll back to previous pages of screen output. more displays
one screenful of output at a time.
The core of the subshell code loops through the lines of the guinea pig
script. It first tests to see if the line it is about to display is in the array of
breakpoints. If it is, a breakpoint character (*) is set and the local variable j
is incremented. j was initialized to 0 at the beginning of the function; it
contains the current breakpoint that we are up to. It should now be apparent
why we went to the trouble of sorting the breakpoints in _setbp: both the
line numbers and the breakpoint numbers increment sequentially, and once
we pass a line number that has a breakpoint and find it in the breakpoint
array, we know that future breakpoints in the script must be further on in the
array. If the breakpoint array contained line numbers in a random order,
we'd have to search the entire array to find out if a line number was in the
array or not.
The core of the subshell code then checks to see if the current line and the
line it is about to display are the same. If they are, a "current line" character
(>) is set. The current displayed line number (stored in i), breakpoint
character, current line character, and script line are then printed out.
We think you'll agree that the added complexity in the handling of
breakpoints is well worth it. Being able to display the script and the location
of breakpoints is an important feature in any debugger.

Break conditions
bashdb provides another method of breaking out of the guinea pig script:
the break condition. This is a string that the user can specify that is
evaluated as a command; if it is true (i.e., returns exit status 0), the
debugger enters the command loop.
Since the break condition can be any line of shell code, there's a lot of
flexibility in what can be tested. For example, you can break when a
variable reaches a certain value—e.g., (( $x < 0 ))—or when a particular
piece of text has been written to a file (grep string file). You will probably
think of all kinds of uses for this feature.[17] To set a break condition, type
bc string. To remove it, type bc without arguments—this installs the null
string, which is ignored.
_steptrap evaluates the break condition $_brcond only if it's not null. If the
break condition evaluates to 0, then the if clause is true and, once again,
_steptrap calls the command loop.
Execution tracing
The final feature of the debugger is execution tracing, available with the x
command.
The function _xtrace "toggles" execution tracing simply by assigning to the
variable _trace the logical "not" of its current value, so that it alternates
between 0 (off) and 1 (on). The preamble initializes it to 0.
Debugger limitations
We have kept bashdb reasonably simple so that you can see the
fundamentals of building a shell script debugger. Although it contains some
useful features and is designed to be a real tool, not just a scripting
example, it has some important limitations. Some are described in the list
that follows.

1. Debuggers tend to run programs slower than if they were executed on
their own. bashdb is no exception. Depending upon the script you use
it on, you'll find the debugger runs everything anywhere from 8 to 30
times more slowly. This isn't so much of a problem if you are stepping
through a script in small increments, but bear it in mind if you have,
say, initialization code with large looping constructs.
2. The debugger will not "step down" into shell scripts that are called
from the guinea pig. To do this, you'd have to edit your guinea pig
script and change a call to scriptname to bashdb scriptname.
3. Similarly, nested subshells are treated as one gigantic statement; you
cannot step down into them at all.
4. The guinea pig itself should not trap on the fake signals DEBUG and
EXIT; otherwise the debugger won't work.
5. Command error handling could be significantly improved.
Many of these are not insurmountable and you can experiment with solving
them yourself; see the exercises at the end of this chapter.
The debugger from an earlier version of this book helped inspire a more
comprehensive bash debugger maintained by Rocky Bernstein, which you
can find at the Bash Debugger Project, http://bashdb.sourceforge.net/ .
OceanofPDF.com

A Sample bashdb Session
Now we'll show a transcript of an actual session with bashdb, in which the
guinea pig is the solution to Task 6-1, the script ndu. Here is the transcript
of the debugging session:
[bash]$ bashdb ndu
bash Debugger version 1.0
Stopped at line 0
bashdb> ds
1:     for dir in ${*:-.}; do
2:       if [ -e $dir ]; then
3:         result=$(du -s $dir | cut -f 1)
4:         let total=$result*1024
5:    
6:         echo -n "Total for $dir = $total bytes"
7:    
8:         if [ $total -ge 1048576 ]; then
9:           echo " ($((total/1048576)) Mb)"
10:         elif [ $total -ge 1024 ]; then
11:           echo " ($((total/1024)) Kb)"
12:         fi
13:       fi
14:     done
bashdb> s
Stopped at line 2
bashdb> bp 4
Breakpoint set at line 4
bashdb> bp 8
Breakpoint set at line 8
bashdb> bp 11
Breakpoint set at line 11
bashdb> ds
1:     for dir in ${*:-.}; do
2:  >    if [ -e $dir ]; then
3:         result=$(du -s $dir | cut -f 1)
4:*        let total=$result*1024
5:    
6:         echo -n "Total for $dir = $total bytes"
7:    
8:*        if [ $total -ge 1048576 ]; then
9:           echo " ($((total/1048576)) Mb)"
10:         elif [ $total -ge 1024 ]; then
11:*          echo " ($((total/1024)) Kb)"
12:         fi
13:       fi
14:     done

bashdb> g
Reached breakpoint at line 4
bashdb> !echo $total
6840032
bashdb> cb 8
Breakpoint cleared at line 8
bashdb> ds
1:     for dir in ${*:-.}; do
2:       if [ -e $dir ]; then
3:         result=$(du -s $dir | cut -f 1)
4:* >      let total=$result*1024
5:    
6:         echo -n "Total for $dir = $total bytes"
7:    
8:         if [ $total -ge 1048576 ]; then
9:           echo " ($((total/1048576)) Mb)"
10:         elif [ $total -ge 1024 ]; then
11:*          echo " ($((total/1024)) Kb)"
12:         fi
13:       fi
14:     done
bashdb> bp
Breakpoints at lines: 4 11
Break on condition:
    
bashdb> !total=5600
bashdb> g
Total for . = 5600 bytes (5 Kb)
Reached breakpoint at line 11
bashdb> cb
All breakpoints have been cleared
bashdb> ds
1:     for dir in ${*:-.}; do
2:       if [ -e $dir ]; then
3:         result=$(du -s $dir | cut -f 1)
4:         let total=$result*1024
5:    
6:         echo -n "Total for $dir = $total bytes"
7:    
8:         if [ $total -ge 1048576 ]; then
9:           echo " ($((total/1048576)) Mb)"
10:         elif [ $total -ge 1024 ]; then
11:  >        echo " ($((total/1024)) Kb)"
12:         fi
13:       fi
14:     done
bashdb> g
[bash]$

First, we display the script with ds and then perform a step, taking
execution to line 2 of ndu. We then set breakpoints at lines 4, 8, and 11 and
display the script again. This time the breakpoints are clearly marked by
asterisks (*). The right angle bracket (>) indicates that line 2 was the most
recent line executed.
Next, we continue execution of the script that breaks at line 4. We print out
the value of total now and decide to clear the breakpoint at line 8.
Displaying the script confirms that the breakpoint at line 8 is indeed gone.
We can also use the bp command, and it too shows that the only
breakpoints set are at lines 4 and 11.
At this stage we might decide that we want to check the logic of the if
branch at line 11. This requires that $total be greater than or equal to 1,024,
but less than 1,048,576. As we saw previously, $total is very large, so we
set its value to 5,600 so that it will execute the second part of the if and
continue execution. The script enters that section of the if correctly, prints
out the value, and stops at the breakpoint.
To finish off, we clear the breakpoints, display the script again, and then
continue execution, which exits the script.
OceanofPDF.com

Exercises
We'll conclude this chapter with some suggested enhancements to our
simple debugger and a complete listing of the debugger command source
code.
1. Improve command error handling in these ways:
1. Check that the arguments to s are valid numbers and print an
appropriate error message if they aren't.
2. Check that a breakpoint actually exists before clearing it and warn
the user if the line doesn't have a breakpoint.
3. Any other error handling that you can think of.
2. Add code to remove duplicate breakpoints (more than one breakpoint
on one line).
3. Enhance the cb command so that the user can specify more than one
breakpoint to be cleared at a time.
4. Implement an option that causes a break into the debugger whenever a
command exits with non-zero status:
1. Implement it as the command-line option -e.
2. Implement it as the debugger command e to toggle it on and off.
(Hint: when you enter _steptrap, $? is still the exit status of the
last command that ran.)
5. Implement a command that prints out the status of the debugger:
whether execution trace is on/off, error exit is on/off, and the number
of the last line to be executed. In addition, move the functionality for
displaying the breakpoints from bp to the new option.
6. Add support for multiple break conditions, so that bashdb stops
execution whenever one of them becomes true and prints a message
indicating which one became true. Do this by storing the break
conditions in an array. Try to make this as efficient as possible, since
the checking will take place after every statement.
7. Add the ability to watch variables.
1. Add a command aw that takes a variable name as an argument
and adds it to a list of variables to watch. Any watched variables
are printed out when execution trace is toggled on.

2. Add another command cw that, without an argument, removes all
of the variables from the watch list. With an argument, it removes
the specified variable.
8. Although placing an underscore at the start of the debugger identifiers
will avoid name clashes in most cases, think of ways to automatically
detect name clashes with the guinea pig script and how to get around
this problem. (Hint: you could rename the clashing names in the
guinea pig script at the point where it gets combined with the preamble
and placed in the temporary file.)
9. Add any other features you can think of.
Finally, here is a complete source listing of the debugger function file
bashdb.fns:
# After each line of the test script is executed the shell traps to
# this function.
    
function _steptrap
{
    _curline=$1        # the number of the line that just ran
    
    (( $_trace )) && _msg "$PS4 line $_curline: ${_lines[$_curline]}"
  
    if (( $_steps >= 0 )); then
        let _steps="$_steps - 1"
    fi
    
    # First check to see if a line number breakpoint was reached.
    # If it was, then enter the debugger.
    if _at_linenumbp ; then
        _msg "Reached breakpoint at line $_curline"
        _cmdloop
    
    # It wasn't, so check whether a break condition exists and is true.
    # If it is, then enter the debugger
    elif [ -n "$_brcond" ] && eval $_brcond; then
        _msg "Break condition $_brcond true at line $_curline"
        _cmdloop
    
    # It wasn't, so check if we are in step mode and the number of
    # steps is up. If it is, then enter the debugger.
    elif (( $_steps == 0 )); then
        _msg "Stopped at line $_curline"
        _cmdloop
    
    fi
}
    

# The Debugger Command Loop
    
function _cmdloop {
  local cmd args
    
  while read -e -p "bashdb> " cmd args; do
    case $cmd in
      \? | h  ) _menu ;;          # print command menu
      bc ) _setbc $args ;;        # set a break condition
      bp ) _setbp $args ;;        # set a breakpoint at the given line
      cb ) _clearbp $args ;;      # clear one or all breakpoints
      ds ) _displayscript ;;      # list the script and show the
                                  # breakpoints
      g  ) return ;;              # "go": start/resume execution of
                                  # the script
      q  ) exit ;;                # quit
      s  ) let _steps=${args:-1}  # single step N times (default = 1)
           return ;;
      x  ) _xtrace ;;             # toggle execution trace
     * ) eval ${cmd#!} $args ;; # pass to the shell
      *  ) _msg "Invalid command: '$cmd'" ;;
    esac
  done
}
    
    
# See if this line number has a breakpoint
function _at_linenumbp
{
    local i=0
    
    # Loop through the breakpoints array and check to see if any of
    # them match the current line number. If they do return true (0)
    # otherwise return false.
    
    if [ "$_linebp" ]; then
        while (( $i < ${#_linebp[@]} )); do
            if (( ${_linebp[$i]} == $_curline )); then
                return 0
            fi
            let i=$i+1
        done
    fi
    return 1
}
    
    
# Set a breakpoint at the given line number or list breakpoints
function _setbp
{

    local i
    
    # If there are no arguments call the breakpoint list function.
    # Otherwise check to see if the argument was a positive number.
    # If it wasn't then print an error message. If it was then check
    # to see if the line number contains text. If it doesn't then
    # print an error message. If it does then echo the current
    # breakpoints and the new addition and pipe them to "sort" and
    # assign the result back to the list of breakpoints. This results
    # in keeping the breakpoints in numerical sorted order.
    
    # Note that we can remove duplicate breakpoints here by using
    # the -u option to sort which uniquifies the list.
    
    if [ -z "$1" ]; then
        _listbp
    elif [ $(echo $1 | grep '^[0-9]*')  ]; then
        if [ -n "${_lines[$1]}" ]; then
            _linebp=($(echo $( (for i in ${_linebp[*]} $1; do
                      echo $i; done) | sort -n) ))
            _msg "Breakpoint set at line $1"
        else
            _msg "Breakpoints can only be set on non-blank lines"
        fi
    else
        _msg "Please specify a numeric line number"
    fi
}
    
    
# List breakpoints and break conditions
function _listbp
{
    if [ -n "$_linebp" ]; then
        _msg "Breakpoints at lines: ${_linebp[*]}"
    else
        _msg "No breakpoints have been set"
    fi
    
    _msg "Break on condition:"
    _msg "$_brcond"
}
    
# Clear individual or all breakpoints
function _clearbp
{
    local i bps
    
    # If there are no arguments, then delete all the breakpoints.
    # Otherwise, check to see if the argument was a positive number.

    # If it wasn't, then print an error message. If it was, then
    # echo all of the current breakpoints except the passed one
    # and assign them to a local variable. (We need to do this because
    # assigning them back to _linebp would keep the array at the same
    # size and just move the values "back" one place, resulting in a
    # duplicate value). Then destroy the old array and assign the
    # elements of the local array, so we effectively recreate it,
    # minus the passed breakpoint.
    
    if [ -z "$1" ]; then
        unset _linebp[*]
        _msg "All breakpoints have been cleared"
    elif [ $(echo $1 | grep '^[0-9]*')  ]; then
          bps=($(echo $(for i in ${_linebp[*]}; do
                if (( $1 != $i )); then echo $i; fi; done) ))
          unset _linebp[*]
          _linebp=(${bps[*]})
          _msg "Breakpoint cleared at line $1"
    else
        _msg "Please specify a numeric line number"
    fi
}
    
    
# Set or clear a break condition
function _setbc
{
    if [ -n "$*" ]; then
        _brcond=$args
        _msg "Break when true: $_brcond"
    else
        _brcond=
        _msg "Break condition cleared"
    fi
}
    
    
# Print out the shell script and mark the location of breakpoints
# and the current line
    
function _displayscript
{
    local i=1 j=0 bp cl
    
    ( while (( $i < ${#_lines[@]} )); do
          if [ ${_linebp[$j]} ] && (( ${_linebp[$j]} == $i )); then
              bp='*'
              let j=$j+1
          else
              bp=' '

          fi
          if (( $_curline == $i )); then
              cl=">"
          else
              cl=" "
          fi
          echo "$i:$bp $cl  ${_lines[$i]}"
          let i=$i+1
      done
    ) | more
}
    
    
# Toggle execution trace on/off
function _xtrace
{
    let _trace="! $_trace"
    _msg "Execution trace "
    if (( $_trace )); then
        _msg "on"
    else
        _msg "off"
    fi
}
    
    
# Print the passed arguments to Standard Error
function _msg
{
    echo -e "$@" >&2
}
    
    
# Print command menu
function _menu {
    _msg 'bashdb commands:
         bp N                set breakpoint at line N
         bp                  list breakpoints and break condition
         bc string           set break condition to string
         bc                  clear break condition
         cb N                clear breakpoint at line N
         cb                  clear all breakpoints
         ds                  displays the test script and breakpoints
         g                   start/resume execution
         s [N]               execute N statements (default 1)
         x                   toggle execution trace on/off
         h, ?                print this menu
         ! string            passes string to a shell
         q                   quit'
}

    
    
# Erase the temporary file before exiting
function _cleanup
{
    rm $_debugfile 2>/dev/null
}
[10] Unfortunately, the debugger will not work with versions of bash prior to
2.0, because they do not implement the DEBUG signal.
[11] All function names and variables (except those local to functions) in
bashdb have names beginning with an underscore (_), to minimize the
possibility of clashes with names in the guinea pig script.
[12] exec can also be used with an I/O redirector only; this makes the
redirector take effect for the remainder of the script or login session. For
example, the line exec 2>errlog at the top of a script directs standard error
to the file errlog for the rest of the script.
[13] If you are typing or scanning in the preamble code from this book, make
sure that the last line in the file is the call to set the trap, i.e., no blank lines
should appear after the call to trap.
[14] There is nothing to stop you from changing the commands to something
you find easier to remember. There is no "official" bash debugger, so feel
free to change the debugger to suit your needs.
[15] This isn't a complete solution. Certain other lines (e.g., comments) will
also be ignored by the DEBUG trap. See the list of limitations and the
exercises at the end of this chapter.
[16] bash versions 2.01 and earlier have a bug in assigning arrays to
themselves that prevents the code for setbp and clearbp from working. In
each case, you can get around this bug by assigning _linebp to a local
variable first, unsetting it, and then assigning the local variable back to it.
Better yet, update to a more recent version of bash.
[17] Bear in mind that if your break condition sends anything to standard
output or standard error, you will see it after every statement executed.

Also, make sure your break condition doesn't take a long time to run;
otherwise your script will run very, very slowly.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 10. bash Administration
There are two areas in which system administrators use the shell as part of
their job: setting up a generic environment for users and for system security.
In this chapter, we'll discuss bash's features that relate to these tasks. We
assume that you already know the basics of UNIX system administration.[1]
OceanofPDF.com

Installing bash as the Standard Shell
As a prelude to system-wide customization, we want to emphasize that bash
can be installed as if it were the standard Bourne shell, /bin/sh. Indeed,
some systems, such as Linux, come with bash installed instead of the
Bourne shell.
If you want to do this with your system, you can just save the original
Bourne shell to another filename (in case someone needs to use it) and
either install bash as sh in the /bin directory, or better yet install bash in the
/bin directory and create a symbolic link from /bin/sh to /bin/bash using the
command ln -s /bin/bash /bin/sh. The reason we think that the second
option is better is because bash changes its behavior slightly if started as sh,
as we will see shortly.
As detailed in Appendix A, bash is backward-compatible with the Bourne
shell, except that it doesn't support ^ as a synonym for the pipe character (|).
Unless you have an ancient UNIX system, or you have some very, very old
shell scripts, you needn't worry about this.
But if you want to be absolutely sure, simply search through all shell scripts
in all directories in your PATH. An easy way to perform the search is to use
the file command, which we saw in Chapter 5 and Chapter 9. file prints
"executable shell script" when given the name of one.[2] Here is a script that
looks for ^ in shell scripts in every directory in your PATH:
IFS=:
for d in $PATH; do
    echo checking $d:
    cd $d
    scripts=$(file * | grep 'shell script' | cut -d: -f1)
    for f in $scripts; do
        grep '\^' $f /dev/null
    done
done
The first line of this script makes it possible to use $PATH as an item list in
the for loop. For each directory, it cds there and finds all shell scripts by
piping the file command into grep and then, to extract the filename only,
into cut. Then for each shell script, it searches for the ^ character.[3]

If you run this script, you will probably find several occurrences of ^—but
these carets should be used within regular expressions in grep, sed, or awk
commands, not as pipe characters. As long as carets are never used as pipes,
it is safe for you to install bash as /bin/sh.
As we mentioned earlier, if bash is started as sh (because the executable file
has been renamed sh or there is a link from sh to bash) its startup behavior
will change slightly to mimic the Bourne shell as closely as possible. For
login shells it only attempts to read /etc/profile and ~/.profile, ignoring any
other startup files like ~/.bash_profile. For interactive shells it won't read
the initialization file ~/.bashrc.[4]
OceanofPDF.com

POSIX Mode
Besides its native operating mode, bash can also be switched into POSIX
mode. The POSIX (Portable Operating System Interface) standard,
described in detail in Appendix A, defines guidelines for standardizing
UNIX. One part of the POSIX standard covers shells.
bash is nearly 100% POSIX-compliant in its native mode. If you want strict
POSIX adherence, you can either start bash with the —posix option, or set
it from within the shell with set -o posix.
Only in very rare circumstances would you ever have to use POSIX mode.
The differences, outlined in Appendix A, are small and are mostly
concerned with the command lookup order and how functions are handled.
Most bash users should be able to get through life without ever having to
use this option.
OceanofPDF.com

Command-Line Options
bash has several command-line options that change the behavior of and
pass information to the shell. The options fall into two sets: single character
options, like we've seen in previous chapters of this book, and
multicharacter options, which are a relatively recent improvement to UNIX
utilities.[5] Table 10-1 lists all of the options.[6]
Table 10-1. bash command-line options
Option
Meaning
-c string
Commands are read from string, if present. Any arguments after string are
interpreted as positional parameters, starting with $0.
-D
A list of all double-quoted strings preceded by $ is printed on the standard ouput.
These are the strings that are subject to language translation when the current locale
is not C or POSIX. This also turns on the -n option.
-i
Interactive shell. Ignores signals TERM, INT, and QUIT. With job control in effect,
TTIN, TTOU, and TSTP are also ignored.
-l
Makes bash act as if invoked as a login shell.
-o option
Takes the same arguments as set -o.
-O, +O
shopt-option
shopt-option is one of the shell options accepted by the shopt builtin. If shopt-option
is present, -O sets the value of that option; +O unsets it. If shopt-option is not
supplied, the names and values of the shell options accepted by shopt are printed on
the standard output. If the invocation option is +O, the output is displayed in a
format that may be reused as input.
-s
Reads commands from the standard input. If an argument is given to bash, this flag
takes precedence (i.e., the argument won't be treated as a script name and standard
input will be read).
-r
Restricted shell. See the Section 10.3.1 later in this chapter.
-v
Prints shell input lines as they're read.
-
Signals the end of options and disables further option processing. Any options after
this are treated as filenames and arguments. — is synonymous with -.
—debugger
Arranges for the debugger profile to be executed before the shell starts. Turns on
extended debugging mode and shell function tracing.[7]

Option
Meaning
—dump-
strings
Does the same as -D.
—dump-po-
strings
Does the same as -D but the output is in the GNU gettext po (portable object) file
format.
—help
Displays a usage message and exits.
—login
Makes bash act as if invoked as a login shell. Same as -l.
—noediting
Does not use the GNU readline library to read command lines if interactive.
—noprofile
Does not read the startup file /etc/profile or any of the personal initialization files.
—norc
Does not read the initialization file ~/.bashrc if the shell is interactive. This is on by
default if the shell is invoked as sh.
—posix
Changes the behavior of bash to follow the POSIX guidelines more closely where
the default operation of bash is different.
—quiet
Shows no information on shell startup. This is the default.
—rcfile file,
—init-file
file
Executes commands read from file instead of from the initialization file ~/.bashrc if
the shell is interactive.
—verbose
Equivalent to -v.
—version
Shows the version number of this instance of bash and then exits.
[7] Only available in bash version 3.0 and later.
The multicharacter options have to appear on the command line before the
single-character options. In addition to these, any set option can be used on
the command line. Like shell built-ins, using a + instead of - turns an option
off.
Of these options, the most useful are -i (interactive), -r (restricted), -s (read
from standard input), -p (privileged), and -m (enable job control). Login
shells are usually run with the -i, -s, and -m flags. We'll look at restricted
and privileged modes later in this chapter.

[1] A good source of information on system administration is Essential
System Administration by Æleen Frisch (O'Reilly ).
[2] The exact message varies from system to system; make sure that yours
prints this message when given the name of a shell script. If not, just
substitute the message your file command prints for "shell script" in the
following code.
[3] The inclusion of /dev/null in the grep command is a kludge that forces
grep to print the names of files that contain a match, even if there is only
one such file in a given directory.
[4] bash also enters POSIX mode when started as sh. Versions of bash prior
to 2.0 don't—POSIX mode has to be explicitly set with the —posix
command-line option.
[5] Multicharacter options are far more readable and easier to remember than
the old, and usually cryptic, single character options. All of the GNU
utilities have multicharacter options, but many applications and utilities
(certainly those on old UNIX systems) allow only single-character options.
[6] See Appendix B for a list of options for versions of bash prior to 2.0.
OceanofPDF.com

Environment Customization
Like the Bourne shell, bash uses the file /etc/profile for system-wide
customization. When a user logs in, the shell reads and runs /etc/profile
before running the user's .bash_profile.
We won't cover all the possible commands you might want to put in
/etc/profile. But bash has a few unique features that are particularly relevant
to system-wide customization; we'll discuss them here.
We'll start with two built-in commands that you can use in /etc/profile to
tailor your users' environments and constrain their use of system resources.
Users can also use these commands in their .bash_profile, or at any other
time, to override the default settings.
OceanofPDF.com

umask
umask, like the same command in most other shells, lets you specify the
default permissions that files have when users create them. It takes the same
types of arguments that the chmod command does, i.e., absolute (octal
numbers) or symbolic permission values.
The umask contains the permissions that are turned off by default
whenever a process creates a file, regardless of what permission the process
specifies.[8]
We'll use octal notation to show how this works. As you probably know, the
digits in a permission number stand (left to right) for the permissions of the
owner, owner's group, and all other users, respectively. Each digit, in turn,
consists of three bits, which specify read, write, and execute permissions
from left to right. (If a file is a directory, the "execute" permission becomes
"search" permission, i.e., permission to cd to it, list its files, etc.)
For example, the octal number 640 equals the binary number 110 100 000.
If a file has this permission, then its owner can read and write it; users in the
owner's group can only read it; everyone else has no permission on it. A file
with permission 755 gives its owner the right to read, write, and execute it
and everyone else the right to read and execute (but not write).
022 is a common umask value. This implies that when a file is created, the
"most" permission it could possibly have is 755—which is the usual
permission of an executable that a compiler might create. A text editor, on
the other hand, might create a file with 666 permission (read and write for
everyone), but the umask forces it to be 644 instead.
OceanofPDF.com

ulimit
The ulimit command was originally used to specify the limit on file
creation size. But bash's version has options that let you put limits on
several different system resources. Table 10-2 lists the options.
Table 10-2. ulimit resource options
Option Resource limited
-a
All limits (for printing values only)
-c
Core file size (1 Kb blocks)
-d
Process data segment (Kb)
-f
File size (1 Kb blocks)
-l
Maximum size of a process that can be locked in memory (Kb)[9]
-m
Maximum resident set size
-n
File descriptors
-p
Pipe size (512 byte blocks)
-s
Process stack segment (Kb)
-t
Process CPU time (seconds)
-u
Maximum number of processes available to a user
-v
Virtual memory (Kb)
[9] Not available in versions of bash prior to 2.0.
Each takes a numerical argument that specifies the limit in units shown in
the table. You can also give the argument "unlimited" (which may actually
mean some physical limit), "hard" and "soft", which refer to the current
hard and soft limits (see below), or you can omit the argument, in which
case it will print the current limit. ulimit -a prints limits (or "unlimited") of
all types.[10] You can specify only one type of resource at a time. If you
don't specify any option, -f is assumed.

Some of these options depend on operating system capabilities that don't
exist in older UNIX versions. In particular, some older versions have a
fixed limit of 20 file descriptors per process (making -n irrelevant), and
some don't support virtual memory (making -v irrelevant).
The -d and -s options have to do with dynamic memory allocation, i.e.,
memory for which a process asks the operating system at runtime. It's not
necessary for casual users to limit these, though software developers may
want to do so to prevent buggy programs from trying to allocate endless
amounts of memory due to infinite loops.
The -v and -m options are similar; -v puts a limit on all uses of memory,
and -m limits the amount of physical memory that a process is allowed to
use. You don't need these unless your system has severe memory constraints
or you want to limit process size to avoid thrashing.
The -u option is another option which is useful if you have system memory
constraints or you wish just wish to stop individual users from hogging the
system resources.
You may want to specify limits on file size (-f and -c) if you have
constraints on disk space. Sometimes users actually mean to create huge
files, but more often than not, a huge file is the result of a buggy program
that goes into an infinite loop. Software developers who use debuggers like
sdb, dbx, and gdb should not limit core file size, because core dumps are
necessary for debugging.
The -t option is another possible guard against infinite loops. However, a
program that is in an infinite loop but isn't allocating memory or writing
files is not particularly dangerous; it's better to leave this unlimited and just
let the user kill the offending program.
In addition to the types of resources you can limit, ulimit lets you specify
hard or soft limits. Hard limits can be lowered by any user but only raised
by the super user (root); users can lower soft limits and raise them—but
only as high as the hard limit for that resource.
If you give -H along with one (or more) of the options above, ulimit will
set hard limits; -S sets soft limits. Without either of these, ulimit sets the
hard and soft limit. For example, the following commands set the soft limit
on file descriptors to 64 and the hard limit to unlimited:

ulimit -Sn 64
ulimit -Hn unlimited
When ulimit prints current limits, it prints soft limits unless you specify -H.
OceanofPDF.com

Types of Global Customization
The best possible approach to globally available customization would be a
system-wide environment file that is separate from each user's environment
file—just like /etc/profile is separate from each user's .bash_profile.
Unfortunately, bash doesn't have this feature.
Nevertheless, the shell gives you a few ways to set up customizations that
are available to all users at all times. Environment variables are the most
obvious; your /etc/profile file will undoubtedly contain definitions for
several of them, including PATH and TERM.
The variable TMOUT is useful when your system supports dialup lines. Set
it to a number N, and if a user doesn't enter a command within N seconds
after the shell last issued a prompt, the shell will terminate. This feature is
helpful in preventing people from "hogging" the dialup lines.
You may want to include some more complex customizations involving
environment variables, such as the prompt string PS1 containing the current
directory (as seen in Chapter 4).
You can also turn on options, such as emacs or vi editing modes, or
noclobber to protect against inadvertent file overwriting. Any shell scripts
you have written for general use also contribute to customization.
Unfortunately, it's not possible to create a global alias. You can define
aliases in /etc/profile, but there is no way to make them part of the
environment so that their definitions will propagate to subshells. (In
contrast, users can define global aliases by putting their definitions in
~/.bashrc.)
However, you can set up global functions. These are an excellent way to
customize your system's environment, because functions are part of the
shell, not separate processes.
[8] If you are comfortable with Boolean logic, think of the umask as a
number that the operating system logically ANDs with the permission given

by the creating process.
[10] The "hard" and "soft" arguments are not available in bash prior to
version 2.05a.
OceanofPDF.com

System Security Features
UNIX security is a problem of legendary notoriety. Just about every aspect
of a UNIX system has some security issue associated with it, and it's
usually the system administrator's job to worry about this issue.
bash has two features that help solve this problem: the restricted shell,
which is intentionally "brain damaged," and privileged mode, which is used
with shell scripts that run as if the user were root.
OceanofPDF.com

Restricted Shell
The restricted shell is designed to put the user into an environment where
her ability to move around and write files is severely limited. It's usually
used for "guest" accounts.[11] You can make a user's login shell restricted by
putting rbash in the user's /etc/passwd entry.[12]
The specific constraints imposed by the restricted shell disallow the user
from doing the following:
Changing working directories: cd is inoperative. If you try to use it,
you will get the error message bash: cd: restricted.
Redirecting output to a file: the redirectors >, >|, <>, and >> are not
allowed.
Assigning a new value to the environment variables ENV,
BASH_ENV, SHELL, or PATH.
Specifying any commands with slashes (/) in them. The shell will treat
files outside of the current directory as "not found."
Using the exec built-in.
Specifying a filename containing a / as an argument to the . built-in
command.
Importing function definitions from the shell environment at startup.
Adding or deleting built-in commands with the -f and -d options to the
enable built-in command.
Specifying the -p option to the builtin command.
Turning off restricted mode with set +r.
These restrictions go into effect after the user's .bash_profile and
environment files are run. In addition, it is wise to change the owner of the
users' .bash_profile and .bashrc to root, and make these files read-only. The
users' home directory should also be made read-only.
This means that the restricted shell user's entire environment is set up in
/etc/profile and .bash_profile. Since the user can't access /etc/profile and
can't overwrite .bash_profile, this lets the system administrator configure
the environment as he sees fit.

Two common ways of setting up such environments are to set up a directory
of "safe" commands and have that directory be the only one in PATH, and
to set up a command menu from which the user can't escape without exiting
the shell.
OceanofPDF.com

A System Break-In Scenario
Before we explain the other security features, here is some background
information on system security that should help you understand why they
are necessary.
Many problems with UNIX security hinge on a UNIX file attribute called
the suid (set user ID) bit. This is like a permission bit (see umask earlier in
this chapter): when an executable file has it turned on, the file runs with an
effective user ID equal to the owner of the file, which is usually root. The
effective user ID is distinct from the real user ID of the process.
This feature lets administrators write scripts that do certain things that
require root privilege (e.g., configure printers) in a controlled way. To set a
file's suid bit, the superuser can type chmod 4755 filename; the 4 is the suid
bit.
Modern system administration wisdom says that creating suid shell scripts
is a very, very bad idea.[13] This has been especially true under the C shell,
because its .cshrc environment file introduces numerous opportunities for
break-ins. bash's environment file feature creates similar security holes,
although the security feature we'll see shortly make this problem less
severe.
We'll show why it's dangerous to set a script's suid bit. Recall that in
Chapter 3, we mentioned that it's not a good idea to put your personal bin
directory at the front of your PATH. Here is a scenario that shows how this
placement combines with suid shell scripts to form a security hole: a
variation of the infamous "Trojan horse" scheme. First, the computer
cracker has to find a user on the system with an suid shell script. In
addition, the user must have a PATH with her personal bin directory listed
before the public bin directories, and the cracker must have write
permission on the user's personal bin directory.
Once the cracker finds a user with these requirements, he follows these
steps:

Looks at the suid script and finds a common utility that it calls. Let's
say it's grep.
Creates the Trojan horse, which is this case is a shell script called grep
in the user's personal bin directory. The script looks like this:
cp /bin/bash filename
                     chown root 
                     filename
                     chmod 4755 
                     filename
                     /bin/grep "$@
rm ~/bin/grep
filename should be some unremarkable filename in a directory with
public read and execute permission, such as /bin or /usr/bin. The file,
when created, will be that most heinous of security holes: an suid
interactive shell.
Sits back and waits for the user to run the suid shell script—which
calls the Trojan horse, which in turn creates the suid shell and then
self-destructs.
Runs the suid shell and creates havoc.
OceanofPDF.com

Privileged Mode
The one way to protect against Trojan horses is privileged mode. This is a
set -o option (set -o privileged or set -p).
In privileged mode, when an suid bash shell script is invoked, the shell does
not run the user's environment file—i.e., it doesn't expand the user's
BASH_ENV environment variable.
Since privileged mode is an option, it is possible to turn it off with the
command set +o privileged (or set +p). But this doesn't help the potential
system cracker: the shell automatically changes its effective user ID to be
the same as the real user ID—i.e., if you turn off privileged mode, you also
turn off suid.
Privileged mode is an excellent security feature; it solves a problem that
originated when the environment file idea first appeared in the C shell.
Nevertheless, we still strongly recommend against creating suid shell
scripts. We have shown how bash protects against break-ins in one
particular situation, but that certainly does not imply that bash is "safe" in
any absolute sense. If you really must have suid scripts, you should
carefully consider all relevant security issues.
Finally, if you would like to learn more about UNIX security, we
recommend Practical UNIX and Internet Security, by Gene Spafford and
Simson Garfinkel (O'Reilly ).
[11] This feature is not documented in the manual pages for old versions of
bash.
[12] If this option has been included when the shell was compiled. See
Chapter 11 for details on configuring bash.
[13] In fact, most versions of UNIX intentionally disable the suid feature for
shell scripts.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 11. Shell Scripting
For the majority of this book, we've looked at the various elements that
make up bash and how you can use them in writing shell scripts. If you've
used other programming languages you will know that there is a difference
between writing a piece of code that gets a job done and writing a piece of
code that does the job but is also maintainable and conforms to what we
could call "good practice."
This chapter will give a brief introduction to some aspects of good practice
and writing maintainable shell scripts along with helpful tips and tricks that
you can use to make writing scripts easier.
OceanofPDF.com

What's That Do?
Six months ago you coded up a 100 line shell script. It made perfect sense
then, but now you look at it and wonder, "Just what does that do?" This is a
common pitfall among programmers—especially those writing in a shell
language. Unfortunately, shells have developed with more than their fair
share of obscure punctuation. This is a blessing for keeping typing to a
minimum but doesn't help readability. It's important to make your code as
readable as possible.
OceanofPDF.com

Comments
The first rule of shell scripting is to comment your code. You should do this
right from the start, even if the script is only a couple of lines long. Shell
scripts have a habit of growing from a couple of lines to many hundreds of
lines as more features are added, so it's best to get into the habit of
commenting your code right at the beginning.
To start with, consider having a main header or banner for your scripts. The
information in the header should, at a minimum, say what the script does.
Here is an example of a script header:
#!/bin/bash
#####################################################
# Name: graphconv.sh
#
# Converts graphics files from one format to another.
#
# Usage: graphconv.sh <input-file> <output-file>
#
# Author: C. Newham
# Date: 2004/12/02
#####################################################
This main header gives the name of the script, a brief summary of what it
does, usage information, the name of the author, and when the script was
written.
If you are using a source control system (e.g., CVS), you can dispense with
the author and date as these will be stored when the script is archived. If
you aren't using such a system, we strongly advise that you not only include
the above information but also place in the header additional data such as
modification dates and authors.
Whatever system you use, make sure that you make the format of the
banner a standard across all of your scripts.
Every function should also have a header. If it is a standalone function, it
should have a main header, as given above. If it is a function used locally in
a script, it should have a simpler banner stating what it does, what
parameters it expects, and what it returns, e.g.:

# Changes the filename extension
#
# param: $infile - the original filename
#
# returns: the modified name with new extension.
#
function change_filename( )
...
Comments should also be used frequently in your code to say what the code
is doing. While we aren't about to dictate style, comments within the flow
of the code are generally better on a line by themselves, while variable
declaration comments are better on the same line as the variable:
startup_dir=/home/startup/  # directory with startup files
file_limit=50               # maximum number of files to process
...
if [ -d "$startup_dir" ]
then
    # the startup directory exists so read any initialisation file.
    echo "initialising file processing..."
OceanofPDF.com

Variables and Constants
Headers and comments are just one way to document your code. Another is
by the use of descriptive variable names. Good variable names should give
an indication of what the variable represents. Names like "x", "resn" or
"procd" will only have meaning at the time that you write the script. Six
months down the track and they will be a mystery.
Good names should be short but descriptive. The three examples above
might have been more meaningfully written as "file_limit", "resolution",
and "was_processed". Don't make the names too long; the name
"horizontal_resolution_of_the_picture" just clutters a script and takes away
any advantage in making the name so descriptive.
Constants should be in uppercase and should normally be declared as read-
only:
declare -r CAPITAL_OF_ENGLAND="London"
You should always avoid "magic numbers" sprinkled throughout the code
by using constants. For example:
if [[ $process_result == 68 ]]
...
should be replaced with:
declare -ir STAGE_3_FAILURE=68
...
if [[ $process_result == $STAGE_3_FAILURE ]]
...
Not only does this make the code more readable but it makes changing the
value easier, especially if it is used numerous times in the script.
OceanofPDF.com

Starting Up
In Chapter 6 we talked about using getopts to obtain options and arguments
passed in to a shell script. This command makes it easy for the script
programmer to process what the user has provided, but what about the other
half of the deal? The programmer must make an effort to make life as easy
for the user as possible. Nothing makes a user more irate than a script that
doesn't take standard arguments, doesn't provide a usage message, doesn't
process the arguments in the expected way, and forces the user into a way
of thinking that the programmer thinks is the right way. Having to examine
the source code for a script to find out what is an acceptable argument or
option is usually the last straw!
The Free Software Foundation has published a set of guidelines for writing
GNU software that suggests standard ways in which UNIX utilities should
operate.[1] When writing your own shell scripts, it is worthwhile to follow
the guidelines because your script will then look familiar to users who have
used other command-line programs.
At a minimum your script should provide single letter options (such as -h)
and long options with the double dash (such as —help). It should also
provide two options: —help and —version. From the GNU manual:
—version
This option should direct the program to print information about its
name, version, origin, and legal status, all on standard output, and then
exit successfully. Other options and arguments should be ignored once
this is seen, and the program should not perform its normal function.
—help
This option should output brief documentation for how to invoke the
program, on standard output, then exit successfully. Other options and
arguments should be ignored once this is seen, and the program should
not perform its normal function.
Near the end of the —help option's output there should be a line that
says where to mail bug reports. It should have this format:
Report bugs to mailing-address.

Table 11-1 lists a few of the common single-letter and long options
that you may consider using for your own scripts. This list is by no
means exhaustive and is intended merely for guidance.
Table 11-1. Possible options
Long option
Option Examples where used
—all
-a
du, ls, nm, stty, uname, unexpand
—append
-a
etags, tee, time
—binary
-b
cpio, diff
—blocks
-b
head, tail
—date
-d
touch
—directory
-d
cpio
—exclude-from -X
tar
—file
-f
fgrep
—help
-h
man
—long
-l
ls
—line
-l
wc
—links
-L
cpio, ls
—output
-o
cc, sort
—quiet
-q
who
—recursive
-r
rm
—recursive
-R
ls
—silent
-s
Synonym for -quiet
—unique
-u
sort
—verbose
-v
cpio, tar
—width
-w
pr, sdiff
For commands that take one or more input files and produce an output file
it is considered good practice to make only the input files normal arguments

(i.e., command filename ) and have the output file specified by an option
(i.e., command -o filename ).
Another thing to watch out for is assuming that a particular environment
variable needed by your script has been set in the users' environment. If
your script is relying on the user to have set an environment variable, it is
probably better to redesign your script to allow the value to be passed in as
an argument.
[1] The document is available at http://www.gnu.org/prep/standards/.
OceanofPDF.com

Potential Problems
Here are some useful things to watch out for when writing shell scripts.
Being aware of them will not only save you time in tracking down bugs but
will also make your scripts more robust, more readable, and above all, more
maintainable.
Don't create massive scripts or functions that try to do everything. Split
functionality up into smaller units and place them in functions. This
not only makes the code easier to read but makes it easier to debug.
Always place the shell execution directive (e.g., #!/bin/bash) at the top
of your scripts to ensure they will be run by bash.
Don't use reserved words for variable names. This can become very
confusing:
let let="echo"
let echo="hello"
echo "$echo world"
Be careful with whitespace. Attempting the following assignment will
not give the expected result:
cat = 5
Don't use the same names for variables and functions:
function letter
{
     echo $1etter
}
letter=letter
letter letter
This causes more confusion that it's worth. While this example is
contrived, be on your guard for more subtle examples. To guard
against this, try and name your functions using verbs, e.g., function
print_letter.
Be careful when using the test operator [...]. The following two if
statements are not the same, although they look very similar:

         if [ "$var" = 42 ]
         if [ "$var" -eq 42 ]
The first is a string comparison, the second an integer comparison. We
suggest using ((...)) for arithmetic comparisons in if statements.
OceanofPDF.com

Don't Use bash
Sometimes you might start writing a script and after several hours of work
find that you've created a monster with many hundreds of lines of
complicated code. This is not always a bad thing, but it is a good idea to
always be thinking about whether the job could be done in a better way.
Usually the choice of programming language should take place at the
design stage. If you are starting from scratch on a Unix system you will
have many options, including C and C++, perl, python, and a host of others.
They all have their advantages and disadvantages, and no one language will
be the best solution for every problem.
If you find that your script has a huge amount of processing to do quickly or
if the script requires mathematical capabilities beyond simple integer
arithmetic, it might be worthwhile considering C or C++ for the job. If you
are looking for better portability across systems, python or perl might be a
better match to the task.
However, even if bash is not suitable in the final solution to a problem, you
might find it makes an excellent language for mocking up your solution and
trying out various options.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 12. bash for Your System
The first 10 chapters of this book looked at nearly all aspects of bash, from
navigating the filesystem and editing the command-line to writing shell
scripts and functions using lesser-known features of the shell. This is all
very well and good, but what if you have an old version of bash and want
the new features shown in this book (or worse yet, you don't have bash at
all)?
In this chapter we'll show you how to get the latest version of bash and
install it on your system, and we'll discuss potential problems you might
encounter along the way. We'll also look briefly at the examples that come
with bash and how you can report bugs to the bash maintainer.
OceanofPDF.com

Obtaining bash
If you have a direct connection to the Internet, you should have no trouble
obtaining bash; otherwise, you'll have to do a little more work.
The bash home page is located at
http://www.gnu.org/software/bash/bash.html and you can find the very
latest details of the current distribution and where to obtain it from there.
You can also get bash on CD-ROM by ordering it directly from the Free
Software Foundation, either via the web ordering page at http://order.fsf.org
or from:
The Free Software Foundation (FSF)
59 Temple Place - Suite 330
Boston, MA 02111-1307 USA
Phone: +1-617-542-5942
Fax: +1-617-542-2652
Email: order@fsf.org
OceanofPDF.com

Unpacking the Archive
Having obtained the archive file by one of the above methods, you need to
unpack it and install it on your system. Unpacking can be done anywhere—
we'll assume you're unpacking it in your home directory. Installing it on the
system requires you to have root privileges. If you aren't a system
administrator with root access, you can still compile and use bash; you just
can't install it as a system-wide utility. The first thing to do is uncompress
the archive file by typing gunzip bash-3.0.tar.gz.[1] Then you need to
"untar" the archive by typing tar -xf bash-3.0.tar. The -xf means "extract
the archived material from the specified file." This will create a directory
called bash-3.0 in your home directory.
The archive contains all of the source code needed to compile bash and a
large amount of documentation and examples. We'll look at these things and
how you go about making a bash executable in the rest of this chapter.
[1] gunzip is the GNU decompression utility. gunzip is popular but relatively
new and some systems don't have it. If your system doesn't, you can obtain
it by the same methods as you obtained bash. gunzip is available from the
FSF. gzip -d does the same thing as gunzip.
OceanofPDF.com

What's in the Archive
The bash archive contains a main directory (bash-3.0 for the current
version) and a set of files and subdirectories. Among the first files you
should examine are:
MANIFEST
A list of all the files and directories in the archive
COPYING
The GNU Copyleft for bash
NEWS
A list of bug fixes and new features since the last version
README
A short introduction and instructions for compiling bash
You should also be aware of two directories:
doc
Information related to bash in various formats
examples
Examples of startup files, scripts, and functions
The other files and directories in the archive are mostly things that are
needed during the build. Unless you are going to go hacking into the
internal workings of the shell, they shouldn't concern you.
OceanofPDF.com

Documentation
The doc directory contains a few articles that are worth reading. Indeed, it
would be well worth printing out the manual entry for bash so you can use
it in conjunction with this book. The README file gives a short summary
of the files.
The document you'll most often use is the manual page entry (bash.1). The
file is in troff format—that used by the manual pages. You can read it by
processing it with the text-formatter nroff and piping the output to a pager
utility: nroff -man bash.1 | more should do the trick. You can also print it
off by piping it to the lineprinter (lp). This summarizes all of the facilities
your version of bash has and is the most up-to-date reference you can get.
This document is also available through the man facility once you've
installed the package, but sometimes it's nice to have a hard copy so you
can write notes all over it.
Of the other documents, FAQ is a Frequently Asked Questions document
with answers, readline.3 is the manual entry for the readline facility, and
article.ms is an article about the shell that appeared in Linux Journal, by the
current bash maintainer, Chet Ramey.
OceanofPDF.com

Configuring and Building bash
To compile bash "straight out of the box" is easy;[2] you just type configure
and then make! The bash configure script attempts to work out if you have
various utilities and C library functions, and whereabouts they reside on
your system. It then stores the relevant information in the file config.h. It
also creates a file called config.status that is a script you can run to recreate
the current configuration information. While the configure is running, it
prints out information on what it is searching for and where it finds it.
The configure script also sets the location that bash will be installed; the
default is the /usr/local area (/usr/local/bin for the executable,
/usr/local/man for the manual entries etc.). If you don't have root privileges
and want it in your own home directory, or you wish to install bash in some
other location, you'll need to specify a path to configure. You can do this
with the —exec-prefix option. For example:
$ configure --exec-prefix=/usr
specifies that the bash files will be placed under the /usr directory. Note that
configure prefers option arguments be given with an equals sign (=).
After the configuration finishes and you type make, the bash executable is
built. A script called bashbug is also generated, which allows you to report
bugs in the format the bash maintainers want. We'll look at how you use it
later in this chapter.
Once the build finishes, you can see if the bash executable works by typing
./bash. If it doesn't, turn to the Section 11.3 in Chapter 11.
To install bash, type make install. This will create all of the necessary
directories (bin, info, man and its subdirectories) and copy the files to them.
If you've installed bash in your home directory, be sure to add your own bin
path to your PATH and your own man path to MANPATH.
bash comes preconfigured with nearly all of its features enabled, but it is
possible to customize your version by specifying what you want with the —
enable- feature and —disable- feature command-line options to configure.

Table 12-1 is a list of the configurable features and a short description of
what those features do.
Table 12-1. Configurable features
Feature
Description
alias
Support for aliases.
arith-for-
command
Support for the alternate form of the `for' command that behaves like the C
language for statement.
array-
variables
Support for one dimensional arrays.
bang-history
C-shell-like history expansion and editing.
brace-
expansion
Brace expansion.
command-
timing
Support for the time command.
cond-
command
Support for the [[ conditional command.
cond-regexp
Support for matching POSIX regular expressions using the =~ binary operator in
the [[ conditional command.
directory-
stack
Support for the pushd, popd, and dirs directory manipulation commands .
disabled-
builtins
Whether a built-in can be run with the builtin command, even if it has been
disabled with enable -n.
dparen-
arithmetic
Support for ((...)) .
help-builtin
Support for the help built-in.
history
History via the fc and history commands .
job-control
Job control via fg, bg, and jobs if supported by the operating system.
multibyte
Support for multibyte characters if the operating system provides the necessary
support.
net-
redirections
Special handling of filenames of the form /dev/tcp/HOST/PORT and
/dev/udp/HOST/PORT when used in redirections.

Feature
Description
process-
substitution
Whether process substitution occurs, if supported by the operating system.
prompt-string-
decoding
Whether backslash escaped characters in PS1, PS2, PS3, and PS4 are allowed .
progcomp
Programmable completion facilities. If readline is not enabled, this option has no
effect .
readline
readline editing and history capabilities.
restricted
Support for the restricted shell, the -r option to the shell, and rbash.
select
The select construct.
usg-echo-
default
xpg-echo-
default
Make echo expand backslash-escaped characters by default, without requiring the -
e option. This sets the default value of the xpg_echo shell option to on, which
makes the bash echo behave more like the version specified in the Single Unix
Specification, Version 2.
The options disabled-builtins and xpg-echo-default are disabled by
default. The others are enabled.
Many other shell features can be turned on or off by modifying the file
config-.top.h. For further details on this file and configuring bash in
general, see INSTALL.
Finally, to clean up the source directory and remove all of the object files
and executables, type make clean. Make sure you run make install first,
otherwise you'll have to rerun the installation from scratch.
OceanofPDF.com

Testing bash
There are a series of tests that can be run on your newly built version of
bash to see if it is running correctly. The tests are scripts that are derived
from problems reported in earlier versions of the shell. Running these tests
on the latest version of bash shouldn't cause any errors.
To run the tests just type make tests in the main bash directory. The name
of each test is displayed, along with some warning messages, and then it is
run. Successful tests produce no output (unless otherwise noted in the
warning messages).
If any of the tests fail, you'll see a list of things that represent differences
between what is expected and what happened. If this occurs you should file
a bug report with the bash maintainer. See the Section 12.4.2 later in this
chapter for information on how to do this.
OceanofPDF.com

Potential Problems
Although bash has been installed on a large number of different machines
and operating systems, there are occasionally problems. Usually the
problems aren't serious and a bit of investigation can result in a quick
solution.
If bash didn't compile, the first thing to do is check that configure guessed
your machine and operating system correctly. Then check the file NOTES,
which contains some information on specific UNIX systems. Also look in
INSTALL for additional information on how to give configure specific
compilation instructions.
OceanofPDF.com

Installing bash as a Login Shell
Having installed bash and made sure it is working correctly, the next thing
to do is to make it your login shell. This can be accomplished in two ways.
Individual users can use the chsh (change shell) command after they log in
to their accounts. chsh asks for their password and displays a list of shells to
choose from. Once a shell is chosen, chsh changes the appropriate entry in
/etc/passwd. For security reasons, chsh will only allow you to change to a
shell if it exists in the file /etc/shells (if /etc/shells doesn't exist, chsh asks
for the pathname of the shell).
Another way to change the login shell is to edit the password file directly.
On most systems, /etc/passwd will have lines of the form:
cam:pK1Z9BCJbzCrBNrkjRUdUiTtFOh/:501:100:Cameron Newham:/home/cam:/bin/bash
cc:kfDKDjfkeDJKJySFgJFWErrElpe/:502:100:Cheshire Cat:/home/cc:/bin/bash
As root you can just edit the last field of the lines in the password file to the
pathname of whatever shell you choose.
If you don't have root access and chsh doesn't work, you can still make bash
your login shell. The trick is to replace your current shell with bash by
using exec from within one of the startup files for your current shell.
If your current shell is similar to sh (e.g., ksh), you have to add the line:
[ -f /pathname/bash ] && exec /pathname/bash --login
to your .profile, where pathname is the path to your bash executable.
You will also have to create an empty file called .bash_profile. The
existence of this file prevents bash from reading your .profile and re-
executing the exec—thus entering an infinite loop. Any initialization code
that you need for bash can just be placed in .bash_profile.
If your current shell is similar to csh (e.g., tcsh) things are slightly easier.
You just have to add the line:
if ( -f /pathname/bash ) exec /pathname/bash --login
to your .login, where pathname is the path to your bash executable.
OceanofPDF.com

Examples
The bash archive also includes an examples directory. This directory
contains some subdirectories for scripts, functions, and examples of startup
files.
The startup files in the startup-files directory provide many examples of
what you can put in your own startup files. In particular, bash_aliases gives
many useful aliases. Bear in mind that if you copy these files wholesale,
you'll have to edit them for your system because many of the paths will be
different. Refer to Chapter 3 for further information on changing these files
to suit your needs.
The functions directory contains about 50 files with function definitions that
you might find useful. Among them are:
basename
The basename utility, missing from some systems
dirfuncs
Directory manipulation facilities
dirname
The dirname utility, missing from some systems
whatis
An implementation of the Tenth Edition Bourne shell whatis builtin
whence
An almost exact clone of the Korn shell whence builtin
Especially helpful, if you come from a Korn shell background, is kshenv.
This contains function definitions for some common Korn facilities such as
whence, print, and the two-parameter cd builtins.
The scripts directory contains over 20 examples of bash scripts. The two
largest scripts are examples of the complex things you can do with shell
scripts. The first is a (rather amusing) adventure game interpreter and the
second is a C shell interpreter. The other scripts include examples of
precedence rules, a scrolling text display, a "spinning wheel" progress
display, and how to prompt the user for a particular type of answer.

Not only are the script and function examples useful for including in your
environment, they also provide many alternative examples that you can
learn from when reading this book. We encourage you to experiment with
them.
[2] This configuration information pertains to bash version 3.0 and later. The
configuration and installation for earlier versions is fairly easy, although it
differs in certain details. For further information, refer to the INSTALL
instructions that came with your version of bash.
OceanofPDF.com

Who Do I Turn to?
No matter how good something is or how much documentation comes with
it, you'll eventually come across something that you don't understand or that
doesn't work. In such cases it can't be stressed enough to carefully read the
documentation (in computer parlance: RTFM).[3] In many cases this will
answer your question or point out what you're doing wrong.
Sometimes you'll find this only adds to your confusion or confirms that
there is something wrong with the software. The next thing to do is to talk
to a local bash guru to sort out the problem. If that fails, or there is no guru,
you'll have to turn to other means (currently only via the Internet).
OceanofPDF.com

Asking Questions
If you have any questions about bash, there are currently two ways to go
about getting them answered. You can email questions to bash-
maintainers@gnu.org or you can post your question to the USENET
newsgroups gnu.bash.bug or comp.unix.shell.
In both cases either the bash maintainer or some knowledgeable person on
USENET will give you advice. When asking a question, try to give a
meaningful summary of your question in the subject line.
OceanofPDF.com

Reporting Bugs
Bug reports should be sent to bug-bash@gnu.org, and include the version of
bash and the operating system it is running on, the compiler used to
compile bash, a description of the problem, a description of how the
problem was produced, and, if possible, a fix for the problem. The best way
to do this is with the bashbug script, installed with bash.
Before you run bashbug, make sure you've set your EDITOR environment
variable to your favorite editor and have exported it (bashbug defaults to
emacs, which may not be installed on your system). When you execute
bashbug it will enter the editor with a partially blank report form. Some of
the information (bash version, operating system version, etc.) will have
been filled in automatically. We'll take a brief look at the form, but most of
it is self-explanatory.
The From: field should be filled out with your email address. For example:
From: confused@wonderland.oreilly.com
Next comes the Subject: field; make an effort to fill it out, as this makes it
easier for the maintainers when they need to look up your submission. Just
replace the line surrounded by square brackets with a meaningful summary
of the problem.
The next few lines are a description of the system and should not be
touched. Next comes the Description: field. You should provide a detailed
description of the problem and how it differs from what is expected. Try to
be as specific and concise as possible when describing the problem.
The Repeat-By: field is where you describe how you generated the
problem; if necessary, list the exact keystrokes you used. Sometimes you
won't be able to reproduce the problem yourself, but you should still fill out
this field with the events leading up to the problem. Attempt to reduce the
problem to the smallest possible form. For example, if it was a large shell
script, try to isolate the section that produced the problem and include only
that in your report.
Lastly, the Fix: field is where you can provide the necessary patch to fix the
problem if you've investigated it and found out what was going wrong. If

you have no idea what caused the problem, just leave the field blank.
Once you've finished filling in the form, save it and exit your editor. The
form will automatically be sent to the maintainers.
[3] RTFM stands for "Read The F(laming) Manual."
OceanofPDF.com

Appendix A. Related Shells
The fragmentation of the UNIX marketplace has had its advantages and
disadvantages. The advantages came mostly in the early days: lack of
standardization and proliferation among technically knowledgeable
academics and professionals contributed to a healthy "free market" for
UNIX software, in which several programs of the same type (e.g., shells,
text editors, system administration tools) would often compete for
popularity. The best programs would usually become the most widespread,
while inferior software tended to fade away.
But often there was no single "best" program in a given category, so several
would prevail. This led to the current situation, where multiplicity of similar
software has led to confusion, lack of compatibility, and—most unfortunate
of all—the inability of UNIX to capture as big a share of the market as
other operating platforms (MS-DOS, Microsoft Windows, Novell NetWare,
etc.).
The "shell" category has probably suffered in this way more than any other
type of software. As we said in the Preface and in Chapter 1, several shells
are currently available; the differences between them are often not all that
great.
Therefore we felt it necessary to include information on shells similar to
bash. This appendix summarizes the differences between bash and the
following:
The standard Bourne shell, as a kind of "baseline"
The IEEE POSIX 1003.2 shell Standard, to which bash adheres and
other shells will adhere in the future
The Korn shell (ksh), a popular commercial shell provided with many
UNIX systems
pdksh, a widely used public domain Korn shell
zsh, a popular alternative to bash and the Korn shell
OceanofPDF.com

The Bourne Shell
bash is almost completely backward-compatible with the Bourne shell. The
only significant feature of the latter that bash doesn't support is ^ (caret) as
a synonym for the pipe (|) character. This is an archaic feature that the
Bourne shell includes for its own backward compatibility with earlier
shells. No modern UNIX version has any shell code that uses ^ as a pipe.
To describe the differences between the Bourne shell and bash, we'll go
through each chapter of this book and enumerate the features discussed in
the chapter that the Bourne shell does not support. Although some versions
of the Bourne shell exist that include a few bash features,[1] we refer to the
standard Bourne shell that has been around for many years.
Chapter 1
The cd - form of the cd command; tilde (~) expansion; the jobs
command; the help built-in.
Chapter 2
All. (That is, the Bourne shell doesn't support any of the readline,
history, and editing features discussed in this chapter.)
Chapter 3
Aliases; prompt string customization; set options. The Bourne shell
supports only the following: -e, -k, -n, -t, -u, -v, -x, and -. It doesn't
support option names (-o). The shopt built-in. Environment files aren't
supported. The following built-in variables aren't supported:
All variables beginning with BASH_
All variables beginning with COMP
CDPATH
DIRSTACK
FCEDIT
FUNCNAME
GROUPS
HISTCMD
HISTCONTROL
HISTFILE
HISTIGNORE
HISTSIZE

HISTFILESIZE
HOSTFILE
HOSTNAME
HOSTTYPE
IGNOREEOF
INPUTRC
LANG
LC_ALL
LC_COLLATE
LC_MESSAGES
LINENO
MACHTYPE
MAILCHECK
OLDPWD
OPTARG
OPTERR
OPTIND
OSTYPE
PIPESTATUS
 
PS3
PS4
POSIXLY_CORRECT PROMPT_COMMAND
PWD
RANDOM
REPLY
SECONDS
SHELLOPTS
SHLVL
TIMEFORMAT
TMOUT
auto_resume
histchars
Chapter 4
Functions; the type command; the local command; the ${#parameter}
operator; pattern-matching variable operators (%, %%, #, ##).
Extended pattern matching. Command-substitution syntax is different:
use the older ` command ` instead of $( command). The built-in pushd
and popd commands.
Chapter 5
The ! keyword; the select construct isn't supported. The Bourne shell
return doesn't exit a script when it is sourced with . (dot).
Chapter 6
Use the external command getopt instead of getopts, but note that it
doesn't really do the same thing. Integer arithmetic isn't supported: use
the external command expr instead of the $(( arithmetic-exp )) syntax.

The arithmetic conditional (( arithmetic-exp )) isn't supported; use the
old condition test syntax and the relational operators -lt, -eq, etc. Array
variables are not supported. declare and let aren't supported.
Chapter 7
The command, builtin, and enable built-ins. The -e and -E options to
echo are not supported. The I/O redirectors >| and <> are not
supported. None of the options to read is supported. printf is usually
available as an external command.
Chapter 8
Job control—specifically, the jobs, fg, and bg commands. Job number
notation with %, i.e., the kill and wait commands only accept process
IDs. The - option to trap (reset trap to the default for that signal). trap
only accepts signal numbers, not logical names. The disown built-in.
Chapter 9
The DEBUG, ERR, and RETURN fake signals are not supported. The
EXIT fake signal is supported as signal 0.
Chapter 10
The ulimit command and privileged mode aren't supported. The -S
option to umask is not supported. The Bourne shell's restrictive
counterpart, rsh, only inhibits assignment to PATH.
[1] For example, the Bourne shell distributed with System V supports
functions and a few other shell features common to bash and the Korn shell.
OceanofPDF.com

The IEEE 1003.2 POSIX Shell Standard
There have been many attempts to standardize UNIX. Hardware companies'
monolithic attempts at market domination, fragile industry coalitions,
marketing failures, and other such efforts are the stuff of history—and the
stuff of frustration.
Only one standardization effort has not been tied to commercial interests:
the Portable Operating System Interface, known as POSIX. This effort
started in 1981 with the /usr/group (now UniForum) Standards Committee,
which produced the /usr/group Standard three years later. The list of
contributors grew to include the Institute of Electrical and Electronic
Engineers (IEEE) and the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO).
The first POSIX standard was published in 1988. This one, called IEEE
P1003.1, covers low-level issues at the system-call level. IEEE P1003.2,
covering the shell, utility programs, and user interface issues, was ratified in
September 1992 after a six-year effort. In September 2001, a joint revision
of both standards was approved. The new standard, covering all the material
in the two earlier separate documents, became known as IEEE Standard
1003.1-2001. The latest version of the standard is 1003.1-2004.
The POSIX standards were never meant to be rigid and absolute. The
committee members certainly weren't about to put guns to the heads of
operating system implementers and force them to adhere. Instead, the
standards are designed to be flexible enough to allow for both coexistence
of similar available software, so that existing code isn't in danger of
obsolescence, and the addition of new features, so that vendors have the
incentive to innovate. In other words, they are supposed to be the kind of
third-party standards that vendors might actually be interested in following.
As a result, most UNIX vendors currently comply with both standards. bash
is no exception; it is almost 100% POSIX-compliant.
The shell part of the standard describes utilities that must be present on all
systems, and others that are optional, depending upon the nature of the

system. One such option is the User Portability Utilities option, which
defines standards for interactive shell use and interactive utilities like the vi
editor. The standard—on the order of 2,000 pages—is available through the
IEEE; for information, contact the IEEE:
IEEE Customer Service
445 Hoes Lane, PO Box 1331
Piscataway, NJ 08855-1331
(800) 678-IEEE (United States and Canada)
(732) 981-0060 (international/local)
(732) 981-9667 (fax)
customer.service@ieee.org
http://www.standards.ieee.org/catalog/ordering.html
The committee members had two motivating factors to weigh when they
designed the shell standard. On the one hand, the design had to
accommodate, as much as possible, existing shell code written under
various Bourne-derived shells (the Version 7, System V, BSD, and Korn
shells). These shells are different in several extremely subtle ways, most of
which have to do with the ways certain syntactic elements interact with
each other.
It must have been quite difficult and tedious to spell out these differences,
let alone to reach compromises among them. Throw in biases of some
committee members towards particular shells, and you might understand
why it took six years to ratify the first 1003.2 standard and further years to
merge the standards.
On the other hand, the shell design had to serve as a standard on which to
base future shell implementations. This implied goals of simplicity, clarity,
and precision—objectives that seem especially elusive in the context of the
above problems.
The designers found one way of ameliorating this dilemma: they decided
that the standard should include not only the features included in the shell,
but also those explicitly omitted and those included but with unspecified
functionality. The latter category allows some of the existing shells'
innovations to "sneak through" without becoming part of the standard,
while listing omitted features helps programmers determine which features
in existing shell scripts won't be portable to future shells.

The POSIX standard is primarily based on the System V Bourne shell,
which is a superset of the Version 7 shell discussed earlier in this appendix.
Therefore you should assume that bash features that aren't present in the
Bourne shell also aren't included in the POSIX standard.
The following bash features are left "unspecified" in the standard, meaning
that their syntax is acceptable but their functionality is not standardized:
The other syntax for functions shown in Chapter 4 is supported; see
the following discussion.
The [[...]] syntax for conditional tests. The external test or [...] utility
should be used instead.
The select control structure.
Code blocks ({...}) are supported, but for maximum portability, the
curly brackets should be quoted (for reasons too complicated to go into
here).
Signal numbers are only allowed if the numbers for certain key signals
(INT, TERM, and a few others) are the same as on the most important
historical versions of UNIX. In general, shell scripts should use
symbolic names for signals.
The POSIX standard supports functions, but the semantics are weaker: it is
not possible to define local variables, and functions can't be exported.
The command lookup order has been changed to allow certain built-in
commands to be overridden by functions. Built-in commands are divided
into two sets by their positions in the command lookup order: some are
processed before functions, some after. Specifically, the built-in commands
break, : (do nothing), continue, .(source), eval, exec, exit, export,
readonly, return, set, shift, trap, and unset take priority over functions.
Finally, because the POSIX standard is meant to promote shell script
portability, it avoids mentioning certain fundamental implementation issues:
in particular, there is no requirement that multitasking be used for
background jobs, subshells, etc. This was done to allow portability to non-
multitasking systems like MS-DOS, so that shells on these systems can be
POSIX-compliant.
OceanofPDF.com

The Korn Shell
One of the first major alternatives to the "traditional" shells, Bourne and C,
was the Korn shell, publicly released in 1986 as part of AT&T's
"Experimental Toolchest." The Korn shell was written by David Korn at
AT&T. The first version was unsupported, but eventually UNIX System
Laboratories (USL) decided to give it support when they released it with
their version of UNIX (System V Release 4) in 1989. The November 1988
Korn shell is the most widely used version of this shell.
The 1988 release is not fully POSIX-compliant—less so than bash. The
latest release (1993) has brought the Korn shell into better compliance as
well as providing more features and streamlining existing features.
The 1993 Korn shell and bash share many features, but there are some
important differences in the Korn shell:
Functions are more like separate entities than part of the invoking shell
(traps and options are not shared with the invoking shell).
Associative arrays are supported.
Floating-point numbers and expressions are supported.
Coroutines are supported. Two processes can communicate with one
another by using the print and read commands.
The command print replaces echo. print can have a file descriptor
specified and can be used to communicate with coroutines.
Function autoloading is supported. Functions are read into memory
only when they are called.
One-dimensional arrays are supported, although they are limited in
size (4,096 elements in early versions of ksh93, 64K elements in later
releases).
The history list is kept in a file rather than in memory. This allows
concurrent instantiations of the shell to access the same history list, a
possible advantage in certain circumstances.
There is no default startup file. If the environment variable ENV is not
defined, nothing is read.
The type command is replaced with the more restrictive whence.

The primary prompt string (PS1) doesn't allow escaped commands.
There is no built-in equivalent to enable.
There is no provision for key bindings and no direct equivalent to
readline.
There are no built-in equivalents to pushd, popd, and dirs. They have
to be defined as functions if you want them.
The history substitution mechanism is not supported.
Prompt strings don't allow backslash-escaped special characters.
Many of the bash environment variables don't exist.
In addition, the startup and environment files for Korn are different,
consisting of .profile and the file specified by the ENV variable. The default
environment file can be overridden by using the variable ENV. There is no
logout file.
For a more detailed list of the differences between bash and the Korn shell
see the FAQ file in the doc directory of the bash archive.
The Korn shell is a good alternative to bash. Its only major drawback is that
it is upgraded only every few years.
OceanofPDF.com

pdksh
pdksh (Public Domain Korn shell) is a version of the Korn shell that is a
free alternative to bash. pdksh is available as source code in various places
on the Internet, including the USENET newsgroup comp.sources.unix, and
the pdksh home page http://www.cs.mun.ca/~michael/pdksh/ of the current
maintainer, Michael Rendell.
pdksh was originally written by Eric Gisin, who based it on Charles
Forsyth's public domain Version 7 Bourne shell. It has all Bourne shell
features plus some of the POSIX extensions and a few features of its own.
pdksh's additional features include user-definable tilde notation, in which
you can set up ~ as an abbreviation for anything, not just usernames.
Otherwise, pdksh lacks a few features of the official Korn version and bash.
In particular, it lacks the following bash features:
The built-in variable PS4
The advanced I/O redirectors >| and <>
The options errexit, noclobber, and privileged
One important advantage that pdksh has over bash is that the executable is
only about a third the size and it runs considerably faster. Weighed against
this is that it is less POSIX-compliant, has had numerous people add code
to it (so it hasn't been as strongly controlled as bash), and isn't as polished a
product as bash (for example, the documentation isn't anywhere near as
detailed or complete).
However, pdksh is a worthwhile alternative for those who want something
other than bash and can't obtain the Korn shell.
OceanofPDF.com

zsh
zsh is a powerful interactive shell and scripting language with many
features found in bash, ksh, and tcsh, as well as several unique features.
zsh was originally written by Paul Falsted in the early 1990s and is now
maintained by various people.
It is freely available and should compile and run on just about any modern
version of Unix. Ports for other operating systems are also available. The
zsh home page is http://www.zsh.org. The current version is 4.2.1.
Some of the main differences between bash and zsh are:
Extended globbing capabilities
A slightly more advanced textual completion system
A powerful multi-line command line editor
Various visual bells and whistles, such as command prompt color and
placement
zsh is a good alternative to bash, especially for "power users."
OceanofPDF.com

Shell Clones and Unix-like Platforms
The proliferation of shells has not stopped at the boundaries of UNIX-dom.
Many programmers who got their initial experience on UNIX systems and
subsequently crossed over into the PC world wished for a nice UNIX-like
environment. It's not surprising then that several UNIX shell-style
interfaces to small-computer operating systems have appeared, Bourne shell
emulations among them.
In the past several years, not only shell clones have appeared, but entire
Unix "environments." Two of them use shells that we've already discussed.
Two others provide their own shell reimplementations. Providing lists of
major and minor differences is counterproductive. Instead, this section
describes each environment in turn (in alphabetical order), along with
contact and Internet download information.
OceanofPDF.com

Cygwin
Cygnus Consulting (now part of Red Hat) created the cygwin environment.
First creating cgywin.dll, a shared library that provides Unix system call
emulation, they ported a large number of GNU utilities to various versions
of Microsoft Windows. The greatest functionality comes under
Windows/NT, Windows 2000, and Windows XP, although the environment
can and does work under Windows 95/98/ME, as well.
The cygwin environment uses bash for its shell, GCC for its C compiler,
and the rest of the GNU utilities for its Unix toolset. A sophisticated mount
command provides a mapping of the Windows C:\path notation to Unix
filenames.
The cygwin project can be found at http://www.cygwin.com.
OceanofPDF.com

DJGPP
The DJGPP suite provides 32-bit GNU tools for the MS-DOS environment.
To quote the web page:
DJGPP is a complete 32-bit C/C++ development system for Intel 80386 (and higher) PCs
running MS-DOS. It includes ports of many GNU development utilities. The development tools
require a 80386 or newer computer to run, as do the programs they produce. In most cases, the
programs it produces can be sold commercially without license or royalties.
The name comes from the initials of D.J. Delorie, who ported the GNU
C++ compiler, g++ to MS-DOS, and the text initials of g++, GPP. It grew
into essentially a full Unix environment on top of MS-DOS, with all the
GNU tools and bash as its shell. Unlike cygwin or UWIN (see later in this
Appendix), you don't need a version of Windows, just a full 32-bit
processor and MS-DOS. (Although, of course, you can use DJGPP from
within a Windows MS-DOS window.) The web site is
http://www.delorie.com/djgpp/.
OceanofPDF.com

MKS Toolkit
Perhaps the most established Unix environment for the PC world is the
MKS Toolkit from Mortice Kern Systems:
MKS Canada - Corporate Headquarters
410 Albert Street
Waterloo, ON  N2L 3V3
Canada
+1 519 884-2251
+1 519 884-8861 (fax)
+1 800 265-2797 (sales)
http://www.mks.com
The MKS Toolkit comes in various versions depending upon the
development environment and the number of developers who will be using
it. It includes a shell that is POSIX-compliant, along with just about all the
features of the 1988 Korn shell, as well as over 300 utilities, such as awk,
perl, vi, make, etc. Their library supports over 1,500 Unix APIs, making it
extremely complete and easy to port to the Windows environment. More
information is available at
http://www.mkssoftware.com/products/tk/ds_tkdev.asp.
OceanofPDF.com

AT&T UWIN
The UWIN package is a project by David Korn and his colleagues to make
a Unix environment available under Microsoft Windows. It is similar in
structure to cygwin, discussed earlier. A shared library, posix.dll, provides
emulation of the Unix system call APIs. The system call emulation is quite
complete. An interesting twist is that the Windows registry can be accessed
as a filesystem under /reg. On top of the Unix API emulation, ksh93 and
over 200 Unix utilities (or rather, re-implementations) have been compiled
and run. The UWIN environment relies on the native Microsoft Visual
C/C++ compiler, although the GNU development tools are available for
download and use with UWIN.
The project can be found at http://www.research.att.com/sw/tools/uwin/.
The web site describes what is available, with links for downloading
binaries, as well as information on commercial licensing of the UWIN
package. Also included are links to various papers on UWIN, additional
useful software, and links to other, similar packages.
OceanofPDF.com

Appendix B. Reference Lists
OceanofPDF.com

Invocation
Table B-1 and Table B-2 list the options you can use when invoking current
versions of bash and the older 1.x version, respectively.[1] The
multicharacter options must appear on the command line before the single-
character options. In addition to these, any set option can be used on the
command line; see Table B-7. Login shells are usually invoked with the
options -i (interactive), -s (read from standard input), and -m (enable job
control).
Table B-1. Command-line options
Option
Meaning
-c string
Commands are read from string, if present. Any arguments after string are
interpreted as positional parameters, starting with $0.
-D
A list of all double-quoted strings preceded by $ is printed on the standard ouput.
These are the strings that are subject to language translation when the current locale
is not C or POSIX. This also turns on the -n option.
-i
Interactive shell. Ignores signals TERM, INT, and QUIT. With job control in effect,
TTIN, TTOU, and TSTP are also ignored.
-l
Makes bash act as if invoked as a login shell.
-o option
Takes the same arguments as set -o.
-O, +O
shopt-option
shopt-option is one of the shell options accepted by the shopt builtin. If shopt-option
is present, -O sets the value of that option; +O unsets it. If shopt-option is not
supplied, the names and values of the shell options accepted by shopt are printed on
the standard output. If the invocation option is +O, the output is displayed in a
format that may be reused as input.
-s
Reads commands from the standard input. If an argument is given to bash, this flag
takes precedence (i.e., the argument won't be treated as a script name and standard
input will be read).
-r
Restricted shell. See Chapter 10.
-v
Prints shell input lines as they're read.
-
Signals the end of options and disables further option processing. Any options after
this are treated as filenames and arguments. — is synonymous with -.

Option
Meaning
—debugger
Arranges for the debugger profile to be executed before the shell starts. Turns on
extended debugging mode and shell function tracing.[2]
—dump-
strings
Does the same as -D.
—dump-po-
strings
Does the same as -D but the output is in the GNU gettext po (portable object) file
format.
—help
Displays a usage message and exits.
—login
Makes bash act as if invoked as a login shell. Same as -l.
—noediting
Does not use the GNU readline library to read command lines if interactive.
—noprofile
Does not read the startup file /etc/profile or any of the personal initialization files.
—norc
Does not read the initialization file ~/.bashrc if the shell is interactive. This is on by
default if the shell is invoked as sh.
—posix
Changes the behavior of bash to follow the POSIX guidelines more closely where
the default operation of bash is different.
—quiet
Shows no information on shell startup. This is the default.
—rcfile file,
—init-file
file
Executes commands read from file instead of the initialization file ~/.bashrc, if the
shell is interactive.
—verbose
Equivalent to -v.
—version
Shows the version number of this instance of bash and then exits.
[2] Only available in bash version 3.0 and later.
Table B-2. Old command-line options
Option
Meaning
-c string
Commands are read from string, if present. Any arguments after string are
interpreted as positional parameters, starting with $0.
-i
Interactive shell. Ignores signals TERM, INT, and QUIT. With job control in
effect, TTIN, TTOU, and TSTP are also ignored.
-s
Reads commands from the standard input. If an argument is given to bash, this
flag takes precedence (i.e., the argument won't be treated as a script name and

Option
Meaning
standard input will be read).
-r
Restricted shell. See Chapter 10.
-
Signals the end of options and disables further option processing. Any options
after this are treated as filenames and arguments. — is synonymous with -.
-norc
Does not read the initialization file ~/.bashrc if the shell is interactive. This is
on by default if the shell is invoked as sh.
-noprofile
Does not read the startup file /etc/profile or any of the personal initialization
files.
-rcfile file
Executes commands read from file instead of the initialization file ~/.bashrc, if
the shell is interactive.
-version
Shows the version number of this instance of bash when starting.
-quiet
Shows no information on shell startup. This is the default.
-login
Makes bash act as if invoked as a login shell.
-
nobraceexpansion Does not perform curly brace expansion.
-nolineediting
Does not use the GNU readline library to read command lines if interactive.
-posix
Changes the behavior of bash to follow the POSIX guidelines more closely
where the default operation of bash is different.
[1] At the time of writing, the old 1.x versions of bash are still used. We
strongly recommend that you upgrade to the latest version. We have
included a table of old options (Table B-2) just in case you encounter an old
version of the shell.
OceanofPDF.com

Prompt String Customizations
Table B-3 shows a summary of the prompt customizations that are
available. The customizations \[ and \] are not available in bash versions
prior to 1.14. \a, \e, \H, \T, \@, \v, and \V are not available in versions prior
to 2.0. \A, \D, \j, \l, and \r are only available in later versions of bash 2.0
and in bash 3.0.
Table B-3. Prompt string customizations
Command Meaning
\a
The ASCII bell character (007)
\A
The current time in 24-hour HH:MM format
\d
The date in "Weekday Month Day" format
\D
{format}
The format is passed to strftime(3) and the result is inserted into the prompt string; an
empty format results in a locale-specific time representation; the braces are required
\e
The ASCII escape character (033)
\H
The hostname
\h
The hostname up to the first "."
\j
The number of jobs currently managed by the shell
\l
The basename of the shell's terminal device name
\n
A carriage return and line feed
\r
A carriage return
\s
The name of the shell
\T
The current time in 12-hour HH:MM:SS format
\t
The current time in HH:MM:SS format
\@
The current time in 12-hour a.m./p.m. format
\u
The username of the current user
\v
The version of bash (e.g., 2.00)

Command Meaning
\V
The release of bash; the version and patchlevel (e.g., 3.00.0)
\w
The current working directory
\W
The basename of the current working directory
\#
The command number of the current command
\!
The history number of the current command
\$
If the effective UID is 0, print a #, otherwise print a $
\nnn
Character code in octal
\\
Print a backslash
\[
Begin a sequence of non-printing characters, such as terminal control sequences
\]
End a sequence of non-printing characters
OceanofPDF.com

Built-In Commands and Reserved Words
Table B-4 shows a summary of all built-in commands and reserved words.
The letters in the Type column of the table have the following meanings: R
= reserved word, blank = Builtin.
Table B-4. Commands and reserved words
Command Chapter Type Summary
!
5
R
Logical NOT of a command exit status.
:
7
 
Do nothing (just do expansions of any arguments).
.
4
 
Read file and execute its contents in current shell.
alias
3
 
Set up shorthand for command or command line.
bg
8
 
Put job in background.
bind
2
 
Bind a key sequence to a readline function or macro.
break
5
 
Exit from surrounding for, select, while, or until loop.
builtin
5
 
Execute the specified shell built-in.
case
5
R
Reserved word. Multi-way conditional construct.
cd
1
 
Change working directory.
command
7
 
Run a command bypassing shell function lookup.
compgen
D
 
Generate possible completion matches.
complete
D
 
Specify how completion should be performed.
continue
 
 
Skip to next iteration of for, select, while, or until loop.
declare
6
 
Declare variables and give them attributes.
dirs
6
 
Display the list of currently remembered directories.
disown
8
 
Remove a job from the job table.
do
5
R
Part of a for, select, while, or until looping construct.

Command Chapter Type Summary
done
5
R
Part of a for, select, while, or until looping construct.
echo
4
 
Expand and print any arguments.
elif
5
R
Part of an if construct.
else
5
R
Part of an if construct.
enable
7
 
Enable and disable built-in shell commands.
esac
5
R
Part of a case construct.
eval
7
 
Run the given arguments through command-line processing.
exec
9
 
Replace the shell with the given program.
exit
5
 
Exit from the shell.
export
3
 
Create environment variables.
fc
2
 
Fix command (edit history file).
fg
8
 
Put background job in foreground.
fi
5
R
Part of an if construct.
for
5
R
Looping construct.
function
4
R
Define a function.
getopts
6
 
Process command-line options.
hash
3
 
Full pathnames are determined and remembered.
help
1
 
Display helpful information on built-in commands.
history
1
 
Display command history.
if
5
R
Conditional construct.
in
5
R
Part of a case construct.
jobs
1
 
List any background jobs.
kill
8
 
Send a signal to a process.
let
6
 
Arithmetic variable assignment.
local
4
 
Create a local variable.

Command Chapter Type Summary
logout
1
 
Exits a login shell.
popd
4
 
Removes a directory from the directory stack.
pushd
4
 
Adds a directory to the directory stack.
pwd
1
 
Print the working directory.
read
7
 
Read a line from standard input.
readonly
6
 
Make variables read-only (unassignable).
return
5
 
Return from the surrounding function or script.
select
5
R
Menu-generation construct.
set
3
 
Set options.
shift
6
 
Shift command-line arguments.
suspend
 
 
Suspend execution of a shell.
test
5
 
Evaluates a conditional expression.
then
5
R
Part of an if construct.
time
 
R
Run command pipeline and print execution times. The format of the
output can be controlled with TIMEFORMAT.
times
 
 
Print the accumulated user and system times for processes run from
the shell.
trap
8
 
Set up a signal-catching routine.
type
3
 
Identify the source of a command.
typeset
6
 
Declare variables and give them attributes. Same as declare.
ulimit
10
 
Set/show process resource limits.
umask
10
 
Set/show file permission mask.
unalias
3
 
Remove alias definitions.
unset
3
 
Remove definitions of variables or functions.
until
5
R
Looping construct.
wait
8
 
Wait for background job(s) to finish.

Command Chapter Type Summary
while
5
R
Looping construct.
OceanofPDF.com

Built-In Shell Variables
Table B-5 shows a complete list of environment variables available in bash
3.0. The letters in the Type column of the table have the following
meanings: A = Array, L = colon separated list, R = read-only, U = unsetting
it causes it to lose its special meaning.
Note that the variables beginning BASH_, beginning COMP, DIRSTACK,
FUNCNAME, GLOBIGNORE, GROUPS, HISTIGNORE, HOSTNAME,
HISTTIMEFORMAT, LANG, LC_ALL, LC_COLLATE, LC_MESSAGE,
MACHTYPE, PIPESTATUS, SHELLOPTS, and TIMEFORMAT are not
available in versions prior to 2.0. BASH_ENV replaces ENV found in
earlier versions.
Table B-5. Environment variables
Variable
Chapter Type Description
*
4
R
The positional parameters given to the current
script or function.
@
4
R
The positional parameters given to the current
script or function.
#
4
R
The number of arguments given to the current
script or function.
-
 
R
Options given to the shell on invocation.
?
5
R
Exit status of the previous command.
 
 
R
Last argument to the previous command.
$
8
R
Process ID of the shell process.
!
8
R
Process ID of the last background command.
0
4
R
Name of the shell or shell script.
BASH
3
 
The full pathname used to invoke this instance of
bash.
BASH_ARGC
9
A
An array of values which are the number of
parameters in each frame of the current bash

Variable
Chapter Type Description
execution call stack. The number of parameters
to the current subroutine (shell function or script
executed with . or source) is at the top of the
stack.
BASH_ARGV
9
A
All of the parameters in the current bash
execution call stack. The final parameter of the
last subroutine call is at the top of the stack; the
first parameter of the initial call is at the bottom.
BASH_COMMAND
9
 
The command currently being executed or about
to be executed, unless the shell is executing a
command as the result of a trap, in which case it
is the command executing at the time of the trap.
BASH_EXECUTION_STRING  
 
The command argument to the -c invocation
option.
BASH_ENV
3
 
The name of a file to run as the environment file
when the shell is invoked.
BASH_LINENO
9
A
An array whose members are the line numbers in
source files corresponding to each member of
@var{FUNCNAME}. ${BASH_LINENO[$i]}
is the line number in the source file where
${FUNCNAME[$i + 1]} was called. The
corresponding source file name is
${BASH_SOURCE[$i + 1]}.
BASH_REMATCH
 
AR
An array whose members are assigned by the =~
binary operator to the [[ conditional command.
The element with index 0 is the portion of the
string matching the entire regular expression. The
element with index n is the portion of the string
matching the nth parenthesized subexpression.
BASH_SOURCE
9
A
An array containing the source filenames
corresponding to the elements in the
FUNCNAME array variable.
BASH_SUBSHELL
 
 
Incremented by one each time a subshell or
subshell environment is spawned. The initial
value is 0.
BASH_VERSION
3
 
The version number of this instance of bash.
BASH_VERSINFO
3,6
AR
Version information for this instance of bash.
Each element of the array holds parts of the
version number.

Variable
Chapter Type Description
CDPATH
3
L
A list of directories for the cd command to
search.
COMP_CWORD
 
 
An index into ${COMP_WORDS} of the word
containing the current cursor position. This
variable is available only in shell functions
invoked by the programmable completion
facilities.
COMP_LINE
 
 
The current command line. This variable is
available only in shell functions and external
commands invoked by the programmable
completion facilities.
COMP_POINT
 
 
The index of the current cursor position relative
to the beginning of the current command. If the
current cursor position is at the end of the current
command, the value of this variable is equal to
${#COMP_LINE}. This variable is available
only in shell functions and external commands
invoked by the programmable completion
facilities.
COMP_WORDBREAKS
 
U
The set of characters that the Readline library
treats as word separators when performing word
completion. If COMP_WORDBREAKS is
unset, it loses its special properties, even if it is
subsequently reset.
COMP_WORDS
 
A
An array of the individual words in the current
command line. This variable is available only in
shell functions invoked by the programmable
completion facilities.
COMPREPLY
 
A
The possible completions generated by a shell
function invoked by the programmable
completion facility.
DIRSTACK
4,6
ARU The current contents of the directory stack.
EUID
 
R
The effective user ID of the current user.
FUNCNAME
9
ARU
An array containing the names of all shell
functions currently in the execution call stack.
The element with index 0 is the name of any
currently-executing shell function. The bottom-
most element is "main". This variable exists only
when a shell function is executing.

Variable
Chapter Type Description
FCEDIT
2
 
The default editor for the fc command.
FIGNORE
 
L
A list of names to ignore when doing filename
completion.
GLOBIGNORE
 
L
A list of patterns defining filenames to ignore
during pathname expansion.
GROUPS
 
AR
An array containing a list of groups of which the
current user is a member.
IFS
7
 
The Internal Field Separator: a list of characters
that act as word separators. Normally set to
SPACE, TAB, and NEWLINE.
HISTCMD
3
U
The history number of the current command.
HISTCONTROL
3
 
A list of patterns, separated by colons (:), which
can have the following values. ignorespace: lines
beginning with a space are not entered into the
history list. ignoredups: lines matching the last
history line are not entered. erasedups: all
previous lines matching the current line to are
removed from the history list before the line is
saved. ignoreboth: enables both ignorespace and
ignoredups.
HISTFILE
2
 
The name of the command history file.
HISTIGNORE
3
 
A list of patterns to decide what should be
retained in the history list.
HISTSIZE
2
 
The number of lines kept in the command
history.
HISTFILESIZE
3
 
The maximum number of lines kept in the history
file.
HISTTIMEFORMAT
3
 
If set and not null, its value is used as a format
string for strftime(3) to print the time stamp
associated with each history entry displayed by
the history builtin. If this variable is set, time
stamps are written to the history file so they may
be preserved across shell sessions.
HOME
3
 
The home (login) directory.
HOSTFILE
3
 
The file to be used for hostname completion.

Variable
Chapter Type Description
HOSTNAME
 
 
The name of the current host.
HOSTTYPE
3
 
The type of machine bash is running on.
IGNOREEOF
3
 
The number of EOF characters received before
exiting an interactive shell.
INPUTRC
2
 
The readline startup file.
LANG
 
 
Used to determine the locale category for any
category not specifically selected with a variable
starting with LC_.
LC_ALL
 
 
Overrides the value of LANG and any other LC_
variable specifying a locale category.
LC_COLLATE
 
 
Determines the collation order used when sorting
the results of pathname expansion.
LC_CTYPE
 
 
Determines the interpretation of characters and
the behavior of character classes within
pathname expansion and pattern matching.
LC_MESSAGES
 
 
This variable determines the locale used to
translate double-quoted strings preceded by a $.
LC_NUMERIC
 
 
Determines the locale category used for number
formatting.
LINENO
9
U
The number of the line that just ran in a script or
function.
MACHTYPE
 
 
A string describing the system on which bash is
executing.
MAIL
3
 
The name of the file to check for new mail.
MAILCHECK
3
 
How often (in seconds) to check for new mail.
MAILPATH
3
L
A list of file names to check for new mail, if
MAIL is not set.
OLDPWD
3
 
The previous working directory.
OPTARG
6
 
The value of the last option argument processed
by getopts.
OPTERR
6
 
If set to 1, display error messages from getopts.

Variable
Chapter Type Description
OPTIND
6
 
The number of the first argument after options.
OSTYPE
 
 
The operating system on which bash is
executing.
PATH
3
L
The search path for commands.
PIPESTATUS
6
A
An array variable containing a list of exit status
values from the processes in the most recently
executed foreground pipeline.
POSIXLY_CORRECT
 
 
If in the environment when bash starts, the shell
enters posix mode before reading the startup files,
as if the —posix invocation option had been
supplied. If it is set while the shell is running,
bash enables posix mode, as if the command set -
o posix had been executed.
PROMPT_COMMAND
 
 
The value is executed as a command before the
primary prompt is issued.
PS1
3
 
The primary command prompt string.
PS2
3
 
The prompt string for line continuations.
PS3
5
 
The prompt string for the select command.
PS4
9
 
The prompt string for the xtrace option.
PPID
8
R
The process ID of the parent process.
PWD
3
 
The current working directory.
RANDOM
9
U
A random number between 0 and 32767 (215-1).
REPLY
5, 7
 
The user's response to the select command; result
of the read command if no variable names are
given.
SECONDS
3
U
The number of seconds since the shell was
invoked.
SHELL
3
 
The full pathname of the shell.
SHELLOPTS
 
LR
A list of enabled shell options.
SHLVL
 
 
Incremented by one each time an instance of
bash is invoked.

Variable
Chapter Type Description
TIMEFORMAT
 
 
Specifies the format for the output from using the
time reserved word on a command pipeline.
TMOUT
10
 
If set to a positive integer, the number of seconds
after which the shell automatically terminates if
no input is received.
UID
 
R
The user ID of the current user.
auto_resume
 
 
Controls how job control works.
histchars
 
 
Specifies what to use as the history control
characters. Normally set to the string `!^#'.
OceanofPDF.com

Test Operators
Table B-6 lists the operators that are used with test and the [...] and [[...]]
constructs. They can be logically combined with -a ("and") and -o ("or")
and grouped with escaped parenthesis (\( ... \)). The string comparisons <
and > and the [[...]] construct are not available in versions of bash prior to
2.0.
Table B-6. Test operators
Operator
True if...
-a file
file exists
-b file
file exists and is a block device file
-c file
file exists and is a character device file
-d file
file exists and is a directory
-e file
file exists; same as -a
-f file
file exists and is a regular file
-g file
file exists and has its setgid bit set
-G file
file exists and is owned by the effective group ID
-h file
file exists and is a symbolic link
-k file
file exists and has its sticky bit set
-L file
file exists and is a symbolic link
-n string
string is non-null
-N file
file was modified since it was last read
-O file
file exists and is owned by the effective user ID
-p file
file exists and is a pipe or named pipe (FIFO file)
-r file
file exists and is readable
-s file
file exists and is not empty

Operator
True if...
-S file
file exists and is a socket
-t N
File descriptor N points to a terminal
-u file
file exists and has its setuid bit set
-w file
file exists and is writeable
-x file
file exists and is executable, or file is a directory that can be searched
-z string
string has a length of zero
fileA -nt fileB
fileA modification time is newer than fileB
fileA -ot fileB
fileA modification time is older than fileB
fileA -ef fileB
fileA and fileB point to the same file
stringA = stringB
stringA equals stringB (POSIX version)
stringA == stringB stringA equals stringB
stringA != stringB stringA does not match stringB
stringA =~ regexp stringA matches the extended regular expression regexp[3]
stringA < stringB
stringA sorts before stringB lexicographically
stringA > stringB
stringA sorts after stringB lexicographically
exprA -eq exprB
Arithmetic expressions exprA and exprB are equal
exprA -ne exprB
Arithmetic expressions exprA and exprB are not equal
exprA -lt exprB
exprA is less than exprB
exprA -gt exprB
exprA is greater than exprB
exprA -le exprB
exprA is less than or equal to exprB
exprA -ge exprB
exprA is greater than or equal to exprB
exprA -a exprB
exprA is true and exprB is true
exprA -o exprB
exprA is true or exprB is true
[3] Only available in bash version 3.0 and later. May only be used inside [[...]].

OceanofPDF.com

set Options
Table B-7 lists the options that can be turned on with the set - arg
command. All are initially off except where noted. Full Names, where
listed, are arguments to set that can be used with set -o. The Full Names
braceexpand, histexpand, history, keyword, and onecmd are not
available in versions of bash prior to 2.0. Also, in those versions, hashing is
switched with -d.
Table B-7. Options to set
Option Full name
Meaning
-a
allexport
Export all subsequently defined or modified variables.
-B
braceexpand The shell performs brace expansion. This is on by default.
-b
notify
Report the status of terminating background jobs immediately.
-C
noclobber
Don't allow redirection to overwrite existing files.
-E
errtrace
Any trap on ERR is inherited by shell functions, command substitutions, and
commands executed in a subshell environment.
-e
errexit
Exit the shell when a simple command exits with non-zero status. A simple
command is a command not part of a while, until, or if; or part of a && or ||
list; or a command whose return value is inverted by !.
 
emacs
Use emacs-style command-line editing.
-f
noglob
Disable pathname expansion.
-H
histexpand
Enable ! style history substitution. On by default in an interactive shell.
 
history
Enable command history. On by default in interactive shells.
-h
hashall
Disable the hashing of commands.
 
ignoreeof
Disallow CTRL-D to exit the shell.
-k
keyword
Place keyword arguments in the environment for a command.
-m
monitor
Enable job control (on by default in interactive shells).

Option Full name
Meaning
-n
noexec
Read commands and check syntax but do not execute them. Ignored for
interactive shells.
-P
physical
Do not follow symbolic links on commands that change the current
directory. Use the physical directory.
-p
privileged
Script is running in suid mode.
 
pipefail
The return value of a pipeline is the value of the last (rightmost) command to
exit with a non-zero status, or zero if all commands in the pipeline exit
successfully. This option is disabled by default.
 
posix
Change the default behavior to that of POSIX 1003.2 where it differs from
the standard.
-T
functrace
Any trap on DEBUG is inherited by shell functions, command substitutions,
and commands executed in a subshell environment.
-t
onecmd
Exit after reading and executing one command.
-u
nounset
Treat undefined variables as errors, not as null.
-v
verbose
Print shell input lines before running them.
 
vi
Use vi-style command-line editing.
-x
xtrace
Print commands (after expansions) before running them.
-
 
Signals the end of options. All remaining arguments are assigned to the
positional parameters. -x and -v are turned off. If there are no remaining
arguments to set, the positional arguments remain unchanged.
—
 
With no arguments following, unset the positional parameters. Otherwise,
the positional parameters are set to the following arguments (even if they
begin with -).
OceanofPDF.com

shopt Options
The shopt options are set with shopt -s arg and unset with shopt -u arg.
See Table B-8 for options to shopt. Versions of bash prior to 2.0 had
environment variables to perform some of these settings. Setting them
equated to shopt -s.
The variables (and corresponding shopt options) were:
allow_null_glob_expansion (nullglob), cdable_vars (cdable_vars),
command_oriented_history (cmdhist), glob_dot_filenames (dotglob),
no_exit_on_failed_exec (execfail). These variables no longer exist.
The options extdebug, failglob, force_fignore, and gnu_errfmt are not
available in versions of bash prior to 3.0.
Table B-8. Options to shopt
Option
Meaning if set
cdable_vars
An argument to cd that is not a directory is assumed to be the name of
a variable whose value is the directory to change to.
cdspell
Minor errors in the spelling of a directory supplied to the cd
command will be corrected if there is a suitable match. This
correction includes missing letters, incorrect letters, and letter
transposition. It works for interactive shells only.
checkhash
Commands found in the hash table are checked for existence before
being executed and non-existence forces a PATH search.
checkwinsize
Checks the window size after each command and, if it has changed,
updates the variables LINES and COLUMNS accordingly.
cmdhist
Attempt to save all lines of a multiline command in a single history
entry.
dotglob
Filenames beginning with a . are included in pathname expansion.
execfail
A non-interactive shell will not exit if it cannot execute the argument
to an exec. Interactive shells do not exit if exec fails.
expand_aliases
Aliases are expanded.

Option
Meaning if set
extdebug
Behavior intended for use by debuggers is enabled. This includes: the
-F option of declare displays the source filename and line number
corresponding to each function name supplied as an argument; if the
command run by the DEBUG trap returns a non-zero value, the next
command is skipped and not executed; and if the command run by the
DEBUG trap returns a value of 2, and the shell is executing in a
subroutine, a call to return is simulated.
extglob
Extended pattern matching features are enabled.
failglob
Patterns which fail to match filenames during pathname expansion
result in an expansion error.
force_fignore
The suffixes specified by the FIGNORE shell variable cause words
to be ignored when performing word completion even if the ignored
words are the only possible completions.
gnu_errfmt
Shell error messages are written in the standard GNU error message
format.
histappend
The history list is appended to the file named by the value of the
variable HISTFILE when the shell exits, rather than overwriting the
file.
histreedit
If readline is being used, the opportunity is given for re-editing a
failed history substitution.
histverify
If readline is being used, the results of history substitution are not
immediately passed to the shell parser. Instead, the resulting line is
loaded into the readline editing buffer, allowing further modification.
hostcomplete
If readline is being used, an attempt will be made to perform
hostname completion when a word beginning with @ is being
completed.
huponexit
bash will send SIGHUP to all jobs when an interactive login shell
exits.
interactive_comments
Allows a word beginning with # and all subsequent characters on the
line to be ignored in an interactive shell.
lithist
If the cmdhist option is enabled, multiline commands are saved to the
history with embedded newlines rather than using semicolon
separators where possible.
login_shell
If bash is started as a login shell. This is a read-only value.

Option
Meaning if set
mailwarn
If the file being checked for mail has been accessed since the last time
it was checked, the message "The mail in mailfile has been read" is
displayed.
no_empty_cmd_completion
If readline is being used, no attempt will be made to search the PATH
for possible completions when completion is attempted on an empty
line.
nocaseglob
bash matches filenames in a case-insensitive fashion when
performing pathname expansion.
nullglob
Allows patterns which match no files to expand to null strings rather
than to themselves.
progcomp
Programmable completion facilities are enabled. Default is on.
promptvars
Prompt strings undergo variable and parameter expansion after being
expanded.
restricted_shell
Set if the shell is started in restricted mode. The value cannot be
changed.
shift_verbose
The shift built-in prints an error if it has shifted past the last
positional parameter.
sourcepath
The source built-in uses the value of PATH to find the directory
containing the file supplied as an argument.
xpg_echo
echo expands backslash-escape sequences by default.
OceanofPDF.com

I/O Redirection
Table B-9 shows a complete list of I/O redirectors. (This table is also
included earlier as Table 7-1.) Note that there are two formats for specifying
standard output and error redirection: &>file and >&file. The second of
these, and the one used throughout this book, is the preferred way.
Table B-9. I/O redirectors
Redirector Function
cmd1 |
cmd2
Pipe; take standard output of cmd1 as standard input to cmd2
> file
Direct standard output to file
< file
Take standard input from file
>> file
Direct standard output to file; append to file if it already exists
>| file
Force standard output to file even if noclobber is set
n>| file
Force output to file from file descriptor n even if noclobber set
<> file
Use file as both standard input and standard output
n<> file
Use file as both input and output for file descriptor n
<< label
Here-document
n > file
Direct file descriptor n to file
n < file
Take file descriptor n from file
>> file
Direct file descriptor n to file; append to file if it already exists
n>&
Duplicate standard output to file descriptor n
n<&
Duplicate standard input from file descriptor n
n>&m
File descriptor n is made to be a copy of the output file descriptor
n<&m
File descriptor n is made to be a copy of the input file descriptor
&> file
Directs standard output and standard error to file

Redirector Function
<&-
Close the standard input
>&-
Close the standard output
n>&-
Close the output from file descriptor n
n<&-
Close the input from file descriptor n
n>&word
If n is not specified, the standard output (file descriptor 1) is used; if the digits in word
do not specify a file descriptor open for output, a redirection error occurs; as a special
case, if n is omitted, and word does not expand to one or more digits, the standard
output and standard error are redirected as described previously
n<&word
If word expands to one or more digits, the file descriptor denoted by n is made to be a
copy of that file descriptor; if the digits in word do not specify a file descriptor open
for input, a redirection error occurs; if word evaluates to -, file descriptor n is closed;
if n is not specified, the standard input (file descriptor 0) is used
n>&digit-
Moves the file descriptor digit to file descriptor n, or the standard output (file
descriptor 1) if n is not specified
n<&digit-
Moves the file descriptor digit to file descriptor n, or the standard input (file descriptor
0) if n is not specified; digit is closed after being duplicated to n
OceanofPDF.com

emacs Mode Commands
Table B-10 shows a complete list of emacs editing mode commands.
Table B-10. emacs mode commands
Command
Meaning
CTRL-A
Move to beginning of line
CTRL-B
Move backward one character
CTRL-D
Delete one character forward
CTRL-E
Move to end of line
CTRL-F
Move forward one character
CTRL-G
Abort the current editing command and ring the terminal bell
CTRL-J
Same as RETURN
CTRL-K
Delete (kill) forward to end of line
CTRL-L
Clear screen and redisplay the line
CTRL-M
Same as RETURN
CTRL-N
Next line in command history
CTRL-O
Same as RETURN, then display next line in history file
CTRL-P
Previous line in command history
CTRL-R
Search backward
CTRL-S
Search forward
CTRL-T
Transpose two characters
CTRL-U
Kill backward from point to the beginning of line
CTRL-V
Make the next character typed verbatim
CTRL-V TAB
Insert a TAB
CTRL-W
Kill the word behind the cursor, using whitespace as the boundary

Command
Meaning
CTRL-X /
List the possible filename completions of the current word
CTRL-X ~
List the possible username completions of the current word
CTRL-X $
List the possible shell variable completions of the current word
CTRL-X @
List the possible hostname completions of the current word
CTRL-X !
List the possible command name completions of the current word
CTRL-X (
Begin saving characters into the current keyboard macro
CTRL-X )
Stop saving characters into the current keyboard macro
CTRL-X e
Re-execute the last keyboard macro defined
CTRL-X CTRL-
R
Read in the contents of the readline initialization file
CTRL-X CTRL-
V
Display version information on this instance of bash
CTRL-Y
Retrieve (yank) last item killed
DEL
Delete one character backward
CTRL-[
Same as ESC (most keyboards)
ESC-B
Move one word backward
ESC-C
Change word after point to all capital letters
ESC-D
Delete one word forward
ESC-F
Move one word forward
ESC-L
Change word after point to all lowercase letters
ESC-N
Non-incremental forward search
ESC-P
Non-incremental reverse search
ESC-R
Undo all the changes made to this line
ESC-T
Transpose two words
ESC-U
Change word after point to all uppercase letters
ESC-CTRL-E
Perform shell alias, history, and word expansion on the line

Command
Meaning
ESC-CTRL-H
Delete one word backward
ESC-CTRL-Y
Insert the first argument to the previous command (usually the second word) at
point
ESC-DEL
Delete one word backward
ESC-^
Perform history expansion on the line
ESC-<
Move to first line of history file
ESC->
Move to last line of history file
ESC-.
Insert last word in previous command line after point
ESC-_
Same as above
TAB
Attempt filename completion on current word
ESC-?
List the possible completions of the text before point
ESC-/
Attempt filename completion on current word
ESC-~
Attempt username completion on current word
ESC-$
Attempt variable completion on current word
ESC-@
Attempt hostname completion on current word
ESC-!
Attempt command name completion on current word
ESC-TAB
Attempt completion from text in the command history
ESC-~
Attempt tilde expansion on the current word
ESC-\
Delete all the spaces and TABs around point
ESC-*
Insert all of the completions that would be generated by ESC-= before point
ESC-=
List the possible completions before point
ESC-{
Attempt filename completion and return the list to the shell enclosed within
braces
OceanofPDF.com

vi Control Mode Commands
Table B-11 shows a complete list of all vi control mode commands.
Table B-11. vi control mode commands
Command Meaning
h
Move left one character
l
Move right one character
w
Move right one word
b
Move left one word
W
Move to beginning of next non-blank word
B
Move to beginning of preceding non-blank word
e
Move to end of current word
E
Move to end of current non-blank word
0
Move to beginning of line
.
Repeat the last a insertion.
^
Move to first non-blank character in line
$
Move to end of line
i
Insert text before current character
a
Insert text after current character
I
Insert text at beginning of line
A
Insert text at end of line
R
Overwrite existing text
dh
Delete one character backward
dl
Delete one character forward
db
Delete one word backward

Command Meaning
dw
Delete one word forward
dB
Delete one non-blank word backward
dW
Delete one non-blank word forward
d$
Delete to end of line
d0
Delete to beginning of line
D
Equivalent to d$ (delete to end of line)
dd
Equivalent to 0d$ (delete entire line)
C
Equivalent to c$ (delete to end of line, enter input mode)
cc
Equivalent to 0c$ (delete entire line, enter input mode)
x
Equivalent to dl (delete character forwards)
X
Equivalent to dh (delete character backwards)
k or -
Move backward one line
j or +
Move forward one line
G
Move to line given by repeat count
/ string
Search forward for string
? string
Search backward for string
n
Repeat search forward
N
Repeat search backward
f x
Move right to next occurrence of x
F x
Move left to previous occurrence of x
t x
Move right to next occurrence of x, then back one space
T x
Move left to previous occurrence of x, then forward one space
;
Redo last character finding command
,
Redo last character finding command in opposite direction
\
Do filename completion

Command Meaning
*
Do wildcard expansion (onto command line)
\=
Do wildcard expansion (as printed list)
~
Invert (twiddle) case of current character(s)
\_
Append last word of previous command, enter input mode
CTRL-L
Start a new line and redraw the current line on it
#
Prepend # (comment character) to the line and send it to history
OceanofPDF.com

Appendix C. Loadable Built-Ins
bash 2.0 introduced a new feature that increased the flexibility of the shell:
dynamically loadable built-ins. On systems that support dynamic loading,
you can write your own built-ins in C, compile them into shared objects,
and load them at any time from within the shell with the enable built-in
(see Chapter 7 for details on all of the enable options).
This appendix will discuss briefly how to go about writing a built-in and
loading it in bash. The discussion assumes that you have experience with
writing, compiling, and linking C programs.
The bash archive contains a number of pre-written built-ins in the directory
examples/loadables/. You can build them by uncommenting the lines in the
file Makefile that are relevant to your system, and typing make. We'll take
one of these built-ins, tty, and use it as a "case study" for built-ins in
general.
tty will mimic the standard UNIX command tty. It will print the name of
the terminal that is connected to standard input. The built-in will, like the
command, return true if the device is a TTY and false if it isn't. In addition,
it will take an option, -s, which specifies that it should work silently, i.e.,
print nothing and just return a result.
The C code for a built-in can be divided into three distinct sections: the
code that implements the functionality of the built-in, a help text message
definition, and a structure describing the built-in so that bash can access it.
The description structure is quite straightforward and takes the form:
struct builtin structname = {
    "builtin_name",
    function_name,
    BUILTIN_ENABLED,
    help_array,
    "usage",
    0
};
builtin_name is the name of the built-in as it appears in bash. The next field,
function-name, is the name of the C function that implements the built-in.

We'll look at this in a moment. BUILTIN_ENABLED is the initial state of
the built-in, whether it is enabled or not. This field should always be set to
BUILTIN_ENABLED. help_array is an array of strings which are printed
when help is used on the built-in. usage is the shorter form of help; the
command and its options. The last field in the structure should be set to 0.
In our example we'll call the built-in tty, the C function tty_builtin, and the
help array tty_doc. The usage string will be tty [-s]. The resulting structure
looks like this:
struct builtin tty_struct = {
    "tty",
    tty_builtin,
    BUILTIN_ENABLED,
    tty_doc,
    "tty [-s]",
    0
};
The next section is the code that does the work. It looks like this:
tty_builtin (list)
    WORD_LIST *list;
{
    int opt, sflag;
    char *t;
    
    reset_internal_getopt ( );
    sflag = 0;
    while ((opt = internal_getopt (list, "s")) != -1)
    {
      switch (opt)
      {
          case 's':
              sflag = 1;
              break;
          default:
              builtin_usage ( );
              return (EX_USAGE);
      }
    }
    list = loptend;
    
    t = ttyname (0);
    if (sflag == 0)
        puts (t ? t : "not a tty");
    return (t ? EXECUTION_SUCCESS : EXECUTION_FAILURE);
}

Built-in functions are always given a pointer to a list of type WORD_LIST.
If the built-in doesn't actually take any options, you must call
no_options(list) and check its return value before any further processing. If
the return value is non-zero, your function should immediately return with
the value EX_USAGE.
You must always use internal_getopt rather than the standard C library
getopt to process the built-in options. Also, you must reset the option
processing first by calling reset_internal_getopt.
Option processing is performed in the standard way, except if the options
are incorrect, in which case you should return EX_USAGE. Any arguments
left after option processing are pointed to by loptend. Once the function is
finished, it should return the value EXECUTION_SUCCESS or
EXECUTION_FAILURE.
In the case of our tty built-in, we then just call the standard C library
routine ttyname, and if the -s option wasn't given, print out the name of the
tty (or "not a tty" if the device wasn't). The function then returns success or
failure, depending upon the result from the call to ttyname.
The last major section is the help definition. This is simply an array of
strings, the last element of the array being NULL. Each string is printed to
standard output when help is run on the built-in. You should, therefore,
keep the strings to 76 characters or less (an 80-character standard display
minus a 4-character margin). In the case of tty, our help text looks like this:
char *tty_doc[] = {
  "tty writes the name of the terminal that is opened for standard",
  "input to standard output.  If the `-s' option is supplied, nothing",
  "is written; the exit status determines whether or not the standard",
  "input is connected to a tty.",
  (char *)NULL
};
The last things to add to our code are the necessary C header files. These
are stdio.h and the bash header files config.h, builtins.h, shell.h, and
bashgetopt.h.
Here is the C program in its entirety:
#include "config.h"
#include <stdio.h>
#include "builtins.h"
#include "shell.h"
#include "bashgetopt.h"

    
    
extern char *ttyname ( );
    
tty_builtin (list)
    WORD_LIST *list;
{
    int opt, sflag;
    char *t;
    
    reset_internal_getopt ( );
    sflag = 0;
    while ((opt = internal_getopt (list, "s")) != -1)
    {
        switch (opt)
        {
            case 's':
                sflag = 1;
                break;
            default:
                builtin_usage ( );
                return (EX_USAGE);
        }
    }
    list = loptend;
    
    t = ttyname (0);
    if (sflag == 0)
        puts (t ? t : "not a tty");
    return (t ? EXECUTION_SUCCESS : EXECUTION_FAILURE);
}
    
char *tty_doc[] = {
    "tty writes the name of the terminal that is opened for standard",
    "input to standard output.  If the `-s' option is supplied, nothing",
    "is written; the exit status determines whether or not the standard",
    "input is connected to a tty.",
    (char *)NULL
};
    
struct builtin tty_struct = {
    "tty",
    tty_builtin,
    BUILTIN_ENABLED,
    tty_doc,
    "tty [-s]",
    0
};

We now need to compile and link this as a dynamic shared object.
Unfortunately, different systems have different ways to specify how to
compile dynamic shared objects. Table C-1 lists some common systems and
the commands needed to compile and link tty.c. Replace archive with the
path of the top level of the bash archive.
Table C-1. Shared object compilation
System
Commands
SunOS 4
cc -pic -Iarchive -Iarchive/builtins -Iarchive/lib -c tty.c
 
ld -assert pure-text -o tty tty.o
SunOS 5
cc -K pic -Iarchive -Iarchive/builtins -Iarchive/lib -c tty.c
 
cc -dy -z text -G -i -h tty -o tty tty.o
SVR4, SVR4.2, Irix cc -K PIC -Iarchive -Iarchive/builtins -Iarchive/lib -c tty.c
 
ld -dy -z text -G -h tty -o tty tty.o
AIX
cc -K -Iarchive -Iarchive/builtins -Iarchive/lib -c tty.c
 
ld -bdynamic -bnoentry -bexpall -G -o tty tty.o
Linux
cc -fPIC -Iarchive -Iarchive/builtins -Iarchive/lib -c tty.c
 
ld -shared -o tty tty.o
NetBSD, FreeBSD
cc -fpic -Iarchive -Iarchive/builtins -Iarchive/lib -c tty.c
 
ld -x -Bshareable -o tty tty.o
After you have compiled and linked the program, you should have a shared
object called tty. To load this into bash, just type enable -f path/ tty tty,
where path is the full pathname of the shared object. You can remove a
loaded built-in at any time with the -d option, e.g., enable -d tty.
You can put as many built-ins as you like into one shared object; all you
need are the three main sections that we saw above for each built-in in the
same C file. It is best, however, to keep the number of built-ins per shared
object small. You will also probably find it best to keep similar built-ins, or
built-ins that work together (e.g., pushd, popd, dirs), in the same shared
object.

bash loads a shared object as a whole, so if you ask it to load one built-in
from a shared object that has twenty built-ins, it will load all 20 (but only
one will be enabled). For this reason, keep the number of built-ins small to
save loading memory with unnecessary things, and group similar built-ins
so that if the user enables one of them, all of them will be loaded and ready
in memory for enabling.
OceanofPDF.com

Appendix D. Programmable Completion
Programmable completion is a feature that was introduced in bash 2.0.[1] It
extends the built-in textual completion that is discussed in Chapter 2 by
providing hooks into the completion mechanism. This means that it is
possible to write virtually any form of completion desired. For instance, if
you were typing the man command, wouldn't it be nice to be able to hit
TAB and have the manual sections listed for you. Programmable
completion allows you to do this and much more.
This Appendix will only look at the basics of programmable completion.
While completion is a feature you are very likely to use in everyday shell
operation, you are unlikely to need to delve into the inner depths and
actually write your own completion code. Fortunately the feature has been
around for some time and there are already several libraries of completion
commands developed by other people. We'll just outline the basic
commands and procedures needed to use the completion mechanism should
you ever need to work on it yourself.
In order to be able to do textual completion in a particular way you first
have to tell the shell how to do it when you press the TAB key. This is done
via the complete command.
The main argument of complete is a name that can be the name of a
command or anything else that you want textual completion to work with.
As an example we will look at the gunzip command that allows compressed
archives of various types to be uncompressed. Normally, if you were to
type:[2]
         $ gunzip [TAB][TAB]
you would get a list of filenames from which to complete. This list will
include all kinds of things that are unsuitable for the gunzip command.
What we really would like is the subset of those files that are suitable for
the command to work on. We can set this up by using complete:[3]
complete -A file -X '!*.@(Z|gz|tgz)' gunzip
Here we are telling completion mechanism that when the gunzip command
is typed in we want it to do something special. The -A flag is an action and

takes a variety of arguments. In this case we provide file as the argument,
which asks the mechanism to provide a list of files as possible completions.
The next step is to cut this down by selecting only the files that we know
will work with gunzip. We've done this with the -X option, which takes as
its argument a filter pattern. When applied to the completion list the filter
removes anything matching the pattern, i.e., the result is everything that
doesn't match the pattern. gunzip can uncompress a number of file types
including those with the extensions .Z, .gz, and .tgz. We want to match all
filenames with extensions that have one of these three patterns. We then
have to negate this with a ! (remember, the filter removes the patterns that
match).
We can actually try this out first and see what completions would be
returned without having to install the completion with complete. We can do
this via the compgen command:
compgen -A file -X '!*.@(Z|gz|tgz)'
This produces a list of completion strings (assuming you have some files in
the current directory with these extensions). compgen is useful for trying
out filters to see what completion strings are produced. It is also needed
when more complex completion is required. We'll see an example of this
later in the Appendix.
Once we install the complete command above, either by sourcing a script
with it in or executing it on the command line, we can use the augmented
completion mechanism with the gunzip command:
$gunzip [TAB][TAB]
archive.tgz  archive1.tgz  file.Z
$gunzip
You can probably see that there are other things we could do. What about
providing a list of possible arguments for specific options to a command?
For instance, the kill command can takes a process ID but can optionally
take a signal name preceded by a dash (-) or a signal name following the
option -n. We should be able to complete with PIDs but, if there is a dash or
a -n, with signal names.
This is slightly more complex than the one-line example above. Here we
will need some code to distinguish what has already been typed in. We'll
also need to get the PIDs and the signal names. We'll put the code in a

function and call the function via the completion mechanism. Here's the
code to call our function, which we'll name _kill:
complete -F _kill kill
The -F option to complete tells it to call the function named _kill when it is
performing textual completion for the kill command. The next step is to
code the function:
_kill( )
{
    local cur
        local sign
    COMPREPLY=( )
    cur=${COMP_WORDS[COMP_CWORD]}
    if (($COMP_CWORD == 2)) && [[ ${COMP_WORDS[1]} == -n ]]; then
       # return list of available signals
           _signals
    elif (($COMP_CWORD == 1 )) && [[ "$cur" == -* ]]; then
       # return list of available signals
       sign="-"
       _signals
        else
       # return list of available PIDs
       COMPREPLY=( $( compgen -W '$( command ps axo pid | sed 1d )' $cur ) )
    fi
}
The code is fairly standard apart from the use of some special environment
variables and a call to a function called _signals, which we'll come to
shortly.
The variable COMPREPLY is used to hold the result that is returned back
to the completion mechanism. It is an array that holds a set of completion
strings. Initially this is set to an empty array.
The local variable cur is a convenience variable to make the code more
readable because the value is used in several places. Its value is derived
from an element in the array COMP_WORDS. This array holds the
individual words on the current command line. COMP_CWORD is an
index into the array; it gives the word containing the current cursor position.
The value of cur is the word currently containing the cursor.
The first if statement tests for the condition where the kill command is
followed by the -n option. If the first word was -n and we are on the second

word, then we need to provide a list of signal names for the completion
mechanism.
The second if statement is similar, except this time we are looking to
complete on the current word, which starts with a dash and is followed by
anything else. The body of this if again calls _signals but this time it sets the
sign variable to a dash. The reason for this will become obvious when we
look at the _signals function.
The remaining part in the else block returns a list of process IDs. This uses
the compgen command to help in creating the array of completion strings.
First it runs the ps command to obtain a list of PIDs and then pipes the
result through sed to remove the first line (which is the heading "PID").[4]
This is then given as an argument to the -W option of compgen, which
takes a word list. compgen then returns all completion strings that match
the value of the variable cur and the resulting array is assigned to
COMPREPLY.
compgen is important here because we can't just return the complete list of
PIDs provided by ps. The user may have already typed part of a PID and
then attempted completion. As the partial PID will be in the variable cur,
compgen restricts the results to those that match or partially match that
value. For example if cur had the value 5 then compgen would return only
values beginning with a "5", such as 5, 59 or 562.
The last piece of the puzzle is the _signals function:
_signals( )
{
        local i
        COMPREPLY=( $( compgen -A signal SIG${cur#-} ))
        for (( i=0; i < ${#COMPREPLY[@]}; i++ )); do
                COMPREPLY[i]=$sign${COMPREPLY[i]#SIG}
        done
}
While we can get a list of signal names by using complete -A signal, the
names are unfortunately not in a form that is very usable and so we can't use
this to directly generate the array of names. The names generated begin
with the letters "SIG" while the names needed by the kill command don't.

The _signal function should assign to COMPREPLY an array of signal
names, optionally preceded by a dash.
First we generate the list of signal names with compgen. Each name starts
with the letters "SIG". In order to get complete to provide the correct subset
if the user has begun to type a name, we add "SIG" to the beginning of the
value in cur. We also take the opportunity to remove any preceding dash
that the value has so it will match.
We then loop on the array removing the letters "SIG" and adding a dash if
needed (the value of the variable sign) to each entry.
Both complete and compgen have many other options and actions; far
more than we can cover in a few simple exercises. If you are interested in
taking programmable completion further, we recommend looking in the
bash manual and downloading some of the many examples that are
available on the Internet or in the bash archive under bash-
3.0\examples\complete.
As you can see, textual completion can get quite involved and creating the
necessary code can be time-consuming. Fortunately there are already
completion libraries available for bash. One of these is the bash Completion
Project, which can be found at
http://freshmeat.net/projects/bashcompletion/ .
[1] Technically it was added in bash Version 2.04.
[2] For the rest of this Appendix we will denote typing a TAB character as
[TAB].
[3] In order for @(...) to work you will need extended pattern matching
switched on (shopt -s extglob).
[4] On AIX and Solaris you will have to use the command ps -efo pid.
OceanofPDF.com

About the Author
Cameron Newham lives in Perth, Western Australia. After completing a
Bachelor of Science majoring in information technology and geography at
the University of Western Australia, Cameron joined Universal Defence
Systems (later to become Australian Defence Industries) as a software
engineer. He has been with ADI for six years, working on various aspects of
command and control systems. In his spare time Cameron can be found
surfing the Internet, ballroom dancing, or driving his sports car. He also has
more than a passing interest in space science, 3D graphics, synthesiser
music, and Depeche Mode.
OceanofPDF.com

Colophon
Our look is the result of reader comments, our own experimentation, and
feedback from distribution channels. Distinctive covers complement our
distinctive approach to technical topics, breathing personality and life into
potentially dry subjects.
The animal on the cover of Learning the bash Shell, Third Edition, is a
silver bass, one of the 400-500 species of sea bass. The silver bass, also
known as the white perch, is found in freshwater bays and river mouths
along the Atlantic coast of North America from Nova Scotia to South
Carolina, and is most abundant in the Chesapeake region. Silver bass live in
large schools and feed on small fishes and crustaceans. Although many bass
never stray far from one place their whole lives, silver bass swim upstream
to spawn, often becoming landlocked in the process. Like most bass, the s\
ilver bass is attracted to bright, shiny objects, and can be drawn quite close
to swimmers and divers in this way.
Colleen Gorman was the production editor and copyeditor for Learning the
bash Shell, Third Edition . MaryAnne Weeks Mayo, Lydia Onofrei, and
Emily Quill provided quality control. Peter Ryan provided production
assistance. Angela Howard wrote the index.
Edie Freedman designed the cover of this book. The cover image is a 19th-
century engraving from the Dover Pictorial Archive. Karen Montgomery
produced the cover layout with Adobe InDesign CS using Adobe's ITC
Garamond font.
David Futato designed the interior layout. This book was converted by Judy
Hoer to FrameMaker 5.5.6 with a format conversion tool created by Erik
Ray, Jason McIntosh, Neil Walls, and Mike Sierra that uses Perl and XML
technologies. The text font is Linotype Birka; the heading font is Adobe
Myriad Condensed; and the code font is LucasFont's TheSans Mono
Condensed. The illustrations that appear in the book were created by Chris
Reilley and updated for the third edition by Robert Romano, Jessamyn
Read, and Lesley Borash using Macromedia FreeHand MX and Adobe
Photoshop CS. This colophon was written by Clairemarie Fisher O'Leary.

The online edition of this book was created by the Digital Books production
group (John Chodacki, Ken Douglass, and Ellie Cutler) using a set of
Frame-to-XML conversion and cleanup tools written and maintained by
Erik Ray, Benn Salter, John Chodacki, Ellie Cutler, and Jeff Liggett.
OceanofPDF.com

SPECIAL OFFER: Upgrade this ebook with
O'Reilly
Upgrade this ebook today for $4.99 at oreilly.com and get access to
additional DRM-free formats, including PDF and EPUB, along with free
lifetime updates.
OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

