
OceanofPDF.com

THE LIGHTS IN
THE TUNNEL
AUTOMATION, ACCELERATING
TECHNOLOGY AND THE
ECONOMY OF THE FUTURE
Martin Ford
Acculant Publishing
Copyright © 2009 by Martin R. Ford
All Rights Reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in part in any form.
Published in the United States by Acculant™ Publishing.
 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ford, Martin R.
The Lights in the Tunnel: Automation, Accelerating Technology and the Economy of the Future / Martin Ford
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references
ISBN-10 1-4486-5981-7
ISBN-13 978-1-4486-5981-4
1. Economics—Future Trends 2. Economics—Impact of Advanced Technology on 3. Artificial Intelligence and Robotics 4. Computer Technology and Civilization 5. Technological
Unemployment I. Title
 
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet without the permission of the publisher is illegal. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions. Your
support of the author's rights is appreciated.
 

This book is available for purchase in paper and electronic formats at:
www.TheLightsintheTunnel.com
OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS
 
A Note to Kindle Users
Introduction
Chapter 1: The Tunnel
The Mass Market
Visualizing the Mass Market
Automation Comes to the Tunnel
A Reality Check
Summarizing
Chapter 2: Acceleration
The Rich Get Richer
World Computational Capability
Grid and Cloud Computing
Meltdown
Diminishing Returns
Offshoring and Drive-Through Banking
Short Lived Jobs
Traditional Jobs: The "Average" Lights in the Tunnel
A Tale of Two Jobs
"Software" Jobs and Artificial Intelligence
Automation, Offshoring and Small Business
"Hardware" Jobs and Robotics
"Interface" Jobs
The Next "Killer App"
Military Robotics
Robotics and Offshoring
Nanotechnology and its Impact on Employment
The Future of College Education
Econometrics: Looking Backward

The Luddite Fallacy
A More Ambitious View of Future Technological Progress: The Singularity
A War on Technology
Chapter 3: Danger
The Predictive Nature of Markets
The 2008-2009 Recession
Offshoring and Factory Migration
Reconsidering Conventional Views about the Future
The China Fallacy
The Future of Manufacturing
India and Offshoring
Economic and National Security Implications for the United States
Solutions
Labor and Capital Intensive Industries: The Tipping Point
The Average Worker and the Average Machine
Capital Intensive Industries are "Free Riders"
The Problem with Payroll Taxes
The "Workerless" Payroll Tax
"Progressive" Wage Deductions
Defeating the Lobbyists
A More Conventional View of the Future
The Risk of Inaction
Chapter 4: Transition
The Basis of the Free Market Economy:
Incentives
Preserving the Market
Recapturing Wages
Positive Aspects of Jobs
The Power of Inequality
Where the Free Market Fails: Externalities
Creating a Virtual Job
Smoothing the Business Cycle and Reducing Economic Risk
The Market Economy of the Future
An International View
Transitioning to the New Model

Keynesian Grandchildren
Transition in the Tunnel
Chapter 5: The Green Light
Attacking Poverty
Fundamental Economic Constraints
Removing the Constraints
The Evolution toward Consumption
The Green Light
Appendix / Final Thoughts
Are the ideas presented in this book WRONG? (Opposing arguments with responses)
Two Questions Worth Thinking About
Where are we now? Four Possible Cases
The Next 10-20 years: Some Indicators to Watch For
Outsmarting Marx
The Technology Paradox
Machine Intelligence and the Turing Test
 
About / Contacting the Author
Notes
OceanofPDF.com

A Note to Kindle Users
 The printed edition of this book employs both footnotes and endnotes.
Footnotes are marked with an asterisk (*) and appear at the bottom of the
page. The author uses footnotes for supplementary or supporting
information and comments that he feels are likely to be of interest to a large
percentage of readers.
Because the Kindle treats footnotes as hyperlinks, it is cumbersome for
the reader to access these and then return to the main text. We have,
therefore, moved the footnote text inline as follows:
 
*[ The text that would appear at the bottom of the page in the printed version is shown between
square brackets and in a smaller font. The text is placed as soon as is practical after the footnote
reference, usually after the next paragraph break. This should make it possible to move between the
main text and the footnote text using the normal Next and Previous page buttons. If you are not
interested in the footnote, please feel free to skip ahead to the main text. ]
 
Endnotes are used primarily for citations and references to supporting
source materials, and in a few cases for comments that will probably be of
less interest to most readers. Endnotes are numbered sequentially and are
left as hyperlinks in the Kindle version. We suggest that it might be more
productive for the reader to leave an examination of the endnotes until the
main text has been completed.
OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION
 
Like most people, I have been giving a lot of thought to the economic
situation as the most serious crisis since the Great Depression has continued
to unfold. Since I develop software and run a high tech business, I also
spend a great deal of time thinking about computer technology, and so I
began to focus on how economics and technology intertwine. The current
crisis has been perceived as primarily financial in origin, but is it possible
that ever advancing technology is an unseen force that has contributed
significantly to the severity of the downturn? More importantly, what
economic impact will technological acceleration have as we anticipate
recovery from the current crisis—and in the years and decades ahead? What
will the economy of the future look like?
Among people who work in the field of computer technology, it is fairly
routine to speculate about the likelihood that computers will someday
approach, or possibly even exceed, human beings in general capability and
intelligence. Speaking at an industry conference in 2007, Google co-
founder Larry Page said, "We have some people at Google [who] are really
trying to build artificial intelligence and to do it on a large scale. It's not as
far off as people think."
1 Ray Kurzweil, a well-known inventor, author and
futurist, states quite categorically that he expects computers to become at
least as intelligent as humans by the year 2029.
2 While other experts are far
more conservative about the prospect for machines that can achieve genuine
intelligence, there can be little doubt that computers and robots are going to
become dramatically more capable and flexible in the coming years and
decades.
What is the likely economic impact of machines or computers that begin
to catch up with—and maybe even surpass—the average person's capability
to do a typical job? Clearly, the employment market would be one of the
first areas to feel that influence. Put yourself in the position of a business
owner and think of all the problems that are associated with human
employees: vacation, safety rules, sick time, payroll taxes, poor
performance...maternity leave. If an affordable machine can do nearly any

routine job as well as a human worker, then what business manager in his or
her right mind would hire a worker?
Even if computers never become truly intelligent, surely machines are
likely to become far more capable in terms of their ability to perform a
relatively narrow range of tasks. The reality is that a substantial fraction of
the routine, specialized jobs held by average people—including many
people with college degrees—simply do not really require the full
intellectual breadth of a human being. This is the reason that a lot of jobs
are boring. If computers can already beat the best chess players in the
world, isn't it likely that they will also soon be able to perform many
routine jobs? In fact, I think there are good reasons to expect that machines
may begin to approach this more specialized level of "intelligence" within a
decade or two.
Since many of the people who work in fields like artificial intelligence
and robotics are talking about the future prospects for these technologies on
a fairly regular basis, I assumed that a similar discussion must be going on
among economists. Surely, the economists are thinking ahead. If machines
suddenly get smarter and start doing many of our jobs, then the economists
will have a plan in place. At least they will have thought about it; they'll
have some good suggestions. Right?
Well, no. It turns out that while technologists are actively thinking
about, and writing books about, intelligent machines, the idea that
technology will ever truly replace a large fraction of the human workforce
and lead to permanent, structural unemployment is, for the majority of
economists, almost unthinkable. For mainstream economists, at least in the
long run, technological advancement always leads to more prosperity and
more jobs. This is seen almost as an economic law. Anyone who challenges
this "law of economics" is called a "neo-Luddite." This is not a
compliment. (We'll talk about Luddites and the associated "Luddite fallacy"
in some detail in Chapter 2 of this book.)
While most economists dismiss the question completely, the technical
people seem to be entirely caught up in the excitement of the technology
itself and what it might potentially promise. There is some discussion of the
fact that artificial intelligence might have serious impacts on society, but
much of this is focused on the threat of truly advanced or even sentient
machines in some way "taking over." There is little attention given to the
more mundane and immediate threats to the job market and the overall

economy. Perhaps the technologists just assume that once the technology
comes along, the economic issues will somehow work themselves out.
Now that is an unsupportable assumption. It would probably be
reasonable to assume that technical problems will sort themselves out.
Technology usually seems to find a way. But economic policy and political
issues? Think back to 1993. Bill Clinton had just been elected and had
promised to reform the health care system. As we all know, that effort
failed. The major issues back in 1993 were very similar to what we continue
to face in 2009. As this is being written, Congress is once again taking up
the issue of comprehensive health care reform. It has taken a full 16 years to
get to this point, and still the outcome is by no means certain.
But what happened with technology? In 1993, hardly anyone had heard
of the Internet: it was something that people in government and at
universities used primarily for work-related email. Some people had
primitive cell phones. Microsoft had just introduced Windows 3.1, which
for the first time brought a usable graphical interface to IBM PC-compatible
computers. The evidence is pretty clear: a race between technology and our
ability to reform our political and economic systems is really no race at all.
So if we can foresee that technology is likely to have a highly disruptive
impact on our economy in the coming years and decades, then we really
need to start thinking about that well in advance.
The disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991 demonstrated quite
conclusively that there is no good alternative to the free market system.
Other economic systems simply cannot compete. In fact, it's probably
reasonable to say that the free market economy is one of mankind's greatest
inventions—ranking right up there with the wheel. The wealth and progress
that we enjoy in the industrialized world would not have come into being
without the underlying logic of capitalism. Historically, technology and the
market economy have worked together to make us all more wealthy. Will
this always be true? Is it simply a matter of leaving the system we have in
place?
The reality is that the free market economy, as we understand it today,
simply cannot work without a viable labor market. Jobs are the primary
mechanism through which income—and, therefore, purchasing power—is
distributed to the people who consume everything the economy produces. If
at some point, machines are likely to permanently take over a great deal of
the work now performed by human beings, then that will be a threat to the

very foundation of our economic system. This is not something that will
just work itself out. This is something that we need to begin thinking about
—and that is the primary subject of this book.
Once you identify and begin to think about the economic ramifications
of advancing technology, it becomes clear that these trends are already well
established and may even underlie the current crisis to a significant extent.
If you make some very logical, and even conservative, assumptions about
where technology is likely to lead in the coming years, much of the
conventional wisdom about what the future will look like becomes
unsupportable. In particular, important trends such as globalization simply
may not play out in the way we have been led to expect. If we do not
recognize these issues and adapt to the changes they imply, it will be very
difficult—perhaps impossible—to achieve a sustainable recovery that will
lead to long-term prosperity in the years and decades to come.
As we will see, technology is not just advancing gradually: it is
accelerating. As a result, the impact may come long before we expect it—
and long before we are ready. And yet, this issue is simply not on the radar.
If after reading this book, you are concerned about the issues raised here,
then I hope you will consider speaking out. Perhaps if enough people start
to discuss these issues, even the economists will take notice.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 1
 
OceanofPDF.com

THE TUNNEL
 
What if technology progresses to the point where a substantial fraction of
the jobs now performed by people are instead performed autonomously by
machines or computers? Is that likely, or even possible? And if it is, what
are the implications for our economy?
In this book, we are going to explore what increasing technological
advancement, and in particular job automation, could mean to the
economies of developed countries like the United States and also to the
world economy as a whole. To do this, we are going to start by creating an
imaginary simulation (or mental video game) that should provide some very
useful insight into what we can expect in the future.
As we all know, in recent years the practice of offshoring, or
outsourcing jobs to countries like India where wages are lower, has
attracted a great deal of controversy. Many people in a variety of jobs and
professions in the U.S. and other developed countries are now very
concerned that their jobs might eventually be moved overseas. While
offshoring seems to get most of the attention at the moment, we also know
that automation—the complete replacement of human jobs by machines—
continues to go on in a variety of industries.
There are certain conventional views that most of us accept regarding
these practices. For example, we are told that although automation and
offshoring may result in significant job losses in certain industries, types of
jobs, or geographic regions, this is part of the normal functioning of the free
market economy. As jobs are eliminated in one area, economic growth and
innovation create new opportunities. As a result, new products and services
are developed, new businesses arise and new jobs are created.
We also know that practices like the offshoring of jobs and the
relocation of manufacturing to low wage countries like China are creating
new opportunities for workers in those countries. As a result, a massive new
middle class in being created. As those newly wealthy people enter the
world market, they create dramatic new worldwide demand for consumer
products and services. Businesses in countries throughout the world will
thus enjoy access to new markets, and as a result, new jobs will be created

everywhere. In short, the general belief is that the trends toward
globalization and automation may create temporary displacements and
pockets of unemployment, but ultimately, technological progress creates
new jobs and makes all of us more wealthy.
In this chapter, we are going to start off by creating a mental simulation
that rejects these conventional wisdoms. We are instead going to make the
following assumption:
At some point in the future—it might be many years or decades from now—
machines will be able to do the jobs of a large percentage of the "average"
people in our population, and these people will not be able to find new jobs.
 
Many people might disagree with this assumption; they may feel
strongly that in our economy, new jobs will always be created. Let's leave
that aside for the moment; we'll discuss it in great detail in the next chapter.
For now, let's just go ahead and use this assumption. After all, it's only a
simulation.
Who are these "average" people whose jobs we are going to simulate
away? We simply mean the bulk of the working people in our population.
Let's say at least 50 to 60 percent of the employed population. These are
just typical people doing typical jobs. In the United States, about 28
percent
3 of the adult population has a college degree. So many of these
average people may have gone to college or even graduate school, but most
have not. They are the people who drive trucks, fix cars, and work in
department stores, supermarkets and all types of offices and factories. They
probably are not neurosurgeons, and they most likely do not have a PhD
from MIT. They work on the loading dock, sell insurance or real estate or
laptop computers, work in customer service, or accounting, in a variety of
small businesses or at the post office. They are what we all think of as
regular people.
So our assumption is going to be that, at some point down the line,
machines or computers will take over a great many of these people's jobs.
Not all of them, but a lot. Maybe 40 percent. Maybe half. The exact number
doesn't really matter.
We are also assuming that, although these people might try very hard,
they simply will not be able to find another job. Perhaps another job is
created somewhere else in the economy, but maybe that job requires very
advanced or specific education, skills or training, so that we can't have any

reasonable expectation that this "average" person can fill that job. Or then
again, maybe no new job is created. Maybe the new job just gets automated
right away.
Before we get started with our simulation, let's look at the idea of the
world mass market.
      
The Mass Market
 Each of us, if we are lucky enough to live in one of the advanced nations of
the world, enjoys access to an immense variety of products and services. As
you walk through one of the large consumer electronics retail stores, you
are confronted with a seemingly limitless number of different products in a
variety of price ranges. Similarly if you enter a large bookstore, you'll be
presented with literally thousands of different books, music CDs and movie
DVDs.
This tremendous selection of products, and also services, which we now
take for granted, is unprecedented in human history. Never before has such
a variety been available—and certainly not to the "typical" people who
comprise the majority of the population. All these products owe their
existence to the mass market. In today's world, a business that sells mp3
players, cell phones, laptop computers, personal financial services, or
automobiles sees a potential market comprised of tens or, in some cases,
even hundreds of millions of potential buyers. It is this seemingly limitless
ocean of good customer prospects that makes very high volume production
and marketing possible.
When a business creates products or services at high volume, it realizes
economies of scale, and that, of course, results in lower prices. In addition,
however, high volume production also makes it possible for the business to
adopt statistical quality control techniques and to improve overall
consistency and precision in the production process. The result is not just
cheaper products—but better and more reliable products.
Because of the mass market, we enjoy a seemingly infinite variety of
choices, and we also have come to expect products and services of
consistently high quality. For most of us, the benefits of the mass market
have had such a deep impact, that in a very real sense, they have become

integrated into our culture and now govern the expectations that we have
for the quality of our daily lives.
     
 
Visualizing the Mass Market
 So that we can better understand how the mass market works, let's now
create our mental simulation or "video game" of the market. Once we can
visualize a working simulation, we can return to our original question about
the impact of automation and see what might happen.
Before we start, I should mention that in order to keep things simple, we
are thinking in terms of a single worldwide mass market. In fact, we know
that different regions and countries actually have distinct but highly
connected markets. The markets are currently kept separate by things like
geographic distance, language barriers, incompatibilities (many U.S. cell
phones won't work elsewhere for example), and cultural differences.
However, we know that continuing forces such as globalization and the
Internet have caused the markets to become much more closely linked than
in the past. For this reason, we can safely use a simple one-market model
for our simulation.
* * * * *
To visualize the mass market, think of a vast tunnel. The tunnel is dark,
but streaming though the tunnel are countless points of white light. The
lights float along at a somewhat leisurely pace like tiny moving stars. Each
light represents a single person (or consumer) who participates in the world
mass market.
The number of lights seems limitless, but in fact they represent only a
small fraction of the world's population. The lights include the people of the
United States, Canada, Western Europe, Japan, Australia, New Zealand, and
other developed nations. Also among the lights are wealthy people from
throughout the world and the fast-growing middle classes in developing
countries like China, India, Russia and Brazil. All told, there are perhaps
somewhere around a billion lights in the tunnel.

The brightness of each light represents the purchasing power (or
discretionary income) of each person. In order to enter the tunnel and
participate in the mass market, a person must meet a certain threshold of
purchasing power.
If we could go outside the tunnel, we would find over five billion barely
perceptible lights. These dimly lit lights represent the world's poor: the
approximately 80 percent of the population that lives on less than ten
dollars per day.
4 These lights are, of course, eager to enter the tunnel.
However, they are prevented from entering until they can achieve the
necessary threshold of brightness. Nonetheless, at the entrance to the tunnel,
we can see that a continuous stream of lights suddenly begin to shine more
brightly and are thus able to enter the mass market. As we have said, these
are the growing middle classes of China, India and other nations. The
number of lights in the tunnel is constantly growing.
As we watch the lights float past, we notice that the vast majority shine
with a medium range of brightness. These are the average (or typical)
people who make up the middle class populations of the world.
Looking closely, we can see that there are also a significant number of
much dimmer lights. These are the marginal participants in the mass market
—people who just meet the threshold for remaining in the tunnel. These
people either hold the very lowest paying jobs, or in many cases, they
subsist on government transfer payments, such as welfare or unemployment
insurance. Many of the dim lights stay that way only for a short time. They
may be unemployed for a while but then find a new job and quickly begin
to shine more brightly. Many others, however, are caught in the cycle of
poverty and remain dim indefinitely. These people must constantly fight to
stay above the threshold of brightness that keeps them in the tunnel. Some
will fail. Even in the United States, there are people, such as the homeless,
who have been cast out from the tunnel.
Finally, we see that there are a fewer number of lights which shine much
more brightly than the rest. These are wealthy people. Many of these people
have advanced educations or specialized skills and, as a result, earn a high
income. We can see that among these bright lights there is also a range of
brightness. We notice that the brighter the lights, the fewer they are in
number. At the extreme, we can very occasionally see an intensely bright
light, shining like a miniature sun. These are the truly rich people of the

world: people who through inheritance or entrepreneurship or other means
have acquired vast amounts of wealth.
Still, as we watch the scene inside the tunnel, it is the overwhelming
number of the average lights that truly captivates us. We can feel
instinctively that it is these average lights that collectively represent the true
power of the mass market.
Now let's change our perspective so that we are inside the tunnel with
the lights. Looking around us, we see that the walls of the tunnel are alive
with a continuous mosaic of color and motion. The tunnel walls are tiled
with thousands upon thousands of flat panel displays. Each display runs a
continuous advertisement for a product or service that is offered for sale in
the mass market. These panels vary greatly in size and arrangement.
Some panels are huge and are arranged in clusters, each advertising a
specific product. These are the large corporations that have become
household names. Although the large companies stand out, we can see that
huge areas of the tunnel walls are covered in a patchwork of many
thousands of much smaller panels. These are the products and services
offered by small businesses that also cater to the mass market.*
*[ We can also imagine that small, locally oriented businesses (such as restaurants) are included in
our tunnel. While these businesses obviously don't cater directly to the global mass market, they are
nonetheless integrated into the activity that occurs in the tunnel, and they are heavily impacted by the
overall health and vitality of the mass market. ]
As we continue to watch the lights, we can now see that they are
attracted to the various panels. We watch as thousands of lights steam
toward a large automaker's panels, softly make contact and then bounce
back toward the center of the tunnel. As the lights touch the panel, we
notice that they dim slightly while the panel itself pulses with new energy.
New cars have been purchased, and a transfer of wealth has taken place.
We know that a natural cycle exists within the tunnel. Almost instantly,
we can see that many thousands of lights scattered randomly throughout the
tunnel shine a little more brightly. These are the employees of the
automaker being refreshed with new light. Another transfer of wealth has
taken place. The autoworkers in turn make purchases from other business,
small and large, and the light continues to parade through the tunnel.

We also know that behind the walls of the tunnel there are more
businesses and interconnections that we can't see. A large steel company
receives payment from the automobile manufacturer and, in turn, its
employees shine with new light.
If we could watch the action in the tunnel over a long period of time, we
would find that the tunnel is not at all a static place. We would notice that
some of the panels on the walls gradually grow dimmer and attract fewer
lights. In some cases, they may reverse their decline and become strong
again. But in many other cases, they weaken and grow dark.
Even as this happens, however, elsewhere on the tunnel walls, we see
that new panels are appearing and growing stronger. A few seem to grow
rapidly in size before our eyes. This is the process of creative destruction.
In the mass market, the collective purchasing decisions of the lights
determine which businesses succeed and thrive, and which ones ultimately
decline and fail. This is a natural and cyclical process. When an inefficient
business fails, its capital, resources and employees will eventually be
transferred to a new, stronger business. As a panel on the tunnel wall goes
dark, the lights that represent that company's workers will also grow dim.
But over time, they will find new jobs and their light will be restored.
We now have a pretty clear picture of how the mass market works. We
see the lights streaming toward and contacting various panels, and then,
elsewhere in the tunnel, other lights brightening as wealth is cycled between
consumers, businesses and workers within the tunnel. Over time, we see
panels die and other new panels spring up, as old businesses that can no
longer compete in the market are replaced with new, more competitive start-
ups, often in completely new and different industries.
We can also feel that, in general, the total amount of light in the tunnel
is increasing. This is partly due to the new lights constantly streaming into
the tunnel, but we also have the sense that as the light is cycled throughout
the tunnel, its intensity seems to very gradually increase of its own volition
—as though the very process of moving the light around naturally makes it
grow over time.
This then is the mass market: a natural cycle of increasing light and
wealth governed by the logic of the marketplace. It is the primary engine of
our free market economy.
    

 
Automation Comes to the Tunnel
 Now that we have a working simulation of the mass market, let's go ahead
and perform our experiment with job automation. To keep things simple,
let's first focus on the issue of jobs being taken over completely by
machines or computers and leave the question of offshoring for later.
* * * * *
Now we are back in our tunnel. Very gradually, we begin to eliminate
the jobs held by many of the average lights. As this happens, the impacted
lights grow dimmer and in many cases disappear completely.
The automation process affects jobs throughout the world. In developed
countries, the people who lose their jobs will usually continue to receive
income, at least for a time, from government programs such as
unemployment insurance. However, as we have seen, these programs
generally produce only very dim lights. In third world countries with little
or no safety net, these unlucky people will likely be cast out from the
tunnel, and their light will disappear entirely.
The impact of automation is still very difficult to discern among the
multitude of lights in the tunnel. We notice, however, that some of the
brightest lights in the tunnel are beginning to shine with even more
intensity. As jobs are eliminated, many of the businesses in the tunnel
become more profitable. Some of this wealth is then transferred to the
owners and top executives of the businesses. As this process continues, we
see the brighter lights continue to slowly gain strength as more of the
average lights gradually dim or flicker out. The distribution of income is
becoming more concentrated in the tunnel.
Now, finally, we begin to see a real difference in the tunnel. It becomes
obvious that there are fewer lights and that the number is continuing to
diminish. Just as this realization strikes us, we immediately feel that there is
a new sense of urgency pervading the panels that line the walls of the
tunnel. The panels begin to dance with more and more desperate motion
and color as they attempt to attract the dwindling number of lights.
The businesses on the walls of the tunnel are now suddenly seeing
significantly slower demand for their products and services. This is

happening even though many of the brightest lights in the tunnel have
continued to gain in strength.
Imagine that your job is to sell as many $50 cell phones as you can in
one hour. You are offered two doors: Behind door #1 sit Bill Gates and
Warren Buffet, the two richest people in America. Behind door #2 are a
thousand average people. You may well be tempted to choose the first door
just so you'll get to meet Bill and Warren, but in terms of getting your job
done, you would probably agree that door #2 is clearly the best choice. This
is because the demand for the mass market products that drive our economy
depend much more on the number of potential customers than on the wealth
of any particular customer. You are not going to be able to sell 40 cell
phones to one person, no matter how wealthy they are.
We can now sense that many of the businesses in the tunnel are clearly
in trouble. Even though they are continuing to save money as automation
slowly eliminates some of their remaining workers, this is not enough to
make up for the reduction in sales they are experiencing. Many of these
companies are now at the point where they must take action to survive.
A great deal of each company's resources is invested in factories,
machines and equipment and offices. These things, which an economist
might refer to as capital, are very hard to quickly get rid of. For example, if
you just bought a lot of new automated machines for your factory, then you
are stuck with them. You can't just return them and get your money back if
demand for your products suddenly starts to fall. For this reason, a business
which sees rapidly falling demand usually has only one choice in order to
survive: cut more jobs. We see this, of course, as part of the normal business
cycle. Businesses routinely lay off workers in bad times and then rehire in
good times.
In the tunnel, we now see that the businesses are beginning to cut more
and more jobs. They are becoming more desperate and, in many cases, they
must eliminate even key employees that they formerly felt were crucial to
their operations. As this happens, we begin to see some of the brighter lights
in the tunnel rapidly begin to dim.
The continuing decrease in demand falls especially heavily on the
manufacturing businesses located in developing nations like China. These
businesses rely on producing very high volume products, which they export
to first world nations. They are now severely cutting jobs and the flow of
new middle class people into the tunnel has all but stopped.

As a result of the job cuts, the lights are becoming even more sparse in
the tunnel. Many of the businesses are now failing and whole regions of the
tunnel walls are growing dark. Now we see that many of the very brightest
lights in the tunnel finally feel the impact and also begin to lose their light.
The owners of the businesses in the tunnel are seeing much of their wealth
gradually drain away.
The tunnel has become a far darker and more stagnant place. We sense
clearly that the hopes of even the remaining brighter lights are gradually
evaporating into the new emptiness of the tunnel.
      
 
A Reality Check
 Clearly, our simulation did not turn out well. Perhaps our initial assumption
about jobs being automated was wrong. But, again, let's leave that for the
next chapter. In the meantime, we might wonder if we have made a mistake
somewhere in the simulation. Let's see if we can perform some type of
"reality check" on our result. Perhaps we can look to history to see if there
is anything in the past that might support what we saw happen in our
simulation.
Let's leave our tunnel and travel back in time to the year 1860. In the
southern part of the United States, we know will find the greatest injustice
ever perpetrated in the history of our nation. Here, long before the new light
of advanced technology first began to shine, men had discovered a far more
primitive and perverse form of job automation.
The injustice and moral outrage associated with slavery rightly attracts
nearly all of our attention. For this reason, most of us don't have occasion to
think about the overall economic impact of slavery. At the time Abraham
Lincoln was elected president, we know that while the Northern
population's moral objection to slavery was a primary divisive issue, there
were also significant differences and debate about issues relating to the
differing economic systems of the North and the South.
The Northern economy was built on free labor and entrepreneurship and
tended to spread opportunity more equally throughout the population. In

contrast, the Southern states relied on slave labor, and wealth was primarily
concentrated in the hands of white plantation owners who owned many
slaves. One result of this system was that it was very hard for poorer whites
to advance their situation because relatively few free labor opportunities
were available.
Documented observations illustrate the impact of slavery on the
Southern economy. In her book Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of
Abraham Lincoln, Doris Kearns Goodwin describes a journey that William
Seward, who would years later become Lincoln's Secretary of State, took in
1835. Seward traveled with his family from his home in New York State to
the slave state of Virginia.
5 As the Sewards cross into Virginia they leave
behind the bustling towns and cities to which they had become accustomed.
Instead, they travel a rough, deserted road with few homes, businesses or
taverns. Dilapidated shacks dot the landscape, and the land itself seems to
have been assaulted by poverty. During his journey, Seward observed:
"How deeply the curse of slavery is set upon this venerated and storied
region of the old dominion. Of all the countries I have seen France only
whose energies have for forty years been expended in war and whose
population has been more decimated by the sword is as much decayed as
Virginia."
6
It seems clear that there are some definite parallels between what we
saw in our simulation and the slave economy in the South. We noticed that
in our tunnel, the brightest lights initially became even brighter as the
average lights began to dim and flicker out. This fits well with the fact that
most wealth in the South was concentrated in the hands of rich plantation
owners, while the majority of the population was trapped in poverty.
There is one important discrepancy, however. In our simulation, the
situation continued to deteriorate until even the brightest lights eventually
began to lose their strength. In contrast, slavery in the Southern states lasted
for over two hundred years. The plantation owners were able to hold onto
their wealth at least until the start of the Civil War in 1861. If our simulation
seems to indicate that a slave (or automation-based) economy is destined to
undergo continuing decline, how is it that the slave states were able to
maintain stability for so long?
The answer lies in the fact that the South was primarily an export
economy. The large plantations produced raw cotton which was then
shipped to Europe and to the Northern states where it was manufactured

into textiles and clothing. It was this constant wealth flowing in from the
outside that was able to maintain the economy over time.
Our simulation, of course, was of the entire world mass market, so there
was obviously no export market available. In the simulation, we found that
across-the-board automation of jobs eventually reduced demand for
products and services as the number of lights in the tunnel decreased. You
can imagine that, if the South had been completely isolated economically
with no outside trade allowed, it would likely have followed a path of
decline similar to the one we saw in the simulation.
In fact, one of President Lincoln's first acts after the Southern states
seceded from the Union was to implement a complete blockade of the
South. The blockade became increasingly effective as the years progressed
—ultimately achieving a 95 percent reduction in Southern cotton exports—
and was certainly an important factor in the outcome of the war. By the time
the war ended in 1865, the Southern economy was in complete ruin. One
can speculate that if the blockade could have been maintained without an
actual shooting war taking place, the economic impact alone might have in
time led to the end of slavery.*
*[Is it really reasonable to draw a comparison between the economic effects of slavery and advanced
machine automation? I would argue that the comparison almost certainly underestimates the
economic impact of autonomous machines. Because of its inhumanity, slavery carries with it obvious
costs. These include both the direct costs of enslaving unwilling human beings as well as lost
productivity. The owners of machines would, of course, see none of these costs. In addition,
machines, which can operate essentially continuously, obviously have the potential to be far more
productive than even a willing human worker could be.]
  
Summarizing
 Both our tunnel simulation and our examination of the Southern slave
economy seem to support the idea that once full automation penetrates the
job market to a substantial degree, an economy driven by mass-market
production must ultimately go into decline. The reason for this is simply
that, when we consider the market as a whole, the people who rely on jobs
for their income are the same individuals who buy the products produced.

Another way of expressing this is to say that although machines may
take over people's jobs, the machines—unless we are really going to jump
into the stuff of science fiction—do not participate in the market as
consumers. Recall from our example of selling cell phones to the two
billionaires or to a thousand regular people, that making a few people richer
will not make up for losing a large number of potential customers. That may
work for yachts and Ferraris but not for the mass produced products and
services that are the backbone of our economy.
At the very beginning of the automation process this effect was not at all
clear. The first businesses to automate saw a significant reduction in their
costs as they cut workers, while the impact on the demand for their products
was negligible—or in fact, demand may have actually increased for a time,
as they were able to lower their prices. As a result, their profits, and
therefore the wealth of their top employees and shareholders increased.
These were the brighter lights in the tunnel that initially became stronger.
However, as nearly all businesses in the tunnel continued to automate
jobs, at some point the decrease in the number of potential customers began
to outweigh the advantages gained from automation. Once this happened,
businesses were forced to cut even more jobs, which eliminated even more
consumers from the market and caused demand to fall still further. From
this point on, the economy entered a continuing downward spiral.
Not a very happy ending. However, we still need to examine our initial
assumption. Is it really possible that, at some point in the future, machines
or computers could take over the jobs performed by a large percentage of
average workers without new jobs within the capability of these people
being created? Could that really happen?
We'll look at that question in the next chapter. We'll also look at
something called the Luddite fallacy—which is an established line of
economic reasoning that strongly contradicts the result we saw in our
simulation.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 2
 
OceanofPDF.com

ACCELERATION
 
Let's now turn to the question of whether or not the assumption we made
about jobs being automated in the future is a reasonable one. It might be
helpful to start by turning that assumption inside out and looking at its
converse. If you believe the assumption we made is incorrect, then you
must believe that:
Technology will never advance to the point where the bulk of jobs
performed by typical people will be automated. The economy will always
create jobs that are within the capabilities of the vast majority of the human
population.
 
When you look at things this way, you might see some cause for
concern. The real problem, of course, is that one offending word: "never."
Never is a very long time: it is three hundred or a even a thousand years.
Never is, well, forever.
To make things more reasonable, let's lower the standard somewhat.
Let's think in terms of our own lifetimes or the lives of our children. That
should make the issue much more approachable and personal. After all,
surely none of us would want something dramatically negative to happen
during the lives of our own children, even if we weren't around to see it.
With that standard in mind, let's just assume a reasonable average
lifespan of 80 years for a baby born today. That gives us the year 2089 as a
cutoff date. So the assumption that we want to test now becomes:
Technology will not advance to the point where the bulk of jobs performed
by typical people will be automated before the year 2089. Prior to that year,
the economy will always create jobs that are within the capabilities of the
vast majority of the human population.
 
Can we bank on that?
 
 

The Rich Get Richer
 Nearly all of us sense that our world is changing rapidly and that perhaps
things seem to be speeding up. We've become accustomed especially to
continuous improvement in technology. We notice that the laptop computer
we buy today is dramatically faster and lighter and more feature-packed that
the one we bought just a few years ago, and yet it costs less. Our new cell
phone is smaller or lighter, but it does more.
As human beings, we are geared toward thinking in terms of constant
motion or gradual change. We tend to analyze things in terms of straight
lines. For the most part, this is how the physical world around us works.
We are, of course, familiar with the concept of acceleration. We
experience it while driving or when an airplane takes off. But in the course
of our daily lives, acceleration is—almost without exception—something
that is of very short duration: something typically limited to seconds.
Perhaps for this reason, it is not easy for us to really comprehend the idea of
an acceleration that continues relentlessly for decades. It is difficult for us
to really get our minds around the implications of this.
In 1965, Gordon E. Moore, the co-founder of Intel Corporation,
observed that, as a result of constant innovation, the number of transistors
on a silicon chip roughly doubled at a consistent pace. Moore speculated
that the rate of growth would continue into the foreseeable future, and in the
years since, his forecast has proven to be correct. Moore's observation
initially related to the nuts and bolts of how chips are fabricated, but over
time it has evolved into a broader rule of thumb that gives us a useful
framework for thinking about how our ability to manipulate and process
information increases over time. This rule of thumb has become known as
Moore's Law,* and it can be expressed as follows:
As technology progresses, the computational capability of a computer will
roughly double every two years.
 
*[ Some versions of Moore's Law use 18 months rather than 2 years as the doubling standard. I have
chosen the more conservative number. ]
Moore's Law is, of course, not a "law" at all—certainly not in the sense
that physical rules like the ones postulated by Isaac Newton are laws. It is,

however, an accurate observation and projection, and nearly everyone in the
technology field accepts it. Moore's Law is an overall estimate. Different
facets of technology, in fact, progress at different rates. Still, we can
probably agree that it is our expanding ability to manipulate and
communicate information that is the driving force behind the technical
innovation we see all around us—and Moore's Law does an especially good
job of capturing the rate of progress in that arena.
When something doubles at a regular pace, we say that it grows
geometrically, or exponentially.* To illustrate the extraordinary acceleration
that this implies, imagine starting with a penny and then doubling the
amount you have every day for a month. You begin with one cent; on the
second day you have two cents and then four cents on the third day, and so
on.
*[ These terms have slightly different technical meanings, but for our purposes they are
interchangeable. ]
The first chart that follows shows the first fifteen days as our penny
doubles. You can see that we start out very slowly and then begin to
accelerate. On day fifteen, we have about $164—which is not bad at all
since we started with only a penny!
In our next chart, we look at days 15-30. Now we've had to greatly
expand the scale of our bar chart so we can accommodate some very big
numbers toward the end. You can see that we start where we left off with
$164, but now this amount is so tiny against our new scale that we don't

even see a visible bar. We have to wait until day 22 before we see a hint of
progress—but still that amount represents nearly 21 thousand dollars.
Things really start to fly from there. We pass the million-dollar mark at
day 28 and end up on day 30 with over five million dollars. Not bad for a
month's work. If we had been lucky enough to choose a month with 31 days
for our experiment, we would have nearly eleven million dollars to show
for it. If we could continue the process for another thirty days, we would
have an astonishing $5,764,607,523,034,235—or nearly six quadrillion
dollars!
As you can see, a geometric or exponential progression is really the
ultimate case of "the rich get richer." The more you have, the more you get,
and it just keeps going. When we compare this with the more routine things
we encounter in life, the contrast is astonishing. Consider economic growth,
or perhaps the raise you might hope to get at work; in these things, we are
happy to see a gain of a few percentage points. Can this be real? Is the
computational capability of computers really expanding that fast?
To illustrate that this is indeed the case, let me use an example from my
own experience. In 1981, I entered the University of Michigan as a
freshman with plans to study computer engineering. Computer engineering
was then a new discipline just introduced at Michigan and at a few other
universities. Up until then, no one had been quite sure that computers were
important enough to merit their own engineering field.
The University of Michigan had one of the most advanced computing
centers in the country. The computer then in use was a state-of-the-art
mainframe machine manufactured by the Amdahl Corporation. In my first
computer programming course, we were assigned the task of writing and
running a program using computer punch cards.
7
To do this, you first went to the university bookstore and purchased a
large box of blank punch cards. These were similar to, but a little longer
than, standard index cards.
You then wrote your program using pencil and paper, and took your
blank cards to a card punch machine at the computing center. You inserted a
blank card in the machine and entered, or "keyed in," one line from your
program. As you did this, the machine punched corresponding holes in the
card. You repeated this for each line in your program. If you made a
mistake, you had to throw the entire card away and start over. For a
complex program, you might have to punch hundreds of cards.

Next, being very careful not to scramble or drop the stack of cards, you
took them to a card reader machine. You fed the stack of cards into the
machine and your program was entered into a long line of other programs
waiting for the attention of the computer.
After a time, in some cases hours, you went to the print center and
retrieved a paper printout of the results. Since it is virtually impossible to
write a perfect program the first (or usually even second) time, you had to
go through this process several times until you found and fixed the "bugs"
in your program.
Obviously, the way we with interact with computers has changed
dramatically. I had to include a description of punch cards above for the
benefit of younger readers who may not have seen these. What about the
computer itself? The mainframe in use at Michigan then was an Amdahl
470/V8. This was a machine that probably occupied a significant portion of
a room and cost somewhere in the neighborhood of two million dollars.
In order to compare the relative speeds of different computers, engineers
have developed a measurement known as Millions of Instructions per
Second, or MIPS. The MIPS rating of a computer is a bit like the
horsepower rating of an engine. While each computer has a unique design,
MIPS ratings give us a useful way to make rough comparisons.
If you imagine a software program running on a computer to be similar
to someone playing a tune on a piano, then each computer instruction would
correspond to one strike of the piano keys. The Amdahl mainframe at
Michigan had a rating of about seven MIPS.
8 So we can think of our piano
player ripping along at seven million keystrokes per second. Obviously, that
is a very fast piano player, and at the time, it was pretty good for a
computer.
By the time I graduated from Michigan in 1985, things on campus had
changed a great deal. The year before, Apple Computer had released the
MacIntosh. The MacIntosh and its predecessor, the Apple Lisa, were the
first commercially available personal computers to have a graphical
interface and a mouse. The university had purchased dozens of these new
computers, and students were now using them in their courses rather than
the mainframe.
The original MacIntosh ran at about one MIPS.
9 In other words, it was
about 1/7 as fast as the Amdahl mainframe. That seemed quite impressive.

After all, the MacIntosh was this tiny thing that sat on your desk, while the
Amdahl was a $2 million behemoth that required its own room.
Now let's look at how things progressed after I left college:
By 1988, Intel's 386DX processor was running at 8.5 MIPS. This
microprocessor was used in the first IBM PC's that could run early
versions Microsoft Windows. Thus a desktop computer had now
exceeded the speed of the Amdahl mainframe.
By 1992, Intel's 486DX ran at about 54 MIPS or nearly eight times
the speed of the old Amdahl mainframe. 486-based PC's were the first
machines to really provide a useful platform for Microsoft Windows.
Windows 3.1, also introduced in 1992, became an enormous
commercial success for Microsoft.
By 1999, the Intel Pentium III was rated at over 1,300 MIPS. Our
piano player is now going at over a billion keystrokes per second. This
is close to 200 times the speed of the old Amdahl.
In 2008, an Intel Core 2 Extreme processor was rated at up to
59,000 MIPS. That's 59 billion piano keystrokes per second and over
8000 times the speed of our 1981-vintage $2 million Amdahl
mainframe.
Obviously, things have progressed very impressively over the 24 or so
years since I left college. What we are more interested in, however, is what
will happen in the future.
We know from Moore's Law that computers are progressing at a
geometric or a "rich get richer" rate where we double what we already have
every two years. In the first chapter, I used an example where we thought
about selling cell phones to Bill Gates and Warren Buffet. Let's drag Bill
back into the story now and perform an experiment that might give us an
idea of the level of future progress that we can expect.

Bill Gates left Harvard in 1975 to move to New Mexico and found
Microsoft along with his partner Paul Allen. We can mark that date as being
essentially the beginning of the personal computer industry. As Bill starts
work in 1975, let's imagine that we slip our magic penny into his pocket.
Bill's focused on other things, and he won't notice. We'll double the penny
every two years and see how much Bill ends up with:
The IBM PC, which uses Microsoft's MS-DOS software, is
introduced in August 1981. This sets Microsoft on its path to success.
Bill now has eight cents in his pocket.
In March 1986, Microsoft goes public and its stock trades for the
first time on the NASDAQ market. Bill has about 45 cents.
10
Windows 3.1 is introduced in 1992. For the first time, Microsoft
began to offer some competition to Apple's MacIntosh. Bill now has
about $3.60 in his pocket.
Windows XP is introduced in 2001. Bill has about $82.
Let's zoom forward to 2009 and look in Bill's pocket: about $1,300.
Obviously, it's a good thing Bill didn't pin his fortunes on our magic penny.
Consider everything that Bill Gates has accomplished over his career.
He built Microsoft into the world's dominant software company and has
now retired from full time work at the company to run his charitable
foundation. After all that, in terms of our experiment to measure the
geometric acceleration of technology, Bill has less than 1,500 dollars.
However, we can also see that things have accelerated quite dramatically in
the years between 2001 and 2009: in just eight years, Bill has gained over
$1,200, compared with a gain of only $82 over the 26 years leading up to
2001.
We know from the charts we looked at earlier that Bill will eventually
reach the million dollar mark. What can we say about the future?
In 2015, Bill will have about $10,500 or eight times what he has in
2009.
In 2021, Bill will have nearly $84,000 or 64 times the 2009 figure.
In 2025, Bill will have almost $336,000 or about 258 times what he
has in 2009.

In 2031, Bill becomes a multi-millionaire. He will have 2.6 million
dollars or 2000 times what he has in 2009.
Looking at these numbers, we can see that unless technical progress
slows significantly, computers are going to get dramatically more powerful
by 2031. That date is nearly 60 years before the cutoff date of 2089 that we
set at the beginning of this chapter.
What would Bill have in 2089? 1.4 quadrillion dollars. This is over one
trillion times the 2009 amount of $1,300!
These numbers should give you a sense of the incredible degree of
technological acceleration we can expect over the coming years and
decades. As futurist and inventor Ray Kurzweil writes, "Exponential [or
geometric] growth is deceptive. It starts out almost imperceptibly and
explodes with unexpected fury."
11
How confident can we be that Moore's Law will continue to be
sustainable in the coming years and decades? Evidence suggests that it is
likely to hold true for the foreseeable future. At some point, current
technologies will run into a fundamental limit as the transistors on computer
chips are reduced in size until they approach the size of individual
molecules or atoms. However, by that time, completely new technologies
may be available. As this book was being written, Stanford University
announced that scientists there had managed to encode the letters "S" and
"U" within the interference patterns of quantum electron waves.
12 In other
words, they were able to encode digital information within particles smaller
than atoms. Advances such as this may well form the foundation of future
information technologies in the area of quantum computing; this will take
computer engineering into the realm of individual atoms and even
subatomic particles.
Even if such breakthroughs don't arrive in time, and integrated circuit
fabrication technology does eventually hit a physical limit, it seems very
likely that the focus would simply shift from building faster individual
processors to instead linking large numbers of inexpensive, commoditized
processors together in parallel architectures. As we'll see in the next
section, this is already happening to a significant degree, but if Moore's
Law eventually runs out of steam, parallel processing may well become the
primary focus for building more capable computers.

Even if the historical doubling pace of Moore's Law does someday
prove to be unsustainable, there is no reason to believe that progress would
halt or even become linear in nature. If the pace fell off so that doubling
took four years (or even longer) rather than the current two years, that
would still be an exponential progression that would bring about staggering
future gains in computing power.
13
Let's look at our original assumption again:
Technology will not advance to the point where the bulk of jobs performed
by typical people will be automated before the year 2089. Prior to that year,
the economy will always create jobs that are within the capabilities of the
vast majority of the human population.
 
Does that seem reasonable now? But wait, there's more.
  
 
World Computational Capability
 Back in 1975, it probably would have been quite easy to make a list of
every computer in the world. Primarily, we would have found computers in
government agencies, universities, and large corporations. A manufacturer
like IBM could probably have given us a list showing where each computer
was installed. In the preceding section, we talked about how the power and
speed of computers has increased. If we took that geometric rate of increase
and just applied it to the computers that existed in 1975, that would be an
incredible expansion of computational power. But of course, we know that
is not what happened.
The number of computers in the world has also increased at a fantastic
rate. By some estimates, there are now over a billion personal computers in
use. But it doesn't stop there. Computers in the form of embedded
microprocessors are in our cell phones, mp3 players, car engines,
appliances and in countless other places. Computers are everywhere.
In fact, we might speculate that both the power and the number of
computers in the world are increasing at a geometric rate—or at least
something close to it. That is clearly an incomprehensible increase in our
total ability to manipulate information. If you consider the number of

obsolete devices that have been thrown away since the PC was introduced,
it's easy to see that the computing power in landfills today is many orders
of magnitude beyond what existed in the world in 1975.
It seems impossible to imagine that such an incredible advance in our
ability to compute and to process information could take place without it
having a dramatic effect on general technology, economics and society in
general. In fact, however, in many areas, change has not come as quickly as
we perhaps might have expected.
Cars and airplanes now incorporate computers, but their overall design
and operation is still, for the most part, what it was in 1975. NASA
managed the Apollo missions and reached the moon without access to
modern computing power. Even the space shuttle dates back to the
introduction of the first PCs. Likewise, economists speak of something
called the productivity paradox, which basically says that, at least until
quite recently, the economy has not really shown the productivity gains you
might expect given all the new computers that have been introduced into
workplaces. The computer revolution seems, so far, to have largely turned
its energy inward on itself, resulting in advances primarily in the
information and communication areas.*
*[ Even much of biotechnology and genetics could be considered a type of information science
because it is focused on cataloging and understanding the information in our DNA. ]
 
I have the feeling that this staggering increase in our computational
capability represents a pent up resource that is poised to burst out in new
and unexpected ways. In the future, we can expect that many more
traditional technologies, and in fact nearly every aspect of our lives, will
change—perhaps very rapidly—in ways that we cannot foresee. As
examples of what we might expect, let's look at two things that have
already occurred: one that, at least so far, has been generally positive, and
one that has been decidedly negative.
  
 
Grid and Cloud Computing

 Grid computing is a rapidly growing field that focuses on leveraging not
just the power of an individual computer, but also the large number of such
computers now available. The idea is to tie many computers together using
special software. A big computational problem can then be broken down
into pieces and distributed across hundreds or even thousands of computers
so that they can work on it simultaneously. Grid computing has the potential
to bring an unprecedented level of computing power to bear on difficult
problems in the areas of science and engineering.
One of the first and most notable applications of grid computing was in
the Human Genome Project. This international project began in 1990 and
was completed in 2003—two years ahead of schedule. The primary goal of
the project was to sequence the entire human DNA molecule and to identify
the 25,000 or so individual genes that comprise our genetic code. The
process of decoding our DNA molecule and identifying each gene took a
tremendous amount of computational resources, and grid computing played
a significant role in this.
The genetic information obtained through the project is stored in
databases and can be accessed by scientists and researchers via the Internet.
The result is a fantastic source of knowledge that continues to be analyzed
and which is certain to result in innumerable future advances in the fields of
genetics, bio-engineering and medicine.
An especially interesting development in the field of grid computing is
the idea that unused power on virtually any computer connected to the
Internet can be integrated into a voluntary grid and deployed to solve big
problems. Most computers, if left on, do nothing at all during large blocks
of time, especially overnight. The idea to tie these computers together by
having their owners donate unused computing power has sprung up in a
number of places.
Stanford University's folding@home project is geared toward solving
difficult problems in a specialized area of biochemistry known as "protein
folding." Advances in this area have the potential to provide future
solutions for cancer and for diseases such as Huntington's and Parkinson's.
Another major player in this area is the Berkeley Open Infrastructure for
Network Computing (BOINC). This special software, developed at the
University of California, Berkeley, allows individuals to donate unused
computer time to a variety of scientific projects, including SETI (The
Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence), climate prediction, cancer research,

astrophysics, and many others. The software to participate in these
programs can be downloaded from the web.*
*[ http://folding.stanford.edu and http://boinc.berkeley.edu ]
In the future, we can anticipate that grid computing will become
increasingly important. In addition, it is already evolving into what
computer scientists refer to as "cloud computing." Essentially this will
amount to a new architecture for leveraging the power of huge numbers of
computers on an as needed basis: computational capability, together with
specific applications, will be delivered as though it were a utility much like
electric power. The trend toward grid and cloud computing offers a fantastic
opportunity to deploy our incredible new computational capacity in areas
that will undoubtedly bring positive advances in fields such as science and
medicine. Our next example, however, is far less benign.
 
 
Meltdown
 As nearly everyone knows, the "subprime" meltdown of 2007 was triggered
when borrowers who did not have the best credit ratings began to default on
their mortgages. We know that banks and mortgage companies made these
loans in some cases because of honest miscalculation of the risks involved,
and in other cases due to outright fraud. With expectations driven by the
housing bubble, many lenders may have had the rather callous attitude that,
even if the borrower could not handle the payments, the lender could
minimize its exposure by foreclosing at a higher price.
What does that have to do with computers? Well, if that had been the
entire story, then the subprime crisis would have still been serious, but it
would have been contained within the U.S. It certainly would not have
cascaded around the world and resulted in the global financial crisis that
occurred in 2008.
For an explanation of why the crisis spread throughout the world, we
have to start back in 1973. In that year, an academic paper was published

which contained a mathematical formula called the Black-Scholes Option
Pricing Model. This formula, for the first time, gave a way to calculate the
approximate value of a stock option. Stock options, which represent the
right to buy or sell a stock at a given price at some point in the future, had
been traded on markets for some time, but no one knew how to calculate a
precise value for them.
In the years that followed, and especially during the 1980s, a large
number of people originally trained as physicists or mathematicians began
to take much higher paying jobs on Wall Street. These guys (they were
virtually all men) were referred to as "quants." The quants started working
with the Black-Scholes formula and expanded it in new ways. They turned
their formulas into computer programs and gradually began to create new
types of derivatives based on stocks, bonds, indexes and many other
securities or combinations of securities.
14
As their computers got faster and faster, the quants were able to do more
and more. They created new exotic derivatives based on strange
combinations of things. They could magnify the reward (and risk) of a
security. They could invert it, so you gained if the security fell in value.
They could even try to capture the reward if an investment increased in
value, but eliminate the risk if it went down—or at least they thought they
could.
As housing prices continued to climb during the bubble, the subprime
loans were packaged into mortgage-backed securities so that they could be
traded like bonds. This had become standard practice for mortgages.
However, in addition to that, new types of derivatives were created based
on the packaged subprime loans. Most notable were "collateralized debt
obligations" (or CDOs), which attempted to siphon off the lowest risk loans
and repackage them into a security that could be marketed as a high quality
investment. These new derivative securities were then sold to banks and
financial institutions all over the world, with the understanding that they
were very low risk investments.
When the subprime borrowers started defaulting, the value of the
mortgage-backed securities plunged, and the derivatives did not work as
expected. In many cases it was difficult or impossible to calculate their
value. In addition, financial institutions had engaged in many other complex
interrelationships based on exotic derivatives that were intended to help
manage various risks. All this led to uncertainty that caused values to fall

even more. The result was the downfall of Bear Stearns in March 2008, and
the global crisis that followed.
The point of this, of course, is that it would have been impossible to
create these weird derivatives without access to very powerful computers. If
the subprime crisis had occurred in earlier years, it would certainly have
been a far smaller event. It's worth noting that the meltdown started in
2007. As we are now in 2009, we know that the power of the computers on
Wall Street desks has roughly doubled, even as the crisis has continued.
Exotic derivatives are, of course, not the only example of the dramatic
impact of advancing computer technology on financial markets. On October
19, 1987, the stock market fell a staggering twenty percent in a single day.
There was really no specific news event or other factor that might have
explained the sudden drop. Many of the people involved in quantitative
technologies on Wall Street at the time believe that the crash may have been
precipitated by computer programs that traded autonomously in the hope of
providing "portfolio insurance" for big investors.
As this is being written, articles are appearing in the press regarding the
use of extremely fast Wall Street computers that allow transactions to be
executed in fractions of a second. This practice, known as "flash trading,"
has quickly attracted the notice of the Securities and Exchange Commission
and may result in new regulation.
As these examples show, we can expect that the rate of change and the
volatility of nearly everything around us will be somehow amplified by the
incredible increase in our ability to compute. We can also certainly expect
that this dramatically expanded computational capacity will be focused
increasingly on automating our jobs.
Later in this chapter, we'll look in more detail at several specific
advancing technologies and how they might impact the job market and the
economy in general. But first, let's now turn from machines to human
beings. Is it possible that we can somehow "outrun" computers so we can
all keep our jobs?
 
 
Diminishing Returns

 In 1811, England was in the midst of the Industrial Revolution. That year, a
group called the Luddites formed in Nottingham. The Luddites consisted of
skilled textile workers who felt threatened by the introduction of
mechanical looms that could be operated by low-paid, unskilled workers.
They took their name from a man named Ned Lud who had reportedly
destroyed one of these advanced looms. The Luddites' protests grew into
outright riots and destruction of machines. The British government finally
enacted harsh measures and the movement came to an end in 1812. Since
then, the word "luddite" has, of course, evolved into a somewhat derogatory
term for anyone opposed to technological progress or ill equipped to deal
with new technologies.
Economists generally dismiss the idea that advancing technology will
ever permanently displace humans and thereby continuously increase the
unemployment rate. In other words, most mainstream economists fully
accept our assumption at the beginning of this chapter. (Not the "2089"
version; the never one.) Those who have raised concerns in more recent
times are dismissed as "neo-Luddites." Economists have also formulated
something called the Luddite fallacy to help explain why the concerns of
neo-Luddites are wrong. We'll look at this in a little more detail later.
Obviously, England is now a modern country, and the vast majority of
workers still have jobs. The British people are now far better off than they
were in 1812. So were the Luddites wrong? Or just two hundred or so years
too early?
We know that technology has advanced tremendously since 1812. What
about human beings? Have we advanced as well? In terms of basic biology,
we are essentially unchanged. Little if any biological evolution takes place
in only two hundred years. Still, doesn't it seem likely that the average
British worker today is far more capable than a typical worker nearly two
hundred years ago?
Let's imagine what life was like for an average English person in 1812.
As it turns out, it's easy to get some insight into this because Charles
Dickens was born in that exact year. Dickens drew on his own experiences
and observations as a child when he later wrote his famous novels. His
descriptions of a hash, poverty-stricken society and an environment made
filthy by the soot from coal-burning industry are well known.
In Oliver Twist, Dickens describes the miserable life of an orphan boy
during the Industrial Revolution. Here he expresses his feelings as the

starving Oliver is given scraps of meat that had first been offered to a dog:
"I wish some well-fed philosopher, whose blood is ice, whose heart is iron;
could have seen Oliver Twist clutching at the dainty viands the dog had
neglected. I wish he could have witnessed the horrible avidity with which
Oliver tore the bits asunder with all the ferocity of famine."
15
Clearly, the average British worker is far better fed today. We know the
environment is also much cleaner and more healthy. The literacy rate in
Britain today is purported to be as high as 99 percent. It's hard to know
what it was in 1812, but around 50 percent might be a decent guess—and of
course, the ability to read and write would have been highly concentrated in
the upper classes.
In 1812, there was essentially no public education available in England.
The government did not begin to invest significantly in education until
1870, and attendance was not compulsory until 1880. Obviously, the
average worker today is far better educated than he or she would have been
in 1812.
Given all of this, we can say that, due to dramatic improvements in
living conditions and education, an average worker today is certainly more
capable and able to perform more complex, high-level tasks than a worker
in 1812. But the real question is: can we expect that kind of improvement to
continue in the future?
The following graph shows what an average worker's ability to perform
complex tasks might look like over the past two hundred or so years. The
graphic is just an intuitive estimate. It is not based on any real data.
However, I suspect that most people would agree with the general shape of
the graph, and that is all that really matters.
I've chosen an arbitrary point on the graph to indicate the year 1812.
After that year, we can reasonably assume that human capability continued

to rise quite steeply until we reach modern times. The steep part of the
graph reflects dramatic improvements to our overall living conditions in the
world's more advanced countries:
Vastly improved nutrition, public health, and environmental
regulations have allowed us to remain relatively free from disease and
reach our full biological potential.
Investment in literacy and in primary and secondary education, as
well as access to college and advanced education for some workers,
has greatly increased overall capability.
A generally richer and more varied existence, including easy access
to books, media, new technologies and the ability to travel long
distances, has probably had a positive impact on our ability to
comprehend and deal with complex issues.
The degree of improvement that we have seen, however, is largely
related to the low level at which things got started. In education in
particular, we seem to have hit a ceiling—and may actually be seeing some
evidence of decline. In the United States, the media is replete with a
continuing parade of stories about the ongoing crisis in both primary and
secondary education.
In the U.S., we are not even sure what the actual high school graduation
rate is. A paper published in 2008 by the National Bureau of Economic
Research
16 points out that "Depending on the data sources, definitions, and
methods used, the U.S. graduation rate has been estimated to be anywhere
from 66 to 88 percent in recent years—an astonishingly wide range for such
a basic statistic. The range of estimated minority rates is even greater—
from 50 to 85 percent." A recently published study by the National Center
for Education Statistics
17 showed that over 14 percent of adults in the
United States may lack basic reading skills. It seems self evident that if as
many as a third of our children are unable to graduate from high school and
up to 1/7 of our population fails to achieve basic literacy, then we are not
succeeding in significantly advancing the capability of the average worker.
Even the earlier trends toward improved nutrition and public health
have, in many ways, turned against us. In most Western countries we now
have a raging obesity epidemic among the adult population, and—most
disturbingly—also among children. While advances in medicine continue,
many of these breakthroughs seem to primarily impact the health of

retirement-age people. The overall health of our younger population is
stagnant or, in some cases, perhaps even declining. In recent years, one of
the few positive stories in the public health and nutrition arena has been the
decline in the smoking rate.
While the last graph was just an estimate, here is another graph
18 that is
based on actual data:
The average math score on SAT tests administered by the College Board
has remained essentially flat for the past 35 years. The graph for average
verbal scores looks virtually identical. College-bound students that take the
SAT are, of course, probably above average in turns of work capability. It
seems pretty clear that, in terms of increasing the capability of our average
workers, we have already picked the low-hanging fruit, and we are
struggling just to maintain things at their current level.
At this point, we should have a pretty good sense that if computer
technology continues to progress at the extraordinary rate we have seen in
the recent past, then human workers will not be able outrun machine
capability. You can see this visually with the two graphs below:
 

While these two graphs are not based on any specific data, we have
shown pretty convincingly that their shape is more or less correct. We know
that the lower (computer technology) graph currently lies somewhere below
the human average capability graph. And we know that the technology
graph is increasing at an exceptionally fast geometric pace. What else do we
need to know? Clearly, the lines seem very likely to intersect at some point
in the future.*
* [If you are familiar with the writings of Thomas Robert Malthus, this graph may look familiar to
you. In 1798, Malthus published his Essays on the Principle of Population in which he argued that
geometrically increasing human population would outstrip society's ability to produce food. In
Malthus' version of the graph above, the top (diminishing returns) line represents food production,
while the bottom (geometric) line represents population. He believed that the two lines would
intersect and result in widespread famine. Malthus, of course, turned out to be wrong largely because
he failed to anticipate the technological progress that would occur in food production and processing.
So does that mean the graph above is just another "Malthusian" prediction which is also destined to
be wrong? One thing to keep in mind is that Malthus in essence placed his bet against technology;
the graph above assumes exactly the opposite. We should also acknowledge the unhappy possibility
that Malthus might still be vindicated in the future, especially if climate change has a highly negative
impact on agriculture. ]
The continuing advance of computer technology along a geometrically
increasing path and the diminishing returns from investment in education
seem to make a very strong case that the average worker—and perhaps
many above-average workers—are in clear danger of having their jobs
automated. Next, let's look at some trends and specific technologies that
show exactly how this is likely to happen.

 
 
Offshoring and Drive-Through Banking
 Automation and offshore outsourcing have one important thing in common:
they are both driven by technology. Obviously, it is the vast improvement in
our communication and information technologies that has enabled many
service-oriented jobs to be relocated to low-wage countries.
When I was growing up in the 1970s, I often had the opportunity to see
drive-through banking in action. This, of course, was before the
introduction of ATM machines. A typical bank drive-through was set up
with two or three lanes so that multiple customers could be handled at one
time. If you used the lane closest to the building, you communicated with
the teller through a standard cash drawer.
If you were in one of the lanes further out, however, things were far
more interesting. You sealed your money, paperwork, checkbook, etc. into a
plastic cylinder and then dropped the cylinder into the provided opening.
The cylinder then traveled through an underground tube—propelled I think
by some sort of vacuum mechanism—until it reached the teller. She then
completed the transaction and sent the cylinder back to you the same way. It
arrived somewhat like a ball being returned at a bowling alley.
At the time, this seemed very high tech. The system had its flaws,
however. I clearly remember waiting in line behind one unlucky bank
customer who, failing to insert the cylinder properly, watched it fall to the
ground and then roll under his car. He then found that when he attempted to
get out and retrieve it, he was unable to open his door. This, of course, was
an uproarious sight for an eleven or twelve year old. I would be willing to
bet that another potential problem was customers forgetting they still had
the cylinder and simply driving away with it.
This type of drive-through bank has now, of course, followed in the path
of the dinosaurs. Today the technology seems clunky. At the time, however,
it represented the leading edge of what was technically possible. Drive-
through banks provided a useful convenience to customers and also often
offered extended hours of operation.

The point I am making here is that offshoring is really a precursor of
automation. Offshoring is what you do when you have some technology, but
not enough to fully automate a job. Just as clunky drive-through banks were
eventually made obsolete by ATMs, so many jobs that are currently being
offshored will, in the future, end up being fully automated. This trend was
already discernable in 2004, when an article in InformationWeek pointed
out that "low-wage foreign labor may pose a threat to American call-center
workers, but their counterparts in countries such as India and the
Philippines themselves face being replaced by increasingly sophisticated
voice-automation technology."
19
This is one of the reasons that I did not include offshoring in our tunnel
simulation. We could have simulated an offshored job as an average light
flickering out in one part of the tunnel and then another somewhat dimmer
light appearing elsewhere. However, our simulation was intended to show
what would happen over the long run as automation gradually increased. As
technology continues its relentless advance, many of the jobs now being
transferred overseas will simply disappear altogether.
Currently, most of the controversy and political debate is focused is on
offshoring rather than automation. This may well prove to be a shortsighted
view. Information technology (IT) workers in the developed nations have
been one of the groups hardest hit by job losses from offshoring. A 2006
study by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD)
20 concluded that automation has resulted in more IT job losses than
offshoring and predicted that this trend will continue. Offshoring is the
small wave that distracts you. Automation is the big one further out that you
don't see coming.
  
 
Short Lived Jobs
 The conventional wisdom as generally presented by economists and other
analysts is that technology creates jobs. While history has shown that this is
indeed true, it also shows quite clearly that the new job types created by
technology are very often themselves quickly vaporized by the same

phenomenon. The IT jobs that are now being offshored and automated are
brand new jobs that were largely created in the tech boom of the 1990s. For
someone who chose IT as a promising career path little more than ten years
ago, this can be a disheartening reality.
Earlier in this chapter, I told of my experience using computer punch
cards at the University of Michigan. At the time, these cards were used for
nearly everything. The utility bill you received in the mail was often a type
of punch card. As a result, there were thousands of "new" jobs for key
punch operators. These later became "new" jobs for data entry clerks sitting
at computer terminals. Now, of course, technologies such as optical bar
codes are greatly reducing the need for this type of data entry.
Similarly, I mentioned that my college field of study, computer
engineering, was new at the time. Software engineering is now also a highly
offshored field, and much progress has been made toward automating some
parts of the software development process. A college student today might
well think twice before selecting this relatively new field that was created
only about thirty years ago.
Technology has always caused job transitions. Train conductors have
been largely replaced by airline flight crews, for example. However, within
the high tech and computer fields, the pace of change is unprecedented and
continues to drive relentlessly toward the total elimination of jobs. What we
are seeing is clear empirical evidence of the geometric increase in the
power of computer technology.
 
 
Traditional Jobs: The "Average" Lights in the Tunnel
 All the attention being focused on new jobs being created by technology
tends to distract us from the reality that the bulk of the job types in our
economy have remained remarkably stable over time. While technology has
certainly impacted the way people in these jobs work, or the types of
businesses at which they work, it has not yet altered the basic definitions of
these traditional job categories.

The table that follows is constructed from data published by the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics in May 2006.
21 It lists all the occupations in the
United States with at least one million workers.
OceanofPDF.com

U.S. Occupations with at least one million workers (2006)
 
Occupation, Number of Workers, Percentage of Workers
Retail salespersons, 4,374,230, 3.3%
Cashiers , 3,479,390, 2.6%
Office clerks, 3,026,710, 2.3%
Combined food preparation and serving workers, including fast food , 2,461,890, 1.9%
Registered nurses, 2,417,150, 1.8%
Laborers and freight, stock, and material movers, hand, 2,372,130, 1.8%
Waiters and waitresses, 2,312,930, 1.7%
Customer service representatives, 2,147,770, 1.6%
Janitors and cleaners, except maids and housekeeping cleaners, 2,124,860, 1.6%
Bookkeeping, accounting, and auditing clerks, 1,856,890, 1.4%
Secretaries, except legal, medical, and executive, 1,750,600, 1.3%
Stock clerks and order fillers, 1,705,450, 1.3%
Truck drivers, heavy and tractor-trailer, 1,673,950, 1.3%
General and operations managers, 1,663,280, 1.3%
Elementary school teachers, 1,509,180, 1.1%
Sales representatives, wholesale and manufacturing, except technical and scientific products,
1,488,990, 1.1%
Executive secretaries and administrative assistants, 1,487,310, 1.1%
Nursing aides, orderlies, and attendants, 1,376,660, 1.0%
First-line supervisors/managers of office and administrative support workers, 1,351,180, 1.0%
Maintenance and repair workers, general, 1,310,580, 1.0%
Team assemblers, 1,250,120, 0.9%
Teacher assistants, 1,246,030, 0.9%
Receptionists and information clerks, 1,112,350, 0.8%
First-line supervisors/managers of retail sales workers, 1,111,740, 0.8%

Accountants and auditors, 1,092,960, 0.8%
Secondary school teachers, except special and vocational education, 1,030,780, 0.8%
Construction laborers, 1,016,530, 0.8%
Security guards, 1,004,130, 0.8%
Total of Occupations Listed Above, 50,755,770, 38.3%
All Other Occupations, 81,849,210, 61.7%
Total Employment, 132,604,980, 100.0%
These workers make up a significant number of the average lights that
we automated away in our simulation. Where are the "new" jobs created by
technology? I can find exactly one job mentioned in this list which could
not have existed in 1930. Can you find it? Give up? Four lines from the top
it says "including fast food." McDonalds didn't introduce the fast food
concept until 1948.
The job types listed in the table make up nearly 40 percent of all the
workers in the United States. Each of us could probably also come up with
dozens of other job titles that have similarly remained unchanged for half a
century or more. Many of these are much higher paying professional jobs:
doctors, dentists, CPAs, lawyers, architects, pilots, engineers, etc. The fact
is that the vast majority of our workers continue to be employed in
traditional jobs. The new job types created by technology represent a
relatively small fraction of employment and, as noted above, often tend not
to last very long.
Even within high technology industries, the bulk of jobs are traditional
jobs. Suppose you found a new technology start-up company in Silicon
Valley. You obtain funding, and your company starts to grow. Who do you
hire? Engineers, people to work in accounting, human resources, marketing
and finance; administrative assistants and people to work in shipping and
receiving: these are all traditional jobs. The people working at Google do
not all have weird new-age jobs; by and large, they have the same types of
jobs as people working at General Motors. What needs to concern us is not
just the number of new jobs created by technology, but the types of jobs.
Later in this chapter, we will see that entire traditional job categories are at
risk of being heavily automated in the not too distant future. To suggest that
technology is going to somehow create completely new job categories

capable of absorbing millions of workers displaced from traditional jobs is
pure fantasy.
What are the implications for our economy if a large fraction of these
traditional jobs are ultimately automated away? Automated checkout lanes
are currently in use at a number of retail stores. We can be sure that in the
future, these will become more reliable, easier to use, and more popular.
What will we do if someday a substantial percentage of the three and a half
million cashiers in the U.S. no longer have jobs? What additional education
and training can we offer these workers? And what jobs would it prepare
them for?
And what is the impact of that potential unemployment on market
demand for goods and services? Cashiers are generally not highly paid, but
they nonetheless exist as lights in our mass market tunnel. Cashiers, just
like other workers, drive cars, buy clothes and consumer electronics, rent
DVDs, shop for Christmas gifts and perhaps drink coffee at Starbucks. In
terms of unit demand for moderately priced personal products like cell
phones or mp3 players, a cashier may count as much as a corporate CEO.
Many of the jobs listed in the table are already in the process of being
automated or offshored. Others will be targeted in the very near future.
Millions of other workers in occupations that do not appear in the list are
also at high risk. As we will see, this includes many occupations that are
not, by any means, either low-skill or low paid. Allowing these jobs to be
relentlessly eliminated by the millions, without any concrete plan to handle
the issues that will result, is a clear recipe for disaster.
  
 
A Tale of Two Jobs
 A common misconception about automation is the idea that it will primarily
impact low paying jobs that require few skills or training. To illustrate that
this is not necessarily the case, consider two very different occupations: a
radiologist and a housekeeper.
A radiologist is a medical doctor who specializes in interpreting images
generated by various medical scanning technologies. Before the advent of

modern computer technology, radiologists focused exclusively on X-rays.
This has now been expanded to include all types of medical imaging,
including CT scans, PET scans, mammograms, etc. To become a radiologist
you need to attend college for four years, and then medical school for
another four. That is followed by another five years of internship and
residency, and often even more specialized training after that. Radiology is
one the most popular specialties for newly minted doctors because it offers
relatively high pay and regular work hours; radiologists generally don't
need to work weekends or handle emergencies.
In spite of the radiologist's training requirement of at least thirteen
additional years beyond high school, it is conceptually quite easy to
envision this job being automated. The primary focus of the job is to
analyze and evaluate visual images. Furthermore, the parameters of each
image are highly defined since they are often coming directly from a
computerized scanning device.
Visual pattern recognition software is a rapidly developing field that has
already produced significant results. The government currently has access
to software that can help identify terrorists in airports based on visual
analysis of security photographs.
22 Real world tasks such as this are
probably technically more difficult than analyzing a medical scan because
the environment and objects in the image are far more varied.
Radiology is already subject to significant offshoring to India and other
places. It is a simple matter to transmit digital scans to an overseas location
for analysis. Indian doctors earn as little as 10 percent of what American
radiologists are paid.
23 As we saw earlier, automation will often come
rapidly on the heels of offshoring, especially if the job focuses purely on
technical analysis with little need for human interaction. Currently, U.S.
demand for radiologists continues to expand because of the increase in use
of diagnostic scans such as mammograms. However, this seems likely to
slow as automation and offshoring advance and become bigger players in
the future. The graduating medical students who are now rushing into
radiology for its high pay and relative freedom from the annoyances of
dealing with actual patients may eventually come to question the wisdom of
their decision.
Now let's turn to a very different job: that of a housekeeper. A
housekeeper, of course, doesn't require any formal education at all, but as
you might have guessed, this job is actually much harder to fully automate

than the radiologist's. To take over the housekeeping job, we would need to
build a very advanced robot—or perhaps several robots to perform various
tasks.
If you asked the housekeeper to name the most difficult part of his or
her job, you might expect the answer to be cleaning the bathrooms or the
windows. For our robot, however, the truly difficult task is probably
something that is relatively light work for the human housekeeper. Consider
what is involved in tidying up clutter in a typical home. For the
housekeeper, this is easy. A human being can instantly recognize objects
that are out of place and can quickly put them back where they belong.
Building a machine to reliably do the same thing is probably one of the
most difficult challenges in robotics.
A housekeeping robot would need to be able to recognize hundreds or
even thousands of objects that belong in the average home and know where
they belong. In addition, it would need to figure out what to do with an
almost infinite variety of new objects that might be brought in from outside.
Designing computer software capable of recognizing objects in a very
complex and variable field of view and then controlling a robot arm to
correctly manipulate those objects is extraordinarily difficult. The task is
made even more challenging by the fact that the objects could be in many
possible orientations or configurations. Consider the simple case of a pair of
sunglasses sitting on a table. The sunglasses might be closed with the lenses
facing down, or with the lenses up. Or perhaps the glasses are open with the
lenses oriented vertically. Or maybe one side of the glasses is open and the
other closed. And, of course, the glasses could be rotated in any direction.
And perhaps they are touching or somehow entangled with other objects.
Building and programming a robot that is able to recognize the sunglasses
in any possible configuration and then pick them up, fold them and put
them back in their case is so difficult that we can probably conclude that the
housekeeper's job is relatively safe for the time being.
Contrast the housekeeping robot's complex visual recognition challenge
with the task of automating the radiologist's job. A medical scan is, by
definition, precise in terms of its scale and orientation: you know exactly
what you are looking at. You don't need to worry about dealing with
unknown objects oriented in different ways. In fact, the entire point may be
simply to locate something out of the ordinary, such as a tumor. It is also
much easier and more profitable to partially automate the radiologist's job.

There would be little point to building a housekeeping robot that could only
clear up some of the clutter in a home. On the other hand, if you can
automate 20 percent of the radiologist's more routine work, then you can
immediately eliminate one out of five radiology jobs.
None of this is to say that the housekeeper's job will never be
automated. It is very likely that intense research and development in
robotics will eventually produce a solution to even the most difficult
problems. In addition, robots already exist to automate a few of the
housekeeper's more routine tasks. You can already purchase inexpensive
robot vacuum cleaners, and larger industrial floor cleaning robots are also
available. As The Economist pointed out in June 2008, "Robots are getting
cleverer and more dexterous. Their time has almost come." 
24
Still, it seems likely that the radiologist's job is at higher risk of being
automated in the near future.* A big part of the reason for this is that the
radiologist has what I call a software job.
*[ In reality, there is another factor that might slow the adoption of full automation in Radiology: that
is malpractice liability. Because the result of a mistake or oversight in reading a medical scan would
likely be dire for the patient, the maker of a completely automated system would assume huge
potential liability in the event of errors. This liability, of course, also exists for radiologists, but it is
distributed across thousands of doctors. However, it is certainly possible that legislation and/or court
decisions will largely remove this barrier in the future. For example, in February 2008, the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled in an 8-1 decision that, in certain cases, medical device manufacturers are
protected from product liability cases as long as the FDA has approved the device. In general, we can
expect that non-technological factors such as product liability or the power of organized labor will
slow automation in certain fields, but the overall trend will remain relentless. ]
 
"Software" Jobs and Artificial Intelligence
 When I speak of a "software" job, I don't mean that a person who has the
job necessarily works with or programs software. I simply mean that
automation of the job potentially requires only sufficiently advanced
software. In other words, someone with a software job could eventually be
replaced by a computer similar to the one that currently sits on his or her
desk. There is no need for robotic arms or, in fact, any moving parts at all.

Another, more common, term for people with software jobs is, of course,
knowledge worker.
Software jobs are also highly subject to offshoring. The conventional
wisdom used to be that becoming a knowledge worker represented the best
path to a prosperous future. The advent of offshoring has increasingly called
this proposition into question. Today, offshoring is impacting knowledge
workers across the board. Jobs in fields such as radiology, accounting, tax
preparation, graphic design, and especially all types of information
technology are already being shipped to India and to other countries. This
trend will only grow, and as I have pointed out previously, where offshoring
appears, automation is often likely to eventually follow.
The automation of software jobs is tied closely to the field of artificial
intelligence. When most of us think about artificial intelligence, we are
quickly sidetracked into the world of science fiction. We think of the robots
C3PO and R2D2 from the Star Wars movies, or perhaps the HAL 2000
computer from 2001: A Space Odyssey. As a result of this, we have been
lured into the false belief that in order to replace us, machines have to
become like us—that, in fact, they have to somehow replicate our humanity.
This is simply not true. How often has each of us said "I am not my
job." Or "I work to live; not the other way around." How much of your
complete identity as a human being really goes into your job? Outside of
work, you may read books; listen to a certain type of music. Maybe you
have a hobby or passion. Perhaps you feel strongly about politics or the
environment. Certainly you care deeply for your children, your family and
others close to you. Collectively, all this makes up who you are. Duplicating
all of that in a machine certainly remains in the realm of science fiction. But
how much of all that is really required to do your job? The fact is that the
bar which technology needs to hurdle in order to displace many of us in the
workplace is much lower than we really imagine.
To gain some insight into how artificial intelligence works in the real
world, let's consider computer chess. In 1989, Garry Kasparov, the world
chess champion faced off against a special computer called Deep Thought.
Deep Thought was designed at Carnegie Mellon University and IBM.
Kasparov easily defeated the machine in a two game match.
In 1996, Kasparov faced a new computer developed by IBM called
Deep Blue. Again Kasparov defeated the computer. In 1997, IBM came
back with an improved version of Deep Blue that finally defeated Kasparov

in a six game match. This represented the first time that a machine had
defeated the top human chess player.
Since then, computer chess has continued to progress. In 2006, the new
world chess champion, Vladimir Kramnik, lost a match against a German
software program called Deep Fritz. While IBM's Deep Blue was a
completely custom computer about the size of a refrigerator, Deep Fritz is a
program that runs on a computer using two standard Intel processors. It
seems highly likely that, in the near future, a program like Deep Fritz,
running on virtually any cheap laptop computer, will be able to defeat the
best chess players in the world.
When we think of what it takes for a human being to be a world chess
champion, most of us would probably agree that it takes a certain degree of
creativity—at least within the confines of a highly defined set of rules. Yet,
creativity is a trait that we are very reluctant to ascribe to a machine—even
if that machine can beat a human at chess. This tendency to be somewhat
underwhelmed by the accomplishments of machines, may have something
to do with the fact that the working of the human brain remains a mystery.
Who can say what is going on in a human chess master's head when he
or she plays a match? We simply don't know. And therefore it becomes to
us something mysterious and especially creative. In the case of the
computer, however, we know exactly what is happening. The computer is
simply calculating through millions of different possible moves and then
picking the best one. It is using a brute force algorithm. The computer's
advantage arises not from the fact that it is genuinely smart, but because it
is almost unimaginably fast. It's natural for us to give this brute force
accomplishment a lower status than the creativity and precise thinking
exhibited by an exceptional human being. But the question for us here is:
will that protect us from brute force algorithms that can do our jobs?
If you agree that the game of chess requires creativity within a set of
defined rules, then could not something similar be said about the field of
law? Currently there are jobs in the United States for many thousands of
lawyers who rarely, if ever, go into a courtroom. These attorneys are
employed in the areas of legal research and contracts. They work at law
firms and spend much of their time in the library or accessing legal
databases through their computers. They research case law, and write briefs
which summarize relevant court cases and legal strategies from the past.

They review contracts and look for loopholes. They suggest possible
strategies and legal arguments for new cases that come to their firms.
Based on our previous discussion, the first thing you might guess about
these attorneys is that they are already subject to offshoring. And you would
be correct: in India there are already teams of lawyers who specialize in
researching case law not in India—but in the United States.
What about automation? Can a computer do the lawyer's job? One of
the primary research areas in artificial intelligence has focused on creating
"smart" algorithms that can quickly search, evaluate and summarize
information. We see the fruition of this body of research every time we use
Google or any other advanced Internet search engine. We can expect that
such smart algorithms will increasingly be used in the field of legal
research. The software may start out as a productivity tool to make the
lawyer's job easier, and then eventually evolve into a full automation
solution.
Obviously, it is easier to automate some parts of the lawyer's job than
others. For example, finding and summarizing relevant case law would be a
likely target for an initial effort. As I pointed out with the radiologist,
automating even a portion of the lawyer's job will quickly result in fewer
attorneys on the payroll. What about the more advanced or creative aspects
of the lawyer's job? Could a computer formulate a strategy for an important
legal case? For the time being, this may be a challenge, but as we saw in the
case of chess, a brute force algorithm may ultimately prevail. If a computer
can evaluate millions of possible chess moves, then why can it not also
iterate through every known legal argument since the days when Cicero
held forth in the Roman Forum? Would this be a "lesser" form of legal
creativity? Perhaps it would. But would that matter to our lawyer's
employer?
Although the practical applications of artificial intelligence have so far
emphasized brute force solutions, it is by no means true that this is the only
approach being taken in the field. A very important area of study revolves
around the idea of neural nets, which are a special type of computer that is
built upon a model of the human brain. Neural nets are currently being used
in areas such as visual pattern recognition. In the future, we can probably
expect some important advances in this area, especially as the engineers
who design neural nets work more closely with scientists who are
uncovering the secrets of how our brains work.

One thing that probably jumps out at you as we speak of lawyers and
radiologists is that these people make a lot of money. The average
radiologist in the United States makes over $300,000. In fact, we can
reasonably say that software jobs (or knowledge worker jobs) are typically
high paying jobs. This creates a very strong incentive for businesses to
offshore and, when possible, automate these jobs. Another point we can
make is that there is really no relationship between how much training is
required for a human being, and how difficult it is to automate the job. To
become a lawyer or a radiologist requires both college and graduate
degrees, but this will not hold off automation. It is a relatively simple matter
to program accumulated knowledge into an algorithm or enter it into a
database.
For knowledge workers, there is really a double dose of bad news. Not
only are their jobs potentially easier to automate than other job types
because no investment in mechanical equipment is required; but also, the
financial incentive for getting rid of the job is significantly higher. As a
result, we can expect that, in the future, automation will fall heavily on
knowledge workers and in particular on highly paid workers. In cases
where technology is not yet sufficient to automate the job, offshoring is
likely to be pursued as a interim solution.
Given this reality, it may be that the simulation we performed in Chapter
1 was actually somewhat conservative. Look back at the table listing
traditional jobs. Very few of these people are knowledge workers. In our
simulation, we assumed that automation would fall evenly on some
significant percentage of the average lights in the tunnel. We now see,
however, that automation may, in fact, arrive in a relatively "top heavy"
pattern. It may well be that a great many of the brighter lights in our tunnel
will be among the first impacted.
What does this mean for a business that offers products and services in
the mass market? Clearly, it implies that automation may be poised to
someday eliminate not just untold millions of your potential customers—it
is likely to hit hard at your best customers.
 
 
Automation, Offshoring and Small Business

 We tend to think of automation and offshoring as primarily impacting jobs
in large corporations. After all, it takes a substantial investment to set up a
relationship with an overseas outsourcing firm or bring in specialized
automation equipment or software. In the near future, however, both of
these practices are likely to become increasing accessible and inexpensive
for even the smallest businesses.
There is a significant trend toward breaking jobs into smaller pieces or
specific tasks—which can then be either automated or offshored. This
capability is increasingly being offered to small businesses either as pre-
packaged software or through easy to use online interfaces over the
Internet. Tax preparation is one area where this approach is already
widespread. Instead of making a large investment in sophisticated
automation software, a small business owner or manager will be able to
visit a website and then rent access to the software on either a per-hour or
per-task basis. I think it is very possible that the same will happen with
task-specific offshoring. Competition between service providers will
quickly produce lower prices, easier to use online interfaces, and a wider
variety of services.
The result will be rapid penetration of these practices into businesses of
all sizes. As we saw with the radiologist and the lawyer, once significant
portions of jobs can be automated, the number of workers employed will
immediately begin to fall. The U.S. Small Business Administration
estimates that businesses with fewer than 500 employees have generated
from 60-80 percent of all job growth over the past decade.
25 As it becomes
easier and cheaper for business owners to employ automation and
offshoring, we may well find that these practices will become a significant
drag on America's primary job creation engine.
 
 
"Hardware" Jobs and Robotics
 A "hardware" job is a job that requires some investment in mechanical or
robotic technologies in order for the job to be automated. The automation of
hardware jobs started long before the computer revolution. Machines used

on assembly lines, farm equipment, and heavy earth moving equipment are
all technologies that have displaced millions of workers in the past. As
history has shown, repetitive motion manufacturing jobs are among the
easiest to automate. In fact, as I mentioned, this is how the Luddite
movement got started back in 1811. However, the merger of mechanics and
computer technology into the field of robotics will almost certainly impact
an unprecedented number and types of jobs. Whether a specific hardware
job is difficult or easy to automate really depends on the combination of
skills and manual dexterity required.
For an example of a job that is very difficult to automate, let's consider
an auto mechanic. A mechanic obviously requires a great deal of hand-eye
coordination. He or she has to work on thousands of different parts in a
variety of different engines, often in highly varied states of repair. In other
words, a robot mechanic would face many visual recognition and
manipulation problems similar to the ones we discussed earlier with the
robot housekeeper. In addition, the robot mechanic would require a much
higher degree of problem solving skill than the housekeeper. In fact, this
diagnostic skill it not something that could be solved with software alone
because it extends to nearly all the human senses. A mechanic may listen to
the sound an engine makes or even diagnose a problem based on a specific
smell.
As things stand, we can say that becoming an auto mechanic is probably
a pretty safe choice for the time being. But, as we said with the
housekeeper, that does not imply the job will be safe forever. Advances in
robotic technology will continue relentlessly until many of these problems
are solved. However, an even more important factor is likely to be changes
made to the cars the mechanic is working on. Advancing technology has
already impacted the way mechanics work; computerized diagnostic tools
are now used to read fault codes provided by microprocessors embedded in
the engine. We can expect that this trend will continue, and that, at some
point in the future, cars may well be designed specifically to be worked on
by robotic mechanics.
A truck driver is another example of a job that is likely to be protected
for the time being, but, in the long run, the reason will probably not be so
much technology as social acceptance. The military is already making
substantial investments in automated trucks that could be used on the
battlefield. These could be completely autonomous, or they might be

programmed to simply follow a lead truck. Similarly, many car
manufacturers will soon be deploying collision avoidance technology in
cars. These systems will help drivers avoid mistakes that might lead to
accidents; however over time they could evolve into technology capable of
driving the car autonomously—just as jet airliners now routinely fly and
land without assistance.
While the technology for automated cars and trucks may arrive, it is
somewhat difficult to imagine that most people would be eager to share the
road with 50-ton driverless trucks. A second important issue would likely be
the power of the Teamsters union. Once again, however, I have to give my
standard disclaimer: this does not mean truck driving jobs will always be
protected.
The job types that are likely to be threatened fairly soon by advances in
robotics are the jobs that fit somewhere between the auto mechanic and the
repetitive motion assembly line worker. As an example, consider the shelf
stocker in a supermarket or chain retail store. This job requires more
flexibility than working on an assembly line, but still falls far short of what
the auto mechanic faces.
The layout of a supermarket is standardized and could easily be
programmed into a computer. The isles are wide and the floors are smooth;
ideal territory for an industrial robot. Every item has a specific place on the
shelves. Bar codes make it a simple matter to identify items, and special
location markers could be placed on the shelves: a shelf stocking robot
faces few of the visual recognition issues that challenged our housekeeping
or auto mechanic robots. Designing a robot that could move inventory from
the stock room and place it on shelves is certainly well within the realm of
possibility in the not too distant future. Needless to say, if a robot can be
designed to stock shelves, then it can also be made to unload trucks and
move material of all types.
Skeptical that robots might someday be stepping into these jobs?
Consider that as far back as 2005, CNET News Blog published an article
entitled "Why so Nervous about robots, Wal-Mart?"
26 The article pointed
out that reports had surfaced about Wal-Mart testing inventory-taking
robots. These would be robots programmed to navigate the isles at night
and automatically take a complete store inventory. When the CNET reporter
contacted Wal-Mart management, he received an unusually abrupt denial
that Wal-Mart was considering using robots in any way.

We can take Wal-Mart's management at its word and assume that it, in
fact, has no plans to use robots. In the long run, however, that won't matter.
At some point, if one of Wal-Mart's competitors tries to gain an advantage
by employing robots, then Wal-Mart and every other competing business
will really have no choice but to follow suit. The point of this is not to vilify
Wal-Mart or any other business that might someday choose to employ
automation. We have to acknowledge that, in a free market economy, every
business has to respond to its competitive environment and employ the best
available technologies and processes. If it does not do so, it will not survive.
History has shown that job automation very often involves pushing a
significant portion of the job onto the customer. Automation in the customer
service area is really self-service. This has been the case with ATMs,
automated checkout isles and even self-serve gas pumps. In the recently
opened Future Store
27 near Düsseldorf, Germany, in-store retail sales and
customer assistance is being automated via a cell-phone interface. Shoppers
are able to get real time assistance, while shopping, through their mobile
phones. They can also scan bar codes as they shop and, in the near future,
will be able to pay for their purchases directly through their phones—
presumably avoiding the checkout isle altogether.
The specter of near fully automated supermarkets and chain retail stores
is cause for genuine concern. These are now the jobs of last resort. These
are the jobs that workers displaced from other industries take because there
is nothing better available. Look back at the table of traditional occupations.
We have already mentioned that 3.5 million cashiers are potentially at risk.
The table shows another 4 million retail salespersons and 2.3 million
laborers and freight, stock and material movers, as well as 1.7 million stock
clerks and order fillers. What new jobs could we possibly find for all these
people?
Read any article in the popular press about the field of robotics and its
potential future implications, and you will almost invariably find a sentence
pointing out that "in the future, robots will be used to perform tasks which
are dangerous for people, or jobs which people don't really want." That is
surely true, but it implies the somewhat wistful assumption that robots
won't be used in jobs that people do want. That is obviously a silly
assumption. Robots, and other forms of automation, will be used instead of
people as soon it becomes cost effective and profitable for businesses to do
so.*

*[ For more on robotics and its potential impact on employment and on society, see Marshall Brain's
"Robotic Nation" blog at http://roboticnation.blogspot.com. ]
"Interface" Jobs
 A third type of job is what I call an "interface" job. The people who hold
these jobs, to a large extent, fill in the cracks which currently exist between
various information formats and technologies. As an example, consider
what happens when you apply for a home mortgage loan. If you work with
an independent mortgage agent, he or she will probably give you a paper
application to fill out. Next, you will need to retrieve and make copies of
your supporting documentation: pay stubs, tax returns, bank statements,
insurance documents, etc.
All of this documentation will be on paper or it will be faxed to you. A
property appraisal will be done, and the report will be forwarded to the loan
agent. Once the loan agent collects everything together, he or she will
probably fax it all to the bank, where a loan officer will review it.
Ultimately, numbers such as your salary, credit rating, and the equity to loan
ratio will be plugged into a computer program and the loan will either be
approved or denied.
Clearly, the bulk of the labor associated with this process is in
collecting, copying, collating and faxing information. The intellectual
portion of the job—either approving or denying the loan—is probably
already essentially handled by a computer. Throughout the economy, there
are probably thousands of jobs for clerks and office workers that continue to
exist because of this clunky interface between what exists on paper and
what needs to be in a computer.
Clearly, we cannot expect that this state of affairs will continue forever.
Financial statements are already available online. Standard data formats are
making it increasingly easy for computers to talk directly to one another.
The "XML" standard is a very popular format that is already widely used to
move data between different businesses over the Internet. Using XML, the
computers at a manufacturing company can talk directly to the computers
belonging to the company's suppliers. The continuing drive toward

paperless documents and seamless communication is likely to eliminate
many of these human interface jobs in the coming years.
  
 
The Next "Killer App"
 Since the beginnings of the personal computer industry, computer hardware
sales have often been driven by a particular software application so
compelling that it has motivated customers to purchase the machine
required to run it. When the Apple II was introduced in 1977, it was initially
a success within a relatively small group of computer hobbyists. It wasn't
until the first electronic spreadsheet, VisiCalc, was developed that the Apple
II began to generate wider interest. VisiCalc was the catalyst that helped
transform the Apple II from an interesting toy into a true business machine.
Likewise, when the IBM PC was introduced, Lotus 1-2-3 fulfilled the
"killer app" role. Later, it was graphic design and desktop publishing
software that drove the Apple MacIntosh to success.
In recent years, the highest sales growth for the computer industry has
not been in high-end desktop computers but instead in laptops and, lately,
the newer netbook machines that provide a simple and inexpensive way to
browse the web. At least in part, this probably results from the fact that the
acceleration of computer hardware capability has largely outpaced what is
required to run most of the software applications of interest to the average
user. If you are primarily interested in word processing, spreadsheets and
web browsing, it may be difficult to justify the cost of a high-end computer
when a lower cost or more portable machine offers more than enough
power to run the software. Likewise, it seems to be increasingly difficult for
Microsoft and other software vendors to continually add new features to
desktop productivity applications and operating systems that are compelling
enough to justify expensive upgrades.
Yet the business models of both Intel and Microsoft depend on
continuing to sell ever more powerful processors and new or updated
software applications to take advantage of that power. If customers were to
permanently turn away from the idea of faster processors, the business

would quickly become commoditized, and Intel would lose its competitive
advantage. For that reason, we can be sure that Intel, Microsoft and
hundreds of other software companies are actively seeking the next killer
app—something that will fully leverage the vastly increased computer
power that will be available in the coming years and decades.
I think that there are good reasons to believe that this next killer app is
going to turn out to be artificial intelligence (AI). AI applications are highly
compute intensive and will take full advantage of all the computational
power that new processors can offer. New standalone AI applications will
appear, but more importantly, artificial intelligence is likely to be built
directly into existing productivity applications and operating systems, as
well as the enterprise software and database systems used by large
businesses.
The market for AI software is likely to extend far beyond the computer
industry. Increasingly sophisticated robots will demand the most advanced
hardware and software available. High-end microprocessors and AI
software will also surely be used to build intelligence into appliances,
consumer devices and industrial equipment of all kinds. Ultimately, robots
and other non-computer applications may well eclipse the personal
computer market as the primary growth engine for leading-edge hardware
and software.
Products that give some insight into what the future may hold are
already on display. Microsoft recently demonstrated a "virtual personal
assistant" which appears as a computer generated person on the screen. The
assistant is capable of tasks such as making airline reservations or
scheduling meetings and requires the most advanced hardware available.
According to the New York Times, Microsoft's virtual assistant can "make
sophisticated decisions about the people in front of her, judging things like
their attire, whether they seem impatient, their importance and their
preferred times for appointments."
28 The Times article also quotes a
Microsoft executive who speculates that future applications might include a
"medical doctor in a box" that could help with basic medical issues.
An artificial intelligence application that could dispense basic medical
advice is certainly a compelling idea, especially in light of the continuing
problem with accelerating health care costs. However, it raises an important
point. What education and training would we require of a person who
dispensed such information? Would this person need to be a doctor?

Perhaps not, but clearly this would not be one of the low skill, low wage
jobs that we often associate with vulnerability to automation. The reality is
that there is simply little or no relationship between the level of education
and training required for a person to do a job and whether or not that job
can be automated. While doctors are probably not in danger of losing their
jobs in the foreseeable future, the same cannot be said for many thousands
of knowledge workers and middle managers in the private sector.
It's important to note that, while humanoid interfaces like Microsoft's
virtual assistant make for great demonstrations, the AI applications that will
likely displace knowledge workers will not need such elaborate interfaces.
They will simply be workhorse programs that make the routine decisions
and perform the tasks and analysis that are currently the responsibility of
highly paid workers sitting in cubicles all over the world. AI capability may
start out by being built into the productivity applications used by workers,
but over time, it will evolve to the point that these applications can perform
much of the work autonomously: AI will become a tool for managers rather
than workers. The result is likely to be substantial job losses for knowledge
workers and a flattening of organizational charts that will eliminate large
numbers of middle managers. (The impact of automation will, of course, be
in addition to that of offshoring.) Many of these people will be highly
educated professionals who had previously assumed that they were, because
of their skills and advanced educations, beneficiaries of the trend toward an
increasingly technological and globalized world.*
*[ Please see "Machine Intelligence and the Turing Test" in the Appendix for more on artificial
intelligence. ]
 
Military Robotics
 One of the biggest investors in robotics technology is the Pentagon. In his
recent book Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the
21st Century, P.W. Singer points out that the U.S. military expects robotic
technologies to play an increasingly important role in conflicts of the future.
Remote-controlled drone aircraft and bomb-diffusing ground robots are
already making crucial contributions to the war effort in Iraq and

Afghanistan. The Defense Advanced Projects Agency (DARPA)—the
birthplace of the original computer network that led to the Internet—now
considers military robotics to be one of its top research priorities.
29 In the
coming decades, we can anticipate far more advanced robots playing an
increasingly autonomous role in warfare in the air, on the ground and at sea.
All of this makes for a rather harsh contrast between the foresight
shown by the military as compared with civilian economists and analysts.
Consider the uneven terrain and the highly unpredictable and dynamic
situations that would be faced by battlefield robots. Now compare that with
the environment inside a supermarket or warehouse. It seems obvious that
designing robots to perform much of the routine work required within
commercial and industrial job settings is far less challenging than producing
autonomous military robots. The U.S. military is rightly investing
substantial resources in studying the future impact of robotics and artificial
intelligence on the way in which future wars will be fought. And yet, little
or no cohesive thought or planning is being given to the disruptive impact
that these technologies will certainly have in the commercial sector and on
the overall economy.
  
 
Robotics and Offshoring
 As we've shown, "software" jobs are highly subject to offshoring and
potentially also to automation. Those "Hardware" jobs that require
significant hand-eye coordination in a varied environment are currently
very difficult to fully automate. But what about offshoring? Can a hardware
job be offshored?
In fact it can, and we are likely to see this increasingly in the near
future. As an example, consider a manufacturing assembly line. Suppose
that the highly repetitive jobs have already been automated, but there
remain jobs for skilled operators at certain key points in the production
process. How could management get rid of these skilled workers?
They could simply build a remote controlled robot to perform the task,
and then offshore the control function. As we have pointed out, it is the

ability to recognize a complex visual image and then manipulate a robot
arm based on that image that is a primary challenge preventing full robotic
automation. Transmitting a real-time visual image overseas, where a low
paid worker can then manipulate the machinery, is certainly already
feasible. Remote controlled robots are currently used in military and police
applications that would be dangerous for humans. We very likely will see
such robots in factories and workplaces in the near future.
 
Nanotechnology and its Impact on Employment
 One of the most exciting and high impact technological advances that we
can look forward to in the coming decades is in the emerging field of
nanotechnology. Nanotechnology is concerned with the manipulation of
matter at the molecular or even the atomic level. In the future, we may be
able to build molecular machines: tiny inventions, far smaller than the head
of a pin, that can essentially transform matter and create nearly anything we
want out of the most basic ingredients.
This may seem like pure fantasy until we learn that nanotechnology is
already here and has been operating since long before human beings walked
the earth.* It is all around us and even inside us. All living things, at the
most basic level, operate under the direction of molecular machines. We
know that our genetic recipe is encoded in the double helix-shaped DNA
molecules in the nucleus of our cells. But how does that recipe get
translated into an incomprehensibly complex organism like a human being?
*[ I am referring here to truly advanced nanotechnology or "molecular machines." A number of
techniques and processes which are currently in use are referred to as "nanotechnology," but these
really represent the leading edge of traditional materials science. It is likely to be decades before
advanced nanotechnology is put to widespread, practical use. ]
If we could zoom in and watch the action inside our cells, we would see
tiny molecular machines "unzip" our DNA molecules and read portions of
our genetic code in a way that is not unlike a computer scanning in a bar
code. That genetic "bar code" is then transmitted to another area in our
cells. In a tiny biological factory called the ribosome, the recipe captured in
the bar code is again read by other nano-machines that build protein

molecules. It is these protein molecules that are the true building blocks of
life. Our muscle tissue, the hemoglobin in our red blood cells, the insulin
that we need to process sugar, the enzymes that digest our food—all of
these and countless thousands of other structures and chemicals that
comprise our bodies and make us function are proteins. And they are all
constructed through nanotechnology.
It is likely that the coming "nanotech" revolution will begin with the
study of these existing, living machines. Imagine a team of scientists
descending on an alien spacecraft found buried in the New Mexico desert.
They would begin by studying this alien technology and attempting to
reverse-engineer it. In time, they might begin to tinker with the spacecraft
and make it operate in new and different ways. Eventually, they would
understand the technology at a fundamental level, and they would begin
using it to build new machines of their own. This will quite probably be the
path along which nanotechnology will evolve.
30
Nanotechnology is currently in its infancy, and it is likely that it will
take decades before truly advanced applications become available.
Nonetheless, the field offers enormous promise and may someday touch
nearly every aspect of our lives. Amazing new treatments and cures in the
field of medicine, the possibility of generating virtually limitless energy
from the sun, even faster and more powerful computers, unimaginable new
possibilities in manufacturing—all these things and more may come from
nanotechnology.
But as we contemplate these exciting possibilities, there is another
question we need to ask: will nanotechnology create jobs? Will our
displaced cashiers and shelf-stockers and office clerks find employment in
the nanotechnology industry? A simple application of common sense should
give us the answer. We speak here of manipulating matter at the molecular
level. The level of precision required is obviously beyond any human being,
and nanotechnology will have to be fully automated. Certainly there may be
jobs for a few very highly trained technicians, but the idea that jobs will be
created for blue collar workers is fantasy. If in fact, at some point in the
future, the bulk of our traditional manufacturing evolves into nano-
manufacturing, the global impact on employment would be nearly beyond
measure.
       

 
The Future of College Education
 Nearly everyone agrees that a college degree is generally a ticket to a
brighter future. In the United States in 2006, the average worker with a
bachelor's degree earned $56,788,
31 while the average high school graduate
earned a little more than half this amount, or $31,071. Workers with
graduate or professional degrees earned a still higher average salary of
$82,320. While the primary motive for the majority of individuals to pursue
advanced education is almost certainly economic, we would all agree that
education also conveys many other benefits both to the individual and to
society as a whole. A person with more education seems likely to enjoy a
generally richer existence, to have an interest in a greater variety of issues
and is perhaps also more likely to be focused on continuing personal and
professional growth. A more educated society is generally a more civil
society with a lower crime rate. An educated person is likely to hang out in
the library—rather than on street corners.
The unfortunate reality, however, is that the college dream is likely at
some point to collide with the trends in offshoring and automation that we
have been discussing in this chapter. The fact is that college graduates very
often end up taking "software" jobs; they become knowledge workers. As
we have seen, these jobs—and in particular more routine or entry level jobs
—are at very high risk. The danger is that as these trends accelerate, a
college degree will be seen increasingly not as a ticket to a prosperous
future, but as a ticket to a job that will very likely vaporize. At some point
in the future, the high cost of a college education, together with diminishing
prospects for college graduates, is likely to begin having a negative impact
on college enrollment. This will be especially true of students coming from
more modest backgrounds, but it will have impact at all levels of society.
This is, obviously, a very unconventional view. Most economists and
others who study such trends would probably strongly argue exactly the
opposite case: that in the future, a college degree will be increasingly
valuable and there will be strong demand for well-educated workers.
This is essentially the "skill premium" argument—the idea that
technology is creating jobs for highly skilled workers even as it destroys
opportunities for the unskilled. I think the evidence clearly shows that this

has indeed been the case over the past couple of decades, but I do not think
it can continue indefinitely. The reason is simple: machines and computers
are advancing in capability and will increasingly invade the realm of the
highly educated. We'll likely see evidence of this at some point in the form
of diminished opportunity and unemployment among recent graduates and
also among older college-educated workers who lose jobs and are unable to
find comparable positions.
We may not see an actual closing of the gap in average pay for college
v. non-college graduates because opportunities for workers of all skill levels
are likely to be in decline. I am not suggesting that high school graduates
who would have otherwise gone to college will chose to remain completely
unskilled, but I do think there is likely to be a migration toward relatively
skilled blue collar jobs if there is a perception that these occupations offer
more security.
As new high school graduates begin to shy away from a course leading
to knowledge worker jobs, they will increasingly turn to the trades. As we
have seen, jobs for people like auto mechanics, truck drivers, plumbers and
so forth are among the most difficult to automate. The result may well be
intense competition for these relatively "safe" jobs. As high school
graduates who might previously have been college-bound compete instead
for trade jobs, they will, of course, end up displacing less academically
inclined people who may have been a better fit for those jobs. That will
leave even fewer options for a large number of workers.
We see evidence of this trend already in the daily news. Newspapers
routinely report that people are specifically seeking jobs that can't be
offshored. Much is made of new "green collar jobs that cannot be
outsourced." While this is certainly a desirable development, we have to
acknowledge that the bulk of these jobs are going to involve installing solar
panels, wind turbines and so forth. They are trade jobs; not jobs for college
graduates.
The cost to society of such a turn away from education would be
enormous. It would damage the hopes, dreams and expectations of our
children and potentially rob them of things that we ourselves have come to
take for granted. Those workers whose prospects were diminished by a new
influx of more "book smart" competitors would become even more
dispirited and more likely to turn to crime or other undesirable alternatives.
This hash new reality would fall most heavily on people in disadvantaged

sectors of the population. Finally, and perhaps most chillingly, a trend away
from college would rob us of talent we may well need in the future.
  
 
Econometrics: Looking Backward
 The majority of mainstream economists, upon whom we depend to detect
and project trends such as the ones we have discussed here, do not seem to
be particularly concerned about a potential transition to an automated
economy. They hold firm to the belief that the economy will continuously
generate jobs within the capabilities of the average worker—and that this
process will continue indefinitely. I think the reason that economists cannot
see what is really happening may be that they are simply too buried in their
data.
In recent decades, the field of economics has been increasingly taken
over by the branch of the field known as econometrics. Econometrics is
essentially a merger of economics and statistics. Econometricians engage in
the task of analyzing reams of past economic data. They apply advanced
statistical techniques and create complex computer models. In fact, it would
be fair to say that econometrics is another example of change that has come
about as a result of our vast increase in computational capability. Without
computers, there would certainly be far fewer econometricians.
Unfortunately, the purveyors of econometrics labor under the delusion
that they are economists, when in fact they are historians. Statistics is well
suited to measuring things which are relatively constant or which are
changing gradually. It works great for baseball and for projecting
demographic trends. It does not, however, do well in an environment that is
that is likely to be increasingly impacted by a geometric or exponential
change. The graph that follows should help illustrate this point.
 

The reasoning of the econometrician is illustrated by the straight,
gradually increasing line. He or she assumes that it is possible to crunch
data from two, five or even ten years ago and discern trends that will likely
hold true in the future. The problem is compounded by the fact that a basic
tenet of statistics is the idea that more data gives a more reliable result. For
our econometrician, more data often means going even further back into the
past. So a study based on ten years worth of data might well be considered
better than one looking at only the last two years.
The problem with all this is shown by the other line on this chart. This,
of course, is the geometrically increasing line that represents technological
advance. Obviously, technology is going to have a highly disruptive impact
on the assumptions of the econometricians. Why have they not seen it?
Because a geometric advance starts out very gradually and then, very
suddenly, begins to increase dramatically. In fact, by the time econometrics
shows clear evidence it of what is happening, it will be very late in the
game. Economists looking at past data are always looking back at the flat
(left) part of the geometrically increasing technology line. Prior to the point
where the impact becomes obvious, there is really no way past data can
show them the steep vertical part of the line that lies ahead.
  
 
The Luddite Fallacy
 As mentioned previously, economists have invented a concept, named in
honor of the 1811 Luddite movement, called the Luddite fallacy. This line

of reasoning says that, while technological progress will cause some
workers to lose their jobs as a result of outdated skills, any concern that
advancing technology will lead to widespread, increasing unemployment is,
in fact, a fallacy. In other words, machine automation will never lead to
economy-wide, systemic unemployment. The reasoning offered by
economists is that, as automation increases the productivity of workers, it
leads to lower prices for products and services, and in turn, those lower
prices result in increased consumer demand. As businesses strive to meet
that increased demand, they ramp up production—and that means new jobs.
Faith in the reasoning behind the Luddite fallacy is deeply ingrained in
most professional and academic economists. William Easterly is a professor
at New York University and an expert in the economies of developing
countries. In his book The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists'
Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics,* Easterly very well expresses
the conventional view that we set out to challenge when we created our
tunnel simulation in Chapter 1. His main point is that, as advancing
technology increases productivity, prices will fall, demand will increase,
and the economy will therefore produce more goods and services. In other
words, the same number of workers will be employed but they will produce
more.
32
*[ This is in no way intended to disparage Easterly's book—which gives many very useful insights
into the economic issues related to poverty in third world countries. Easterly's book is cited here
because it offers a very cohesive explanation of the reasoning accepted by the majority of
economists. We should also note that the book primarily deals with developing nations in the tropics.
These countries are starting from a low technological level and may well have export-driven
economies, and so it is not unreasonable to assume that their economic development would follow
the historical trend seen in advanced counties. However, if we extend this idea to include the future
broad-based integration of advanced technologies such as robotics and artificial intelligence in to the
entire world economy, it falls apart. These technologies are game changers: at some point in the
future, they are going to fundamentally alter the relationship between workers and machines. ]
The question we have to ask is: where will this increase in demand
come from? Who is going to step forward and purchase all this increased
output? As we have seen in this chapter, automation stands poised to fall
across the board—on nearly every industry, on a wide range of occupations,
and on workers with graduate degrees as well as on those without high

school diplomas. Automation will come to the developed nations and to the
developing ones. The consumers that drive our markets are virtually all
people who either have a job or depend on someone who has a job. When a
substantial fraction of these people are no longer employed, where will
market demand come from?
The world economy is a closed system; there are no export markets to
prop up the world economy in the way that the Southern slave economy
was sustained. Nearly every consumer—every light in our tunnel—derives
income from a job. If we automate the bulk of those jobs away, demand
must fall. No wealthy Martians are going to step up to the plate and buy
stuff from us.
Economists' faith that the Luddite fallacy is, well, a fallacy—and indeed
in much of generally accepted economic theory—rests on two fundamental
assumptions about the relationship between workers and machines: (1)
machines are tools which are used by, and increase the productivity of,
workers, and (2) the vast majority of workers in our population are capable
of becoming machine operators; in other words, the average worker can
(with proper training) add value to the tasks performed by machines. What
happens when these assumptions fail? What happens when machines
become workers—when capital becomes labor?
It is important to note that such a change in the relationship between
workers and machines will have a worldwide impact. Advanced machine
automation will come to low wage countries as well as developed nations.
A 2003 article in AutomationWorld pointed out that "productivity gains
spawned by factory automation are driving a worldwide decline in
manufacturing jobs, even in developing nations."
33 According to the article,
even back in 2003, automation was causing significant job loss in Brazil,
India and China.
We cannot succumb to the temptation to assume that the rising middle
classes in China and India are going to solve the demand problem. Our
simulation in Chapter 1 used just one tunnel to represent the entire world
mass market. Export and import flows between nations are not simulated in
our tunnel because they are just accounting contrivances. Our tunnel is just
a bunch of lights—each of which represents someone, somewhere with a
job.
The conventional view is echoed strongly by former Federal Reserve
Chairman Alan Greenspan in his book, The Age of Turbulence. Greenspan's

book includes an entire chapter devoted to the growing problem of income
inequality. Greenspan tells us that income in the United States is now more
concentrated that at any time since the late 1920s.
34 He correctly attributes
this to globalization and, especially, technological advance, pointing out
that many of the jobs previously held by "moderately skilled workers" are
now handled by computers. What Greenspan apparently fails to see is that
technological progress will never stop, and in fact, may well accelerate.
While today jobs that require low and moderately skilled workers are being
computerized, tomorrow it will be jobs performed by highly skilled and
educated workers. Indeed, this is already happening among information
technology professionals, where jobs that once required college degrees are
simply vanishing into the computer network.
Greenspan's suggested solution is that we dramatically improve our
elementary and secondary education systems. While that is a goal that I
certainly support, the idea that it will solve the problem is simply not a
realistic expectation. Even if we could wave a magic wand and improve
education in the United States overnight, it would obviously be years before
those children enter the workforce. In the meantime, computer technology
will continue its relentless advance. The subtitle of Chairman Greenspan's
book is "Adventures in a New World." However, it appears that, like most
economists, he has failed to perceive just how new that world really is.
The reality is that the Luddite fallacy amounts to nothing more than a
historical observation. Since things have worked out so far, economists
assume that they will always work out. For centuries, machines have
continuously become more sophisticated, and as a result, the productivity—
and therefore the wages—of the average worker have increased. It stands to
reason that if this process continues indefinitely, at some point the machines
will become autonomous, and the worker will no longer add value. Long
before that extremity is reached, however, there must come a tipping point
at which job losses from automation begin to overwhelm any positive
impact on employment from lower prices and increased consumer demand.
In light of unprecedented, geometrically advancing computer technology,
the Luddite "fallacy" does not really look all that fallacious.
  
 

A More Ambitious View of Future Technological Progress: The
Singularity
 In this book, I have been quite conservative in terms of projecting where
technology may take us. I have spoken of robots that may eventually
manage to stock store shelves and of other robots that might be remotely
controlled from low wage countries. I have not spoken of armies of
marauding, humanoid robots, or of intelligent computers taking control of
nuclear weapons. Partly, the reason is that I want to come across as very
down to earth. I want you to take this book seriously. A second reason is
that none of those science fiction-like scenarios are at all necessary.
Technology—if we do not prepare for it—does not need to directly or
physically attack us to cause us great harm. The only thing it needs to do is
take our jobs.
Nonetheless, I would be remiss if I didn't include the fact that many
extremely well regarded individuals with deep experience in science and
technology have a far more ambitious view of what is ultimately possible.
World-renowned cosmologist and author of the book, A Brief History of
Time, Stephen Hawking, has said, "Computers are likely to overtake
humans in intelligence at some point in the next hundred years."
35 Inventor
and author Ray Kurzweil, who received the National Medal of Technology
from President Clinton in 1999, is far more optimistic and predicts that
machines will achieve true intelligence by 2029.
Kurzweil is also one of the leading proponents of the technological
singularity, which he expects to occur by the year 2045.
36 This concept,
which was originally introduced by the mathematician and author Vernor
Vinge,
37 suggests that at some point in the future, technological progress
will simply explode incomprehensibly. Basically, things will just get away
from us. If you look at the now familiar chart that follows, the technological
singularity would occur at some point close to where the line becomes
nearly vertical. Beyond this point, it is just straight up.

Many people have postulated that the singularity will be brought on
when machines finally become smarter than us, and then apply that higher
intelligence to the task of designing even better versions of themselves.
After that, human beings would no longer be able to understand the
progress taking place.
It seems obvious that if the singularity does indeed take place, nearly all
of us could potentially be out of a job. People with PhDs from top
universities could well find themselves in the same boat as autoworkers in
Detroit. How could the average people who make up the bulk of our
population earn a living in a world in which machines were smarter and
more capable than even the most intelligent humans?
Aside from the issue of providing essential support for the population,
the singularity introduces a more basic economic paradox. In a free market
economy, nothing is produced unless there is demand—and "demand" in
economic terms means desire combined with the ability to pay. There is no
incentive to produce products if there are no consumers with sufficient
discretionary income to purchase those products. This is true even if
intelligent machines someday become super-efficient producers. If average
—or even exceptional—human beings are unable to find employment
within their capabilities, then how will they acquire the income necessary to
create the demand that in turn drives production? If we consider the
singularity in this context, then is it really something that will necessarily
push us forward exponentially? Or could it in actuality lead to rapid
economic decline?*
*[ The technologists who speculate about the singularity don't seem too concerned about this
problem. Perhaps they assume that the super-intelligent machines of the future will figure all this out

for us. However, if something other than consumer demand drives production, then we no longer
have a market economy; we will then have a planned economy. The Soviet Union, of course, didn't
have intelligent machines—but they did have lots of very intelligent mathematicians staffing an
agency called Gosplan, which attempted to figure things out. Let's hope the machines will do a better
job. (Please see "The Technology Paradox" in the Appendix for more on this.) ]
In this book, we won't again stray into this more speculative arena
(except in the last sections of the Appendix). The ideas presented in this
book do not depend on the occurrence of the technological singularity. The
standard we have set is much lower: we are concerned only with the
possibility that machines will become capable of performing most average,
routine jobs. The singularity represents a far more extreme case. It's fair to
say, however, that if something along the lines of the technological
singularity is to occur, we may first need a paradigm shift in the way our
economy works—or at least some changes in our economic architecture.
Otherwise, we will be in for quite a shock.
 
 
A War on Technology
 In this chapter we have seen that computers are increasing in both power
and number at a simply astonishing rate. We've looked at clear evidence
that shows we have essentially hit the ceiling in terms of what we can
expect from future increases in the capability of average human beings.
We've also looked at a variety of specific job types and technologies and
shown how automation is likely to have a much broader impact than many
of us might imagine—and also how the jobs of many highly paid and highly
educated workers may be among the most vulnerable. Let's look again at
the assumption we set out to test at the beginning of this chapter:
Technology will not advance to the point where the bulk of jobs performed
by typical people will be automated before the year 2089. Prior to that year,
the economy will always create jobs that are within the capabilities of the
vast majority of the human population.
 

At this point, it seems very difficult to support this assumption. Most of
the trends we have reviewed in this chapter are likely to come into play
long before our cutoff date of 2089. It is very possible that even advanced
nanotechnology would be available within that time frame. We therefore
cannot escape the conclusion that we will very likely have to deal with the
impact of across-the-board automation in our lifetimes, or at the very least,
within the lifetimes of our children.
If we do not have a strategy—and specific policies—in place to deal
with this issue before its full impact arrives, the outcome will be decidedly
negative. As the trend toward systemic job loss increases, it is quite easy to
foresee a number of possible ramifications. I have already mentioned the
likelihood of a drop in college enrollment and a migration toward safer
trade jobs. Another trend that will surely occur as recognition sets in will be
a general "war on technology." Workers in virtually every occupation—
even many of those who themselves work in technical fields—will
desperately, and quite understandably, attempt to protect their livelihoods.
We can expect substantial pressure on government to somehow restrict
technological progress and job automation. It is possible that there will be a
significant, last-ditch resurgence in the power of organized labor. Workers
in jobs and industries that are not now organized will very possibly turn to
unions in an attempt to exert some power over their own futures. The result
is likely to be somewhat slowed technical progress, work stoppages, and
significant economic and social disruptions.
The economists who believe in the premise of the Luddite fallacy are
not wrong about one thing: technological advancement is the only thing that
can, over the long term, drive us toward continuing economic growth.
Continuing technical progress is our only hope for a wealthier society in the
future.
We know that in the coming decades, we will face enormous new
challenges. Most notable will be the related issues of increasing energy
scarcity and climate change. We are likely to face a wide-ranging impact on
climate, agriculture and even geography—including the possibility of rising
ocean levels that could result in humanitarian disasters of unimaginable
proportions. As we are all aware, currently the efforts to mitigate global
warming and the other important environmental impacts from burning fossil
fuels are enjoying very limited success. The unfortunate reality is that we
may ultimately be forced to accept the fact that we will fail—at least to

some degree—in our quest to stop climate change. But the costs associated
with somehow adapting to those changes will be astronomical. At the same
time, reserves of oil, natural gas, and in the longer run even coal, are going
to be depleted. How can we hope to face these challenges if our economy is
in decline and the bulk of our population is focused almost exclusively on
the continuity of individual incomes?
A similar point can be made regarding the global war on poverty. How
can we hope to win this war, if we ourselves are not prosperous? We know
that poverty is one of the primary drivers of war, conflict and terrorism. In a
long-term stagnant or declining economic environment, these problems will
only grow.
The answer cannot be to attempt to halt technological progress. The
problem is not with technology; it is with our economic system, and it lies
specifically in that system's inability to continue thriving in the new reality
that is being created. It will be extraordinarily difficult to make material
changes to that system because it has served us so well, for so long.
Nonetheless, in the final chapters of this book, I will suggest some changes
that I believe will allow us to move from fearing technology to leveraging it
as never before and then deploying it against the challenges we will face.
Before then, however, we must move from our tunnel simulation back into
the real world. There we will see that the situation is probably far more
dangerous and perhaps more immediate than we have yet imagined.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 3
 
OceanofPDF.com

DANGER
 
In the first chapter of this book, our tunnel simulation showed that, as
large numbers of workers were automated out of their jobs, the economy
would eventually go into decline because each worker is also a consumer
(and may support other consumers) in the mass market. In the real world, it
seems very likely that the automation process would be a fairly gradual one.
Can we assume, therefore, that the economic impact of this transition would
also be gradual in nature and might not be apparent until some point in the
distant future? To answer this question, let's look at how markets work in
the real world.
 
 
The Predictive Nature of Markets
 One of the more interesting developments to arise out of the Internet has
been the appearance of online prediction markets. A prediction market is
really just another name for a betting market, and it operates in a similar
fashion to the futures markets that allow traders to place bets on the future
direction of things like oil prices and stock market indexes. Prediction
markets, such as the Iowa Electronic Markets (IEM) and Intrade, allow
participants to bet real money on things like elections, economic
developments (such as recessions), or specific events in the business or
entertainment worlds.
While prediction markets are specifically set up to predict future events,
we know that we can expand this idea and say that all free markets are, in
essence, prediction markets. If you buy a particular company's stock, then
you are placing a bet that, in the future, that stock will trade at a higher
value. Collectively, the millions of participants in the world's stock markets
often act as a sort of predictive barometer for the economy as a whole.
Historically, the U.S. stock market has often anticipated recessions by six

months or so. Likewise, recovery from a recession is very often preceded
by a rise in the stock market.
This predictive feature also applies to all the other various markets with
which we interact, including the housing market, the job market, and the
mass market for goods and services. The reason is quite obvious. People are
rational beings and every individual, to some degree, incorporates his or her
expectations for the future into his or her current actions. If you expect that
you will receive a large sum of money at some point in the near future, you
are very likely to begin spending some of that money even before you
actually receive it.
Now we can begin to see a potential problem. As automation begins to
eliminate jobs in an increasingly wide range of industries and occupations,
its impacts are clearly not going to be kept a secret. People will become
aware of what is happening—even if it is not officially recognized by
governments—and they will begin to modify their current behavior
accordingly. As a growing percentage of the population is exposed to direct
evidence of ongoing job losses, many people will begin to experience a
greatly heightened level of stress and worry. Facing this, individuals will
take the obvious action: they will cut back on consumption, perhaps quite
dramatically, and try to save more in anticipation of a very uncertain future.
It is important to note that what we are talking about here is really not
the same as what occurs in the normal business cycle. In a typical recession,
many consumers will also cut back on spending as they worry about losing
their jobs, and this will tend to deepen the downturn. However, this worry is
predominantly a short-term concern because people realize that, in the long
run, when the economy recovers, businesses will have to again begin hiring.
But what if, at some point in the coming decades, there is a general
coalescence of belief that suggests the basic character of the economy has
changed to such an extent that jobs may not be available—or at least will be
very hard to obtain—in the future? If this were to occur in a critical mass of
the consumers who participate in the market, in the absence of an effective
government policy, we could clearly be thrust into a very dark scenario. An
individual faced with possible long-term or even permanent unemployment
at some point in the foreseeable future is in essence looking at an
involuntary, early and unpredictable retirement. Seeing this, consumers
might begin to adjust their current consumption in light of such extreme

uncertainty. If this were to occur, a dramatic economic downward spiral
would almost certainly be precipitated.
If such a disastrous event were to occur, the standard responses
employed by governments, such as stimulus spending, would probably be
largely ineffective. This is because stimulus spending (or tax cuts) would
not address people's long-term concern about their incomes; it seems very
likely that any additional income received by consumers would
immediately be saved. It is, in fact, very difficult to imagine a government
policy short of somehow guaranteeing individuals' continuity of income
that would be effective in such a scenario. And undertaking such an income
guarantee policy in the midst of such a severe economic downturn would be
extraordinarily difficult and expensive. In short, the consequences of such a
scenario are really not something we would want to contemplate.
 
 
The 2008-2009 Recession
 Obviously, our current economy remains highly dependent on the efforts of
human workers. We can probably, therefore, assume that the dangerous
scenario described above lies in the fairly distant future—perhaps even
decades from now. Nonetheless, I think we can expect that, long before we
reach such an extreme point, the economy will begin to display evidence of
the overall impact of automation. Is it possible that, at least to some extent,
this has been a factor in the current crisis? As we all know, the 2008-9
recession began with the 2007 subprime meltdown that then evolved into
the credit crunch and global financial crisis. As I pointed out in Chapter 2,
advancing computer technology certainly played an enabling role in the
severity and global nature of the current situation. Beyond this, there are a
number of other factors that should concern us as we look forward to
recovery from the current recession.
The freeze-up of credit in 2008 struck an especially hard blow at
consumer demand because, over the last eight years or so, real wages for
most average Americans have been stagnant or even declining while health
care costs have been exploding. Faced with this, many consumers turned to

home equity loans and credit cards in order to maintain their standard of
living. The collapse of these credit lines in 2008, together with rapidly
rising unemployment, forced consumers to cut back in a fairly dramatic
way. Automation, offshore factory relocations and, to a lesser extent service
job offshoring, have certainly played an important role in this trend toward
declining or stagnant wages.
Globalization, and in particular the need for American manufacturers to
compete against low cost producers in China, has forced job cuts and
accelerated the drive toward automation. This has been reflected in the
substantial productivity increases of the U.S. economy in recent years.
While the impact of globalization on the job market has received most of
the attention, I think most economists would be likely to agree that
advancing technology and job automation have played a far more
significant role.
Although factors such as stagnating wages for average workers would
seem to provide support for the theory that automation is beginning to have
a significant impact on the economy's ability to create jobs, it is important
to note that there are also signals which tend contradict this conclusion:
before the advent of the current crisis, unemployment as measured by the
government, remained very low. However, there is also evidence that
underemployment, especially cases where workers have been forced to
settle for one or more part time jobs rather than a full time position, has
been a significant issue for some time. In short, the evidence is not
conclusive; but I think there may well be reasonable cause for concern.
I don't think it would be unreasonable say that among many average
workers, there is now a sense that good jobs are more difficult to find and
keep than in the past. The term "jobless recovery" is now routinely applied
to nearly every post-recession economic recovery, and there is no reason to
expect that the current case will be an exception. One reason is likely that,
when bottom lines are pressured during a downturn, businesses have an
even bigger incentive to turn toward job eliminating technologies. In many
cases, as efficiency continues to increase even during a downturn,
businesses find that they are able to avoid rehiring displaced workers once a
recovery develops.
If, in fact, automation is beginning to have an increasingly significant
impact, I think there is a very real concern that, even with the
unprecedented level of stimulus spending that has been pursued, the number

of jobs ultimately created may turn out to be disappointing. Without
specific policies and incentives in place to help insure job creation, much of
the stimulus may leak away—much like heat escaping from a poorly
insulated house. In particular, a great deal of the indirect economic stimulus
created by government spending is likely to end up being directed overseas
and to capital rather than to labor. Later in this chapter I will propose some
specific policy initiatives that I feel would greatly assist in job creation.
 
 
Offshoring and Factory Migration
 In Chapter 2 we saw that offshoring is often really just the leading edge of
automation. When a job is offshored, a new consumer is created in a
developing nation—at least temporarily. However, from the point of view
of consumers in the United States or Western Europe, offshoring looks
exactly the same as automation. The same can be said of relocating a
factory to a developing country like China; to workers in the U.S. it looks
exactly the same as simply building a fully automated factory. In other
words, service offshoring and factory relocations accelerate the job loss as
well as the psychological impact on workers (consumers) and make it likely
that the dangerous scenario described above could occur even earlier in the
developed nations. And it is these developed economies that remain the
primary consumption drivers of the world economy as a whole.
In essence, we have succeeded in globalizing labor and capital, but we
have really not globalized consumption. To a large extent, workers in low
wage countries are not capable of purchasing the goods they are producing.
Or even if they can afford to buy those products, they are unlikely to do so
because they are much more interested in saving. Consumers in the United
States are expected to continue powering the factories in China and other
developing nations even as the jobs from which those consumers derive
their income evaporate.* This is clearly unsustainable.
*[ Many economists would argue that this is not a major concern because the U.S. economy will
evolve so that most consumers derive their income from jobs in the service sector, and that these

services will be provided locally. However, as we have seen in this book, many local services will
also ultimately be subject to both offshoring and automation. ]
This danger—together with the fact that the benefits from offshoring in
the third world are likely to be only transitory since automation will follow
—really calls into question the overall wisdom of this practice. This is true
even for the developing nations that are currently benefiting from
offshoring because, as we will see later, the consequences of such a severe
and long lasting economic downturn in the West would almost certainly
wipe out and reverse any temporary gains these countries may have
obtained from offshoring.
Of course, the overall wisdom of a practice like offshoring has
absolutely no bearing on the actions of individual businesses. Businesses
act according to short-term incentives and the competition that they face.
Even a CEO who dislikes offshoring will have little choice but to pursue the
practice if his or her competitors choose to do so. Only governments have
the ability to create incentives and policies that can potentially turn things
around and avoid the disastrous economic spiral that might occur if a
critical mass of consumers someday lose confidence in the future job
market.
  
 
Reconsidering Conventional Views about the Future
 Pick up any recently published book which attempts to forecast the major
trends likely to develop in the coming decades, and you will quickly come
to the conclusion that there is a very conventional set of views on where we
are headed. Many of these widely held beliefs about the future are based on
simple, and inescapable, demographic analysis—and, in particular, on
counting workers. What will be most important in the future? The
conventional answer is: first, the number of workers as compared with the
number of retired persons in most countries, and second the number of
workers (and the wages they are willing to accept) in developing nations
like China as compared with the number of workers in advanced countries.

Two of the most notable books that have fleshed out these commonly
held views are The World is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-first
Century by Thomas Friedman and Futurecast: how superpowers,
populations, and globalization will change the way you live and work by
Robert J. Shapiro. In his book, Shapiro gives a very insightful analysis of
the conventional view.
38 He identifies three basic forces that he feels will
shape the coming decades: (1) The demographic crisis—or "baby boom"
problem—that will result in most countries having an unprecedented
number of elderly persons relative to the number of workers in their
populations. (2) Globalization, which allows labor and capital, as well as
products and many services to move effortlessly across borders, and (3) The
fall of Soviet-style communism and the adoption of market-based
economies throughout the world. This has resulted in hundreds of millions
of workers who were previously locked away in centrally planned
economies now being free to enter the global workforce.
The first thing you might notice is that the issue we have been focusing
on in this book—technological acceleration—does not appear in the list at
all. In fact, in the conventional view of the future, technology is primarily
seen as an enabler of globalization. It has been relegated to a secondary,
supporting role. Somehow, technology has faded into the background.
Nearly everyone agrees that technology has played an important role in
making globalization possible, and that globalization is certainly a highly
disruptive force, but now everyone seems to expect that technology will be
put back into its box. It will behave. Technology's role will be to continue
pushing the existing trends forward so that the projection lines all the
analysts have drawn will remain nice and straight.
Friedman's book, The World is Flat, offers a longer list of ten forces that
have "flattened" the world, and he does include some facets of technology
in that list.
39 However, the focus is almost entirely on specific technologies
that enable global competition and collaboration. No attention is given to
the overall impact of accelerating technology, and in particular, subjects
such as artificial intelligence and robotics go virtually unmentioned. I
suspect that this will prove to be a remarkable oversight in a book that is
subtitled "A Brief History of the Twenty-first Century."
Shapiro correctly notes that there is an increasing trend toward breaking
jobs up into pieces and then offshoring these individual tasks and that this
trend has been enabled by the availability of new productivity software that

makes it possible for workers in developing countries to perform
increasingly complex tasks. All this is undoubtedly true. However, the real
question is this: if software can be developed that enables low wage
workers to do all these things, then why would this technology just
arbitrarily stop there? Clearly, it would not. It will continue advancing to
the point where no person at all is required—and it may well do so in far
less time than we might expect.
The reality is that nearly everyone who attempts to forecast the coming
decades seems to identify the wrong trend. Those who subscribe to the
conventional view fail to see that untold millions of competing and
collaborating global workers are ultimately likely to be flattened by the
major force that will truly shape the new century. Globalization is certainly
significant, but it is really a mere offshoot of the primary force driving us
toward change, and that force continues to be technology.
 
 
The China Fallacy
 No conventional view is more widely held than the belief that the future is
likely to belong to China. Once again, this projection is based primarily on
demographics. I have seen studies where researchers project as far out as
2050—more than 40 years into the future. To do this, analysts take a per-
capita income that is somewhat comparable to that of developed nations and
then multiply it by some huge fraction of the Chinese population. In other
words, they assume that a very significant percentage of the 1.3 billion
people in China are going to be dragged into the middle class. And, the
primary force that will do that dragging is going to be the ever-expanding
employment of hundreds of millions of workers in China's manufacturing
sector.
Currently, a large percentage of Chinese manufacturing is focused on
simple, very low value products. Plastic ornaments and toys for Christmas
and 
Halloween 
come 
to 
mind. 
Increasingly, 
however, 
Chinese
manufacturing is expected to creep up the value chain. More complex
products will be produced. It's generally assumed that Chinese companies

will become a disruptive force in the global automotive market at some
point in the not too distant future.
For all this, automation will be essential. The large industrial
corporations in the United States, Germany and Japan that provide this
automation technology are certainly salivating at the prospect of the future
market that China will provide. The Chinese government, meanwhile, is
focused on insuring that as much of this technology as possible gets
transferred to native businesses. Automation is not just about saving money
by eliminating jobs. Automation conveys benefits far beyond that: it makes
more precise and reliable manufacturing possible.* Machines can simply do
things better, faster and with more precision than can any human worker—
regardless of the prevailing wage level. In the future, mass market products
are likely to become more sophisticated, and in many cases physically
smaller. Tolerances will be tighter and the need for precision greater.
Automation is going to fall heavily on China's manufacturing sector and, in
the long run, the impact on employment is likely to be dramatic.
*[ Those who disagree with my argument here will likely cite anecdotal evidence of Chinese
companies that have so far succeeded by substituting low cost labor for automation. BYD, a
manufacturer of batteries and automobiles is one example. The question is whether that business
model is sustainable. I would argue that, especially in the automotive market, the company will
ultimately have to introduce more automation to meet the quality standards required in export
markets. It's also worth noting that such a business model could be sustained in the long run only if
wages in China remain extremely low indefinitely. If that is the case, how will China succeed in
driving domestic consumption and achieving a more balanced economy which is less dependent on
exports? ]
Another potential problem that China seems likely to face is stagnant or
declining demand for its exports in the United States and other developed
nations. As we have seen, as jobs are lost in the Western countries and fear
of structural unemployment there grows, consumer demand will fall. The
reality is that China does not have an integrated, self-sustaining economy. A
substantial fraction of its factories are geared toward exports, and these
exports are largely responsible for the phenomenal economic growth that
China has enjoyed in recent years.
Evidence of this is clearly seen in the stalling growth that is resulting
from the 2008-9 recession. As of early 2009, thousands of Chinese factories

have shut down and millions of workers have lost their jobs. The Xinhua
news agency reported that in January 2009 that Chinese Premier Wen
Jiabao told the state council that 2009 would be the "most difficult year for
China's economic development so far this century." Aside from exports, the
major factor propping up the Chinese economy is the continuing enormous
investment in infrastructure. Clearly however, this level of spending is not
sustainable indefinitely.
Many analysts have called for China to stimulate its domestic demand in
order to help make up for this decline in demand for exports. In reality, this
will be very difficult. The majority of the products produced in Chinese
factories are either not affordable to Chinese consumers, or they are of no
interest. Chinese people are not going to buy those Halloween trinkets.
Even if production could be redirected to domestic needs, demand would
still not materialize because of China's extraordinarily high savings rate.
The percentage of income saved by workers in China has been
estimated to be as high as 30 percent. This compares with a saving rate in
the United States that—at least up until the start of the current economic
crisis—has been essentially zero. Several reasons can be given for this high
savings rate. A number of economists point to the fact that China has no
social safety nets such as retirement pensions, unemployment insurance or
health care insurance for the vast majority of its population. Others
40 argue
that the high saving rate is due to intentional government policies that
repress consumer spending. It is very likely that both of these factors play a
significant role, but my personal opinion is that the importance of saving for
the future is simply integrated deeply into Chinese culture. Obviously,
something like that is very hard to turn around. It seems extraordinarily
unlikely that any government policy would succeed in substantially
increasing Chinese consumer spending—especially in a time of general
economic distress.
Even if we put aside the issue of automation, the immense size of
China's population relative to the global economy represents a significant
challenge to its long-term development. As smaller countries such as Japan
and South Korea industrialized, wages in those countries inevitably rose,
and their populations were largely elevated into a consumer class. China,
however, is so large that the number of available workers is seemingly
limitless.

In addition, the government actively enforces discrimination that tends
to drive wages even lower. Much of the work in China's factories is
performed by migrant workers who officially live in the countryside but are
allowed to come to cities or industrial regions to work. These workers
typically live in factory dormitories and do not have the right to bring their
families to the cities or to genuinely assimilate into an urban middle class.
Wages for these workers are far lower than for urban dwellers, and the
money that they do earn is for the most part either saved or sent home to
help support their families. These workers are not in a position to become
major drivers of local consumption any time soon.
My own opinion on the future of China may well be dismissed as being
too pessimistic. I do not believe that China can fully industrialize along the
same path followed in the West. China is too late—and simply too big.
China's economic development, for all of its phenomenal progress, is in a
race with technology, and that is a race it cannot win.
If I am even partly correct in this projection, then the ramifications for
the rest of the world will be enormous. In the West, we look to the
impending economic might of China with mixed emotions. On the one
hand, we worry about all that power residing in a country that may well
continue to be essentially undemocratic for the foreseeable future. On the
other hand, many of our hopes for the future are tied directly to the
assumption that unfettered economic growth will continue in China. We
look forward to enormous new markets for our products and services, and
we have even gone so far as to pin our hopes for a resolution to some of our
own demographic problems to our expectations for China.
Most people are aware that as the population ages in Western countries,
a tremendous amount of pressure will be put on pension programs like
Social Security in the United States and on retiree health programs. What is
less often discussed is that there is also a potential problem with the general
value of assets. As people work throughout their careers they save for
retirement. The majority of this goes into stocks and bonds, often via 401(k)
plans. When these people then reach retirement age, they begin to sell those
assets in order to maintain their standard of living.
The problem is that, for the first time, we will have a very large number
of older people actively selling assets, while at the same time, a relatively
smaller number of younger workers will be available to buy those assets.
The obvious result is that asset values of nearly all types are likely to fall

under the duress of this lopsided selling pressure. A number of people—
including Alan Greenspan in his book The Age of Turbulence—have
suggested that the solution to this problem is going to be huge numbers of
newly wealthy young workers from China, India and other developing
nations who will step forward to buy our assets. As we have seen, that
might not be such a good bet.
The reality is that the idea of this tremendous new market resulting from
an exploding Chinese middle class is something of a mirage. The Chinese
middle class is not an independent market. These people are essentially
standing on the shoulders of American and European consumers. And as we
have noted again and again in this book, those Western consumers all
depend on jobs. If automation begins to dramatically impact employment in
China, while at the same time demand dwindles in the West—and certainly
if the catastrophic event described at the beginning of this chapter occurs—
then this economic perpetual motion machine is going to collapse.
Given all this, what can we really say about the future of China? Nearly
a fourth of the world's population lives in China; therefore, there is no
doubt that this country will continue to have significant, and perhaps
increasing, influence in the decades to come. However, simply
extrapolating current trends is very unlikely to give an accurate projection.
China is going to heavily impacted by accelerating technology, and its
future—along with the future of developed nations—is going to be highly
unpredictable. Its fate will ultimately be determined by the Chinese
government's ability to maintain control and civil order and to adapt to the
changes that are coming.
In terms of economics, the most important challenge for China is likely
to be transitioning to a self-sustaining economy that is driven by internal
consumption rather than by exports. As we have seen, this will be very
difficult because of low wages, a growing unemployment problem and the
Chinese propensity to save rather than consume. However, local
consumption will be increasingly essential because the primary incentives
which drive the private sector to locate manufacturing in countries like
China are likely to shift dramatically in the coming decades.
  
 

The Future of Manufacturing
 Recent years have seen a mass migration of manufacturing to developing
countries. Low labor costs have clearly been the primary incentive
underlying this trend. In the future, however, factories of all types are likely
to become increasingly automated. As the years and decades progress, labor
costs will comprise a smaller and smaller component of manufacturers' cost
structures.
To get some insight into how automation is likely to continue impacting
manufacturing, it may help to look at a sector which has already been
heavily automated: agriculture in the United States. In her book Travels of a
T-shirt in the Global Economy, economist Pietra Rivoli tells the story of
cotton farming in West Texas. Up until the 1920s, every aspect of cotton
farming was highly labor intensive. Fields were ploughed with mules, and
once the crop was planted, a constant backbreaking vigil was required in
order to keep the weeds a bay. Harvesting required the availability of large
numbers of workers at precisely the right time—before unfavorable weather
conditions destroyed or reduced the value of the crop.
Over the decades, however, the process has become increasingly
mechanized. Today cotton farming in West Texas is almost literally a "one-
man show."
41 A single farmer with access to tractors, specialized machinery
and chemical herbicides can now function almost entirely alone. No
workers are required, and the labor content of cotton produced in West
Texas is essentially zero.
Obviously, not every agricultural sector is as automated as cotton
farming, but there can be absolutely no doubt that the mechanization of
agriculture in developed nations has resulted in a massive and irreversible
elimination of jobs.* The reality is that the manufacturing sector is
following the same path. In her book, Rivoli also cites evidence showing
that many of the jobs lost in the U.S. textile industry are in fact due to
machine automation rather than globalization, and that China, in spite of its
low wage workforce, lost nearly two million textile jobs to improving
automation technology between 1995 and 2002.
42
*[ Cotton farming in poor countries, of course, remains highly labor intensive. However, this should
not be used to argue that manufacturing in poor countries will also remain unchanged. The dynamics

of these sectors are very different—poor farmers are subject to many factors which keep
mechanization at bay, including lack of education and access to capital, small plots with poor
economy of scale, trade barriers, and often outright exploitation at the hands of governments and
corrupt officials. Manufacturing in China is very different from agriculture in Africa (or even China).
]
It is easy to imagine factories of the future that are almost entirely
automated and run by a few skilled technicians. As labor costs fall, we can
expect that energy costs will be rising. Nearly all analysts agree that world
oil production will peak at some point in the coming years and decades.
Beyond this point, in the absence of replacement energy technologies, the
cost of fossil fuels is likely to rise inexorably. Given this, we can reasonably
expect that the primary incentives for locating the factories of the future
will shift away from seeking low labor costs and toward minimizing energy
costs.
One of the most significant drivers of energy expenditure is, of course,
transportation. Economists Jeff Rubin and Benjamin Tal have suggested
that soaring transportation costs resulting from high energy prices alone
may be sufficient to reverse globalization. They point out that once oil
reaches a price of $150/barrel, the additional transportation costs are
essentially equivalent to the tariffs that existed in the 1970s.
43
In a world with automated factories and high energy costs, there will be
clear incentives toward distributed manufacturing. It will make sense to
locate factories as close as possible to consumers and/or to the natural
resources used as inputs in the production process. A primary motivation in
locating factories will be to minimize the transportation costs associated
with moving both inputs and final products. It is also possible that
advancing automation technology may ultimately transform the traditional
economy of scale model so that much smaller and more flexible factories
located in direct proximity to markets make sense.
Aside from energy costs, a second crucial consideration will be political
stability. The forces unleashed by accelerating technology are likely to have
a highly disruptive impact on governments throughout the world.
Businesses will place increasing importance on minimizing investment risk:
they will seek to build factories and hold capital in countries they perceive
as stable. In the future, those nations which can adapt to change so as to
continue to support sustained consumption, maintain stability and rule of

law, and provide reliable access to energy, as well as efficient, energy-
minimizing transportation systems, are likely to have a significant
competitive advantage in terms of attracting and retaining investment.
  
 
India and Offshoring
 We've noted that China does not yet have an integrated, self-sustaining
modern economy. This is equally true of India. India is essentially an
impoverished, developing nation with a government that is democratic, but
also often mired in bureaucracy. In the midst of this, India has an isolated
island of enormous growth and prosperity: its software and offshoring
industries.
India will face exactly the same two retarding forces that are going to
hold back China: First, automation is going to invade its offshoring
businesses (as well as its traditional industries) and take back many of those
jobs. We are likely to see "jobless repatriation" as technology advances to
the point where many lower-skill jobs can be performed by computer
technology.
Indian companies will probably respond by trying to outrun automation.
They will seek to increasingly capture higher value jobs performed by
highly educated and paid workers in Western countries. As we have seen,
however, even many high skill jobs will ultimately be subject to
automation. And any success in capturing higher value jobs will only
exacerbate the second problem, which will be the collapse in demand that
results from fear of job loss in the West.
       
 
Economic and National Security Implications for the United
States
 

What would all this mean for the United States? The answer to that depends
entirely on how well the U.S. can adapt to the new reality. The conventional
views all point to a decline in global influence and power for the United
States. The catch phrases for the coming decades will be "the post-
American era" and "the end of American exceptionalism."
Once again, though, those conventional views are all based largely on
demographics—on counting workers. America is expected to decline
because countries like China and India have dramatically more workers—
and they are willing to work for less. What if, in the future, workers are not
going to be as important as we imagine? What if machines advance to the
point where workers become increasingly superfluous to the production
process? In that scenario, it is all about who controls technology. And as of
the moment, that continues to largely be the United States.
In that sense, the future for the U.S. could potentially be much brighter
than the conventional wisdom suggests. But that is only if we can adapt,
and that will be a very serious challenge. The United States is
fundamentally a conservative country. The risk is very high that we will
continue to cling to our existing system simply because it has always
worked in the past. If that happens, a great opportunity will be lost, and
other countries may well seize the initiative.
If that opportunity is indeed lost, it will clearly have dire national
security and military implications for the United States. The obvious reality
is that America's military power is entirely dependent on its economic
vitality. If the trends projected here are allowed to impact the U.S. economy
in an uncontrolled fashion, the likely result will be greatly diminished
economic 
growth 
(or 
even 
sustained 
decline) 
and 
widespread
unemployment and social problems. This will clearly detract from the
resources and attention that can be allocated to national security.
In the previous chapter, I suggested that there may also be a trend away
from college education and toward trade jobs that are perceived as being
safer from automation and offshoring. This impact may fall especially
heavily on technical fields such as information technology and computer
engineering because jobs in these areas are perceived as being especially
susceptible to offshoring. Clearly, this will threaten the United States' future
leadership position in technology—and therefore its long-term national
security.

As we saw previously, the Pentagon envisions a future in which
technologies such as robotics and artificial intelligence are deployed
increasingly on the battlefield. The reality is that it is impossible to say
exactly which technologies will have important military and national
security applications in the future. The general acceleration of computer
information technology is certain to have a disruptive impact with highly
unpredictable results. We can expect that future technologies that emerge in
commercial settings will rapidly be redirected into the military arena. It is
crucial, therefore, that the U.S. remains competitive in virtually all areas of
technology development.
While advancing technology seems likely to ultimately eliminate job
opportunities for a large number of average people, maintaining control of
that technology will require that the minority of individuals with the
capability to make significant contributions to technical fields continue to
be educated and trained. These people come from a variety of backgrounds
throughout society, and therefore, the disintegration of broad-based
incentives to pursue a college education—especially in scientific and
technical fields—is likely to be disastrous for the United States in the long
run.
   
 
   
OceanofPDF.com

Solutions
 Now that we've identified the danger we might face and some of the
possible implications for the future, let's start thinking about some possible
solutions. What could we do to avoid the scary economic scenario we
discussed at the beginning of this chapter? In order to answer that, let's start
by looking at the idea of labor and capital intensive industries.
 
 
   
 
Labor and Capital Intensive Industries: The Tipping Point
 We can place any industry somewhere on the spectrum that runs from being
extremely labor intensive to being highly capital intensive. In our current
economy, some of the most labor intensive industries are in the retail,
hospitality and small business sectors. Supermarkets, retail chain stores,
restaurants and hotels all have to hire lots of workers. Capital intensive
industries, on the other hand, hire relatively few workers and instead require
investment in technology: in advanced machinery and equipment and in
computerized systems. High tech industries such as semiconductor
manufacturing, biotechnology and Internet-based companies are all capital
intensive.
Over time, as technology advances, most industries become more
capital intensive and less labor intensive. Technology also creates entirely
new industries, and these are nearly always capital intensive.* This has
been going on for centuries, and historically, it has been a good thing. If you
compare the industries in a developed nation like the United States with the
industries in a third-world nation, you will invariably find that the U.S.
economy is far more capital intensive. It has been the introduction of
advanced technology that has increased productivity and made the
advanced nations of the world rich.

*[ Consider the case of YouTube, which was acquired by Google for about $1.65 billion in 2006. At
the time it was acquired, YouTube had only about 60 employees. That's a valuation of over $27
million per employee. Compare that with about $100,000 per employee for Wal-Mart. ]
The reason for this goes back to the economists' explanation for the
"Luddite fallacy" which we discussed in the previous chapter. As new
technology is adopted by industries, production becomes more efficient.
This results in some loss of jobs, but it also results in lower prices for goods
and services. In other words, it puts more money in consumers' pockets.
These consumers then go out and buy all kinds of things, and so the result is
increased demand for the products produced by all types of industries.
Some of these industries are very labor intensive, so as they strive to meet
this increased demand, they are forced to hire more workers. And so,
overall employment remains stable or even increases. Sometimes, of
course, this results in an unpleasant transition for some workers: they may
lose a high paying manufacturing job and end up with a lower paying retail
job.
Can this process continue forever? As we saw in the previous chapter,
automation technology is likely to increasingly invade the remaining labor
intensive sectors of the economy. When this happens, what industries will
be left to absorb all the dislocated workers? Look at the table above. What
happens when McDonalds begins to look more like Google?
A simple application of common sense should show us that there is
some threshold beyond which the overall economy will become too capital
intensive. Once this happens, lower prices resulting from improved
technology will no longer result in increased employment. Beyond this
threshold or tipping point, the industries that make up our economy will no
longer be forced to hire enough new workers to make up for the job losses
resulting from automation; they will instead be able to meet any increase in

demand primarily by investing in more technology. As we saw in Chapter 2,
this point marks the downfall of economists' faith in the Luddite fallacy,
and it also marks the beginning of a downward economic spiral for the
simple reason that workers are also the consumers of everything produced
in our economy.
What might we expect to happen if the overall economy were
approaching this tipping point, beyond which industries would no longer be
labor intensive enough to absorb workers who lost their jobs to automation?
We would probably expect to see gradually rising unemployment,
stagnating wages and significant increases in productivity (output per hour
of labor) as industries were able to produce more goods and services with
fewer workers.
That sounds uncomfortably close to what actually occurred in the years
leading up to the current recession.* In August, 2003, The Economist wrote
that "the Bureau of Labour Statistics offered the latest evidence of
America's productivity revival: output per worker soared by 5.7% in the
second quarter, at an annualised rate. But in today's less exuberant times,
the figure has raised the unhappy prospect of growth without job
creation."
44 Three years later, in an article entitled "The Case of the Missing
Jobs," BusinessWeek said: "Since 2001, with the aid of computers,
telecommunications advances, and ever more efficient plant operations,
U.S. manufacturing productivity, or the amount of goods or services a
worker produces in an hour, has soared a dizzying 24%....In short: We're
making more stuff with fewer people."
45 There is no way to know for sure
how close the economy might be to the point where overall job creation will
permanently stall. However, these statistics are certainly cause for concern.
*[ As I noted earlier, we did not see an increasing unemployment rate in the years leading up to the
current crisis. We did, however, see stagnating wages, increasing productivity and some evidence of
underemployment. ]
 
The Average Worker and the Average Machine
 

Another way to express this idea of a tipping point is to think of an average
worker using an average machine somewhere in the economy. Obviously, in
the real world there are millions of workers using millions of different
machines. Over time, of course, those machines have gotten far more
sophisticated. Imagine a typical machine that is generally representative of
all machines in the economy. At one time, that machine might have been a
water wheel driving a mill. Then it became something driven by a steam
engine. Later, an industrial machine powered by electricity. Today, the
machine is probably controlled by a computer or by embedded
microprocessors.
As the average machine has gotten more sophisticated, the wages of the
worker operating that machine have increased.* As I pointed out in the
previous section, more sophisticated machines also make production more
efficient and that results in lower prices and, therefore, more money left in
consumers' pockets. Consumers then go out and spend that extra money,
and that creates jobs for more workers who are likewise operating machines
that keep getting better.
*[ The idea that long-term economic growth is, to a large extent, the result of advancing technology
was formalized by economist Robert Solow in 1956. Economists have lots of different theories about
how long-term growth and prosperity come about, but nearly all of them agree that technological
progress plays a significant role. ]
Again, the question we have to ask is: Can this process continue
forever? I think the answer is no, and the very unpleasant graph that follows
illustrates this.

The problem, of course, is that machines are going to get more
autonomous. You can see this in the graph at the point where the dotted line
(conventional wisdom) and the solid line diverge. As more machines begin
to run themselves, the value that the average worker adds begins to decline.
Remember that we are talking here about average workers. To get the graph
above, you might take the distribution of incomes in the United States and
then eliminate both the richest and the poorest people. Then graph the
average income of the remaining "typical" people (the bulk of consumers)
over time. If you were to instead graph Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per
capita, you would end up with a similar graph, but the divergence between
the dotted and the solid lines would occur somewhat later. This is because
the wealthiest people (who own the machines or have high skill levels)
would initially benefit from automation and would drag up the average.
Recall that we saw this in our tunnel simulation in Chapter 1.
Once the lines diverge, things get very ugly. This is because the basic
mechanism that gets purchasing power into the hands of consumers is
breaking down. Eventually, unemployment, low wages—and perhaps most
importantly—consumer psychology will cause a very severe downturn. As
the graph shows, within the context of our current economic rules, the idea
of machines being "fully autonomous" is just a theoretical point that could
never actually be reached.
Some people might feel that I am being overly simplistic in equating
"technological progress" with "machines getting better." After all,

technology is not just physical machines; it is also techniques, processes
and distributed knowledge. The reality, however, is that the historical
distinction between machines and intellectual capital is blurring. It is now
very difficult to separate innovative processes from the advancing
information technology that nearly always enables and underlies them.
Improved inventory management systems and database marketing are
examples of innovative techniques, but they rely heavily on computers. In
fact, we can conceivably think of nearly any process or technique as
"software"—and, therefore, part of a machine.
If you still have trouble accepting this scenario, you might try asking
yourself a couple of questions: (1) Is it possible for a machine to keep
getting better forever without eventually becoming autonomous? (2) Even if
it is possible, then wouldn't the machine someday become so sophisticated
that its operation would be beyond the ability of the vast majority of
average people? And wouldn't that lead right back to making the machine
autonomous?
   
 
Capital Intensive Industries are "Free Riders"
 In Chapter 1, we used lights in a tunnel to simulate the mass market. Let's
try a slightly different analogy now. Imagine that the mass market consists
of a "river" of consumer purchasing power. Along the banks of this river are
located industries of all types.
When an industry sells a product or service to consumers in the market,
it pumps purchasing power from the river. An industry also pumps
purchasing power back into the river in two primary ways: first it pays
salaries and wages to workers, and second as technology advances, the
prices that the industry charges fall and this results in more money in
consumers' pockets. As we have seen, however, at some point, the
industries on the banks of our river will become too capital intensive (the
machines they employ will begin to run themselves). Once this happens,
they will collectively begin to pump more purchasing power from the river
than they return to it. The river will begin to run dry.

In the case of a real-world river, we would never advocate allowing a
business or industry to pump unlimited quantities of water from the river
without bearing the appropriate costs associated with preserving that public
resource. A business that somehow circumvented the regulations or costs
associated with the use of the river would be considered a "free rider." In
economic terms, a free rider is someone who jumps on the bus—or utilizes
any public resource—without paying the fare.
Economists do not consider the market itself to be a public resource.
However, I will argue that the market (or the collective purchasing power of
consumers) is really the ultimate public resource. It is the resource from
which virtually all wealth in a free market economy derives. Think of the
words you might use to describe a business that you admire: "well-
managed," "innovative," "efficient." Within the context of our river
analogy, all these things amount to building a better pump. Obviously, a
great pump positioned next to a dry riverbed doesn't have much value.
When a business becomes highly capital intensive and employs few
workers, it becomes a free rider relative to the market resource. This is true
in terms of purchasing power returned to the market and also in terms of its
tax burden.
Imagine a fully automated factory. The only contribution such a factory
would make to our purchasing power river would be by creating products at
a lower price. No wages would be paid. No payroll taxes would be paid.
While lower prices would return some purchasing power to the river, this
would simply not be enough. Over time, as all industries become less labor
intensive, the river will run dry.
In the future, we will need government policies that recognize this
reality. We will need policies that prevent the market river from running
dry. In the long run, if advanced machine automation permanently
disenfranchises a significant fraction of the work force, we will have no
choice except to make some significant changes to our economic system so
that the free market can continue to function. That will be the subject of the
next chapter. In the meantime, our objective should be to stabilize the
system and insure that the job losses due to automation are as gradual as
possible. The most important short-term goal is to avoid the severe
downturn and potentially catastrophic spiral that could result if consumers
someday lose confidence in their future income continuity.
       

The Problem with Payroll Taxes
 Whenever a business hires a worker, it takes on the additional burden of
payroll taxes on the wages or salary paid to that worker. Payroll taxes are
the primary method for funding public retirement, unemployment
insurance, and in many countries, health care. In the U.S., payroll taxes
include one half of the contribution to Social Security and Medicare, as well
as state and federal unemployment insurance.
These taxes create a significant disincentive to hire and retain workers.
As the capability of machine automation approaches that of workers,
payroll taxes will give employers an even greater incentive to eliminate jobs
—or avoid hiring new workers—as quickly as possible. This is especially
true in Europe, where payroll taxes are significantly higher than in the U.S.
and where it is generally more difficult for companies to lay off workers
once they are hired.
The payroll tax-based system will come under tremendous strain in the
coming years as a demographic shift results in a large number of retirees
supported by relatively fewer workers. In the United States, nearly
everyone is aware that Social Security, and especially Medicare, are at high
risk of becoming insolvent in the coming decades. In Europe and in Japan,
the situation is generally even worse. It is very difficult to see how the
generous public pension programs in European countries will be continue to
be sustainable under a payroll tax-based system. The situation will be far
more dire if the trends projected in this book come into play. If in addition
to these demographic realities, broad-based automation of jobs unfolds
simultaneously, the entire payroll tax-based system seems very likely to fall
apart.
As we saw in the previous section, capital intensive industries which
enjoy access to the market while employing relatively few workers are not
bearing their fair share of the costs associated with maintaining a viable
consumer market. Such industries are also avoiding the costs associated
with payroll tax-funded social welfare programs. In a very real sense,
capital intensive industries are stealing from our purchasing power river and
circumventing their responsibility to society.
We can see then that the whole idea of funding social programs via
payroll taxes is fundamentally flawed and outdated. It puts an unfair burden
on labor intensive industries while allowing capital intensive industries to

free ride. That, of course, creates a tremendous incentive for every industry
to become more capital intensive as quickly as possible.
This problem also makes the funding of social programs highly
susceptible to demographic imbalances. The solution is to get away from
the idea of counting workers and taxing based on workers. We need to
instead fund social programs with a different form of tax—a tax that falls
fairly on both capital and labor intensive industries and which will be
sustainable even as automation increasingly encroaches in the future.
Taxation should be based on a business's success in utilizing the market
resource, rather than on the number of workers it happens to employ.
   
 
 
The "Workerless" Payroll Tax
 If we are going to get rid of payroll taxes, then we obviously have to come
up with a viable alternative. We need a tax that falls fairly on every business
that enjoys access to the market—regardless of the number of workers
employed. A simple solution might be to just get rid of payroll taxes and
instead increase general business income taxes. This is probably the right
direction in which to move, but the problem is that businesses only pay
income taxes when they are profitable. Payroll taxes have to be paid
regardless of year-to-year profitability. Obviously, the government needs a
reliable revenue stream in order to fund social programs.
For this reason, I would suggest that a good alternative might be some
form of gross margin tax. The gross margin of a business is a measure of its
basic operating profitability. Essentially it is equal to revenue less cost of
goods sold. Gross margins vary a great deal by industry, so it would
probably be necessary to adjust the tax based on the dynamics of individual
industry sectors. Nonetheless, it should be possible to come up with a
relatively simple formula for a gross margin tax that would raise the same
amount of revenue as the current payroll tax system while distributing the
tax burden fairly among industries. For the vast majority of businesses the

gross margin will always be positive, and a minimum could be enforced if
necessary to insure a reliable revenue stream.
Under this new system, businesses would pay two types of taxes just as
they do currently: (1) They would pay a gross margin tax instead of the
current payroll tax, and (2) they would continue to pay the normal business
income tax. Consider some of the advantages of this system:
Since payroll taxes would be eliminated, the incentive to automate
jobs or move them overseas would immediately be reduced. Likewise,
the prospect of hiring a new worker would immediately become more
attractive.
A business that did choose to automate or offshore jobs would not
be able to avoid contributing to the social programs that support the
population.
The demographic, or "baby boom," issue would be mitigated
because we would be moving away from a model based on counting
workers and toward a model where overall economic activity supports
social programs.
The new revenue system would provide an obvious mechanism for
funding universal health care in the U.S. without creating yet another
incentive to eliminate workers.
It is important to note that a gross margin tax would, of course, only
work in the for-profit sector. In other employment sectors a different
scheme would need to be used, or perhaps payroll taxes could be retained.
   
     
"Progressive" Wage Deductions
 As this book is being written, there is significant public outcry over the
issue of excessive paychecks for corporate CEOs. One of the basic
messages I have tried to express is that extreme income inequality and
concentration of income is not simply an issue of fairness. In fact, it drives
at the very heart of a functional mass market. As we have mentioned
previously, if you consider nearly any moderately priced mass market
product or service, an average worker contributes nearly as much to the

viability of that market as a corporate CEO. An extremely wealthy
individual may purchase a very nice car, or perhaps even several cars. But
he or she is not going to purchase 100 or 1000 automobiles. When income
is too concentrated, it undermines the mass market. That is a reality that
ultimately will affect everyone—and the corporate CEOs of the future are
going to find themselves on the frontline when the wave hits.
Currently, businesses in the United States can deduct all wage and
salary expenses when calculating corporate income taxes. No consideration
is given to how that deduction is distributed among workers. This simply
makes no sense.
I would suggest that a significant job creation incentive could be
established if we instead used a progressive schedule for deductions. This
would work in a somewhat similar fashion to the progressive
46 tax brackets
we now have—except that it would apply to deductions. Here is an example
that is intended only as a very simple illustration. Employers might be
allowed to deduct twice the amount paid to workers making up to $50,000.
From $50,001 to $200,000 a full deduction would be allowed. From
$200,001 to $400,000 half the amount could be deducted. And beyond
$400,000 no deduction would be allowed.
So for example:
For a worker earning $50,000, twice this amount, or $100,000 could be
deducted.
For a worker earning $150,000, $200,000 could be deducted (2 ×
$50,000 + $100,000)
For a worker earning $400,000, $350,000 could be deducted (2 ×
$50,000 + $150,000 + $200,000/2)
For a CEO earning $20 million, a maximum of only $350,000 could be
deducted.
The basic problem with executive pay is that it creates an excessive and
wasteful incentive. Suppose that CEOs were able to earn a maximum of
only $10 million per year (including bonuses). Would there suddenly be an
extreme shortage of corporate CEOs? No one would want to be a CEO? It's
possible that a few CEOs who have already acquired substantial wealth
might decide to just play golf, but by and large, I think it is evident that
being a corporate CEO would remain a pretty attractive option.

The fact is that such enormous paychecks are simply not necessary in
order to attract talent to these positions. The huge paychecks come about
because of corporate cronyism, where executives sit on the boards of each
other's companies, and also because of competition between companies. A
board that does not offer an outsized pay package may well fear that the
CEO will go to a competitor. This is clearly not a healthy or necessary
dynamic for the economy as a whole, and it is really not something that
should be encouraged by tax policy. Obviously, if progressive wage
deductions were implemented, this would have an impact on the total
amount of revenue collected. To address that we might need to adjust the
overall tax rate so that the changes are, at a minimum, revenue neutral.
   
 
Defeating the Lobbyists
 In Chapter 2, I made the point that information technology is advancing at a
geometric (or exponential) rate. Unfortunately, there is also something else
that is accelerating geometrically: the number of lobbyists in Washington.
47
The federal tax code offers one of the few available opportunities to design
specific incentives that might result in significant job creation. The system
of progressive wage deductions that I proposed earlier is just one example
of such an incentive; others with experience in taxation could no doubt
suggest other ideas. However, any such effort to leverage the tax code
seems very unlikely to survive the influence of the special interest groups
that now dominate the legislative process.
In his book The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and
Abroad, Fareed Zakaria makes the point that the ever increasing power that
lobbyists and special interests wield is at least in part due to laws which
force every aspect of the legislative process into the open. While, on the
surface, it may appear that openness in government is always desirable and
more democratic, the reality is that very few of us have the time, energy or
attention span to take an active interest in the intricate and mundane details
of the legislative process. The people who do take active advantage of this
transparency tend to be the ones who have a very significant vested interest

in the in the legislation being considered. Lobbyists are able to follow every
vote in every committee and can immediately exert influence whenever
they see the slightest hint of something they don't like. This has led to
dramatically reduced opportunities for the type of behind the scenes
bargaining and compromise that was once an integral part of the political
process. The end result is a more partisan Congress and a lot less consensus.
One very interesting idea that offers at least a partial solution to this
problem has been proposed by economist Alan S. Blinder.
48 He has
suggested the creation of an independent agency, similar to the Federal
Reserve, which would have the authority to specify the details of the tax
code. Congress would maintain its overall constitutional authority over
taxation, but the details would be removed from the political process and
instead handled by a board of highly skilled professionals.
The current financial situation has clearly demonstrated the absolute
necessity of having a central bank with the authority to respond rapidly in
times of crisis. While not everyone may agree with the wisdom of each
specific action taken by the Federal Reserve as the crisis has unfolded, very
few would dispute the fact that these initiatives have been extraordinarily
creative and have been executed with a timeliness that few other branches
of government could hope to match. We would not want to imagine a
scenario in which the actions undertaken independently by the Fed instead
required a vote in Congress.
In the future, technological change is likely to continue to cause
increasingly disruptive changes in the economy. We have already seen how
the availability of powerful computers made it possible for Wall Street
technicians to create new, exotic forms of tradable securities and how this
led directly to the severity of the global financial crisis. Unanticipated
economic and financial impacts such as this will almost certainly become
more common as technology continues to progress. Given this, we simply
cannot afford to have a government that runs on only one cylinder. We need
a government with the flexibility to leverage all the tools at its disposal in
times of rapid change or crisis. Getting the details of the tax code, and
perhaps other critical facets of government operation, away from the direct,
detail-level influence of Washington lobbyists would be a very important
first step in the right direction.
   

 
A More Conventional View of the Future
 Many of the ideas presented so far in this book are unconventional; many
people may even feel that they are radical. If you visit any bookstore or
library, you can easily find a dozen or more books, often written by well-
known authors, that present an entirely different, and perhaps more
palatable, forecast of the future. Before you dismiss the ideas presented
here, perhaps it would be worthwhile to look in a little more depth at some
of the most widely held conventional assumptions about the future and see
if they are really reasonable:
 
The primary force that will shape the coming decades will be globalization.
Offshoring of jobs and the continuing migration of manufacturing to low
wage countries will be the major threats to the job market in Western
countries. Technology will continue to enable globalization, and jobs will
move across borders with increasing ease, but automation technology will
not result in broad-based, permanent elimination of jobs. Under pressure
from globalization, jobs in the developed economies will evolve increasingly
toward providing services that are anchored locally—and neither
automation technology nor globalization will succeed in penetrating these
protected employment markets.
 
Technology will improve the way we communicate and collaborate. It will
increasingly allow us to work from home, and many of us will have the
opportunity to offer our unique skills directly to the global market on a
piecemeal or freelance basis, joining ad-hoc teams of other workers from
around the world to work on specific projects. Technology will change our
jobs and the way we work; it will allow us to work together in new ways,
but it will never become capable of autonomously doing our jobs.
 
Even as artificial intelligence becomes far more sophisticated and as robots
are increasingly deployed for military applications and perhaps even as
consumer products, the routine and relatively repetitive jobs held by
millions of workers in offices, warehouses, supermarkets, retail chain stores
and small businesses will remain secure.
 

To the extent that any average workers are, in fact, displaced by
automation, they will be retrained or re-educated—and the economy will
always create jobs that will take advantage of those newly acquired skills.
 
Future technology will result in the creation of entirely new industries, and
these industries will offer new employment opportunities. History has
shown that the more technologically advanced an industry is, the more
capital intensive it typically is; as a result, it employs relatively few people.
This will somehow change in the future, so that millions of new jobs will be
available for average workers.
 
As technology advances, manufactured products will become far more
sophisticated and increasingly miniaturized. Specifications and tolerances
will be tighter. Automation will have to be introduced to make this possible.
Nonetheless, factories throughout the world will continue to be relatively
labor intensive, and untold millions of third-word workers will continue to
migrate from the agrarian economy to the manufacturing sector.
 
These third-world factory workers will continue to churn out products that
will be largely consumed by people in developed countries. Workers
(consumers) in the West—supported by their lucrative online collaboration
and piecemeal work—will be eager purchasers of these imports for decades
to come.
 
Ultimately, it is possible that advanced nanotechnology may begin to be
deployed in the manufacturing sector. Nano-manufacturing will involve
manipulating matter at the molecular and perhaps even atomic level. Self-
replicating "nano-bots" may be designed to build products from the ground
up. Nonetheless, all those millions of low wage workers will remain
indispensable to the production process.
 
Does this view of the future really seem more likely—more down to
earth—than what I have presented? Can we expect this forecast to hold true
decade after decade as technology continues advancing at its geometric
pace? The reality seems to be that most people who forecast the future
either cannot imagine, or are not willing to consider, a world in which
human 
workers 
become 
increasingly 
superfluous. 
Economy-wide

automation of jobs is not a technological impossibility; it is a psychological
impossibility.*
 
*[ It's always very dangerous to use the word "impossible" where technology is concerned. History
has shown this again and again. One famous example is Lord Kelvin, the inventor of the Kelvin
temperature scale and one of the preeminent scientists of his day. Kelvin declared that flight by
heavier than air machines was impossible or at best completely impractical. This was just a few years
before the Wright brothers built the first airplane. ]
Many people will dismiss the ideas presented here primarily on a
historical basis. Because this has never happened before, it can never
happen in the future. The problem with this is that, as we saw in Chapter 2,
the geometric acceleration of information technology is sure to have a
disruptive impact on the historical trend line. As it says in every mutual
fund advertisement and prospectus, "Past performance is not a predictor of
future results."
It is especially easy to be dismissive because similar arguments have
been put forth many times in the past. The Luddites, of course, raised the
alarm a bit prematurely in 1811. Over the years, organized labor has on
various occasions pointed out the threat from automation. In his 1995 book,
The End of Work,
49 Jeremy Rifkin gives many examples of the social impact
that job automation has already had and speculates that, in the future, it may
lead to social disintegration, dramatic rises in crime, civil unrest and
possibly even the fall of governments. The alarm has been raised, but so far
the wolf has not shown up. Does that really mean that the wolf is only an
illusion?
  
   
 
The Risk of Inaction
 At the beginning of this chapter, I suggested that a disastrous economic
downturn could result if a critical mass of consumers begins to anticipate
broad-based, permanent job loss due to automation technologies and

globalization at some point in the future. If such a trend does develop, it
seems clear that only the government has the ability to implement policies
to address the situation. The natural incentives in the private sector would
tend to accelerate, rather than resolve, the crisis.
There is an ongoing trend toward concentration of income that is driven
largely by the continuing advance of automation technology and
globalization, and also by a lack of progressive tax policies. Many people
might argue that increasing income inequality is caused primarily by a
"skill premium." In other words, in the modern, technological economy,
people who are highly educated and skilled have a significant advantage in
the labor force. While this has been true so far, it is largely because
relatively low skill jobs have been the first to be automated and also the
first to be subjected to the full force of globalization. As we saw in Chapter
2, advancing automation technology will increasingly threaten highly paid
knowledge workers with college educations. These jobs will also, of course,
be subject to offshoring. Clear evidence of these trends is already apparent
in information technology (IT) jobs, and we can expect this to become
much more broad- based in the future. We can expect that income will
become even more concentrated in the hands of those who are positioned to
benefit directly from the increasing value of technological capital relative to
labor.
Extreme income inequality is generally presented as a social problem or
an issue of basic fairness. While it may be these things, it is also—more
critically—a mathematical problem in terms of the viability of the mass
market. When purchasing power is taken from thousands of average
consumers and concentrated in the hands of one wealthy individual, that
purchasing power is effectively sterilized: it no longer plays a vibrant role
in generating mass market demand for products and services. As we have
seen, this will ultimately cause the market "river" to run dry.
We often hear that income in the United States is today more
concentrated than at any time since the 1920s. The reality is that the risks
from this concentration are probably even higher today because the rise of
the mass market has changed the nature of our economy. Today, virtually
everyone in industrialized society—including especially the most wealthy
individuals—derives his or her income directly or indirectly from the mass
market.

The social impact resulting from the permanent elimination of a large
fraction of the jobs held by average people would obviously be dramatic.
History shows that once unemployment reaches a certain level, the very
foundations of democratic society may be threatened. During the Great
Depression, unemployment reached 25 percent in the United States. Joseph
P. Kennedy, the founder of the Kennedy dynasty, famously said that during
this period, he would have gladly given up half of everything he had, if he
could have been certain of retaining the other half of his fortune under the
rule of law. Clearly, the risks are very real, not just for the bulk of people
whose incomes may be threatened, but also for those wealthy individuals
who may be likely to resist the idea of government policies that include
more progressive taxation.
My purpose in writing this book is to try to give these issues more
visibility in the hope that a constructive discussion and debate can occur.
Perhaps the arguments that I have presented here will turn out to be wrong.
But if they are even partially correct, then we cannot afford to be taken by
surprise; it will be essential to have a plan.
In the next chapter, we will fast forward to a point in the future where
the trend toward widespread job automation has become clear. Once this
happens, there will really be no choice except to come up with some
modifications to our system so that the free market can continue to function
and thrive.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 4
 
OceanofPDF.com

TRANSITION
 
In the previous chapters of this book, we have seen that machine
automation is likely to someday eliminate a substantial fraction of the jobs
now performed by people. Automation is poised to advance on two broad
fronts. First, machines and robots will increasingly take over the routine
jobs in factories, retail stores, offices and warehouses that are now held by
workers.
Second, the existing trend toward technology-enabled self-service will
accelerate. We already see this trend with ATMs, automated checkout isles,
online banking, and automated telephone answering systems. All of these
represent areas where machines allow consumers to independently perform
tasks that once required the involvement of human workers. In the future,
we can expect that this trend will be extended to include cell phones and
other mobile devices so that consumers will be able perform tasks and get
automated assistance almost anywhere.
In addition, the drive toward self-service will also occur within
businesses. New automation tools will enable managers in both large
corporations and small businesses to directly do the jobs and perform the
analysis that once required human employees.
As we saw in the last chapter, if these trends become unambiguous and
are allowed to impact in an uncontrolled manner, the result is likely to be a
severe economic downturn as workers (who are also consumers) begin to
fear for their long-term employment prospects. In Chapter 3, I proposed
some initiatives which might help to stabilize the situation and delay the
onset of this scenario; however, we cannot escape the fact that technological
advance is relentless and that free market incentives will continue to push
the private sector toward the elimination of jobs. Once we accept the fact
that a large fraction of jobs will be automated in the future, then we really
have no choice but to also accept the reality that our economic system, as it
exists today, cannot continue to function indefinitely without modification.
In this chapter, we are going to fast forward far into the future; we will
imagine a time when at least three quarters of the jobs which exist in our
current economy have been permanently automated away. In other words,

the unemployment rate will be at least 75 percent—an almost unimaginably
high level—and there will be no realistic hope that more jobs will be
created in the future. Is it possible to have a prosperous economy and a civil
society in such a scenario?
If we can devise a system that would work in such an admittedly
extreme situation, then we should also be able to figure out a way to
gradually transition into that new system, so that we can maintain economic
stability as automation advances in the coming years and decades. Toward
that end, let's begin by looking at the basic elements of our existing free
market economy.
 
 
The Basis of the Free Market Economy: Incentives
 The free market economy is a natural system that pushes consumers,
businesses, investors and workers to act in ways that ultimately propel
society as a whole toward advancement and greater prosperity. In other
words, as each of us pursues our own self-interest, collectively we move
everyone forward. Through the logic of the market, these collective actions
automatically allocate resources in the most efficient way so that economic
output is maximized. This, of course, is the "invisible hand" that Adam
Smith spoke of.
We can divide the logic of the free market into three broad sets of
incentives:
1. 
Individual consumers act to find the best values for products and
services. In other words, consumers shop around. No one wants to
overpay, and no one wants to end up with an inferior product.
2. 
The owners of businesses and capital compete to maximize profits
by providing the best possible value to consumers. As they do so, they
invest in ways that drive innovation and create new products, services
and industries.
3. 
Individual workers act to maximize their income. They seek the
best possible job, invest in education and training to enhance their

future career prospects, and do their current job to the best of their
ability.
Historically, these three incentives have worked in concert to drive
society toward ever increasing prosperity. As we have seen, the problem we
face if automation eliminates a large fraction of the jobs held by workers is
that consumers and workers are the same individuals. Without reliable
income from employment, there will no longer be a critical mass of viable
consumers. And it is consumers who ultimately drive the mass market
economy. Without the expectation of sufficient market demand, no rational
business owner will invest in increased production or innovation.
  
 
Preserving the Market
 Clearly, in order to preserve the mass market in a largely automated
economy, we need to provide an alternative to jobs. We need a mechanism
that can get a reliable income stream into the hands of consumers. This of
course, is a proposition that will be very difficult for most of us to accept;
the idea that we must work for a living is one of our most basic core values.
The current alternatives to job-based income, such as unemployment
insurance or welfare payments, come with highly negative connotations and
are purposely designed to provide minimal support so that a disincentive to
work is not established.
Our current value system celebrates the importance of our labor. We
believe that work is essential and that consumption is a privilege that
derives from that work. However, this is a belief system that is
fundamentally based on the historical reality that human labor is
indispensable to the production process. What happens when technology
reaches the point where most human labor is no longer essential?
At that point, we will have to undergo a quantum shift in our value
system. In order to preserve the free market system, we will have to come
to the realization that while work (at least for most people) may no longer
be essential, broad-based consumption is essential. In the developed world,
our mass market economy has grown far beyond what is required to simply

provide individuals with basic necessities. In order to maintain the global
economy and drive it toward future growth, we must have a very large
number of consumers with adequate purchasing power—all of whom have
confidence in their future continuity of income. Without that critical mass
of viable consumers, economic decline is mathematically inescapable.
There is really no way to envision how the private sector can solve this
problem. There is simply no real alternative except for the government to
provide some type of income mechanism for consumers. While this idea
will initially, of course, be vehemently opposed, I believe that in time, this
will have to be accepted as a basic function of government.
Consider the viewpoint of an economically conservative or libertarian
thinker. This person is likely to advocate the smallest possible government
and a market that is as free and unregulated as possible. Nonetheless, this
person—if he or she is reasonable—is very unlikely to propose eliminating
government entirely because he or she understands that there is one core
function of government which is critical to the operation of the free market:
the protection of property rights. The government must maintain a national
defense, a police force and a judicial system, and it must enforce and
protect clearly defined rights to own and trade property. Without these
governmental functions, the free market could not operate effectively and
civil society would erode into jungle warfare.
In a future, largely automated economy, the preservation of robust
market demand by providing an income stream to individual consumers
will also have to become a core function of government. This is an idea that
will no doubt initially elicit derision or outrage. In the long run, however, I
believe that there will simply be no alternative.
Market demand powers our economy. No rational business owner will
invest in increased production in the absence of an expectation of demand.
In the economic environment of 2009, consumerism is very much out of
fashion, and this is really not a good thing. The media is replete with stories
about how Americans have gone out and spent too much on big screen TVs.
These stories miss the point. While there will always be some individuals
who act irresponsibly, the overall problem is really not that Americans have
spent too much. The problem is that their spending has been sustained by
borrowing rather than by growth in real income. And this is because, for
most average people, there has been little or no growth in income, while at
the same time, health care costs have been exploding.

In the long run, only sustained consumer spending can turn the economy
around and return us to economic growth. Everything produced by our
economy is ultimately consumed by individual people; we cannot have
long-term prosperity unless enormous numbers of people have sufficient
income—and sufficient confidence in the future—to power sustained
consumption.
Again, conservative economic thinkers may reflexively object to this
view. Conservatives tend to emphasize the importance of production (or the
"supply side") in the natural cycle that occurs between production and
consumption. Conservatives generally favor low taxes and minimum
regulation of producers in the expectation that this will result in increased
economic activity and job creation, which will then lead to strong consumer
demand. The problem with that way of thinking, of course, is that, in an
increasingly automated economy, the job creation will not occur.
Consumers will have little opportunity to participate in the production
process as workers and will lose access to the wages that sustain them. In
the absence of an alternate income mechanism, a collapse in consumer
spending must be the inevitable result.
 
 
Recapturing Wages
 As we begin to envision how it might be possible to design an alternative
income stream for consumers, let's begin by considering how the wages
from a job that has been automated away could be recaptured by the
government. When a business eliminates a job as the result of automation
technology, the income that was previously paid to that worker does not
simply vaporize. In fact, it is redirected in two ways: (1) Some of the
income accrues to the owners and managers of the business, and (2) some
of the income is redirected to the consumers of the business's products or
services in the form of lower prices.
Therefore, the government can recapture the wages from the automated
job with some combination of two types of taxes. First, higher business
taxes, capital gains taxes and more progressive income taxes on wealthy

individuals can be used to recapture the income that goes to the business's
owners. The gross margin tax proposed in the previous chapter or a carbon
tax might also provide effective mechanisms for recapturing some of this
income. Secondly, some form of consumption tax could be used to
recapture that portion of the lost wages that results in lower prices. This
consumption tax might be a simple sales tax* or a value added tax (VAT)
similar to the ones already popular in Europe.
*[ If a sales tax is used it should certainly be an internal tax that is incorporated into the total price
(similar to gasoline taxes) rather than an external tax that is tacked onto the total (like state sales
taxes). ]
Once again, these ideas will probably be met with strong resistance.
Wealthy individuals and business owners will initially be very unhappy.
However, a business manager in the future will ultimately have to face two
alternatives: (1) A new form of taxation designed to redirect income to
consumers, or (2) catastrophically falling demand. This is really not a
difficult choice. In an automated economy, low tax rates and robust demand
are going to be fundamentally incompatible. In the absence of the jobs that
currently power consumers, some new form of taxation will be essential for
creating an income mechanism that leads to sustained demand for products
and services.
It is very important to note that I am not advocating taxes so high that
all value from technological progress is recaptured. As technology
advances, it provides benefits far beyond simply eliminating jobs.
Innovation results in new products and services and creates entirely new
and very lucrative markets. Consider the case of a fully automated factory.
As technology progresses, the factory will continue to become even more
efficient and produce products at lower prices, even though all the jobs have
already been eliminated. The taxes I have proposed are intended only to
recapture the wages from jobs that have been automated away. In other
words, the higher taxes will simply replace the wages that would have been
paid in the absence of automation. Beyond this, the owners of the business
will continue to benefit from their investments in improved technology. To
see this, consider the table that follows.

The table above offers a hypothetical and admittedly simplistic example
of a product or service that has a current unit cost of $100.* The table
shows that $40 of this currently represents wages paid to non-executive
employees. Over time, as automation progresses, the portion of the unit cost
allocated to wages falls to $10. Notice, however, that the "other costs"
category also falls. This represents the cost benefits of advancing
technology, which are distinct from the elimination of wages. The goal
should be to impose a tax that recaptures the lost wages, without also
capturing the additional non-wage related benefits of innovation. In this
example, we have recaptured all of the lost wages. In reality, we might want
to impose a somewhat lower tax on businesses and then use an additional
consumption tax to capture the remaining wage income. This strategy will
insure that the business continues to see a meaningful incentive to innovate.
*[ For simplicity, I have expressed this idea in terms of per-unit cost. In practice, it would be better to
base the wage recapture scheme on wages as a percentage of total revenue for the business. ]
One approach to this problem might be to develop historical wage
guidelines for each type of business based on industry, business size, etc. As
automation increases, the wage recapture taxes would be gradually raised so
that the total of wages paid and wage recapture taxes remained relatively
constant as a percentage of revenue over time. The government would keep
the revenues raised from these special taxes completely separate from the

revenues it uses for its normal operations. The revenue from these taxes
would then be used exclusively to replace income from lost wages.
It would also be possible to design a wage recapture scheme which de-
emphasizes direct taxes on business and relies more on a consumption tax.
The problems with this are that the tax would need to be very high and
would be regressive (it would fall most heavily on those with low incomes).
However, this could be addressed partly by charging a lower tax rate on
necessities and a higher tax rate on luxury goods. It should also be
combined with more progressive income taxation on individuals. A strategy
relying more on a consumption tax would have the advantage of not making
domestic producers less competitive with their international counterparts.
Any significant consumption tax would have to be imposed equally on
Internet sales and would require the creation of a mechanism for insuring
that taxes were paid on items being shipped from overseas (otherwise sales
would simply gravitate to offshore merchants). The consumption tax would
also either have to apply to services as well as tangible products, or service
providers would need to be subject to a direct wage recapture tax.*
*[ It might also be necessary to have different tax rates for different products or services based on
labor content. For a service that remained labor intensive, the rate could be lower since wages were
already being paid. For a highly automated service the tax rate would be higher. ]
  
The ideas I am presenting here, of course, represent only a basic
framework. The details and the tradeoffs between various types and levels
of taxation would need to be worked out using extensive analysis and
probably through computer simulation of the economy. Obviously, any real
world taxes that we implement in order to recapture the income from
automated jobs will end up doing so in an imperfect way. We also know that
government tends to be inefficient and wasteful. However, that does not
change the reality of the situation. Since government is the only entity that
can impose overall regulation and collect taxes, there is no realistic
alternative to some form of government involvement.
One essential principle of any such scheme to recapture wage income is that
the revenues raised must be kept separate. An absolute firewall should be
established between this special function of government and the funds used
for general government operation. This should be made easier by the fact
that the funds would be immediately distributed to consumers; there would

not be any long-term fund that could be raided and used for other purposes.
A second important point we can make is that, eventually, this special and
separate government function would subsume many of the activities now
provided for by other government programs. Welfare, unemployment
insurance and even social security could ultimately be replaced by this new,
separately managed, income scheme. That would leave a far smaller
government core.
   
 
Positive Aspects of Jobs
 While it is conceptually not difficult to envision how the government might
recapture lost wages through special taxes, it is much harder to design an
effective way to direct that income to consumers in the absence of jobs. In
fact, the incentives attached to jobs provide many benefits beyond income,
both to individuals and to society as a whole:
Jobs provide a useful occupation for our time. They provide
individuals with a sense of purpose, and they result in a more orderly
and civil society.
Jobs provide hope for advancement. Even those workers in the lowest
paid professions can hope that they will someday be afforded a better
opportunity. The presence of this hope for the future is an important
component of stability—both for an individual's emotional state and
for society in general. Belief in the possibility of a better future is also
a significant driver of current consumption.
Jobs motivate people to invest in education, training and other forms
of self improvement. An individual's primary incentive for such an
investment may be the promise of a better career, but both the
individual and society as a whole derive many ancillary benefits.
Clearly, if we are to come up with an alternative income mechanism, it
is essential that these incentives somehow be preserved. The lack of these
incentives is a primary problem with current welfare programs. Welfare, as
it is currently implemented, provides few incentives for self improvement

and little hope for the future. It tends to result in a permanent underclass,
and it certainly does not create the type of viable consumers that we need to
power the economy of the future.
  
 
The Power of Inequality
 The idea of incentives is closely tied to the concept of income inequality. In
this book, I have made the point that extreme income concentration and
inequality will ultimately undermine the viability of the mass market.
However, it is important to note that the other extreme also presents very
serious problems. A program in which everyone is provided with a
relatively equal income—in return for doing nothing—provides no
motivation for self improvement, no sense of self-worth and no hope for a
better future. This is the problem with existing welfare programs.
What we need then is a mechanism that provides for unequal (but not
unfair) incomes. We need to synthetically recreate the rewards and
incentives that are currently tied to jobs. The ideal is to provide unequal
income but equal opportunity, so that every individual can have a realistic
expectation of advancing his or her position. Most importantly, we need to
insure that the incentives built into the system motivate individuals to do
what is best for themselves and for society as a whole.
  
 
Where the Free Market Fails: Externalities
 While there is little question that the free market offers the best overall
efficiency of any known economic system, it is nonetheless an imperfect
system. Perhaps the biggest shortcoming of the free market economy is in
the area of externalities. An externality is a cost (or benefit) which falls on
society as a whole, but which is not incorporated into the individual
incentives faced by businesses and individuals.

A classic example of an externality is industrial pollution. In the absence
of government regulation, it costs a factory nothing to simply dump toxic
waste into the environment. In fact, the natural operation of the free market
would drive even environmentally conscious business managers to pollute
because, if they decided to unilaterally bear the extra costs of handling
waste properly, they would find themselves at a competitive disadvantage.
For this reason, governments enforce regulations regarding toxic waste and
pollution.
The most significant externality that society will have to deal with in the
coming decades is, of course, climate change brought on by uncontrolled
carbon emissions. In the near future, we can hope that regulations or taxes
will increasingly be implemented to help address this issue.
In general, governments have reasonable success enforcing laws that
help minimize negative externalities at the industry level, but it is much
harder to effectively address externalities at the individual consumer level.
This is a huge problem because the day-to-day choices made by billions of
people throughout the world obviously have an enormous collective impact
on the environment.
Because you care about the environment, you may be drawn to the idea
of replacing your older, fuel inefficient car with a newer hybrid model.
While this may save you some money on gasoline, you will quickly realize
that once you factor in other costs, such as depreciation, the transaction
probably does not make sense on a purely financial basis. In fact, individual
incentives for acting in environmentally conscious ways are typically quite
weak. While public education does succeed in motivating many people to
make the right choices in terms of the cars they drive, or a decision to use
public transit, or participation in recycling programs, there is little doubt
that far better results could be obtained if the incentives were somehow
stronger.
Your income depends on your job, and so you are sure to wake up in the
morning and arrive at work on time. That is a powerful incentive. What if
your income also depended to some extent on your behaviors relative to the
environment? Clearly, that would cause a dramatic readjustment in the
priority that we all give to acting in environmentally responsible ways.
While designing a system that replaces the idea of a traditional job with
some other mechanism for delivering income to consumers is a serious
challenge, we can now see that it also presents an enormous opportunity.

Clearly, we will want to incorporate incentives that directly address
environmental issues (and other externalities) into our new income
mechanism.*
*[ Some people might object to the idea of incorporating environmental incentives into income as
government intrusion. Remember, however, we are only talking about income that is provided by the
government. Individuals with private sources of income would be free to ignore the incentives. ]
  
Creating a Virtual Job
 At the most basic level, a job is essentially a set of incentives. As a person
acts according to those incentives, he or she performs work that is currently
required in order to produce products and services. In the economy of the
future, if that work is no longer required, we will need to create "virtual"
jobs. In other words, people will continue to earn income by acting in
accordance with incentives, but their actions will not necessarily result in
"work" in the traditional sense.
The income earned by individuals must be unequal and dependent on
each individual's success in acting according to the established incentives.
This will insure that people are motivated to act in ways that benefit
themselves as well as society as a whole. Most importantly, this system will
get a reliable stream of income into the hands of consumers, and as we have
seen, that is absolutely essential in order to create sustained demand for
mass market products and services and therefore drive the economy. If we
can do that successfully, then the free market economy can continue to
operate and generate broad-based prosperity indefinitely.
The obvious questions that arise next are: What should these incentives
be, and who should set them? The basic incentives should be fairly obvious;
we simply need to combine the best positive incentives that are currently
built into the idea of a traditional job with additional incentives that directly
address the externalities that our current system overlooks. I would suggest
that the incentives should be roughly as follows:
  
Education

The most important determinant of income should be the level of education
achieved. Individuals with more education should earn more. A more
educated population has many benefits to society, including a lower crime
rate, greater civic participation, a more informed electorate and a more
flourishing cultural environment. In addition, more educated individuals are
far more likely to find fulfillment in a future where traditional work takes
up a smaller fraction of each person's time.
While 
automation 
may 
eventually 
eliminate 
full-time 
work
opportunities for the bulk of the population, there will continue to be a
minority of individuals who have the necessary entrepreneurial skills and
knowledge to participate actively in driving technological advancement and
economic growth. These individuals will require a high degree of education
and training. By emphasizing the idea of education for everyone, we will
maximize the number of such individuals that will become available and,
therefore, improve the prospects for continued advancement and prosperity.
I would go further and argue that, in addition to providing incentives for
pursing formal educational degrees, we should create a program that
motivates people to routinely acquire knowledge by engaging in continuing
education programs or even simply by reading. Recent surveys have shown
that the number of people who regularly read books is in continuing
decline. Studies have also shown that our population is, in many cases,
disturbingly ignorant of even the most basic knowledge. A recent National
Science Foundation survey showed that 20 percent of the U.S. population
actually believes that the sun is in orbit around the earth!
50 Likewise, too
many Americans would probably be hard pressed to find Iraq or
Afghanistan—two countries in which we are actively engaged in wars—on
a map of the world.
At the same time, we seem to be moving increasingly toward a direct
democracy model in which a largely uninformed electorate is given
influence over detailed government policy. In California, this occurs
literally in the form of ballot initiatives, but even at the national level, it
happens when politicians adjust their positions based on opinion polls.
There is also strong evidence to suggest that while the Internet provides
unprecedented access to information, too many of us, especially among the
younger generation, are failing to assimilate that information. The migration
toward a society in which a large part of the average person's knowledge of

the world resides not in his or her brain, but in online information sources
like Wikipedia, is dangerous and unacceptable.*
*[ Incentive incomes could be easily tied to the number of books a person reads. Future technology
should make it possible for an artificial intelligence algorithm to scan a book and instantly create a
comprehension test. It is, of course, easy to laugh or sneer at the idea that people should be paid to
read instead of to work. But, as I have tried to point out here again and again, if we transition into an
automated economy, we will have to pay people to do something—or we will have a general collapse
of consumer demand. Providing our citizens with an incentive to read and become informed is really
not a silly utopian idea: it is ultimately a matter of basic national security. ]
 
Community and Civic Activities
A second set of incentives should be designed to motivate individuals to
participate in activities that enhance community, civic and cultural
development. In his book, The End of Work, Jeremy Rifkin advocates the
creation of a "third sector" which would be focused on providing
community and social services, and this idea should certainly be
incorporated into our incentive scheme. It is likely that in the future, we
may see a mix of direct incentive-based income streams and traditional full
or part-time jobs.
As automation advances, the remaining traditional jobs are likely to be
those that require uniquely human attributes. In the future, we will continue
to need social workers, community activists, health care workers, and
people who specialize in working with children. By emphasizing education,
we will likely create many traditional jobs for teachers at all levels.
It is important to note that our new economic model will not in any way
prevent individuals who wish to work and can find positions from doing so
and earning additional income. We are simply recognizing that there will
not be enough of these jobs for everyone, and that they will not, by
themselves, provide an adequate income level for the population. Income
earned from traditional jobs should, in general, be in addition to and
independent of, the incentive-based income paid by the government. This
would insure that a sufficient incentive exists to attract workers into areas
where traditional work is still required.
 

Journalism
Another area which is related to the idea of civic and community
involvement is professional journalism. The framers of the U.S. constitution
recognized that the scrutiny of government provided by a free press was
essential to freedom, and they acted to insure that the press was protected
from government tyranny.
The framers could not have anticipated, however, that it would
ultimately be the Internet, rather than government, that would be the
primary threat to the existence of independent journalism. While it is likely
that the press will continue to provide effective scrutiny of government at
the federal level, we already face a significant risk at the city and local
levels. Major cities throughout the United States, which used to support
competing newspapers, are now served by only a single publication. In San
Francisco, the survival of the only major newspaper is currently at severe
risk. The existence of one or more credible and professional publications
that shine a continuous light on the actions of government at all levels is
critical to effective democracy, and our incentive scheme could recognize
this by providing direct support to those who engage in this activity.
 
The Environment and other Externalities
Finally, our incentive scheme must incorporate the idea of externalities, and
the most important of these will be environmental in nature. Individuals
who make choices that are positive for the environment should be paid
more. By tying income directly to environmentally conscious actions we
would create powerful incentives that would minimize our collective
negative impact on the planet. By adopting this idea, we have the potential
to create a system in which economic prosperity is directly coupled with
favorable environmental outcomes. In addition, the system would be
flexible enough so that it could be refined to address significant
externalities that might arise in the future.*
*[ Another obvious possibility for income incentives is personal health. There are a number of health
issues, especially obesity, which have enormous costs for both individuals and society. This,
however, is a very tricky area. A simple approach might be to just pay higher incomes to people

within a healthy weight range, but this would raise legitimate fairness and discrimination concerns.
Another possibility would be to create incentives for healthy behaviors, but this would be difficult to
track and verify. In general, health-based incentives would require the government to have access to
and track a lot of very personal information, and this would likely raise privacy concerns and the
specter of Big Brother. For these reasons, I have relegated health-based incentives to a footnote, but
this may be a fertile area for further thought and discussion. ]
 
Setting the Incentives
Who should be responsible for defining these incentives and setting the
associated income levels? Clearly, this would have to be a function of
government, although it might be privatized to some degree (see below). In
Chapter 3, I argued that we should consider creating an independent agency
to administer the details of the tax code. We would certainly not want our
future incentive scheme to be directly influenced by special interests, so it
therefore seems likely that the creation of another independent agency
would make sense. A "National Incentives Board" could be set up to define
and maintain income incentives. This agency would be staffed by
professionals and would be able to adjust incentives over time in much the
same way that the Federal Reserve controls interest rates.
For those who dislike the idea of a new Fed-like agency, another
interesting idea might be to instead give the power to set incomes and
incentives to a quasi-private corporation. This would be a corporate entity
whose income would be entirely dependent on the overall performance of
the economy as measured by a number of broad quantitative parameters.
These parameters might include things like economic growth, keeping the
distribution of income within reasonable bounds, environmental impact,
and the average education level of the population.
It might also be feasible to give every citizen stock in this corporation,
perhaps with a long vesting period so that shares could not be rashly sold.
Obviously, such a corporation would need to be very highly regulated both
in terms of its actions, and in terms of who could own stock and what
percentage of ownership would be allowed for any one individual or group.
(It would be critical to insure that the corporation always acted according to
the incentives set by the government, rather than in the interests of
individuals or groups who controlled a lot of stock.)

While such an entity might offer a somewhat more market-oriented
approach to solving the incentive and income problem, the government
would still need to regulate the corporation and define the quantitative
parameters used to evaluate its performance. Again, we would not want this
to be politicized or influenced directly by special interests, so some type of
independent government board would probably be required, or perhaps this
authority could be given to the Federal Reserve.
  
 
Smoothing the Business Cycle and Reducing Economic Risk
 Incentive-based income streams provided by the government would largely
decouple consumers' income from jobs in the private sector. This would
tend to mitigate recessions because job losses would no longer result in
substantial cutbacks in consumer spending.
In essence, the effect of moving away from traditional jobs and toward
an incentive-based income scheme would be to make the entire economy
more robust and less susceptible to unanticipated shocks. As we saw in
Chapter 2, accelerating technology has played an important role in making
the financial markets more volatile and more vulnerable to unexpected
events such as the 2007 subprime meltdown. Once the current global crisis
eases, we can be sure that governments will turn to the task of attempting to
contain this risk in the future by imposing regulation on the markets.
However, the impact of advancing technology will not be confined to just
the financial markets. We will ultimately have to address the issue of
systemic risk throughout the entire world economy, and this will eventually
involve transitioning to a more robust model.
  
 
The Market Economy of the Future
 

The scheme that I have proposed above essentially involves adopting
special taxes to recapture the income from lost jobs and then having the
government redirect that income according to individual incentives—
without the requirement for traditional "work." The conservative reader is
likely to violently recoil from this idea. Is this not the worst form of Robin
Hood socialism? Am I not proposing to steal from those who have worked
hard to build a business and then simply give the proceeds to masses of
indolent people in return for doing nothing?
I will argue that I am proposing none of these things. Put yourself in the
place of a small business owner. Remember that we are still thinking in
terms of our extreme future scenario with 75 percent unemployment. How
would your business survive in such a situation?
The special wage recapture taxes that you would be required to pay as a
business owner would be an inconvenience to you; you would, of course,
prefer that you not have to pay them. (The same could be said of the wages
you currently pay to your employees.) However, the wage recapture taxes
paid by every other business will collectively power the consumers that
drive your sales (exactly as the wages paid by other businesses do today).
We must find a way to redirect income to large numbers of consumers,
or market demand will not be sustainable. It is not necessary to require
work for that income because in an automated economy such work will not
be required. The recipients of this income will not do "nothing;" they will,
in fact, be motivated to behave in ways that benefit us all. The new taxes
that I propose are simply a replacement for the wages that would have been
paid in a less automated economy.
Without government intervention of this type, free market forces,
together with increasing automation, will drive our society toward an
unsustainable concentration of income. Imagine a modern, industrialized
society in which 95 percent of the population is impoverished and leads a
subsistence level existence with little or no discretionary income, while the
remaining 5 percent receives nearly all the income. In such a scenario, the
majority of industries now in existence would collapse. The businesses
from which most wealthy people derive their incomes would fail.
While this is obviously an extreme example, the reality is that economic
decline would occur long before such an extreme concentration of income
was achieved, and that decline would be accompanied by the deflation of
nearly all asset values. The wealthy will not be able to maintain their high

incomes by selling things exclusively to each other. The days of the feudal
economy are gone. We now have a mass market economy.
As long as an enormous mass market of viable consumers is preserved,
the primary incentives that drive the free market economy will remain
intact. In the future, it will still be possible to become extremely wealthy by
building a new business or product. In fact, it may in some ways, be easier
to do so than today. Many business strategists believe that future marketing
will increasingly entail selling customized or unique products to huge
numbers of small market niches.
51 Evolving online technologies will make
it easier to reach the consumers in these tiny niches and offer them highly
personalized products and services. This will likely create many
opportunities for entrepreneurs and small businesses to create new products
geared toward specific market segments. It will also enable large businesses
and new industries to sell huge numbers of different products on a highly
targeted basis.
However, it should be obvious that the existence of a huge number of
viable market niches depends on a robust and ever expanding universe of
consumers. In order to provide future entrepreneurs with a rich market for
new ventures, we have to somehow insure that the average consumers in
our population have access to reliable income streams even as traditional
jobs are increasing automated away.
Consider the business model of an Internet company like Google.
Google relies on revenue from online advertisements that are highly
targeted. The advertisers who use Google's system do so because they have
confidence that their ads will attract viable consumers with adequate
discretionary income. In today's economy, nearly all of those consumers
rely on jobs. If at some point in the future, it became obvious that the
universe of viable consumers was substantially diminished, advertisers
would be far less interested and Google's business model would clearly be
threatened.
History has shown that only a select minority of the population has the
combination of skill, entrepreneurship, access to capital, and luck that is
required to start and run a successful business. This reality will not change:
most people are destined to be buyers rather than sellers. The individuals
who do succeed in building businesses in the future will likely find that
wages paid to employees account for a far smaller fraction of their
expenses. However, they will have to pay higher taxes to compensate for

this; otherwise, they will not enjoy vibrant market demand for the products
and services they create.
  
 
An International View
 Many people might object to the ideas presented here on the grounds that if
a country, such as the United States, were to raise business taxes
substantially it would become less competitive relative to other countries
and would therefore attract less investment. If you look back at the table,
which showed how a wage recapture tax might affect the unit cost of a
hypothetical product or service, the unit cost is clearly higher after taxes to
recapture lost wages are implemented. For products or services that face
international competition, this would constitute a problem. One solution
might be to rely more on a consumption tax rather that a direct business tax.
In countries such as the United States, of course, the manufacturing sector
has already largely migrated overseas and employment has become
increasingly service oriented. In the U.S., the greatest danger is going occur
when the service sector automates, and direct foreign competition is less of
an issue in that arena.
In the long run, job automation will clearly be a worldwide
phenomenon. No country will escape its impact, and this includes
developing nations with low wages. As I pointed out in the previous
chapter, we are likely to see a shift in the incentives that drive businesses to
choose where they invest. Political stability, minimized transportation and
energy costs, and proximity to sustained consumption markets will be
primary issues in the future.
In the broader sense, we can speculate that an automated economy
would, in many ways, redefine the nature of global trade. Some trade
between countries occurs because of the availability of natural or
agricultural resources (oil or French wine, for example), but much trade
occurs because of labor dynamics. If a particular country has low wages
and/or a particularly skilled workforce, it currently enjoys an advantage that

will lead to trade. In an automated economy, where workers play a far less
significant role, this trade dynamic would obviously be less important.
There are really only two primary reasons that the government of a
country would want to attract factories and business investment: jobs and
taxation. As automation reduces the number of jobs, taxation will become
increasingly important. It seems likely that once this issue becomes
apparent, some degree of cooperation between nations will develop.
Perhaps international entities such as the World Trade Organization will
address this issue by setting standards for taxation. We cannot expect that
the transition to a new model would be entirely smooth, and perhaps in
some cases, protectionist measures will be necessary. While free trade may
be desirable, it should clearly be a lower priority than the preservation of
our entire economic model.
  
 
Transitioning to the New Model
 Now that we have seen how the government might be able to support the
consumers of the future by redirecting incentive-based income streams
captured through taxation, we can begin to think about how to transition
into this new model. The primary problem we face is that the current
economy is still highly reliant on human labor. We need to develop a system
that avoids creating a disincentive to perform necessary work. In other
words, we don't want to create inequities by requiring some people to work
and not others, and we don't want a "moral hazard" that pushes people to
avoid work and seek government support instead.
The answer must be some type of job sharing solution. The exact
mechanics of this solution would need to vary depending of the nature of
the job. For many job types, it might be possible to simply move toward a
part time work schedule so that more people are employed doing the same
amount of work. For jobs that do not lend themselves to part time work, a
rotation scheme could be used. A worker might rotate into a job on a
monthly or even a yearly basis. Jobs could be shared by giving workers a
sabbatical at different times of the year.

In each case, workers would be supported by supplementary incentive-
based income streams from the government. As automation progresses and
more jobs are eliminated, this supplementary income stream will become an
increasingly important component of total income. In large corporations and
organizations, it might be possible to handle job rotations internally. In
smaller businesses, it would probably be necessary to set up external
mechanisms so that workers could rotate between employers. Obviously,
regulations and/or incentives* would be required to implement these job
sharing schemes.
*[ The tax code could be used to provide an incentive for participation in a job sharing scheme. In the
previous chapter I suggested the idea of "progressive" deductions for wages paid. In a similar
fashion, higher deductions could be provided to businesses that agreed to incorporate job sharing into
their business models. ]
Needless to say, the business community is likely to initially oppose this
idea and dismiss it as expensive and unworkable. As I've pointed out
however, businesses will ultimately have to choose between government
intervention and taxation and the existence of a robust market. Once this
tradeoff becomes clear, opposition will be less vigorous. We see a similar
phenomenon in the health care arena, where many industries that opposed
efforts at reform in the 1990s now at least recognize the problem and have
lined up behind the general concept of reform—although no consensus has
yet been reached on a solution.
One thing that is abundantly clear is that, in a world where traditional
jobs are disappearing, access to health care insurance cannot be coupled to
employment. One of the primary near term goals for the United States
should be to establish a universal health care system that is not tied to jobs.
Additionally, as I pointed out in Chapter 3, payroll taxes will become
increasingly unsustainable. The first steps in transitioning to a our new
model will have to be to shift the burden for maintaining social programs
away from taxes on individual jobs and toward a broader, more sustainable
model which falls more fairly on capital intensive industries that employ
relatively few people. The burden that falls on a business should depend not
on how many workers it employs, but on how successful that business is at
deriving wealth from the market.

Once a system is put in place that allows work to be shared on an
equitable basis, it should be possible to achieve a relatively smooth
transition into an automated economy. Over time, the incentive-based
income streams provided by the government would increase, and the
amount of traditional work performed would decrease. As job automation
increases and the wages paid by businesses fall, the special taxes that have
been put in place would need to be gradually increased to recapture the
income.
In addition to the primary economic objective of sustaining consumer
demand, this would of course, have many positive impacts on society.
Individuals would have more time for family, leisure, personal health and
education. Better educated consumers with more leisure time and more
confidence in their future incomes would result in sustained consumer
spending, vibrant demand for new products and services, and long-term
economic growth. As incentive-based income became more important
relative to traditional wages, individuals would see increasingly potent
incentives to act in environmentally conscious ways, and that would
potentially have a significant, favorable impact on climate change and other
environmental challenges in the coming decades.
 
Keynesian Grandchildren
 

While few contemporary economists seem particularly concerned about the
seemingly inevitable transition to an automated economy, one legendary
economist did have remarkable insight into the future. In 1930, as the world
plunged into the Great Depression, John Maynard Keynes wrote an essay
entitled "Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren."
52 In his essay,
Keynes coined the term "technological unemployment," writing:
We are being inflicted with a new disease of which some readers many
not yet have heard the name, but of which they will hear a great deal in
the years to come—namely, technological unemployment. This means
unemployment due to our discovery of means of economising the use
of labour outrunning the pace at which we can find new uses for
labour.*
*[ Today, when economists discuss the causes of the Great Depression, they tend to focus almost
exclusively on the monetary policy of the Federal Reserve. While there is little double that the overly
restrictive policies of the Fed prolonged the Depression and perhaps turned a run of the mill recession
into a disaster, it should not be forgotten that there was a widespread belief at the time that the
technological unemployment (and the resulting plunge in consumer demand) that Keynes spoke of
played an important role. Even Albert Einstein expressed this opinion when asked for his take on the
causes of the Depression during a visit to the United States in 1933. ]
Keynes recognized that, in 1930, technological unemployment would be
a temporary phenomenon and that the economy would eventually absorb
the excess workers. The main thrust of his essay was to attempt to look
much further into the future. Keynes argued that over the next hundred
years (in other words, by the year 2030), the economies of developed
nations would grow dramatically. He showed that, over time, economic
growth would operate much like compound interest in a bank account and
make the society of the future far more wealthy. Keynes had a very
optimistic view of the long-term future; some would argue he was
unrealistic. He believed that humanity was "solving its economic problem"
and that the future would be one of relative abundance.
Keynes also foresaw clearly that future technologies would result in less
need for human labor. He believed that we would enter a new "age of
leisure" and he worried that we might struggle to find purpose in a world

that did not require work. Importantly, he also foresaw the need to share
whatever work was required across the population:
...we shall endeavor to spread the bread thin on the butter—to make
what work there is still to be done to be as widely shared as possible.
Three-hour shifts or a fifteen hour work week may put off the problem
[the "problem" being a lack or purpose or activity to occupy time] for
a great while.
In evaluating Keynes' essay, we should keep in mind that attempting to
predict events a hundred years into the future is a remarkably ambitious
undertaking. What economist (or stock market trader) today is capable of
predicting the status of the economy even six months out with any
confidence? Personally, I think that Keynes' take on the future was in many
ways remarkably prescient. In particular, I think his view that technological
progress would be relentless and would ultimately reduce the need for
human labor is very likely to be vindicated in the coming years and
decades. His view of how we would go about sharing the work is also
essentially correct, but a bit more problematic in terms of how it will
evolve. As a practical matter, I think there are a few observations we can
make.
First, left to its own devices, the free market is very unlikely to produce
a viable system in which work is shared equitably. Employing (and
training) multiple people to perform a job that could instead be done by one
person places an excess burden on businesses. They will not take on that
burden voluntarily. Government regulation will be required to make it
happen. Where businesses do today hire part time workers, they often do so
in an effort to avoid regulation or paying for benefits. A second obvious
problem is that the wages from part time work will not provide anything
approaching an adequate income for workers. In today's economy, part time
workers often have to string together multiple jobs in order to earn a living
wage.
In general, I think three basic things will be required for us to move to
an effective transitional economy and to begin to realize the vision that
Keynes wrote of in 1930: (1) We will need the government to enforce a
work-sharing scheme. (2) We need to decouple health care and other social
safety nets from employment, and (3) We need to supplement employment

income with direct income streams—and I have argued strongly that these
income streams should be unequal and based on incentives. These
incentives—particularly a focus on continuing education—will offer at least
a partial solution to the problems of a lack of purpose and an excess of free
time that Keynes foresaw.
  
 
Transition in the Tunnel
 Let's now return to our tunnel and rewind the simulation to the point at
which automation starts to take hold. We can then see how our transitional
strategy might work.
* * * * *
We are back in our tunnel. Very gradually, just as before, we begin to
automate the jobs held by many of the average lights. As this happens, the
impacted lights grow dimmer and in many cases disappear completely.
Now, however, we notice something new in the tunnel. A green light has
appeared. As we watch closely, we see that many more lights gradually
begin to shift in hue. The intensity of the lights remains unchanged, but the
color rotates between white and green. Some lights rotate rapidly between
green and white light, while others shift their color much more slowly.
The green light, of course, represents the purchasing power of
consumers who are supported by incentive-based income streams rather
than traditional jobs. The lights rotate in color as jobs are shared among the
workers first affected by automation.
The green lights initially represent a small minority of the lights within
the tunnel. Most people continue to be employed in traditional jobs. If we
were to watch the action in the tunnel over time, however, we would see
that the number of green lights is constantly increasing. Likewise, if we
were to focus on any one light, we would see that, as it rotates between
white and green, the green light gradually comes to predominate.
While the color rotation among the lights captures our interest for a
time, the most striking realization is that nothing else has changed in the
tunnel. As we watch, we see that the lights continue to softly impact the

panels on the walls of the tunnel as consumers purchase products and
services. The businesses in the tunnel make no distinctions based on the
color of the lights. Over time, the process of creative destruction continues
just as it always has. Inefficient businesses fail and new ones rise up to take
their place.
Among the multitude of lights in the tunnel, we can see that there are
still a significant minority which shine with intense white light. The
wealthiest people in the tunnel may be subject to somewhat higher tax rates,
but the businesses and assets they own are retaining their value as the mass
market continues to thrive.
Overall, we sense that stability has returned to the tunnel. As the
collective light that permeates the tunnel gradually shifts from white to
green, we can also sense that it is once again increasing in overall intensity.
Even as jobs are relentlessly automated away, the logic of the free market
has been successfully leveraged to once again drive sustained prosperity.
OceanofPDF.com

Chapter 5
 
OceanofPDF.com

THE GREEN LIGHT
 
In the previous chapter, I proposed a mechanism for adapting the market
economy so that it can continue to function even as machine automation
inexorably eliminates the jobs that provide income to consumers. The
essential idea is that we should impose some combination of a consumption
tax and/or a special direct tax on business that captures the income which,
in a non-automated economy, would be paid out in wages. Over time, as the
wages paid to average workers decrease (as a percentage of revenue), these
taxes would be gradually increased to recapture at least a portion of this
income. The overall objective is to recapture just the optimal amount of
income and then get it into the hands of consumers so that there will be
sufficient consumer demand to continue driving the economy.
Once the income has been collected, I then argued that it should be
directed to individual consumers based on incentives. If, in the future, most
human labor will someday be unnecessary, then it follows that the private
sector will not be willing to pay for it. If we cannot pay people to work,
then we must pay them to do something else that has value. As I pointed out
in the previous chapter, we can construct a number of incentives which will
drive people to act in ways that benefit themselves and society, and which
help to protect the environment. By offering unequal incentive-based
income to consumers, we not only sustain consumer demand, but also drive
people to act in ways that benefit us all and provide each person with the
possibility of advancement and a higher income in the future.
This hope for the future—the idea that by striving to complete goals one
can attain a better standard of living—is critical to both individual and
collective stability. It offers a way to avoid the enormous problem of an
ever increasing, impoverished, disenfranchised and unmotivated underclass.
As we saw, the incentive-based income scheme can be combined with a job
rotation or sharing plan so that as automation progresses, the remaining
work is shared on a reasonably equitable basis among the population.
In this chapter, we are going to use some imagination and push forward
even further into the future. Let's suppose that our transition has been
underway for some time in the major industrialized and emerging

economies. Things have progressed to the point where the majority of
people in the developed world no longer work full time. Most consumers
now receive a substantial portion of their income from incentive-based
income streams. Based on their particular interests and abilities, people
pursue higher education, work in the community and make choices that
benefit the environment with the understanding that doing these things will
lead to a higher income and a better standard of living. Average people have
sufficient income, and sufficient confidence in the future, so that both
consumer spending and overall economic activity consistently grow over
time.
While most people work only part time, or in some cases not at all, a
significant minority continues to pursue a full time career. Some may still
find employment in specific areas where there continues to be need.
Authors, artists, and entertainers will still be accorded the opportunity to
derive substantial income from their talents. And, of course, there are still
people who have the necessary skills and ability to start successful
businesses and engage directly in innovation. Because the transition has
successfully preserved a robust consumer market, those with the
appropriate talent and ambition still have the potential to become wealthy.
In fact, it is likely that much of the traditional work now performed by
people is entrepreneurial in nature. Many people may choose to engage in
profitable hobbies or part time businesses that augment their income.
Prosperity has been preserved in the developed and emerging
economies. Our next task is to think about how this new system might be
extended to the poorest regions of the world.
 
 
Attacking Poverty
 Most of us understand that there is a basic inequity in the fact that the vast
majority of the world's wealth resides with a relatively small fraction of its
population, and we realize that this inequality is an important factor that
often underlies conflict, terrorism, and general political instability.
Economists have tried for decades to come up with strategies that might

help developing nations climb the ladder of prosperity. Relatively few of
these efforts have achieved any substantial degree of success.
Partly, the reason is that figuring out how to invest in a developing
country in such a way as to insure that the investment results in sustained
growth is extraordinarily difficult. A common problem is, of course,
corruption among officials in the country. These people very often act
primarily for their own benefit—and, in particular, in ways that preserve
their positions and power—rather than for the benefit of their country as a
whole. In the final analysis, it comes down to individual incentives. People
are primarily motivated to do things that they are paid to do. Making an
arms length investment in a country and somehow insuring that that
investment creates appropriate and sustainable incentives throughout the
economy is an extraordinary challenge.
53
A second issue we face in confronting poverty is the environmental
impact that it implies. If we look at a rapidly developing county, such as
China, it quickly becomes apparent that addressing poverty by applying the
normal, historical path to industrialization throughout the poorest regions of
the world could well result in global catastrophe. The earth is simply not
equipped to support untold billions of people who begin to utilize energy
and other resources at levels typical for the major industrialized economies.
In this chapter, I am going to argue that, in a largely automated
economy, it should be possible to attack poverty simply by gradually
extending incentive-based incomes to people in developing countries. The
payments would start out relatively low and the incentives would strongly
emphasize environmental considerations. By paying people directly to
conserve resources and protect the environment, it should be possible to
move toward decoupling economic prosperity from negative ecological
impact.
Clearly, such as initiative would require a high degree of international
cooperation and probably the formation of an agency that would impose
standards and help design income incentives for individual countries. It is
possible that some governments would initially refuse to participate. Over
time, however, if the approach proved successful, it seems likely that the
populations of nearly every country would demand participation.
Once again, we are likely to run into the "paying people for nothing"
psychological stumbling block. The initial reaction of many people would
probably be that such a scheme would be highly inflationary. To see that

this would not necessarily be the case, let's start with a somewhat simplistic
analysis of why such a scheme would not work in our current economy.
Imagine that, in today's world, we simply started providing incomes to
large numbers of impoverished people throughout the world. We might
borrow the money for this, or simply have governments print it. Once the
money found its way into the hands of these people, they would, of course,
start to spend it. Businesses both locally and in other countries would try to
ramp up to meet this new demand. They would have to find and hire
workers for this. We can easily imagine that shortages of skilled workers
might develop and that wages would therefore increase. In short, the
economy's ability to produce real goods and services would not be able to
keep up with all the new money now in the hands of consumers. The result,
of course, would be inflation: the value of all this new money would fall,
and prices and interest rates would increase, perhaps dramatically.
But what if the entire economy where highly automated? Then, no new
workers would need to be hired, and there would be few if any labor
shortages. There would be a need for additional capital investment in
technology to meet the new demand, but this would be a good investment
that would continue to pay off over the long term. We cannot say that all the
constraints that might lead to inflation would be removed because there
might still be shortages of energy or resources. However, such shortages are
not specific to this approach—in other words, if we attempted to address
poverty by the traditional method of building up industry and creating jobs,
natural resource and energy constraints would still come into play.
Money has value only because it can be exchanged for real products and
services. In our current economy, it takes a great deal of human labor to
produce those products and services. Therefore, it is fair to say that the
value of money is tied very closely to productivity, or the general efficiency
of production. If in fact, the economy of the future is highly automated and
requires few workers, then we can imagine that it may well be possible to
achieve a level of economic efficiency that is far beyond what is possible
today.* Furthermore, an automated economy seems likely to be highly
scalable: in other words, it would be much easier to rapidly and smoothly
ramp up production in order to meet increased demand.
*[ Additionally, we can speculate that if production efficiency reached unprecedented heights as
automation invaded the economy, we would also need a much more relaxed monetary policy than is

currently the case. Central banks would probably have to allow the money supply to expand at a
rapid rate relative to historical norms, or production would be needlessly constrained. This is a very
strong argument against the idea (as proposed by some extreme Libertarians) that we should return to
the gold standard. ]
I believe that it may someday be possible to leverage the vastly
increased production efficiency of an automated economy to address the
issue of global poverty. As long as incomes were provided in a gradual
fashion so that any inflationary effects could be controlled, and as long as
individual incomes were tied to incentives that helped address
environmental impact and resource constraints, it should conceptually be
possible to eventually eliminate poverty. Additionally, I think it may be
possible to create a "virtuous cycle" in which billions of newly viable
consumers would eventually drive global economic output to unimaginable
levels by creating markets of staggering size for new products and services.
Many people will, of course, feel that all this is pure fantasy. Obviously,
this is not an idea that is going to be feasible in the near future, and it
clearly could not occur at all if we don't find a way to navigate through the
transition that I discussed in the previous chapter. Nonetheless, I would
argue that this lies within the realm of future possibility—perhaps even by
our cutoff date of 2089. To flesh this idea out a little further, let's use even
more imagination and consider the possible economic implications of truly
advanced technologies that might conceivably be available in the distant
future.
 
  
 
 
Fundamental Economic Constraints
 Given the fact that we have billions of people who all desire material
things, why doesn't global economic output simply soar toward infinity?
Obviously, there are things that limit production. Let's make a list of the
most basic factors that act to constrain economic activity:

 
1.  Labor
In today's economy, human labor is required to some degree in the
production of nearly everything. The availability of workers, the cost of
employing them and the specific skills that they possess is an important
constraint on economic output. Obviously, the point of this book has been
that this constraint is likely to become far less important as automation
technology progresses.
 
2.   Energy, Land, Natural Resources and Environmental Impact
Clearly, production is constrained by the availability of energy and of the
raw materials, suitable land, water, and other resources that are required to
create products and services. Additionally, economic activity will ultimately
be limited by the harmful effects it perpetrates on the environment:
including toxic pollution, over use of public resources, and, of course, the
climate change effects associated with the emission of carbon dioxide and
other greenhouse gasses.
 
3.   Technology
Production is also limited by the sophistication of the machines, processes
and techniques that are available. I have argued here that, as technology
advances, it will ultimately become independent of labor. Machines will
evolve to the point where they are no longer tools used by workers, but
instead autonomous producers.
   
4.   Consumer Demand
Viable consumer demand is also an absolute limiter of production in the
free market economy. We are, of course, speaking here of demand in the
economic sense, which means desire for a product or service combined with
the ability and willingness to pay for it. No business will invest in
production unless there is either existing market demand or the reasonable
expectation of such demand in the foreseeable future. The idea that
production responds to demand is one of the defining characteristics of
capitalism.
   

 Removing the Constraints
 Now that we've listed the four basic constraints on production let's perform
a thought experiment and imagine how those constraints might conceivably
fall in the distant future if technology continues to relentlessly advance. The
point is simply to imagine which constraints could potentially be eliminated
or minimized as technology progresses over decades and even centuries.
The main thesis of this book has been that, eventually, machines will
become autonomous and there will be far less need for human labor.
Therefore, let's go ahead and remove labor as a constraint. Our list now
looks like this:
1. 
Energy, Land, Natural Resources and Environmental Impact
2. 
Technology
3. 
Consumer Demand
Next, let's imagine that advanced nanotechnology and new clean energy
technologies become available. Perhaps we manage to derive nearly
limitless energy from the sun or from nuclear fusion. The cost of energy, as
well as its negative impact on the environment, fall to a near zero level.
Nanotechnology allows us to easily transform matter at the molecular level.
We can inexpensively construct advanced materials from more basic
components and recycle used and waste products into usable raw materials.
Environmental policies and incentives have effectively minimized other
negative impacts that result from production.
We can then reduce our list of economic constraints as follows:
1. 
Technology
2. 
Consumer Demand
Now imagine that, in the absence of resource constraints, technology
continues its relentless advance and ultimately accelerates to the point
where new processes and machines can be conceived and constructed
almost effortlessly. Technology, much like energy, becomes universally
available and virtually free.

Our list can now be reduced to a single line:
1. 
Consumer Demand
And now we must stop. Consumer demand as a constraint is
fundamental to the architecture of the free market system. If we eliminate
this constraint—if production occurs in response to something other than
demand from consumers who have the ability to pay for the products and
services produced—then we no longer have a market economy.
Obviously, this exercise has been purely imaginary. While it might be
centuries before technology advances sufficiently to actually remove these
constraints, we can reasonably expect that, over time, technology will
gradually act to reduce them. By thinking about which constraints could
possibly be eliminated far in the future, we can begin to see what is truly
important. Each of the constraints could conceivably be reduced, or perhaps
even eliminated, except consumer demand.
  
 
The Evolution toward Consumption
 Historically, the primary economic contribution of an individual has been
his or her work. Our economic rules emphasize production because
prosperity has always been heavily dependent on human labor. The
incentives built into the market economy reflect this historical reality.
Consumption is seen as a privilege that derives from our participation in
production. As we can see from the thought experiment we just conducted,
however, in the long run it is really consumption—not production—that is
the one human economic contribution that will always be indispensable.
If we are to fully leverage the production potential of the advanced
technologies that will become available in the decades and centuries ahead,
I believe we will have to re-engineer our economic system so that
consumption is largely decoupled from individual participation in
production. Consumption, rather than production, will eventually have to
become the primary economic contribution made by the bulk of average
people. If we fail to make this adaptation, technological advance is likely to

ultimately be self-limiting, and may well lead to decline rather than
increased prosperity.* If, however, we succeed in evolving to a system that
sustains vibrant consumer demand even as accelerating technology drives
back other economic constraints, we may conceivably emerge into a new
era of unprecedented economic growth and prosperity.
*[ Please see the "Technology Paradox" in the Appendix. ]
I have argued in this book that consumers should eventually be provided
with income based on incentives. Currently, people are offered incentives to
contribute directly to overall prosperity through work. In the future, we
should instead offer people incentives to behave in ways that do not detract
from the prosperity that will result from increasingly automated production.
As individuals act according to these incentives, they will earn the income
they require to participate as consumers in the market economy.
The idea that an individual's consumption might someday be valued
above his or her contribution to production is very difficult to accept. It flies
directly in the face of the values and the work ethic that are instilled in the
vast majority of us. Undoubtedly, it will take time to adapt to this new
reality.
I think it is probably fair to say that, for the majority of the population,
the specific job a person happens to perform does not meaningfully capture
his or her uniqueness as a human being. While a minority of lucky
individuals may have careers that fully engage and even define them, most
average people probably work at their current jobs primarily because they
have few other choices. For most of us, our job is really not who we are.
But what about our consumption? If you could record in time and place
every purchase made by an individual during the course of a lifetime, surely
you would end up with something unique. A record that would reflect in
some way almost every aspect of a person's arc through life—virtually an
economic DNA sequence. Consumption is by far the best overall economic
gauge of who we really are. And yet, these routine, daily purchasing
decisions are amplified by the mechanism of the market into a force that
creates and destroys entire industries. Collective consumer choices have
provided the basic logic that has disciplined and directed markets—and
therefore driven technological progress—for centuries. In a very real sense,
the specific choices we make as consumers create our overall prosperity.

This is why capitalism has succeeded, and other economic systems have
failed.
In time, I think it is likely that our perceptions will shift so that we begin
to truly recognize the economic contribution that our individual
marketplace decisions make. Someday, the majority of people will be
valued in economic terms not for what they directly produce, but for their
participation in consumption markets. If we can succeed in gradually
extending that participation to the billions of people who are now trapped in
poverty—and do so in a way that creates incentives to conserve resources
and minimize environmental impact—we may find that the resulting
consumer demand is capable of fueling an engine that can drive us to
unprecedented economic heights.
 
 
The Green Light
 The natural cycle in the tunnel is stable and reinforcing. The vast majority
of the consumers in the tunnel now glow with a predominantly green light.
As time passes, the collective intensity of the lights continues to gradually
increase.
Suddenly, we see that vast numbers of dim green lights have begun to
stream into the tunnel. These new lights have barely enough intensity to
make it past the threshold, but once inside, they join the river of lights as it
courses over the panels on the tunnel walls. At first, we sense that the
businesses in the tunnel are straining somewhat to meet this new demand,
but as time passes, the cycle again strengthens. The collective intensity of
the light in the tunnel begins to quickly increase. We also notice that, over
time, each of the new dim lights is very gradually becoming brighter.
As the new lights stream into the tunnel and are incorporated into its
natural cycle, we see that some bright white lights begin to pulse with new
energy. New panels are now appearing in many places on the tunnel walls
that were once dark. The entrepreneurs and business owners in the tunnel
are responding to the rapidly increasing demand.

As the number of lights continues to increase, the speed with which
panels are updated and the number of new panels appearing on the tunnel
walls seems to accelerate. Although we had perceived the tunnel as being
almost infinitely vast, it now appears that the walls are completely covered
with panels.
Even as we sense this, however, the tunnel itself begins to expand. As
new panels rapidly fill the spaces on the expanding tunnel walls, we notice
that some of the brightest white lights are now radiating with an
unprecedented intensity. Still, as the ever-increasing cycle of light continues
to parade through the expanding tunnel, we sense strongly that it is the
seemingly infinite number of green lights that truly encapsulates the
collective energy, enterprise and hope of all human beings.
OceanofPDF.com

APPENDIX / FINAL THOUGHTS
  
Are the ideas presented in this book WRONG?
(Opposing arguments and my responses)
Two Questions Worth Thinking About
Where are we now? Four Possible Cases
The Next 10-20 years: Some Indicators to
Watch For
Outsmarting Marx
The Technology Paradox
Machine Intelligence and the Turing Test
 
OceanofPDF.com

Are the ideas presented in this book WRONG? (Opposing
arguments with responses)
 
In this section I have listed some of the arguments that may be made against
the ideas in this book, together with my responses. These are either
conventional arguments or things I have thought of or seen elsewhere.
The economy will always create new jobs; we will never have structural
unemployment as a result of advancing technology
 This is the idea behind the "Luddite fallacy" which I discussed at some
length in Chapters 2 and 3 (see here and here). At present, I suspect that
most economists would probably be likely to agree with this statement and,
therefore, disagree with what I have suggested in this book. Here, in a
nutshell, is my argument for why I think we will end up with a serious
unemployment problem:
As technology advances and industries automate, this improves the
efficiency of production and tends to make the products and services
produced by those industries more affordable. That leaves more purchasing
power in the pockets of consumers. Those consumers then go out and spend
that extra money on all kinds of products and services produced by a variety
of industries. Some of those industries are relatively labor intensive, so they
have to hire more workers to meet this demand—and so overall
employment remains stable or increases. This is the reason that, historically,
technology has not led to sustained, widespread unemployment.
My argument is that accelerating automation technology will ultimately
invade many of the industries that have traditionally been labor intensive.
Additionally, the process of creative destruction will destroy old industries
and create new ones, and very few of these new industries are likely to be
labor intensive. As a result, the overall economy will become less labor
intensive and ultimately reach a "tipping point." Beyond this point, the
economy will no longer be able to absorb the workers who lose jobs due to
automation: businesses will instead invest primarily in more machines. I
have also argued that this process will be relentless, and if it is not

addressed by some type of government policy, we may ultimately see a
precipitous drop in consumer spending as a substantial fraction of the
population loses confidence in its future income continuity. That, of course,
would result in even more unemployment and a downward spiral would
ensue.
OceanofPDF.com

If technology resulted in unemployment, everyone would already be out
of a job because technological progress has been going on for hundreds
of years
 This really just amounts to saying "it hasn't happened yet, so it will never
happen." History has proven time and again that, where technology is
concerned, something can be impossible since the dawn of civilization and
then suddenly, in the blink of an eye, become possible. Revolutionary
technologies, such as the airplane and nuclear power, where all dismissed as
being impossible even by preeminent scientists who were involved in the
research that led to their development.
Today, most of us accept that technology will continue to advance and
produce things that we might currently view as impossible. However, we
still think too narrowly. We accept that there will be new technologies, new
products and new industries, but most of us are not prepared to accept that
all this will change the basic economic rules that we take for granted. But
why wouldn't that be the case? Is there a fundamental reason why
accelerating technology should impact nearly every aspect of our lives—but
not impact the way the economy works? As I pointed out in Chapter 2,
advancing information technology—because it enabled the creation and
distribution of financial derivatives—has certainly played an important role
in the severity of the current economic crisis. I suspect that this is just a
preview of the economic impacts that technology will have in the future.
 
The population is aging. Once the baby boomers retire, we will have a
worker shortage—not unemployment
 In nearly all the developed nations (and also in China), the populations are
rapidly aging and retirement plans are projected to come under intense
pressure, as too few young workers have to support too many older retired
people. Does this imply that there is likely to be an overall shortage of
workers as large numbers of older people leave the workforce? I think it is
certainly possible this may be a counteractive force that might tend to delay
the impact from automation to a certain extent. Here are some things to
consider:

The impact of automation on a specific job category is really not
related to the number of workers available to perform that type of job.
Once technology advances to the point where a type of job can be
automated, the machines to do this can easily be replicated. Machines
do not need to be educated or trained, and so they are not subject to the
bottlenecks that create shortages of workers in fields such as nursing.
Therefore, in considering the overall impact of machine automation,
the important criterion is not the number of workers available but the
types of jobs that can be automated. To the extent that there are worker
shortages within a specific job category, that would actually tend to
increase the incentive for automation technologies to be developed in
that area. We already see this effect in Japan where significant work is
being to done to develop robots capable of assisting with care of the
elderly population.
The current consensus view seems to be that, as a result of the
2008-9 financial crisis (and its impact on 401k plans), many workers
will remain in the workforce longer than originally planned. This will
give automation technology longer to come into play before any
worker shortages materialize.
Even if the aging population does tend to retard unemployment,
this would, of course, simply be a delaying factor—not a long-term
solution to the problem.
I think we can certainly expect to see worker shortages in some areas,
but this may very possibly be combined with an overall unemployment
problem. The danger is that increasing structural unemployment will unfold
in parallel with the demographic problem. I suspect that most of the
projections regarding the impact of aging populations assume reasonably
full employment among younger workers. If this does not turn out to be the
case, the situation will obviously be much worse. As I pointed out in
Chapter 3, a payroll tax-based system for supporting retirement programs
might become completely unsustainable.

OceanofPDF.com

Businesses will never fully automate because of the high initial capital
investment and the lack of flexibility this implies
 There are some valid points here, and I think that these factors may, in
many cases, serve to retard the process of automation—but in the long run
they will not prevent it. Some businesses will certainly delay automation
because of the high capital outlays required. However, over time, machines
will become more affordable, more reliable, and more flexible. At some
point, as technology advances, machines will begin to outperform workers
to the extent that a non-automated business will not be competitive.
Consider the case of online banking: it generally offers a range of services,
such as automatic bill paying, that could not be offered by a human bank
teller.
Keep in mind that automation offers cost benefits beyond simply
eliminating wages. There are also payroll taxes, benefits, vacation time,
management issues (and if you eliminate workers, you can in many cases
also get rid of the first line managers), etc. There are also safety and liability
issues; consider the safety advantages of a fully automated warehouse.
The need for technical and economic flexibility may also tend to hold
back automation for a time. If a business invests heavily in specific
machines to produce a particular product and then that product does not sell
well, it may be stuck with equipment it does not want. The obvious answer
to that is that, in the future, automation technology will be more flexible
and easy to adapt to different products. I think the manufacturers of
automation equipment are fully aware of this issue and will build
increasingly flexible products.
There is also the issue of economic flexibility: a business that employs
workers can lay them off in slow times, while a more automated business
will be stuck with its machines. Again, I think that, in the long run, as
technology advances, businesses that don't automate will simply not be able
to compete: and that reality will overwhelm other considerations.
Another point is that both of these factors (high capital costs and the
need for flexibility) may tend to push the next wave of automation toward
software applications geared toward eliminating knowledge worker jobs.
Software is typically more flexible and has a lower up front cost than
expensive mechanical automation. As I noted in Chapter 2, automation of

these jobs, together with offshoring, may mean diminishing prospects for
knowledge works and college graduates in general.
Machines may take over most unskilled labor, but they will never be
able to do skilled or professional jobs that require lots of training and
education
 I think this is a dangerous misconception that stems, in part, from a certain
amount of hubris on the part of people who are well educated. The
conventional wisdom is that a fence has been erected within our society. On
the lush, garden side of the fence, are workers who have strong educations
and training. These people are beneficiaries of the information age. On the
toxic wasteland side of the fence, are relatively unskilled workers. These
people have been heavily impacted by both technology and globalization.
They often survive by stringing two or three part time jobs together or work
in low wage jobs with few benefits. The obvious solution is for us to find a
way to offer these people additional training—so they can hop over to the
good side of the fence.
I think that the problem with this scenario is that the fence is going to
move, and it may move very rapidly. The good side of the fence is going to
contract, and increasing numbers of well-educated workers are going to find
themselves suddenly on the toxic side. As I pointed out in Chapter 2, we
can expect fields such as artificial intelligence to advance rapidly in the
coming years and decades. While many college-educated knowledge
workers perform tasks that are currently beyond the capability of
computers, they nonetheless have jobs that can be broken down into a
relatively narrow set of tasks and routines. Over time, these jobs will be
increasingly subject to automation, and may well come under significant
pressure from offshoring even sooner. As this trend develops, I think that
the psychological impact on consumers will represent a significant danger
to the economy.
Even if I am wrong and increasing unemployment is confined primarily
to lower skill workers, the overall impact on our society and economy
would be dramatically negative. In the United States, two thirds of workers
—and therefore consumers—do not have a college degree. While efforts to
improve education and training are laudable, the reality is that this is not
likely to offset the impact of geometrically accelerating technology. In fact,

I think that the arguments I have put forth in this book remain relevant even
in the (I think unlikely) event that more educated workers are spared the
impact of automation.
A great many jobs require "people skills" and, therefore, could not be
performed by machines
 I think there are definitely some jobs that meet this standard, but probably
not anywhere near enough to avoid the overall problem that would result
from automation. I also think that people often tend to underestimate the
extent to which their job might be susceptible to automation. Bank tellers
have "people" jobs, but that has not stopped people from using ATMs or
online banking. In general, consumers seem quite receptive to automation
and self-service technologies if they provide convenience.
Many workers whose interactions with other people are primarily
internal to their organization might feel that they have jobs in which people
skills are critical. If you think about it, however, that is true only if most of
the other jobs are also being done by people. Once automation takes hold
within an organization, such people skills might eventually be far less
important.
Finally, it is important to note that automation will have both a direct
and an indirect impact on jobs. Even a person who holds a job that is
completely safe from automation might still be impacted by declining
consumer demand resulting from jobs elsewhere in the economy being
automated.
Perhaps machines will ultimately take over most of the work done by
people, but this won't happen until far into the future (hundreds of
years, etc.)
 In general, if my argument here turns out to not be correct, then there are
really two basic ways in which it can be wrong:
The argument could be fundamentally wrong. This implies that the
economy is capable of growing and advancing technologically

basically forever, without creating an unemployment problem. In other
words, even 500 years from now, when society presumably has
technology that is incomprehensible to us today, the economy will still
provide employment for the vast majority of people in the population.
The argument could be premature. Maybe the ideas here are basically
correct, but they won't come into play until far into the future.
However, once we acknowledge that at some point in the future, the
economy may become nearly fully automated, then as a matter of
mathematics, we cannot get to that point without first passing through
a tipping point—beyond which structural unemployment will begin to
be a problem. The tipping point could occur long before we expect it.
I would guess that if the trends I have presented here do not develop,
then it will most likely be because I have gotten the timing wrong.
However, I do think there is some pretty compelling evidence that we are
fairly close to the point where accelerating machine capability is going to
have a dramatic economic impact (if we have not already passed that point).
Please see the section "Where are we now? Four Possible Cases" later in
the Appendix for more on this.
In the future, wages/income may be very low because of job
automation, but technology will also make everything plentiful and
cheap—so low income won't matter
 This is an idea that is often expressed in conjunction with a discussion of
advanced nanotechnology. Nanotechnology may one day offer the promise
of material objects constructed molecule-by-molecule, perhaps using self-
replicating technologies. Some people argue that, taken to the extreme, this
might mean that physical objects could be constructed in a way that is
analogous to the creation of virtual objects displayed on a computer screen
(think of the "replicator" in Star Trek). There are, of course, a few problems
with this:
Expenditures on manufactured goods represent a fairly small
percentage of the average consumer's spending. Expenses like
housing* and health care are far more important. So even if the price

of most goods fell dramatically, consumers would still need an
adequate income.
Today, we already have digital products that have a zero marginal cost
of production. These products are, for the most part, not free because
they have intellectual property rights attached to them. We can expect
the same if advanced nanotechnology arrives someday. If there isn't a
way to protect and profit from these property rights, it is very unlikely
that investors would provide the enormous sums necessary to realize
the technology.
Advanced nanotechnology almost certainly lies further in the future
than the automation technology that is likely to threaten routine jobs.
So it won't arrive in time to solve the problem in any case.
*[ It is perhaps conceivable that job automation may someday lead to somewhat lower housing costs
because it could result in a lot of empty office towers and commercial buildings. Those buildings
might then be converted to other uses—including perhaps housing. If knowledge worker and office
jobs migrate into the computer network, the really hot commercial real estate in the future might be
in the locations where companies like Google and Microsoft are now building huge "server farms."
These are usually relatively isolated locations far from natural disasters and other threats and close to
clean, reliable energy (which today mostly means hydroelectric power). ]
 
The "Heads in the Sand" Objection
 
If other arguments against the ideas I have presented here prove
insufficient, then I suspect that many people will be tempted to turn to this
one:
 
Some people will reject the idea that machines might begin to exhibit
some degree of intelligence—and, therefore, achieve the capability to
perform a great many jobs—simply because the implications are very
difficult to deal with. This irrational, but perhaps understandable, objection
to the idea that machines might someday begin to think and reason was first
articulated by the founder of computer science, Alan Turing (Please see the
last section of this Appendix).
Turing initiated the field of artificial intelligence with his 1950 paper
"Computing Machinery and Intelligence." Here's how Turing expressed

what he called the "Heads in the Sand" Objection (which, of course, he
rejected):
"The consequences of machines thinking would be too dreadful. Let us hope
and believe that they cannot do so." 
54
OceanofPDF.com

Two Questions Worth Thinking About
 
One
While you might not agree that it will ever be a reality, it is easy to imagine
an economy with no human workers. Obviously if autonomous machines
could do everything, people could spend their time doing whatever they
liked.
 
Can you imagine a market economy with no consumers?
 
Two
Most economists would probably agree that long-term economic growth
and prosperity (perhaps as measured by growth in per capita GDP) is tied
pretty closely to technological progress. This is the same as saying that
society becomes more wealthy largely because the machines we use to
produce goods and services get better over time. We all assume that
economic growth can continue indefinitely. This implies that machines will
have to continue getting better basically forever.
 
Can a machine keep getting better forever without someday becoming
autonomous?
OceanofPDF.com

Where are we now? Four Possible Cases
 On the next page, I've reproduced the scary graph from Chapter 3, which
shows the potential impact of machines throughout the economy becoming
more autonomous. Remember that this graph shows average income for a
"median range" of people in the economy; it's based on what statisticians
would call a "truncated mean" with the poorest and wealthiest people
removed before calculating the average. The reason for doing this is that we
know automation will tend to concentrate income and perhaps drag up
overall average income—at least for a while. Ultimately however, the
collective impact on the bulk of consumers will become overwhelming, and
a graph of per capita GDP should have a similar shape.
If the basic shape of this graph is correct, then the real question is:
where are we on the graph now? I think there are four possible cases, as
shown on the diagram. Keep in mind that while the graph I have drawn is
smooth to show the general trend, in reality the graph would likely have
many short-term ups and downs. This will make it very difficult to figure
out where we are.
 
1. If the ideas I've presented in this book are wrong, then the
conventional wisdom is correct, and the current crisis is just an

aberration. We should eventually get back on track and continue
climbing the graph.
2. If the shape of the graph is basically correct, but we are still far away
from the point where automation is going to become important, then
we should, likewise, get back on track and continue climbing.
3. If we are somewhere close to the point where the dotted and solid lines
diverge, then we are going to see increasing economic impacts, and we
will have difficulty in achieving sustained, long-term growth. If I had
to bet, I would choose this case.
4. If things have gotten away from us, then we could, in fact, be much
further along than we imagine. This could perhaps be explained by
suggesting that consumer borrowing masked the reality of the situation
over the last few years and that the current crisis is the beginning of
the reckoning. This is an ugly scenario, but I don't think it can be
dismissed completely. Obviously, if this is the case, we need to adopt
new policies rapidly.
OceanofPDF.com

The Next 10-20 years: Some Indicators to Watch For
 The ideas that I have presented in this book might be said to constitute a
hypothesis, or perhaps a theory that is still lacking in substantial supporting
evidence. This book is obviously not based on an analysis of historical
economic data, but rather on a rational, and I think somewhat conservative,
projection of existing trends in information technology. Nonetheless, I
believe that there is already at least some empirical evidence to support this
hypothesis.
I cannot reasonably expect anyone to accept these ideas on the basis of
what is presented here alone. My intent in writing this book has been to try
to raise the general level of awareness regarding this issue. My hope is that
economists and others may begin to look for evidence of the trend toward
an automated economy with an open mind, so that we will have a
reasonable chance of addressing the risks we may face in the future. Toward
that end, here are some general indicators that I think may constitute
reasonable evidence that we are moving along the path I have sketched out
here.
Weak consumer spending pushes investment toward cost cutting and
labor saving technologies
 Nearly everyone seems to be projecting that when recovery from the current
downturn comes, it will be relatively weak. Economists are once again
anticipating a "jobless recovery." (When is the last time we had a recovery
that wasn't jobless?) In the face of lingering unemployment and tight credit,
consumer demand in the United States is almost certain to be unimpressive
for some time. The wind has been knocked out of the world economy's
primary consumption engine, and it remains unclear where sustainable
future demand will come from. I've seen several articles in the financial
press that point out that our future prosperity will likely depend on us
consuming less and exporting more. Yes, but who is going to buy all those
exports?
If projections for consumer spending remain unoptimistic, many
businesses are likely to hold back on general technology investment as they

wait for a more sustainable recovery. As a result, we may continue to see
relatively low levels of venture capital flowing into start-up firms for some
time. In the midst of this, it may become evident that one of the few bright
spots is the market for new technology products that result in immediate
cost savings. We might see venture capital increasingly begin to flow to
start-up companies that are focused on labor saving technologies such as
robotics and artificial intelligence.* Some of these new ventures might
focus on embedding intelligence into the enterprise software used by large
corporations, while others create tools that can be used in small businesses
via Internet interfaces. Significant effort is likely to be put into machine
learning technology, so that automation algorithms can be easily taught to
perform a variety of jobs. Because automating the jobs of relatively
unskilled workers often requires high capital investment in mechanically
complex machines, it may well be office and knowledge workers who are
the primary initial targets of these new technologies.
*[ Obviously, even if the current consensus is wrong and we end up with a surprisingly strong
rebound, we are still likely to see significant investment in these areas, as well as a much higher level
of technology investment in general. ]
Offshoring and automation begin to penetrate small business and
possibly combine to capture higher value jobs
 I suspect that most economists discount the potential for outsourcing to
invade the small business arena because they assume that the costs and
inconveniences associated with setting up offshore relationships constitute a
barrier. My concern is that the offshoring industry, especially if it faces
diminished demand in other areas, will move to minimize this barrier by
adopting Internet-based interfaces that make it easy for smaller businesses
to offshore specific jobs and tasks—without any need to travel or engage in
complex negotiations. I think it is likely that exactly the same thing will
happen with increasingly sophisticated automation software. If this were to
occur, it would eventually undercut the U.S. economy's primary job
creation engine to a significant degree.
A second possibility is that as increased investment in artificial
intelligence-driven productivity tools begins to bear fruit, these tools may
be combined with highly educated, but young and inexpensive, offshore

workers to capture jobs which are currently held by highly paid knowledge
workers with deep experience. As AI software advances, it will increasingly
begin to encapsulate what we think of as "experience" and "judgment"
within specific fields of knowledge. An intelligent and educated young
worker wielding such tools might eventually be competitive with
professionals and workers who currently command very high salaries.
Labor intensive areas of the economy begin to see increased automation
 As I have pointed out several times in this book, the primary danger to the
U.S. economy will be when labor-intensive industries, especially in the
service sector, become susceptible to automation. In areas such as retail and
fast food where wages are low, automation may be held at bay for a time by
the high capital costs of automation equipment. However, as technology
advances and costs fall, I think it is inevitable that at some point, the
tradeoff will begin to make sense and competitive pressures will push
businesses and industries toward automation.
New technology industries fail to create significant numbers of jobs
 We can expect that technological advance will give rise to entirely new
industries in the future. However, the reality is that few if any of these are
likely to be labor intensive. By their very nature, these new industries will
tend to rely on information technology and will offer relatively few
opportunities for average workers. There is also a risk that these new
industries may directly compete with and ultimately destroy existing, more
labor intensive industries.
One exception to this may be the so called "green collar" jobs that
involve installing solar panels, wind turbines, and so forth. These, however,
are really one-time infrastructure jobs. Alone, they will not be sufficient to
provide sustainable employment growth.
 
Diminishing prospects for college graduates
Unfortunately, as I suggested in Chapter 2, I think there are reasons to
expect that the assumption that a college degree is a ticket to success may

ultimately be challenged. There are a couple of trends that may develop:
Unemployment, underemployment and low wages for recent graduates
may develop as automation, and possibly offshoring, have a
disproportionate impact on entry-level positions. This will be an
especially significant problem in light of the enormous debt burdens
carried by many graduates.
Older, highly paid knowledge workers, professionals and middle
managers may find that their jobs present plump targets for both
offshoring and automation. Many of these people are likely to be
middle aged with substantial family obligations, and will have few
good prospects. Age discrimination lawsuits may well clog the courts
of the future.
As I pointed out in Chapters 2 and 3, the long-term impact of a
diminishing economic incentive for average people to pursue further
education would be disastrous. In my opinion, this reality probably
constitutes the single best argument for the adoption of an alternate income
system that incorporates education as a primary incentive.
 
A rush for government jobs, and an increasing threat of taxpayer
revolt
In the absence of competitive pressures, the government sector is far less
susceptible to automation (and, of course, offshoring) than the private
sector. As a result, government jobs may come to be perceived as safer, and
the competition for these jobs may become intense. The United States may
begin to look more like France, where nearly three quarters of students
aspire to work for the government.
55
In the wake of corporate layoffs, highly educated private sector workers,
who have spent entire careers working 60 or more hour weeks, may find
themselves with little to show for it—while at the same time, government
clerks enjoy seeming secure jobs, plush health care benefits and even
defined benefit pension plans. The result is likely to be outrage, rejection of
new taxes, and an ongoing conflict between private sector taxpayers and
often unionized government workers.

Systemic unemployment invades the economy
 At some point, evidence may be found that a new type of long-term
unemployment is appearing—and increasing. It may initially be difficult to
discern this new development from the lingering effects of the recession
and from the traditionally high unemployment among certain groups.
Nonetheless, it may eventually become apparent that this new, systemic
unemployment cuts across a broad range of demographic groups.
Specifically, we may see: even higher unemployment where we have come
to expect it (unskilled workers, minorities, teenagers, etc.), unemployed
recent college graduates, increasing numbers of older workers at every skill
level who are unable to find work, retirees who cannot afford to stop
working—but cannot find work, and a general problem with the "long-term
unemployed." These will be people whose unemployment benefits have run
out (perhaps multiple times). Political battles over the continuing extension
of benefits may occur.
Eventually, this new systemic unemployment may begin to show up at
nearly every educational and income level: from high school dropouts to
former members of the "working wealthy." It's important to note that this
unemployment will result from both the direct impact of automation and the
indirect, economic impact associated with depressed consumer spending.
Therefore, it will impact even people whose jobs are not in danger of being
automated.
Increasingly bad news for entitlement and retirement programs
 The current (already dire) forecasts for these programs most likely assume
that younger workers will be fully employed. If systemic unemployment
does appear, it will obviously undercut these assumptions. As I pointed out
in Chapter 3, payroll taxes may become an unsustainable method of
supporting these programs.
Trouble in China
 If consumer spending in the U.S. and the rest of the developed world
remains depressed, China may ultimately find it difficult to sustain the

growth it needs to keep its workers employed. Giant retailers in the United
States will likely continue to exert extreme pressure on Chinese
manufacturers to produce ever cheaper, better and more sophisticated
products. These businesses may have little choice but to turn increasingly to
automation as a way to improve efficiency and trim costs. In a society that
offers little in the way of a safety net, the saving rate among Chinese
workers might remain very high, or perhaps even increase, in spite of the
government's efforts to somehow spur consumer spending. All this may
lead to increased incidents of civil unrest and instability.
Continuing Instability in the Financial Markets
 As everyone knows, the current crisis began with the subprime meltdown.
A case can certainly be made that stagnating wages played a role in the
cause of that meltdown. Obviously, low wages made it difficult for these
people to repay their loans.
Beyond that, I think it is also true that, to some degree, the motivation
behind subprime loan programs was the idea of the "ownership society."
Basically, in light of increasing evidence that wages paid to average people
no longer offer a likely path to success, we turned instead to the promise of
real estate speculation and tried to extend it to as many people as possible.
It didn't turn out well, and the lesson is that virtually all asset values in
our economy are based on the assumption that we are going to continue
having a vibrant mass market economy supported by robust consumer
spending. If that basic assumption is threatened, we are very likely to see
increased risk, volatility and, ultimately, deflating values. The "ownership
society" idea just isn't workable—consumers need incomes (and confidence
in the continuity of those incomes) to support the sustained discretionary
spending that powers the economy. Remember: Everything that is produced
by the economy is ultimately consumed by individual human beings.*
*[ GDP is equal to Personal Consumer Spending + Business Investment (which occurs in anticipation
of future consumer spending) + Net Exports (consumer spending in other countries) + Government
Spending (money that the government spends to provide services to individual people). It all comes
down to individual people buying stuff. ]
Ugly and irrational political battles

 If trends similar to the ones I've listed above do develop, and if there is no
coherent understanding and reasonable consensus regarding what is
occurring, a dark scenario may develop. Political battles will become even
more heated, partisan and irrational. Many politicians may act in even more
purely self-interested ways as they come to genuinely fear the specter of
their own unemployment.
Conservatives will likely cling to the idea that taxes should be cut on
business even as it becomes clear that such cuts will result in little or no job
creation. Liberals may call for increased job training even as the prospects
for more educated workers are diminishing. They may also throw their
weight behind organized labor, and this will lead to a continuing
balkanization of the workforce into a protected elite versus a far larger
number of highly vulnerable workers.
OceanofPDF.com

Outsmarting Marx
 The central thesis of this book is that, as technology accelerates, machine
automation may ultimately penetrate the economy to the extent that wages
no longer provide the bulk of consumers with adequate discretionary
income and confidence in the future. If this issue is not addressed, the result
will be a downward economic spiral.
It must be acknowledged that this idea is quite similar to the predictions
that were made by Karl Marx in the mid to late 1800s. Marx predicted that
capitalism would suffer from a relentless "accumulation of capital,"
resulting in massive unemployment and wages that would be driven down
below subsistence level. This in turn would result in diminished consumer
demand, falling profits and ultimately economic crisis or even collapse.
If the arguments in this book prove correct, then we may be in the
somewhat uncomfortable position of conceding that Marx was, at least in
some ways, perceptive about the challenges the capitalist system would
eventually encounter. That, of course, does not mean that we should
consider adopting Marx's solution. He advocated the abolition of private
property, a centrally planned economy, and perhaps most chillingly, the
overthrow of governments and a "dictatorship of the proletariat." In the
wake of the collapse of communism, these ideas have been shown
unequivocally to be non-starters. They deserve to be swept into the dustbin
of history.
The answer to the problem is clearly to adapt our system. The free
market economy is not a natural phenomenon. It is really a machine that we
have built and refined over centuries: it is an engine that is fundamentally
driven by incentives. Marx wanted to take a sledgehammer to that engine.
Our job is to tune it, and even re-engineer it if necessary, so that it will
continue to power prosperity indefinitely.
OceanofPDF.com

The Technology Paradox
 Most people who watch movies or have read science fiction novels are
familiar with the potential paradoxes associated with time travel. For
example, if you were able to travel back in time and then do something to
prevent your parents from meeting before you were born, or perhaps kill a
younger version of yourself, then you would presumably cease to exist.
While we obviously don't need to worry too much about the practical
problems of owning a time machine, I think that there is a somewhat
analogous issue associated with the future of technology.
Many technologists who think deeply about the future believe that
genuinely amazing things are possible. These visions include things such as
truly intelligent machines and advanced nanotechnology that would allow
us to transform matter, generate abundant clean energy and perhaps create
tangible objects with the same ease that we now create graphics on a
computer screen. There is also a great deal of speculation about fantastic
medical advances that might cure major diseases and perhaps even
dramatically extend the human lifespan.
*[ While many diet books are a bit ambitious in terms of what they promise, Ray Kurzweil and Terry
Grossman take things to an entirely new level with two books (Fantastic Voyage: Live Long Enough
to Live Forever and Transcend: Nine Steps to Living Well Forever) based on the premise that if you
can just hold on long enough to make it to the point of extraordinary technological acceleration (the
"Singularity"), you should be able to take advantage of the continuous medical advances that will
ensue, and then manage to become essentially immortal. You won't find many other books that
discuss subjects such as advanced artificial intelligence and cybernetics—and also have plenty of
recipes for healthy dishes. ]
The essential point I want to make is that all this truly amazing stuff will
require enormous investment. Certainly, trillions of dollars will need to be
invested in order to make such technologies a reality. As I have pointed out
throughout this book, such investment cannot occur in the absence of robust
consumer demand. Within the context of the free market economy, no
investor would make such an investment unless he or she anticipates a
vibrant market for the resulting technology.

I would also argue that the level of automation I have been discussing in
the book—in other words, the idea that a substantial fraction of routine,
average jobs will be automated—represents a much lower point on the
technology curve than all this really fantastic stuff. Therefore, it will occur
first. As I have pointed out, if technology permanently eliminates huge
numbers of workers—and creates pervasive fear in the minds of those who
still have jobs—consumer demand would surely suffer dramatically. The
bottom line is that, if our economic model is not adapted to the new reality,
technology could essentially kill itself off. It is quite easy to imagine a
scenario in which technology reached a certain point, but then slowed
dramatically or even halted before getting to the really amazing things.
OceanofPDF.com

Machine Intelligence and the Turing Test
 This book has primarily been concerned with the potential economic impact
of what researchers in the field of artificial intelligence would call narrow
AI. In other words, machines and software that are capable of sophisticated
analysis, decision making and reasoning within a relatively narrow field of
application. Such machines are not really intelligent in any meaningful
sense—but they are highly competent at performing specific complex tasks
and may well exceed the capability of a human worker.
Narrow AI applications are already in widespread use; expert systems
such as the software that can autonomously pilot and land airliners and
many of the advanced features built into Internet search engines and
multiplayer role playing games fall into this area. Narrow AI is the practical
side of artificial intelligence, and for that reason, we can expect that it will
attract substantial commercial investment. As I have argued in this book,
machines exhibiting vastly improved narrow AI capability may ultimately
be poised to permanently take over a great many of the more routine jobs in
the economy.
While narrow AI is increasingly deployed to solve real world problems
and attracts most of the current commercial interest, the Holy Grail of
artificial intelligence is, of course, strong AI—the construction of a truly
intelligent machine. The realization of strong AI would mean the existence
of a machine that is genuinely competitive with, or perhaps even superior
to, a human being in its ability to reason and conceive ideas. The arguments
I have made in this book do not depend on strong AI, but it is worth noting
that if truly intelligent machines were built and became affordable, the
trends I have predicted here would likely be amplified, and the economic
impact would certainly be dramatic and might unfold in an accelerating
fashion.
Research into strong AI has suffered because of some overly optimistic
predictions and expectations back in the 1980s—long before computer
hardware was fast enough to make true machine intelligence feasible. When
reality fell far short of the projections, focus and financial backing shifted
away from research into strong AI. Nonetheless, there is evidence that the
vastly superior performance and affordability of today's processors is
helping to revitalize the field.

Research into strong AI can be roughly divided into two main
approaches. The direct computational approach attempts to extend
traditional, algorithmic computing into the realm of true intelligence. This
involves the development of sophisticated software applications that exhibit
general reasoning. A second approach begins by attempting to understand
and then simulate the human brain. The Blue Brain Project,
56 a
collaboration between Switzerland's EPFL (one of Europe's top technical
universities) and IBM, is one such effort to simulate the workings of the
brain. Once researchers gain an understanding of the basic operating
principles of the brain, it may be possible to build an artificial intelligence
based on that framework. This would not be an exact replication of a human
brain; instead, it would be something completely new, but based on a
similar architecture.
When might strong AI become reality—if ever? I suspect that if you
were to survey the top experts working in the field, you would get a fairly
wide range of estimates. Optimists might say it will happen within the next
20 to 30 years. A more cautious group would place it 50 or more years in
the future, and some might argue that it will never happen.
True machine intelligence is an idea that, in many ways, intrudes into
the realm of philosophy, and for some people, perhaps even religion. What
is the nature of intelligence? Is intelligence algorithmic? Can it be separated
from consciousness or self-awareness? Roger Penrose, one of the world's
top mathematical physicists, has written several books
57 suggesting that true
artificial intelligence is unattainable using conventional computers because
he believes that intelligence (or at least consciousness) has its roots in
quantum mechanics—the area of physics that governs the probabilistic, and
seemingly bizarre, interactions that occur between particles of subatomic
size.
If strong AI does arrive, how will we know? That is a question that was
first asked by Alan Turing nearly sixty years ago. Turing, a legendary
British mathematician and code breaker during World War II, is often
considered to be the founder of computer science. In 1950, Turing
published a paper entitled "Computing Machinery and Intelligence," in
which he proposed a test to answer the question: "Can machines think?"
Turing's test was based on a game popular at parties at the time. In
today's terms, it amounts to a three-way instant messaging conversation.
One participant is a human judge. The other participants are another person

and a machine—both of whom attempt to convince the judge that they are
human by conducting a normal conversation. If the judge can't tell which
participant is which, then the machine is said to have passed the Turing
Test.
The Turing Test is perhaps the most well-known and accepted method
for measuring true machine intelligence. In practice, the rules would need to
be further refined, and it seems likely that a panel of judges would be
required rather than a single person. In my opinion, the main problem with
the Turing Test is that it is, as Turing pointed out in his paper, an "imitation
game." What it really tests is the ability of an intelligent entity to imitate a
human being—it is not a test of intelligence itself. Presumably the
conversation could roam into almost any area, so I think it is quite possible
that an intelligent machine might be tripped up by a lack of actual human
experience.
The realization of strong AI would mean that a true alien intelligence
has appeared right here—rather than in the signals received from one of the
radio telescopes used by the SETI project. We could not reasonably expect
such an alien entity to think just like us or necessarily be able to replicate
our experiences or outlook. My guess is that the best test for true machine
intelligence will turn out to be similar to the standard devised by Supreme
Court Justice Potter Stewart for obscenity: we'll know it when we see it.
If it does occur, the advent of genuinely intelligent machines will carry
with it many potential perils for our society and economy.* However, there
is a more subtle danger posed by the specter of strong IA: it distracts us
from the far more immediate economic impacts that will likely result from
narrow AI. Recent articles in the press
58 have pointed out that machines
currently exhibit "insect-level" intelligence. In other words, if we were to
set out to build a broadly intelligent machine today, we'd likely end up with
something about as smart as a cockroach.
The problem with that comparison is that it gives us a false sense of
security; it glosses over the obvious reality that cockroaches neither land
aircraft nor defeat human beings at games of chess. When machine
capability is focused narrowly, the story is very different. I think there is
little doubt that in the coming years and decades, our definition of what
constitutes "narrow" artificial intelligence is going to broaden quite
dramatically. If it broadens to the degree that machines begin to encroach
on a substantial fraction of the jobs that support consumers, the viability of

capitalism will ultimately be threatened—unless, of course, our economic
rules are adapted to reflect the new reality.
  
*[ These issues are beyond the scope of this book. For a good introduction to this area, I'd
recommend reading "Why the future doesn't need us," an article written by Sun Microsystems co-
founder Bill Joy for the
April, 2000 issue of Wired Magazine.
Web: http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html ]
 
OceanofPDF.com

About / Contacting the Author
 
Martin Ford is the founder of a Silicon Valley-based software development
firm. He has over 25 years experience in the fields of computer design and
software development. He holds an MBA degree from the Anderson
Graduate School of Management at UCLA and an undergraduate degree in
computer engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
The author welcomes comments, criticisms and corrections and can be
contacted by email at:
lightstunnel@yahoo.com.
OceanofPDF.com

NOTES
 
Introduction
1 Larry Page on AI at Google: Web: http://news.cnet.com/2100-11395_3-6160372.html video:
http://news.cnet.com/1606-2_3-6160334.html?tag=mncol;txt
2 Kurtzweil has a $20,000 bet with Mitch Kapor that a computer will pass the "Turing Test" and
thus exhibit human-like intelligence (see last section of the Appendix) by the year 2029. Web:
http://www.longbets.org/1
Chapter 1: The Tunnel
3 US Census Bureau, 2004, web: http://www.census.gov/Press-
Release/www/releases/archives/education/004214.html
4 Percentage of world's population in poverty, see the graph based on World Bank data at
http://www.globalissues.org/article/26/poverty-facts-and-stats. My focus here is not on extreme
poverty, which is measured at 1-3 dollars per day, but on an income level that prevents people from
being viable mass market consumers.
5 Doris Kearns Goodwin, Team of Rivals: The Political Genius of Abraham Lincoln, Simon and
Schuster , 2005, p 77.
6 "How deeply the curse of slavery...", Letter from William H. Seward to Albert H. Tracy, June
25, 1835. Albert H. Tracy Papers, New York State Library, Albany NY (as cited in Team of Rivals, p
77).
Chapter 2: Acceleration
7 Punch cards at the University of Michigan: The university by then had a very advanced
interactive time-sharing system called the "Michigan Terminal System" or MTS. Most students in
advanced computer science and engineering courses used interactive terminals. However, interactive
computer time was very expensive, so punch cards were still used in introductory courses.
8 Amdahl MIPS rating: Roy Longbottom's PC Benchmark Collection, Web:
http://www.roylongbottom.org.uk/mips.htm#anchorAmdahl
9 All computer MIPS ratings are taken from Wikipedia:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Instructions_per_second. The MacIntosh and Lisa computers used the
Motorola 68000 microprocessor with a rating of 1 MIPS.
10 Calculating the amount in Bill's pocket: Google makes this easy. Just enter the following in
the search box:

.01 * 2 ^ ((1986-1975)/2) (replace 1986 with the desired year)
11 Ray Kurzweil, The Singularity in Near: When Humans Transcend Biology, New York,
Penguin Group, 2005
12 " "S" and "U" encoded within the interference patterns of quantum electron waves", Stanford
News Service: http://news-service.stanford.edu/news/2009/january28/small-012809.html
13 Many technologists believe that the exponential progress of information technology will
ultimately level off. In other worlds, the graph will someday become an "s-curve," somewhat similar
in shape to the graph of human capability that appears later in the "Diminishing Returns" section (see
here). However, there is no way to know how far in the future this might occur, and there is little
evidence to suggest it will happen anytime soon.
14 For more on "quants" and the creation of exotic derivatives, see: Emmanuel Derman, My Life
as a Quant: Reflections on Physics and Finance, New York, John Wiley and Sons, 2004.
15 Charles Dickens, Oliver Twist.
16 James J. Heckman and Paul A. LaFontaine, "The Declining American High School
Graduation Rate: Evidence, Sources, And Consequences", NBER Reporter: Research Summary 2008,
Number 1, web: http://www.nber.org/reporter/2008number1/heckman.html
17 Literacy study, web: http://nces.ed.gov/naal/estimates/overview.aspx
18 SAT Scores, Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SAT
19 "Automation Takes Toll On Offshore Workers" by Paul McDougall, InformationWeek,
January 26, 2004. Web:
http://www.informationweek.com/news/management/trends/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=17500858
20 "The share of employment potentially affected by offshoring", Feb 23, 2006, Organisation
for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Web:
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/37/26/36187829.pdf
21 Table of Occupations taken from: Audrey Watson, "Employment and Wages of Typical U.S.
Occupations", U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, May 2006. Web:
http://www.bls.gov/oes/2006/may/typical.pdf
22 "Tech's part in preventing attacks", Michael Kanellos, CNET News, July 7, 2005. Web:
http://news.cnet.com/Techs-part-in-preventing-attacks/2100-7348_3-5778470.html
23 Stack, Martin ; Gartland, Myles ; Keane, Timothy , "The offshoring of radiology: myths and
realities", SAM Advanced Management Journal, January 1, 2007. Web:
http://www.accessmylibrary.com/coms2/summary_0286-30757731_ITM
24 "Nothing to lose but their chains," The Economist, June 19, 2008. Web:
http://www.economist.com/business/displayStory.cfm?source=hptextfeature&story_id=11575170
25 Jobs created by small business, see: SBA FAQ. Web:
http://www.sba.gov/advo/stats/sbfaq.pdf

26 "Why so Nervous about robots, Wal-Mart?", July 8, 2005, Web: http://news.cnet.com/8301-
10784_3-5779674-7.html
27 "Future Store" Web: http://www.future-store.org/fsi-Internet/html/en/20412/index.html
28 Ashlee Vance, "Microsoft Mapping Course to a Jetsons-style Future", New York Times,
March 1, 2009, Web: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/02/technology/business-
computing/02compute.html?pagewanted=1&_r=4&hp
29 P.W. Singer, Wired for War: The Robotics Revolution and Conflict in the 21st Century, New
York, Penguin Press, 2009, pp 140-1.
30 For more on nanotechnology and living organisms, see: Richard A. L. Jones, Soft Machines:
Nanotechnology and Life, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2004.
31 Average wages by education level: U.S. Census Bureau News Release, January 10, 2008.
Web: http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/releases/archives/education/011196.html
32 William Easterly, The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists' Adventures and Misadventures
in the Tropics, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 2002, p.53.
33 "Outsourcing not the Culprit in Manufacturing Job Loss", AutomationWorld, December 9th,
2003. Web: http://www.automationworld.com/webonly-320
34 Alan Greenspan, The Age of Turbulence, New York, The Penguin Press, 2007, p.397.
35 ABC News 20/20 Special, "Last Days on Earth", 2006
36 Kurtzweil predicts the Technological Singularity by 2045: Fortune Magazine, May 14, 2007,
Web: http://money.cnn.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2007/05/14/100008848/
37 "Vernor Vinge on the Singularity," Web: http://mindstalk.net/vinge/vinge-sing.html
Chapter 3: Danger
38 Robert J. Shapiro, Futurecast: how superpowers, populations, and globalization will change
the way you live and work, New York, St. Martin's Press, 2008.
39 Thomas L. Friedman, The World is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty First Century, New
York, Farrar, Strause and Giroux, 2005, 2006.
40 China's high saving rate the result of government policy, see: Eamonn Fingleton, In the Jaws
of the Dragon: America's Fate in the Coming Era of Chinese Hegemony, New York, St. Martin's
Press, 2008.
41 Pietra Rivoli, The Travels of a T-Shirt in the Global Economy: An Economist Examines the
Markets, Power and Politics of World Trade, John Wiley and Sons, New York, 2005, p 40.
42 Ibid. p 142.
43 Jeff Rubin and Benjamin Tal, "Will Soaring Transport Costs Reverse Globalization?," CIBC
World Markets StrategEcon, March 27, 2008. Web: http://yaleglobal.yale.edu/about/pdfs/oil.pdf
44 "...growth without job creation." , The Economist, August 11, 2003. Web:
http://www.economist.com/agenda/PrinterFriendly.cfm?Story_ID=1985889

45 Huether, David, "The Case of the Missing Jobs, BusinessWeek, April 3, 2006. Web:
http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_14/b3978116.htm
46 Technically this might be better called "regressive" or "reverse progressive" since the
deduction is higher at lower wage levels. However, those words have negative connotations...
47 Fareed Zackaria, The Future of Freedom: Illiberal Democracy at Home and Abroad, New
York, W.W. Norton & Co., 2003, p. 172-173.
48 Blinder, Alan S., "Is Government too Political?" Foreign Affairs, November/December 1997.
Web: http://www.foreignaffairs.org/19971101faessay3815/alan-s-blinder/is-government-too-
political.html
49 Jeremy Rifkin, The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of
the Post-Market Era, New York, Penguin Group, 1995.
50
Chapter 4: Transition
Cornelia Dean, "Scientific Savvy? In U.S. Not Much", New York Times, August 30, 2005, web:
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/30/science/30profile.html
51 See Chris Anderson's The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business is Selling Less of More, a
book based on an article in Wired Magazine, October 2004. Web:
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.10/tail.html
52 John Maynard Keynes, "Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren," (written in 1930),
Essays in Persuasion, New York, W.W. Norton, 1963. Web:
http://www.econ.yale.edu/smith/econ116a/keynes1.pdf
p. 195 footnote, Einstein's view on technological unemployment, see: Walter Isaacson, Einstein:
His Life and Universe, New York, Simon & Schuster, 2007, p.403.
Chapter 5: The Green Light
53 For more on the challenges of addressing poverty, see: William Easterly, The Elusive Quest
for Growth: Economists' Adventures and Misadventures in the Tropics, Cambridge, MA, MIT Press,
2002.
Appendix / Final Thoughts
54 A.M Turing, "Computing Machinery and Intelligence", Mind, 1950. Web:
http://loebner.net/Prizef/TuringArticle.html
55 "French students shy of real world", BBC News, March 14, 2008. Web:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/7293992.stm
56 Blue Brain Project, Web: http://bluebrain.epfl.ch/
57 Roger Penrose, The Emperor's New Mind: Concerning Computers, Minds, and the Laws of
Physics, Oxford University Press, 1989 and Shadows of the Mind: A Search for the Missing Science

of Consciousness, Oxford University Press, 1994.
58 For example: John Markoff, "Scientists worry that Machines may Outsmart Man", New York
Times, July 25, 2009. Web: http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/26/science/26robot.html?em
OceanofPDF.com

