
Thank you for downloading this
Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and
send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in
your inbox.
OceanofPDF.com


OceanofPDF.com

To Kathy, James, and Ava (and Patches, too)
OceanofPDF.com

PROLOGUE
MAKING THE WORLD SAFE FOR HIMSELF
"There must be a meth lab around here."
Alex Karp was out for a jog. It was a Tuesday afternoon in September 2021,
and while it was still warm in northern New Hampshire, there was a hint of
autumn in the air—a slight chill to the sun. Karp, dressed in biking shorts and a
T-shirt, was moving at a very slow clip along the road that abutted his property.
The gentle pace was deliberate, part of a conditioning regimen prescribed by the
former Norwegian commandos who served as his bodyguards and who also
helped him train for cross-country skiing, a sport that he pursued obsessively.
Before his run, Karp had done a tai chi session with his longtime instructor,
Grandmaster Yang Yang, who was visiting from New York, and had eaten a
quick lunch of pretzels slathered with peanut butter.
Karp was at the base of a hill when a beat-up car appeared in front of him. It
was traveling at a crawl, too, as if the driver were lost or looking for a difficult-to-
find address. A man was behind the wheel and a woman was in the front
passenger seat. They appeared to be in their late twenties or early thirties, and
their gaunt faces suggested hard living. Karp was in the business of noticing
things: he ran a company whose work revolved around pattern recognition, and
he had recently observed a couple of mystery cars driving through the sparsely
populated neighborhood, which prompted him to make the comment about
the meth lab. As the car drew closer, Karp raised his hand to say hello. The
couple didn't respond but just eyed him warily.
The suspicion was understandable: here they were, on a twisting country lane
three miles from the nearest town and maybe an hour south of the Canadian
border, and suddenly in front of them was a wiry man with a huge knot of salt-
and-pepper hair trotting down the middle of the street, followed by some burly
guys on bicycles, and trailed by a black Chevy Suburban with tinted windows.

While Karp had reason to wonder why they were there, they had even more
reason to wonder about him and his entourage. Narcs laying a trap? Someone in
witness protection? A drug lord? If the couple was indeed en route to making an
illicit purchase, the curious encounter was doubtless unnerving. Had they
known Karp's true identity, they might have floored the accelerator. Instead,
though, they drove by him cautiously, as if to signal that they didn't want
trouble.
With the car behind him, Karp continued his run. Ambling along, he talked
about the $180,000 donation that he had recently made to a local hermit known
as "River Dave," whose cabin had burned down. It was an act of kindness, but
also a gesture of solidarity, one introvert to another. The gift drew national
headlines. Some articles noted that Karp had been awarded a compensation
package worth $1.1 billion in 2020, making him the highest-paid chief executive
officer of a publicly traded company that year.
After pausing for a moment to watch some foxes darting across the road,
Karp segued into a discussion about the prospect of war with China and the
importance of maintaining America's dominance in computer software. This jag
led to a brief diatribe against the "wokeness" of Silicon Valley and what he saw as
the tech industry's indefensible ambivalence about working with the U.S.
military. And as was often the case, the subject of wokeness brought the
conversation around to our alma mater, Haverford College, its failure to invite
him to speak on campus, and what he considered its lackluster effort to cultivate
him as a potential donor, which he found both insulting and insane.
After maybe a half hour of running, Karp came to an intersection that
marked the end of his route. He toweled off, took a sip of water, and climbed
into the front passenger seat of the Suburban. (Karp had never learned to drive.)
During the short ride back to his house, he ripped into Facebook, calling it a
"parasitic business," and confided that its chairman and chief executive officer,
Mark Zuckerberg, had recently called their mutual friend Peter Thiel to
complain about Karp's broadsides against his company. Karp's five-hundred-acre
property sat on a gently sloping hillside. His home, surrounded by pine and
birch trees, offered a commanding view of the White Mountains. Karp walked
inside, where he was met by Günter, one of four Austrians who were his

executive assistants. The others were Gabriel, Hermann, and Agnes. A Swiss,
Martin, was also part of his personal staff. Karp and Günter spoke briefly, in
German; he conversed with his assistants almost exclusively in German. Several
members of Karp's security detail, which included five Norwegians, a handful of
Americans, a couple of Austrians, an Irishman, and a Scot, were eating a late
lunch at the kitchen table. It was a slightly surreal scene that called to mind a
Bond villain's lair. However, Karp's company worked with British intelligence,
not against it. Plus, the mezuzah on the front door wasn't something you were
likely to see in a Bond flick.
Karp suggested going to the shooting range in his backyard to take target
practice, but sensing my lack of enthusiasm, he dropped the idea. As we walked
into the living room, he put his phone into a Faraday cage and asked me to do
the same. "The Chinese would be crazy not to try to listen to my calls," he
explained. A lifelong bachelor now in his mid-fifties, Karp owned multiple
homes in the United States and Europe. The New Hampshire house was his
primary residence. He had a sentimental attachment to northern New England
(he also owned a place in Vermont); he had spent childhood summers there,
when his parents were still together, before the acrimonious divorce that
upended his life for a time.
The home was sparsely furnished; it had a couch and some chairs, but
otherwise felt unoccupied. This was a reflection of Karp's asceticism and also his
peripatetic schedule; before Covid-19 grounded him, he spent roughly three
hundred days a year on the road and rarely stayed in the same place for more
than a night or two. He insisted that his job required all the travel, but some of
his colleagues were skeptical. "The guy's clearly running from something," one
said with a laugh. Books were scattered around the house. A German-language
biography of Albert Einstein lay on the dining room table, alongside a set of
John le Carré novels. That might have seemed like a peculiar juxtaposition, but
in a home owned by Alex Karp, it had a certain logic.
Karp was the chief executive officer of Palantir Technologies, a company that
specialized in data analytics. Named after the seeing stones in J. R. R. Tolkien's
Lord of the Rings, Palantir built software that could sift through enormous
quantities of data to identify connections and trends that might take human

analysts days, weeks, or even months to find. It was started after 9/11 for the
purpose of helping the American government combat terrorism and was
financed in part by In-Q-Tel, the CIA's venture capital arm. A number of
clandestine services now used Palantir, including the Mossad. Speculation that
its technology had played a part in the 2011 raid that killed Osama bin Laden
had conferred on Palantir an enduring mystique.
The company's work, however, was not limited to counterterrorism. All six
branches of the U.S. military had deployed its technology. More than three
dozen federal agencies were Palantir clients, among them the FBI, the IRS, and
the National Institutes of Health, or NIH. Major corporations like BP, the
energy giant, used Palantir to make sense of the flood tide of data that they
generated every day. Although Palantir was a relatively small company, with only
around four thousand employees, its reach was tentacular. From terrorism to
climate change to famine to immigration to human trafficking to financial fraud
to the future of warfare, Palantir was at the nexus of the most consequential
issues of the twenty-first century, a point illustrated vividly during the pandemic,
when over a dozen countries utilized the company's software to try to track and
contain the novel coronavirus. The United States and Britain also turned to
Palantir for help with distributing vaccines.
But even as the company's business evolved, its core mission remained
unchanged: according to Karp, Palantir existed to defend the West (a mandate
that was known internally as "saving the Shire," a nod to Palantir's literary roots;
company management was also fond of referring to employees as "hobbits").
The explicitly ideological agenda made Palantir an oddity in the corporate world.
From the start, it refused to do business in China and Russia because it saw both
countries as adversarial. This decision was ultimately vindicated, but in the mid-
2000s it struck some potential investors as bizarre: Why would any company
forswear China's booming market? At Palantir, however, the pursuit of
profitability—a goal that would prove frustratingly elusive—was always
subordinate to what Karp and his colleagues saw as their higher purpose: making
Palantir a sword and shield for America and for the West more broadly.
Palantir seemed especially anomalous in Silicon Valley, which was dominated
by companies selling consumer products and services. But the Palantirians took

pride in being different; instead of making gadgets and games, they believed they
were on the front line of a battle to preserve America's way of life. And although
the company was based in Palo Alto, Karp and his colleagues bore a deep animus
to the Valley and its culture—Facebook became an object of particular scorn—
and drew additional motivation from their own sense of estrangement. (In 2020,
Palantir formally broke with the Valley by relocating its headquarters to Denver.)
Karp, certainly, was an outlier in the tech industry. He had no training in
computer science or business, and with his personal background, he was an
improbable choice to lead a company that aimed to become the software
supplier of choice for the intelligence community. A biracial Jew raised in a
staunchly left-wing household, Karp majored in philosophy at Haverford. He
went on to earn a law degree from Stanford University and a doctorate in social
theory from Germany's Goethe University Frankfurt, where for a time his
mentor was Jürgen Habermas, perhaps Europe's most acclaimed living
philosopher. That Karp was dyslexic made his scholarly achievements especially
impressive.
But he had no desire to pursue a career in academia, and when Peter Thiel, a
law school classmate who had cofounded PayPal, asked Karp in 2004 if he would
be interested in joining a start-up that was building software to fight terrorism,
he jumped at the opportunity. Not long thereafter, Karp became Palantir's
CEO. His academic credentials, coupled with his distinctive appearance and
manner, made him a compelling front man for a company like Palantir. So did
his political views: for a time, he claimed to be a neo-socialist, which seemed
unusual for someone working at the intersection of technology and national
security. It also provided an intriguing contrast with Thiel, who was a libertarian
(and who later would gravitate to the far right). And although some Silicon
Valley venture capitalists initially snubbed Palantir, Karp turned out to be a
convincing advocate for his company.
He pitched Palantir as if his life depended on it. In his mind, it did. From the
time that he was a child, Karp had been consumed with a feeling of vulnerability
—he was Jewish and black in a world that seemed implacably hostile to Jews and
blacks. In addition, he had a learning disability. He believed that only in a society
that afforded robust protections to minorities and other at-risk groups could

someone like him survive and prosper. "My biggest fear is fascism," he said
during one of our first conversations, in 2019. At that time, he unambiguously
believed that defending liberal democracy was synonymous with defending the
West, and for him, Palantir's mission was personal: Palantir was making the
world safer for Alex Karp. And to an uncanny degree, the company was a
reflection of him: of his habits and quirks, of the experiences that had shaped
him, and above all, of his bleak worldview and the anxieties that weighed on
him. His sense of foreboding, he said, "propels a lot of decisions for this
company."
Karp's commitment to Palantir was absolute, a point he emphasized in a
2013 interview with Forbes. "The only time I'm not thinking about Palantir is
when I'm swimming, practicing Qigong, or during sexual activity," he told the
magazine. (Swimming was his main sport back then.) Karp rarely took a day off,
and on most weeknights he ate dinner at his desk. He had no children but was in
long-term, concurrent relationships with two women, an arrangement that
worked in part because he was "geographically monogamous," as one colleague
felicitously put it (this person also said that both women were "age-
appropriate"). When Karp wasn't tending to business, he could often be found
skiing. Most of his homes were in remote locations and were chosen for their
proximity to cross-country skiing trails. If time permitted, he skied twelve to
fifteen miles per day. But according to Karp, even his skiing was in service to
Palantir: he believed that only someone conditioned like an elite athlete could
maintain a schedule as grueling as his.
Under Karp, Palantir became a dominant force in data analytics, a
multibillion-dollar enterprise with swank offices around the world and an aura
of intrigue—meticulously cultivated—that set it apart even in the frenzied
atmosphere of Silicon Valley. Validation—for Palantir, for Karp—came in 2020,
when the company, after years of putting off an IPO, went public. The
successful stock market listing affirmed Palantir's viability and officially made
Karp a billionaire. Apart from buying additional homes (and, eventually, his
own private jet), the wealth didn't change his lifestyle, and Karp professed to be
indifferent to his net worth, although not everyone in his orbit was persuaded of
that. "He's probably more financially motivated than he thinks, and I am less

financially motivated than people think," Thiel said. But Karp did enjoy his
enhanced stature. He was now a center of attention at events like the World
Economic Forum, which was held each year in Davos, Switzerland. Heads of
state were eager to hear his thoughts, and he was in ever-greater demand as a
speaker. Except at Haverford.
The college's reluctance to embrace Karp was not surprising, though. Palantir
was controversial. Its software could enable mass surveillance, and the company's
ties to the intelligence community and law enforcement were a source of acute
concern to civil libertarians and privacy advocates. The first Trump presidency
had also made Palantir toxic in the eyes of many observers. The company was
implicated in the Cambridge Analytica scandal, in which Facebook data was
surreptitiously used to try to manipulate millions of Americans into voting for
Donald Trump in 2016. An even bigger flash point was Palantir's work with
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE. When Trump launched
his immigration crackdown, Palantir was accused of abetting racist and
inhumane policies. That Thiel had been one of Trump's most prominent
supporters added to the furor.
Protests were held outside the company's offices, as well as in front of Karp's
Palo Alto home, and Palantir found itself no longer welcome on some college
campuses—including, apparently, our alma mater's. The Trump years, in
addition to being a public relations fiasco for Palantir, exposed an uncomfortable
truth: the company's technology would be a powerful weapon in the hands of
an authoritarian regime.
But except for the Haverford part, all that was just an unpleasant memory
when I visited Karp in New Hampshire in September 2021. I went there to
discuss my interest in writing a book about him and Palantir. The previous year,
I had published a story about Palantir in The New York Times Magazine. Karp
and I didn't know each other until I was assigned the Times Magazine piece. We
were in the same class at Haverford but somehow managed never to exchange a
word, which seemed hard to believe given that the school had fewer than 1,500
students. We first met in April 2019, when I went to Palantir's New York office
for an off-the-record conversation with him (perhaps hoping to rekindle the
college spirit, or something approximating it, he drank a nonalcoholic beer while

we talked). In the months that followed, we met again in New York, as well as in
Washington, Paris, and Vermont. We developed a good rapport; Karp seemed
comfortable talking to me and spoke candidly about Palantir and himself.
The article, which was published in October 2020, a few weeks after Palantir
went public, was around nine thousand words. Even so, I felt that there was
more to say. Karp was a sui generis figure on the business scene, and Palantir was
arguably the most interesting company in the world—and possibly also one of
the most dangerous. Its technology had the potential to help shape the balance
of power in the twenty-first century and to alter the relationship between the
individual and the state. Palantir was a window into the panoptic future that
had now arrived, and one could not begin to understand the company without
understanding the idiosyncratic person at its helm.
Karp was receptive to the book idea. He said that he figured a book would be
written about Palantir and that it made sense to cooperate with an author he
knew and liked. What he didn't say, but what was certainly true, was that he
wanted to be the subject of a book. Although Karp was Palantir's CEO, the press
often referred to the company as "Peter Thiel's Palantir." That was especially the
case during the first Trump administration, when Thiel's name was clickbait.
But while Thiel had conceived the idea for Palantir and served as its chairman of
the board, he had never played a role in its day-to-day operations. In the wake of
Palantir's public listing, Karp wanted to be recognized as the chief architect of
the company's success, and this was his principal motive for agreeing to
cooperate with me.
Karp was generous with his time and thoughts. Many of our conversations
were in person, usually in New York or Washington. In addition, we spoke
numerous times by video and phone. I had a standing offer to travel with him on
his private jet, but I decided from the outset that it would be better not to. I
feared it would undermine the integrity of the book. I also didn't want to fly
with him because I worried that my presence on the plane would start to feel
burdensome. It was hard to hold Karp's attention. Many of his colleagues
assumed that he had ADHD. During meetings, he often played with a Rubik's
Cube, and if not that, he would fidget with something else. If a conversation
took place standing up, he would practice tai chi moves while listening or

talking. Normally, he could give me thirty to forty-five minutes of productive
conversation before he started to drift.
Although Karp was intensely private, he understood that it would be hard to
write a book about him without input from those who know him best. His
brother, Ben, who lives in Japan, spoke with me frequently and shared lots of
memories and insights. I also interviewed Karp's mother. His father was in
declining health and unavailable. There were some limits to Karp's cooperation:
he refused, for instance, to put me in touch with the women with whom he is
involved. I met one of them anyway, but only by chance. She is American. His
other ongoing relationship is with a woman in Europe; he has been with her for
more than two decades. Palantir is a complicated company, and Karp has a
complicated existence.
When I started working on the book, Joe Biden was in the White House,
demonstrators were no longer congregating outside Palantir's offices, the worst
of the pandemic seemed over, and I did wonder if we were entering a period that
would be uneventful for Karp and the company. But just weeks into my
reporting, Russia invaded Ukraine, a conflict in which Palantir's technology
would play a central role. Dramatic advances in machine-learning capabilities,
underscored by the debut in November 2022 of ChatGPT, heralded the dawn
of the AI revolution, and on both the military and commercial side, Palantir was
at its vanguard. Then came October 7, the Hamas attack that left 1,200 Israelis
dead. This tragedy was one of the defining events of Karp's career and an
epochal moment for Palantir—it was the war on terrorism anew, in a world that
now felt very unsafe for Jews, very unsafe for Alex Karp. All the major themes of
Karp's life—his sense of vulnerability, his deep attachment to his Jewish heritage
(in contrast to his seeming ambivalence about being part black), his disdain for
the identarian left and for academia—converged around this one issue, and
listening to him in the days and weeks following the massacre was especially
revealing.
The slaughter in Israel also cemented his political metamorphosis. Although
he had long ago stopped describing himself as a neo-socialist, he still claimed to
be progressive when I first met him, and on certain issues, such as immigration,
he expressed opinions that seemed consistent with a liberal worldview (at the

same time, though, he opposed affirmative action and was a staunch supporter
of the Second Amendment). But during Biden's presidency, it was hard not to
notice that he seldom had a good word to say about the Democratic Party and
was often contemptuous of it. By contrast, he went out of his way to praise
Republicans—even Trump. For a time, I assumed this was just a contrarian
reflex on his part, or a way of telegraphing an independent spirit. But at a certain
point, it became clear that he was moving to the right, and the October 7
pogrom and the eruption of anti-Israel protests at colleges and universities led
him to decisively break with the Democrats.
In the course of my reporting, I was also able to observe the transformation
of Karp's public image. To the extent that he had attracted notice in the past, he
was primarily regarded as an eccentric, an oddball. For a long time, he embraced
that persona, proudly referring to himself as "the batshit-crazy CEO." But
impressions of him began to change as a result of Ukraine, AI, and Israel. He
was outspoken about all three issues and had interesting and often provocative
things to say. He also demonstrated physical courage: in May 2022, three
months into the war, he traveled to Kyiv to meet with Ukrainian President
Volodymyr Zelensky. Karp now projected gravitas, a perception amplified by
what seemed to be the unseriousness of other major figures in the tech world.
While Karp was visiting conflict zones and talking about matters of war and
peace, Mark Zuckerberg and Elon Musk were planning to face off in a cage
match.
And yet, even as his stature and influence grew, Karp was incapable of casting
aside his grievances. He was rarely more animated than when lashing out at Wall
Street or Silicon Valley. I found this puzzling. His company was thriving, he was
a billionaire; by any measure, he had "won." So why couldn't he just let it go? I
eventually came to realize that he needed enemies. The doubters and the haters,
real and imagined, gave him added motivation and were part of the larger
narrative that Karp had constructed about himself and Palantir: that they were
perennial outsiders, always the barbarians at the gate.
Karp and the company rode that rebellious image to great effect, but
Palantir's success accelerated dramatically while I was working on the book. The
company's struggle for profitability had been a source of exasperation for

Palantir investors, not least Thiel. But in late 2022, after almost twenty years in
business, the company finally notched a profit, and that proved to be an
inflection point. Palantir was profitable every quarter thereafter, and on the back
of the generative AI boom, its revenue growth surged. In September 2024,
Palantir was added to the S&P 500, which Karp regarded as the company's most
significant milestone yet. Its stock had more than doubled since the start of the
year and was still rising. On November 4, Palantir released another stellar
earnings report, and it gained almost $10 per share, closing above $50 for the
first time.
Little more than twenty-four hours later, Donald Trump was elected
president again. His signature issue was his promise of an even harsher
immigration crackdown that would potentially see millions of people expelled
from the United States. Trump's campaign was notable for its violent rhetoric,
language that many scholars (and voters) regarded as fascistic. Two former
generals who had served under Trump during his first administration, John
Kelly and Mark Milley, publicly called Trump a fascist. Trump plainly had little
regard for the rule of law and constitutional norms, a fact laid bare by his
attempt to overturn the 2020 election. With Trump restored to power, it
appeared that authoritarianism had triumphed in the United States and that
Palantir, which Karp had always touted as a bulwark of the liberal international
order, would henceforth be serving the agenda of a president who was
contemptuous of America's political tradition, disdainful of the Western
alliance, and strangely enamored of some of the world's most brutal tyrants.
OceanofPDF.com

ONE
THE SCHMATTES FACTORY
On April 14, 2021, President Joe Biden announced that he would withdraw the
last remaining U.S. troops from Afghanistan no later than September 11 of that
year, a date that would mark the twentieth anniversary of the terrorist attack that
led to America's long military engagement there. Biden had been assured by the
U.S. intelligence community that Afghan security forces would be able to hold
off a resurgent Taliban long enough to allow for an orderly evacuation by the
United States and its allies. Biden had campaigned for the presidency on a
promise to end the "forever war" in Afghanistan, and now, barely four months
after taking office, he had decided to make good on that pledge.
However, the intelligence assessments were too optimistic. By midsummer,
Afghanistan's military had all but collapsed, its government was teetering, and
the Taliban had captured large swaths of the country and were closing in on the
capital, Kabul. In July, in response to the deteriorating situation, Biden moved
up the date for the withdrawal of the last U.S. troops to August 31. Most of the
2,500 American servicemen who had been in Afghanistan when Biden initially
announced the drawdown had already left the country, but several hundred
remained. In addition, hundreds of Western diplomats and aid workers, as well
as tens of thousands of Afghans who had assisted the United States and its
coalition partners, were still trying to get out and were facing increasingly
perilous circumstances. On August 13, Biden said that he was immediately
dispatching three thousand additional American troops to Kabul to help with
what would now be a very hasty and dangerous evacuation of noncombatants.
The operation was going to involve hundreds of aircraft and thousands of
flights. The Pentagon also had to send additional Humvees and other support
vehicles to Kabul, along with food and water for U.S. service members and the
civilians being airlifted out of Afghanistan. At the same time, military bases in

Europe and the Middle East had to be readied for the arrival of thousands of
refugees, which meant ensuring that each location had adequate supplies of
food, water, cots, porta potties, and other essentials. On top of that, every
Afghan citizen seeking to resettle in the United States was going to have to be
screened in order to prevent any known or suspected terrorists from being
allowed into the country. Compounding the logistical challenge, a lot of
information that American military planners needed to conduct the evacuation
was siloed in different databases that they couldn't readily access. The mission
was in jeopardy before it even started.
A day after Biden announced that he was sending additional troops to
Afghanistan, the Pentagon reached out to Palantir for help. Since 2018, the
Army had used Palantir's software to manage personnel and supplies; the
system, which the military called Vantage, integrated more than 150 databases
and over thirty thousand datasets, giving the Army a kaleidoscopic view of its
own preparedness at any given moment. Now the Joint Chiefs of Staff wanted
to use Vantage for the evacuation. The message from the Defense Department
conveyed a sense of acute urgency. Mitchell Skiles, who oversaw Palantir's work
with the Army, says that he and his colleagues were told that the goal was simply
"to get the hell out while saving as many lives as possible." Within hours of
receiving the call, Skiles and a team of Palantirians had embedded with the Joint
Staff. Soon, around 150 Palantir engineers were contributing to the effort. Most
were based in the United States, but some were overseas, and because of the
different time zones, Palantir was able to provide round-the-clock support to the
Pentagon.
Through Vantage, the company's engineers quickly pulled in and merged
data from every branch of the military and every civilian agency that was
involved in the evacuation, ranging from the United States Transportation
Command, or Transcom, which oversees all American military transportation,
to the State Department to Customs and Border Patrol, or CBP. In a matter of
days, the Palantirians built a fully integrated data ecosystem for the Joint Staff,
which could now see maintenance records to ensure that planes and support
vehicles were actually operational; could easily locate supplies and match them
with outbound flights; and could quickly verify how many evacuees were aboard

every flight leaving Kabul. The Palantirians drew information from existing
databases and also took in data from ad hoc sources: one data stream that they
plugged into Vantage was a group chat among U.S. troops on the ground at
Kabul's airport. Along the way, Palantir's software helped identify problems
large and small. At one point, it flagged an issue with an American soldier who
was about to leave for Afghanistan: he was only seventeen years old, and under
U.S. law, a person had to be eighteen or older to serve in a conflict zone.
Palantir's technology also played a critical role in the effort to secure the
airport in Kabul. That task fell to the Army's 82nd Airborne Division, under the
command of Major General Chris Donahue. By the time the 82nd Airborne
arrived in Kabul, Afghanistan's president had fled the country, the government
had collapsed, the Taliban had entered the capital, and thousands of desperate
Afghans had converged on the airport. To help ensure that the evacuation could
proceed unimpeded by the Taliban or by terrorist attacks, Donahue and his
troops were equipped with several battlefield intelligence tools that ran on
Palantir's software. The same software was also used on the other end, to help
conduct background checks on refugees as they arrived in the United States.
Palantir's technology became the nerve center for the entire operation.
The Pentagon's decision to enlist Palantir's help was testament to the quality
of the company's products as well as the aptitude of its engineers. But it also
spoke to a deeper truth: even organizations as well funded and seemingly
sophisticated as the U.S. military often struggle to harness their own data. One
of the axioms of this information-soaked age is that data can lead to better
decision-making in almost every sphere of human activity—from the operating
room to the assembly line to the battlefield to the baseball diamond. Fifteen
years before the Afghan airlift, in 2006, a British mathematician and
entrepreneur named Clive Humby gave a speech in London in which he boldly
declared that "data is the new oil." By this, he meant that data would henceforth
be the fuel driving economic growth and material progress. His clever
formulation became the catchphrase of the Big Data revolution. But during that
same speech, Humby extended the oil analogy to make another critical point:
like crude oil, data needs refining in order to be of real value.

Raw data can be challenging to work with. It is often messy and riddled with
mistakes—a misspelled name, an extra zero erroneously attached to a number,
outdated or duplicate records. Data also comes in a wide variety of forms. It can
be structured (charts, spreadsheets, phone logs) or unstructured (text messages,
photographs, Instagram posts). Data can be coded in different languages, such as
Python or Java. A further complication is that organizations routinely store data
in multiple databases that aren't linked—and the larger the organization, the
more data silos it is apt to have. Then there is the sheer volume of data that is
generated now via phones, watches, trains, planes, satellites, automobiles, traffic
lights, toasters, even toilets. It is estimated that the world will have produced 180
zettabytes of data in 2025, a tenfold increase from a decade earlier. A zettabyte is
equivalent to one sextillion bytes, which is... a lot.
Palantir's software helps create order out of all this chaos. It is a tool for
merging, managing, and analyzing large quantities of data. Palantir does not
collect data on behalf of its clients, nor does it store or sell data; its technology
simply enables organizations to make better use of their own data. For a number
of years, Palantir had two software platforms. One, called Gotham, was for the
intelligence community and the military. The other, Metropolis, was mainly for
financial institutions. But Palantir discontinued Metropolis in the mid-2010s
and replaced it with a system called Foundry, which was geared to a broader
spectrum of commercial users. Foundry proved to be so effective that the
company soon began selling it to government agencies and the military, too.
Now Foundry is Palantir's flagship offering, and Gotham is a suite of
applications that sits on top of it. Foundry was used in the Afghan airlift and
today anchors all of Palantir's work. There are rival products on the market, but
most Palantir customers seem to think that the company's software is peerless
(and worth the premium that it charges).
As Palantirians readily acknowledge, data integration is a vital but banal task.
"It's plumbing work, basically," says Louis Mosley, who runs Palantir's London
office. There is something to the analogy. Data is fed into Palantir's software
through virtual pipelines (clients can build the pipelines themselves using
Palantir's technology, or Palantir engineers can do it for them). The software
cleans up and standardizes the data and turns it into a composite dataset.

Customers run queries to obtain answers. They enter a name, a place, or an
event, and they specify how they wish to see the results. It can be via tables,
timelines, graphs, heat maps, histograms, spider diagrams, geospatial analysis, or
artificial intelligence models. But the software then goes a step beyond and
facilitates actual decision-making (something that distinguishes it from
competitors): customers can use Palantir to run simulations, build new
workflows, and otherwise act on the insights derived from their data.
Palantir's software is also known for its adaptability. It can be customized to
reflect the particular needs and habits of mind that guide a corporation or a
government agency, can easily absorb new sources of data, and can be applied to
an astonishingly broad range of issues. Foundry has been used by the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) to track foodborne illnesses;
by the German pharmaceutical company Merck KGaA to accelerate the
development of new drugs; by Airbus to troubleshoot production bottlenecks
and to collate and analyze data generated by sensors on nearly every commercial
Airbus plane in service; by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)
to combat insider trading; by Tampa General Hospital to optimize staffing levels
and schedules; by the World Food Programme (WFP) to manage supplies and
deliveries; and by the Italian automaker Ferrari to improve the performance of its
Formula 1 race cars.
But counterterrorism and defense remain the cornerstone of Palantir's
business. Much of this work necessarily takes place out of public view (it was
never reported, for instance, that Palantir's software was used to help safeguard
the 2024 Paris Olympics). Over the years, Karp has suggested that Palantir's
impact in the war on terrorism was vast and occasionally decisive. During one of
our conversations in 2019, he said Palantir had helped thwart several attacks in
Europe that, had they succeeded, would have caused death and destruction on a
scale that would inevitably have brought the far right to power in a number of
places. Karp was given to dramatic proclamations, and he shared this nugget
with typical brio. "I believe that Western civilization has rested on our somewhat
small shoulders a couple of times in the last fifteen years," he said, adding that
Palantir was the reason why people weren't "goose-stepping" through European
capitals. But such claims, offered without proof, invited skepticism.

Even so, it is true that Palantir frequently operates in the background and
often in fraught situations where unambiguously positive outcomes are not
possible or cannot mask larger failures. That proved to be the case with the
Afghanistan airlift. It ended up being the largest evacuation of noncombatants
in U.S. history: over the course of seventeen days, some eight hundred aircraft
were used to transport nearly 125,000 people. On average, 7,500 people were
put on flights each day, and planes were taking off almost every half hour. By
those measures, it was a formidable achievement, and especially impressive given
the speed with which the mission was thrown together and the hurdles that the
military faced in executing it. There was no way of knowing how many lives were
saved, but the number was surely not a small one. At least three babies were born
aboard flights out of Afghanistan; U.S. military personnel assisted with the
deliveries.
However, the evacuation was ultimately marred by a pair of tragedies. On
August 26, a suicide bomber killed more than 180 people at a section of Kabul's
airport known as Abbey Gate, including thirteen American soldiers. Three days
later, the U.S. military launched a drone strike that mistakenly claimed the lives
of ten innocent Afghans, including seven children. These incidents, coupled
with the scenes of chaos and desperation at the airport, created a widespread
perception that the operation had been a fiasco. The success of the airlift was
also overshadowed by the fact that many Afghans who had hoped to leave were
unable to, and even more so by the harsh reality that the two-decade-long effort
to establish stability and democratic rule in Afghanistan had failed. The war on
terrorism had given rise to Palantir; it seemed somehow fitting that Palantir
played a critical role in bringing one part of that war to an end, albeit with an
ignominious conclusion. But as Karp once put it, "Palantir is the convergence of
software and difficult positions."
"Welcome to the schmattes factory."
Karp was strolling down a corridor of Palantir's Washington office, wearing
his usual work attire: a T-shirt, ski pants, and espadrilles. He also had on a

baseball cap that bore the logo of an elite Norwegian cross-country skiing team
called Team Veidekke Vest. Karp appeared to have an abundant supply of its
gear, and was often photographed in it. The skiing apparel was his sartorial
flourish—his answer to Steve Jobs's black turtleneck and Mark Zuckerberg's
hoodie. However, his access to Team Veidekke Vest's clothing was a source of
curiosity, and some consternation, in Norway. Karp wasn't a member of the
team, nor did Palantir have any involvement with it. The Norwegian
Broadcasting Corporation, or NRK, looked into the matter and discovered that
a member of the team, whom it didn't identify, had supplied Karp with the
clothes (what NRK didn't report was that this person had been training Karp
on a freelance basis). A spokesman for Veidekke, the Scandinavian construction
conglomerate that had sponsored the team, expressed displeasure with Karp.
"It's just completely wrong when he appears to be an employee, a close associate,
or someone sponsored by Veidekke," he said.
Karp's line about the schmattes factory was his way of greeting me, although
he usually acknowledged my presence by declaiming, "Oh, my biographer is
here. Be careful," a comment directed at whoever was within earshot. Karp
walked like someone who spent a lot of time on skis: he had a kind of gliding gait
and rolled his shoulders as if he were pushing through snow. As he made his way
around, he stopped to chat with employees. Most of them were young, and a few
looked like they were barely out of high school. But even though Karp was the
boss, no necks stiffened as he approached. His colleagues addressed him as "Dr.
Karp," and some would get a little starry-eyed when he spoke to them. However,
they never seemed nervous in his presence. Karp would ask what they were
working on and if they were getting adequate support from management. He
sometimes broached other topics. He once decided to prove to me that
Haverford was an institution in decline by asking two Palantirians if they had
ever heard of our alma mater. Both confessed that they had not. Karp nodded
glumly. "It won't even be a top-fifty school in a couple of years," he said.
Karp liked to entertain his colleagues and was often quite funny, though his
jokes and quips could skirt the edge of propriety. Introducing me to one of his
Norwegian bodyguards, he said loudly, "Do you know we are the first Jews he's
ever seen?" He compared himself to Larry David and once suggested that his

comic stylings might be called "Karp Your Enthusiasm." His desire to amuse the
people around him was genuine, but he said that it also served a purpose: humor
was a way of reaching the subconscious, and part of his job was to make sure
that every employee's subconscious was aligned with Palantir's goals. "Freud's
thesis is that the primary process, which is your subconscious, dictates to the
secondary process, the conscious, how you see the world," Karp explained. "If
you are dealing with a lot of people who have learned things that aren't true, like
about how an organization should work, you need to change that so that your
organization actually works, which means you have to get through to the
primary process, and one thing that works pretty well is humor."
Karp tended to speak in an elliptical, discursive manner. Once, while hanging
for a few minutes from a pull-up bar located outside his New York office, he gave
an impromptu talk to a group of Palantirians about features and bugs. His basic
point, to the extent it could be discerned, was that features were not always
features but that bugs weren't always features, either, and that counterintuitive
thinking was valuable except when it wasn't. However, it was hard to follow his
train of thought because he quickly digressed into a discussion about his
unhappily married friends, divorce lawyers, and prenuptial agreements. It was an
orgy of free association but kind of entertaining, which was probably the real
point. Karp was always energetic and upbeat around the office. He was trying to
set a mood. Long hours were obligatory at Palantir, and while the perks were
sweet (breakfast, lunch, and dinner Monday-Friday, beers in the fridge, snacks
galore, dogs welcome), Karp also wanted it to be fun. He sometimes led tai chi
classes for employees.
Like other Silicon Valley moguls, Karp seemed not quite of this world—there
was an awkwardness to him, something a little off-center. I once sat with him in
his office as he ate lunch. At the time, he had a cupcake infatuation, but he had
an unusual way of consuming them: he would decapitate the cupcakes and eat
only the tops—the icing was what he really wanted—leaving the cake part
untouched. His lunch on that afternoon included two cupcakes. One was
apparently meant for me, but Karp didn't know that and scarfed both of them.
Not quite satiated, he stood up and started banging on the glass wall that looked
out on the rest of the office. "Can I get more cupcakes?" he shouted, to no one

in particular. An assistant quickly appeared at the door with several more
cupcakes, which Karp proceeded to cut in half and eat.
But Karp also differed from his fellow tech barons in some important ways,
and not just because of his background in the humanities. He appeared to have a
high degree of emotional intelligence and was very attuned to the needs,
interests, and desires of those around him. "Reading a room—that's Alex's
superpower," says Ward Breeze, a classmate of ours at Haverford who was close
to Karp and later became one of his attorneys. That was true when it came to
winning over potential clients, and it was especially true in his dealings with
Palantir employees. He had lieutenants who kept him apprised of personnel
issues and office dramas, but he also had a keen ear for what was happening
outside his door and seemed to genuinely care about the people who worked for
him.
And he cared deeply about what they thought of him. At the World
Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, in 2022, he was interviewed by
CNBC's Andrew Ross Sorkin. CNBC loved having Karp as a guest; in contrast
to most other CEOs, he was reliably unfiltered, thanks in part to his practice of
getting hopped-up on Mexican Coke beforehand. Booking Karp almost always
guaranteed headlines. I was with Karp in Davos, and as we walked to the CNBC
set, he said he never got nervous before going on television but did feel a very
specific kind of pressure: "I just don't ever want to say anything that would
embarrass Palantirians." The interview with Sorkin was typical Karp—he was by
turns funny, caustic (he teed off, as always, on Wall Street analysts), and
apocalyptic about the state of the world (this was three months after Russia
invaded Ukraine, and Karp suggested that there was a 20-30 percent chance that
Moscow would use a nuclear weapon in the conflict). With the cameras still
rolling, Sorkin had Karp teach him several tai chi moves. CNBC showed clips of
the interview throughout the day. One aired while Karp and a number of
Palantir employees were milling around the pavilion that the company had
rented. Everyone turned to face the television except Karp: he was watching his
colleagues watching him. As they laughed at his comments, he remained
expressionless, just observing. It was clear that their verdict mattered a lot to
him.

Karp often boasted of Palantir's meritocratic culture—he insisted that the
company hired people strictly on the basis of qualifications. This wasn't entirely
true: Palantir had its share of nepo hires, employees who had leveraged
connections of one sort or another to get jobs there. Unsurprisingly, Ivy League
universities and other comparably prestigious schools were overrepresented
(except for Haverford: Karp insisted he wasn't blackballing our alma mater, but
he was Palantir's lone Haverford grad). The company's payroll also included
people with impressive achievements outside the classroom. A number of
military veterans worked at Palantir. So did a former Olympian and a current
astronaut.
Karp was good to those who worked for him. He was not one to scream or
threaten, nor did he ever publicly upbraid or humiliate people. This was a
reflection of his temperament, but also the fact that Palantirians were his de
facto family, and he treated them as such (perhaps too much so: it occasionally
felt as if he infantilized his colleagues, and some of them, in turn, seemed like
needy children, constantly seeking his attention and approval). If anything, he
was sometimes too loyal, a loyalty that could bleed into stubbornness. While
Palantir was generally an agreeable place to work, there were a few employees
who were not well-liked or trusted by others. But Karp resisted getting rid of
them. He could be obstinate that way, although he also just really disliked firing
people.
Karp often joked that his job was "managing unmanageable people." He was
mainly referring to the nearly two thousand software engineers that the
company employed, and he was convinced that he had an almost unique ability
to lead them. "Once I stumbled on it, it turned out that I was built for certain
things that are really valuable, like managing very complex, sometimes difficult—
highly in many cases—technical software engineers. There are just very few
people in the world built for that." While Karp was not lacking in self-regard, it
was true that he had proven to be very adept at guiding the software engineers
who worked at Palantir. One paradoxical reason for this was because he had no
computer science training; he didn't try to micromanage them because he
couldn't, and his respect for boundaries earned him their goodwill and trust.

This isn't to say that Karp refrained from offering input on technical matters.
It was his idea to equip Palantir's software with robust privacy controls, a feature
that became one of the company's major selling points. But whenever he shared
his thoughts about the work the engineers were doing, he made clear that
pushback was welcome.
In this way, too, he had won the confidence and allegiance of Palantir's
engineers. Probably the biggest factor, though, was that he genuinely held the
engineers in high regard, and not just because they were Palantir's lifeblood.
Karp saw them as they saw themselves: as creatives. He recognized that a lot of
ingenuity went into their work and that there was a certain beauty to the
finished product. He gave the engineers their space and showed them respect.
Karp liked to describe Palantir as "an artists' colony," and he really meant it.
In turn, Palantirians were intensely devoted to him. This partly reflected faith
in his judgment—a belief, born of experience, that Karp's instincts, on subjects
ranging from geopolitics to product development to project assignments, were
almost unerring. But his colleagues were also loyal to Karp because working for
him was a blast. One company executive, who had more than enough money to
retire on, told me he couldn't bring himself to walk away because being around
Karp was simply too much fun. "It's just a wild ride," he said with a satisfied
smile. When Palantirians met for drinks or dinner, Karp was frequently the topic
of conversation. It was often said that the company had a cultish vibe, and there
was some truth to this. Certainly, there was a cult of personality around Karp. In
the mid-2010s, several French employees hired a cartoonist to produce a graphic
novel about Karp (it was never publicly released, but the cartoonist later got a
job at Palantir).
Karp kept his private life walled off from even his closest associates at the
company, which added to the fascination with him. (It wasn't until 2017 that he
told his colleagues that his mother was black, and this was only because a
reporter had learned that he was biracial.) He took pleasure in the aura that he
enjoyed inside Palantir and was convinced that it helped make the company
functional. In a workplace full of headstrong iconoclasts, he was the glue that
held everything together. "You need a way you can bond, and my eccentric,
nonstandard character is the bonding mechanism," he explained.

But Karp also believed that his managerial acumen was tied to his dyslexia.
From his point of view, the key variable in his life was not his racial or ethnic
identity but, rather, dyslexia, which had turned out to be a burden and a
blessing, although he liked to put it more colorfully: dyslexia, he said, "fucked
me but also gave me wings to fly." Even though Karp ended up doing well in
school, his formative years were marked by his struggle with dyslexia. But along
the way, he developed certain attributes that would prove useful in business. He
couldn't process as many details as other people, so he learned to get by on less
information, which he believed gave him an advantage in situations that called
for quick, decisive judgments. Dyslexia also taught him the power of
collaboration; it is a disability, and those who have it need the help of others. In
an environment that required team-building and delegating responsibility, Karp
found that he had an intrinsic advantage. Dyslexics, he said, aren't raised on an
ethos of self-reliance and tend to excel in situations in which it is important to
get people to understand that "maybe if we work together it would be more
powerful than if we don't."
As Karp later discovered, a number of well-known CEOs and entrepreneurs
were dyslexic. In 2002, Fortune ran a cover story titled "The Dyslexic CEO,"
which drew attention to this phenomenon: the piece noted that Richard
Branson, Charles Schwab, Cisco's John Chambers, the celebrated trial attorney
David Boies (whose firm represented Palantir in a landmark lawsuit that it
brought against the Army), and Paul Orfalea, the founder of the Kinko's chain,
all suffered from dyslexia. A few years later, Julie Logan, a professor at the City
University of London's Cass Business School, published a study in which she
reported that 35 percent of the entrepreneurs she surveyed were dyslexic. "We
found that dyslexics who succeed had overcome an awful lot in their lives by
developing compensatory skills," Logan told The New York Times. "If you tell
your friends and acquaintances that you plan to start a business, you'll hear over
and over again, 'It won't work. It can't be done.' But dyslexics are extraordinarily
creative about maneuvering their way around problems." She also noted their
collaborative skills: "The willingness to delegate authority gives them a
significant advantage over nondyslexic entrepreneurs, who tend to view their
business as their baby and like to be in total control."

All that said, Karp was hardly a pushover boss. His jocular manner belied a
driven and demanding personality. While he understood that employees had
lives outside Palantir, he got frustrated if he sensed they were not putting the
company first. In the wake of the pandemic, he was often irritated by how it had
changed attitudes and mores—the rise of remote work, the desire for greater
work-life balance. There was some irony in this (perhaps some hypocrisy, too), in
that the way he chose to work and live imposed unusual burdens on the people
who answered to him. Employees often had to travel to various Karp homes to
see him. During the summer, a steady flow of Palantirians would head to his
place in New Hampshire. Sometimes they had to go to Alaska to meet with him
at his house near Anchorage. A group once went to Northern Sweden with
Karp because the first cross-country trails of the season had opened and he
wanted to mix business with his own recreation (they stayed in heated huts while
there). "It could be said that this is a company that works around the CEO's
lifestyle," one Palantir executive drolly commented.
Karp took up cross-country skiing during his first trip to the World
Economic Forum, in 2016. He didn't want to go to Davos—he generally
avoided conferences and crowds. As an inducement, a colleague mentioned that
Davos was renowned for its cross-country skiing trails. Karp gave it a try while
there and was hooked. According to Karp, as his skiing improved, members of
his security detail had trouble keeping up. He also worried that they wouldn't be
able to help him out if a heavy snowstorm struck while he was skiing; this was a
particular risk if one went off-trail, as he sometimes did. A friend suggested that
Karp try to recruit ex-Norwegian soldiers to serve as his skiing companions—
they were often very accomplished skiers and were trained to operate in difficult
winter weather. Karp was eventually introduced to a former member of the
Norwegian special forces, a unit known as the FSK. He agreed to join Karp's
security team and became his regular skiing partner. In time, Karp hired several
other FSK veterans. He referred to them collectively as "the Norwegians" and
also referred to them that way individually. "You should talk to the Norwegian,"
he would say to me, pointing to whichever handsome Nordic guy happened to
be with him at that moment. The Norwegians took turns traveling with Karp;

they would rotate in every two or three weeks, although sometimes two of them
would overlap.
Karp claimed to have no interest in competing; he said his goal was simply to
keep improving and to build a foundation that would allow him to ski into his
later years. But he liked to boast of his Nordic skiing prowess. Maybe the
happiest I ever saw him was after a Norwegian newspaper published an article
that noted the impressive time he had logged on one of the country's most
demanding cross-country skiing courses (he was, however, annoyed that the
story included an unauthorized photo of the house he owned a few hours from
Oslo). The only genuflecting that he seemed to expect from his colleagues was
about his skiing: in my presence, he would periodically ask his assistants to attest
to his aptitude, and they would dutifully oblige him. His videotaped messages to
Palantir shareholders often opened with scenes of him skiing.
During the pandemic, the Norwegians introduced him to the so-called
Norwegian method, which combines endurance, interval, and strength training.
While Karp was already in good shape, he says that the conditioning program
gave him even greater stamina. His VO2 max—a measure of oxygen uptake
during physical exertion and widely regarded as the premier gauge of
cardiovascular fitness—became a source of particular pride for him: he now
clocked in at around 65, a stellar number, particularly for someone his age. He
supplemented his workouts with several dozen vitamins and antioxidants each
day. He enjoyed wine but rarely drank. During the Covid lockdowns, he gave up
the cupcakes and eliminated all sugar from his diet.
When I first met Karp, in 2019, he was spending most of his time in Europe.
Living in Europe agreed with him (especially when snow was on the ground),
and Palantir's business there was flourishing; indeed, London had become its
largest office, with over five hundred employees. Unlike in the United States,
Palantir was not weighed down by controversy in Europe. Its connection to the
Cambridge Analytica scandal made headlines in the UK, but the ICE imbroglio
didn't seem to register. The CIA link spooked some people, but even that wasn't
usually a deterrent to winning business. On both the government and the
commercial side, Palantir's European operations were thriving, helped in part by
the European media, which found Karp very compelling.

But during the pandemic, Palantir's center of gravity shifted back to America.
After winning a bruising legal fight with the Army over its procurement process,
Palantir had landed a number of deals with the Pentagon and was becoming a
major defense contractor. The critical role that the company played in helping
the federal government track Covid-19 and distribute vaccines had burnished its
reputation in Washington, and as war raged in Eastern Europe and conflict
loomed in Asia, Karp was suddenly in wide demand on Capitol Hill and
elsewhere. He was now in Washington so much of the time that he had recently
purchased a home in the Maryland suburbs. He bought it for around $8.5
million, which was much more than he was normally willing to spend. For years,
he had made it his policy to never pay more than $1 million for a home; he
figured that was what the average Palantirian could afford, and he had made it
his own limit as a way of affirming the company's democratic ethos. But while
$1 million could get you a lot of house in Alaska, it wouldn't get you very far in
the Washington area.
Palantir's Washington office was located in Georgetown, close to the
Potomac waterfront. It occupied two floors, and on the morning that he greeted
me with the "schmattes factory" quip, Karp visited both. On the lower floor, a
team working on military projects showed him the latest version of the
"augmented reality" glasses they were developing: on the "screen" was a
meticulously detailed map of a Taiwanese island, along with real-time drone
footage and live data streams. The glasses didn't completely cover your head—
you could see your "real" surroundings. But they would give a soldier in the field
a 360-degree view of the battlefield literally on the end of his nose. Nearby was
the classified room, where top-secret U.S. government documents and other
sensitive materials were held, accessible only to Palantirians who had security
clearance. Karp was not one of them: he said that he never applied for security
clearance because he feared that it would inhibit his ability to speak candidly in
public and private.
Later that morning, Karp was meeting with former Secretary of State Mike
Pompeo, who was stopping by the office to see him (Karp would change into
business attire beforehand). Two decades after cofounding Palantir, Karp had
become a Washington wise man, a sought-after figure in foreign policy and

defense circles. It was another improbable twist in an unlikely career. Certainly,
nothing about his upbringing suggested that he was destined for the business
world, let alone at the helm of a company serving as an instrument of American
power. Karp says that the idea would have horrified his parents and that even
after all the success he has enjoyed, they still wish he had done something else
with his life.
OceanofPDF.com

TWO
SPUN FROM A DIFFERENT ORBIT
Karp grew up in Philadelphia, and when he was a child, his parents regularly
took him and his brother, Ben, to the Philadelphia Museum of Art. Ben says
that Bob Karp, their father, liked to draw their attention to one particular work,
a statue of Icarus. The myth of Icarus is perhaps humanity's most enduring
cautionary tale, a warning about the perils of hubris. Years later, the brothers
theorized that Bob kept returning to the statue because he sensed in Alex an
overweening ambition that he found threatening and wanted to squelch.
According to Ben, Bob was strangely competitive with his older son, and even
after Alex had taken Palantir public and acquired a vast fortune, his father
showed little inclination to acknowledge his success, let alone celebrate it.
It might seem as if the drive that propelled Karp to the pinnacle of the
business world was a form of rebellion against his father's effort to lower his
horizons. But he didn't think that was true, and given how deeply he lived inside
his own head, I was inclined to take him at his word. He maintained instead that
his achievements were rooted to some degree in what he regarded as the failure
of both his parents to capitalize on their own abilities. His mother, Leah Jaynes
Karp, was a talented artist who, in Karp's view, had never achieved the
recognition she deserved. Likewise, Bob was a gifted practitioner and scholar of
pediatric medicine who had not gained the kind of stature within his field that
Karp thought should have accrued to him. In Karp's estimation, both his
parents lacked what he called "navigation skills"—a sense of how to make one's
way in the world. For whatever reason, he had been blessed with those skills, and
overachievement was his answer to their underachievement. As he once put it to
Ben, "If our father had been an alpha, I never would have founded Palantir."
None of this became a source of resentment for Karp. His parents provided
comfortably for him and his brother; when they divorced and Bob balked at

paying for his college education, Karp felt stress and anger, but the anger didn't
linger. In later years, as he became wealthy, he was financially generous with both
of his parents, as well as his brother. For a long time, he was frustrated and
puzzled by what he regarded as his parents' shortcomings—a frustration that
extended (unfairly, I thought) to Ben, a bracingly intelligent man two years his
junior who is a writer and college professor in Tokyo. Karp wasn't being
judgmental; he just wanted to understand why his life had turned out so
differently. A conversation with a friend and confidant helped him come to
terms with the achievement gap in his own family. This person pointed out that
qualities such as aptitude, ambition, and discipline were not evenly distributed
and that Karp was the member of the household who had been endowed with
all the sechel—a Yiddish term that loosely translates as savvy. He could fly close
to the sun. They could not.
Bob Karp was born to a German-Jewish family in Philadelphia. His father,
Manny, was a carpenter and later a school guidance counselor who also ran a
Jewish summer camp in the Poconos. Ben, who has done genealogical research
into his family, believes that Karl Marx was a distant relation. Bob attended
Muhlenberg College, in Allentown, Pennsylvania, and then Jefferson Medical
College in Philadelphia. In 1963, while still in medical school, he met Leah
Jaynes. She was moving into the same apartment building where he resided, and
he offered to help carry her things up. At the time, Leah was working as a
secretary at the University of Pennsylvania. She was originally from Pontiac,
Illinois, and was the great-granddaughter of a former slave. Her father, Milo
Jaynes, was a Baptist minister and a postal worker. He was also an abusive
alcoholic, and Leah went to live with an aunt in Chicago when she was sixteen to
escape her chaotic home.
In high school, Leah won a scholarship to travel to Israel. She spent three
months there, was enthralled by the experience, and left enamored of Judaism.
That Bob Karp was Jewish was a selling point for her. Likewise, part of the
attraction for Bob was that Leah was black; he was politically liberal, and dating

Leah was a powerful way of signaling his progressivism. "My father wanted to
marry a black woman," says Ben. Still, a genuine romance developed, and Bob
and Leah married in a civil ceremony in Philadelphia in 1964. (Leah eventually
converted to Judaism, but only after she and Bob divorced.) Alex's realization,
years later, that racial and ethnic identity had been foundational to his parents'
relationship was part of the reason he developed a visceral dislike of identity
politics. He felt as if he had been the product of virtue signaling, and it bothered
him.
Alex was born in 1967 in New York City, where Bob was doing his residency
at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. Three years later, Bob was hired
as a physician at Philadelphia's St. Christopher's Hospital for Children.
Politically and socially, it was a fraught time in America, and race was at the
forefront of the national conversation. There had been major progress in the
form of the civil rights legislation enacted under President Lyndon B. Johnson.
More pertinent, perhaps, to Bob and Leah, the U.S. Supreme Court, in Loving
v. Virginia, had recently struck down anti-miscegenation laws. However, efforts
to address racial discrimination had provoked a fierce backlash; Richard Nixon
won the presidency in 1968 in part by stoking and exploiting white resentment
and anxiety—the so-called Southern Strategy.
But the backlash wasn't confined to the South. Philadelphia was also a center
of resistance to racial equity. In the late 1960s, under Commissioner Frank
Rizzo, the Philadelphia Police Department was notorious for the brutality that it
directed at the city's black community and other minorities. Rizzo, a proudly
thuggish cop, didn't feel bound by new laws or changing mores; he was a
northern version of the law-and-order sheriffs in the South who had terrorized
blacks. (He and the police department were eventually charged by the U.S.
Department of Justice with a pattern of abuse that in the words of prosecutors
"shocks the conscience.") In 1971, Rizzo was elected Philadelphia's mayor,
pitching himself as a champion of the city's white working-class population. In
1978, campaigning in support of a ballot measure that would have amended the
city charter to enable him to seek a third term as mayor, Rizzo made his racist
appeal explicit, urging Philadelphians to "vote white." (The proposal was
rejected.)

In a city consumed by reactionary politics, the Mount Airy section of
Philadelphia was an island of tolerance and enlightened thinking. Starting in the
1950s, local residents, along with religious leaders and civic groups, promoted
racial integration in Mount Airy. They encouraged black families to move in and
successfully pressured banks, many of which had discriminatory lending
practices, to give them mortgages. In her book Making Good Neighbors: Civil
Rights, Liberalism, and Integration in Postwar Philadelphia, historian Abigail
Perkiss says that "homeowners in Mt. Airy waged a community-wide battle
toward intentional integration.... By replacing residential segregation with
residential integration, they sought to disrupt a system of separation and infuse
their day-to-day lives with the experience of interracial living."
Mount Airy was an ideal place for the Karps to establish roots. They initially
lived in an apartment before purchasing a semidetached house on Wellesley
Road. The family later moved into a home on Lincoln Drive, a slightly more
upscale street also in Mount Airy. They lived simply and frugally: For years, Leah
outfitted Alex and Ben with clothes from consignment sales. The Karps had a
television for a time, but after the boys got into an argument over a show, Leah
deliberately broke it, and it wasn't replaced until they were in high school.
Summer vacation was an annual trip to Vermont's Lake Ninevah, where the
family owned a cabin that had neither electricity nor running water. They used a
gas stove to cook and gas lamps for light, drew water from a well, and bathed in
the lake.
Like others in Mount Airy, Bob and Leah were on the left politically. They
were frustrated by what they regarded as America's failure to live up to its ideals
and were also put off by its rampant consumerism. They took part in political
protests, bringing their sons along. In 1979, the family attended an antinuclear
rally and concert in New York. Bruce Springsteen was among the performers,
and Leah introduced Alex and Ben to Noam Chomsky, who was also there.
According to Ben, misplaced idealism informed Bob and Leah's decision to
have the boys attend Henry H. Houston School, the local K-8. They wanted to
signal their support for public education and for school desegregation. But in
doing so, they ignored how dysfunctional Henry Houston was. Ben recalls that
there were "some really rough kids" who created a "bullying environment." He

says that he and his brother often feared for their safety. At one point, Alex was
bringing money to school to pay off another student who was menacing him.
Yet even as other parents were pulling their children out and sending them to
private schools, Bob and Leah insisted on keeping the boys at Henry Houston,
which would become a source of lingering anger for Alex. "He still talks about it,
the resentment is still there," says Ben.
Academically, Alex was curious and motivated, which led some kids to call
him "Professor." Ben says they weren't taunting him; it was actually a
playground compliment, an acknowledgment that he was really smart. But the
nickname masked a cruel reality: Alex was struggling to learn to read. When he
turned eight and was still having difficulty with written-word recognition, Bob
decided to have him evaluated, and he was diagnosed with dyslexia. Henry
Houston didn't have the resources to help him, so the Karps enrolled Alex in the
Oliver P. Cornman School, which was for children with learning disabilities. At
Cornman, there was a wide range of special needs; some kids were profoundly
disabled. Alex attended Cornman from third grade through fifth, and working
with the school's specialists, he got to the point where he could read fluently. He
would later say that dyslexia was the greatest adversity he had ever faced (a point
he often made in the service of another point—that he had never personally
experienced racial discrimination). Leah Karp told me that her son was
extremely diligent and organized when it came to homework, which she
attributed to his dyslexia—he craved order.
Years later, Karp would say that dyslexia added to the sense of vulnerability
that he felt as a child. He claims that he intuited from an early age that because
he was a biracial Jew with a disability, he had some strikes against him. As he put
it, "You're a racially amorphous, far-left Jewish kid who's also dyslexic—would
you not come up with the idea that you're fucked?" He says that he also
recognized that his parents, hamstrung by their own limitations, were not in a
position to protect him. They loved him, of course, but couldn't shelter him
from a world that seemed especially dangerous for someone with his particular
identity. Long before he left for college, Karp felt that he could only truly
depend on himself for survival.

After Cornman, Alex returned to Henry Houston, which he attended
through eighth grade. From Houston, he went to Walter B. Saul High School, a
magnet school that specialized in agriculture. There, he joined Future Farmers of
America; Ben says that his brother seemed to especially enjoy working with the
cows in the school's dairy barn. Alex spent two years at Saul before transferring
to Central High School. Central was considered Philadelphia's finest public high
school, and it had many notable graduates, among them Noam Chomsky. Bob
Karp was also an alumnus. At Central, Alex blossomed academically, thanks in
part to the influence of a guidance counselor who was struck by the gap between
his high test scores and his solid if unremarkable grades and wanted to help him
close it.
Karp's cousin, the novelist Mat Johnson, also grew up in Mount Airy and
was close to Alex and Ben; he was essentially the third Karp brother. (Alex and
Ben, denied a television of their own, would go to the apartment that Johnson
and his mother, Pauline, shared to watch episodes of Mork & Mindy.) For a
time, Johnson says, Alex was a moody adolescent. "He basically just growled and
hid in his room reading comics," Johnson recalls. By then, it was clear to the
family that Alex "lived in his own world," as Johnson puts it. Even so, he had
plenty of friends. Almost all of them were black, and Karp seemed to identify
strongly with black culture. "Alex in high school was a young black man," says
Ben. During his senior year of high school, he got interested in girls and found
that the interest was mutual. He cut his hair, grew a mustache, and began
dressing more stylishly. He also turned heads with his dance moves. His brother
and cousin started calling him "Al Smooth."
Johnson's mother worked until early evening, so he usually went to the
Karps' after school and stayed through dinner. He says the house was always
freezing—Bob kept the thermostat low to save on energy bills. At meals, the
emphasis was on health foods and animated conversation. "It was a house that
did a lot of arguing—not in a bad way, but in the highly opinionated Jewish
way," says Johnson. "You really had to hold your own in that house." The
discussions typically revolved around whatever issues were making the news that
day. When Johnson would leave after dinner to walk back to his apartment, he
could hear the Karps debating one another from outside. Bob and Leah wanted

their sons to be intellectually curious and engaged, and they hoped that each
would pursue a life of the mind. "My father said that he became a doctor so that
his sons could become poets," says Ben.
By the fall of Alex's senior year at Central, it was clear that he was likely to
have his pick of colleges. He was leaning to the Ivies when that same guidance
counselor suggested that nearby Haverford College might be a better fit. It was
smaller, had a very cerebral student body, and seemed as if it would be a more
congenial place for him. Leah thought that her son ultimately chose Haverford
in part because he had a fond memory of the school. When Alex was young, the
family attended a dance recital at Haverford, which was followed by a dinner in
the cafeteria. The main course was steak, which was a treat for Alex and Ben
("We mostly ate vegetables, plus a little chicken," Leah told me). In Alex's
memory, the steaks were not just delicious; they were huge slabs of meat, which
gave him a favorable impression of Haverford. According to his mother, he was
disappointed, upon matriculating at Haverford, to discover that steak was
seldom on the menu and that when it was served, the portions were small.
For someone raised in the political milieu that Karp was, Haverford was a
logical choice. Founded by Quakers in 1833, Haverford had a strong
commitment to social justice and a history of political dissent. In the late 1960s
and early 1970s, the college was a hotbed of opposition to the Vietnam War. In
1971, a group of activists led by a Haverford physics professor named William
Davidon broke into a local FBI office and stole thousands of documents
pertaining to the FBI's surveillance of antiwar protesters, as well as its
monitoring of black civil rights leaders. Davidon and his coconspirators shared
the documents with The Washington Post and The New York Times, and the
media coverage ultimately helped prompt a congressional investigation. Davidon
and the others were never identified by the police. Davidon died in 2013. Soon
thereafter, three others who had participated in the break-in admitted to their
roles. By then, the statute of limitations had expired and they were no longer at
risk of prosecution.
Haverford was a more sedate place in the mid-1980s. The students mostly
came from comfortable circumstances and were conventionally liberal. Many
participated in protests against apartheid, but that was hardly a radical position.

There were still some firebrands on the faculty. One professor, discussing the
1984 presidential election between President Ronald Reagan and former Vice
President Walter Mondale, said it had been a choice between "a capitalist pig
who's proud of it" and a "capitalist pig who feels a little guilty." Most faculty
members, though, were like the students—mainstream progressives. But while
the college's culture had mellowed, it retained its academic rigor. Haverford was
a demanding school: lots of work was assigned, and professors resisted the grade
inflation that was increasingly prevalent at other prestigious colleges and
universities. A few of us tried, valiantly, to give Haverford a robust social life, but
it was a never-ending struggle.
In the summer of 1985, just before Karp headed off to Haverford, Leah filed
for divorce from Bob. She had been unhappy for some time. Bob had grown
distant, lost in his own thoughts and frustrations. Leah had hoped to stay
together until Ben left for college but decided that she could no longer stick it
out. According to Ben, Bob was shocked when she told him she was ending their
marriage, and then he got angry. He stopped paying the mortgage on the house
and soon put it on the market. He forced Leah to move out but refused to cover
the cost of an apartment for her and Ben; some family friends, the Weisbords,
took them in. He also announced that he would not pay for Alex's college.
For Alex, the breakup of his parents' marriage was a crushing blow. He left
for college feeling as if his world had been sundered. It was also unclear to him
how he would be able to remain at Haverford if Bob was unwilling to pay for it.
The first semester of freshman year was an exhilarating time for most of us at
Haverford, but for Alex, it was a period of emotional upheaval and gnawing
uncertainty. The divorce was bad enough; that Bob was taking out his anger on
Alex and putting his future at risk was unconscionable. It was also, in Alex's
mind, a betrayal of the Jewish values that his father had claimed were paramount
and inviolable: the centrality of family and education.
Leah ended up paying for Haverford, taking out loans and tapping into her
pension to cover the tuition charges and other costs. But her finances were
sufficiently precarious that Karp was never certain he would be able to complete
his degree. "Every semester was torture for Alex, just waiting to find out if his
tuition had been paid and if he could stay," says Ben. It was the first time in

Karp's life that he had experienced economic insecurity, and he came away from
this period determined never to experience it again.
But while anxiety colored his experience there, Haverford became a kind of
sanctuary for Karp, an escape from the turmoil engulfing his family. Despite his
tenuous situation, he threw himself into college life. He ran, unsuccessfully, for
student government and was a member of the cross-country and track teams.
Tom Donnelly, who coached both teams and is a legendary figure in college
track and field, says that Karp was never among the top runners but was "a real
positive presence" who was "always loose and joking around." Looking back,
Donnelly thinks that Karp's carefree attitude was "a cover for a very intense
inner life that he probably balanced through the physical exertion of running
and competing." He says that he and Karp bonded mainly over the fact that they
were both Philly guys, but he admits that he "had no idea how smart this guy
actually was."
Donnelly was not the only person at Haverford who found Karp a little hard
to read. He wasn't aloof; there was just a part of him that seemed closed off to
the rest of the world. That said, he was well-liked and had plenty of friends, and
his inscrutability didn't seem to hurt him with women. He was in a relationship
for two years with a classmate who was Jamaican. He later dated another
classmate, a Latina woman. And as was true in high school, Karp embraced his
black heritage. He was active in black student affairs, and his social life mainly
revolved around Haverford's black community. "He was much more of a black
man then than he is now," says Ward Breeze, who was one of Karp's closest
friends at Haverford.
In the fall of senior year, Karp helped organize a conference at Yale University
sponsored by a group called Campuses Against Racial Violence. A few months
later, Karp was quoted in a Detroit Free Press story about racism at U.S. colleges
and universities. "The most distressing thing was that finding someone to talk
about racial violence was as simple as asking someone to speak," he told the
paper. "It is that pervasive." Karp chided administrators for not doing more to
combat bigotry at their institutions. "If your deans are unwilling to take action,
it's a green light," he said. Karp also blamed Ronald Reagan for the pervasiveness
of racial discrimination on campuses, saying the president had "set a mood" that

signaled to bigots that racism was acceptable. Karp wore a kaffiyeh for his
yearbook photo, which suggested a broader interest in fighting injustice.
Karp insists he didn't work all that hard at Haverford, but his grades
suggested otherwise: in a school that had no shortage of grinds, he stood out as a
particularly high achiever. He majored in philosophy, which was a strong
department at Haverford. It included some eminent names in the field, notably
Richard Bernstein, the famed scholar of American pragmatism. However, the
professor to whom Karp was closest was Mark Gould, who taught sociology.
Gould says that Karp had substance: he possessed a keen mind and could think
deeply and insightfully about complex ideas. He believes that Karp could have
made a significant mark as a scholar. "He had the capacity to do very, very
interesting academic work if that's what he had chosen to do," says Gould.
But Karp opted instead to go to law school. He applied to Stanford, Harvard,
Columbia, and Penn and got into all of them, which caused some envy and awe
among other Haverfordians. Karp decided on Stanford and matriculated at the
end of the summer of 1989. He lived in Crothers Hall, a dorm for law students.
Early on, he fell in with a group of fellow first-years who ate meals at Italian
House, an undergraduate facility known to have good food and that allowed
grad students to eat there. One member of the group, who preferred not to be
cited by name, recalls that Karp was "wickedly funny" and that he also stood out
for his intelligence. "There are people who you can immediately recognize are
not just smarter, but who just see things differently, think about things
differently—that was Alex," she says. Karp also didn't seem to have the self-
doubt that plagued many of his classmates. Other first-years spent a lot of time
fretting about whether they were worthy of Stanford Law and up to the
challenge. Outwardly, at least, Karp displayed no such uncertainty. He didn't
come across as cocky or entitled; he just projected a discernible assuredness.
That said, he quickly regretted going to law school. He says that he knew
within a week of enrolling at Stanford that he had made a mistake and that it
ended up being "the worst three years of my adult life." He found the classroom
experience unsatisfying: in his view, Stanford Law was just a glorified trade
school, the other students seemed mainly animated by a desire to land
prestigious (and lucrative) jobs, and the intellectual discourse was "highly

performative." What made Stanford bearable was the unlikely friendship that he
formed with Peter Thiel, a fellow first-year. Thiel was already a figure of renown
and some notoriety. As an undergraduate at Stanford, the self-declared
libertarian had cofounded a right-wing newspaper called The Stanford Review,
which challenged what he and his colleagues saw as a stifling liberal orthodoxy
on campus.
Thiel also lived in Crothers Hall, and like Karp, he found Stanford Law
disappointing. The two bonded over their shared dissatisfaction and spent a lot
of time playing chess and debating politics with each other. "We argued like feral
animals," Karp recalls. According to Thiel, their bull sessions generally took
place late at night in the dorm. "It sounds too self-aggrandizing, but I think we
were both genuinely interested in ideas," says Thiel. "He was more the socialist, I
was more the capitalist. He was always talking about Marxist theories of
alienated labor and how this was true of all the people around us." By Karp's
account, the friendship he formed with Thiel, and the intellectual nourishment
that it provided, sustained him at Stanford.
During the summer between his second and third years of law school, Karp
traveled to Europe. At a café in Paris, he serendipitously ran into Ward Breeze,
who was now doing graduate work at Goethe University Frankfurt. Karp went
to visit him in Frankfurt a few weeks later. Impressed by the university and quite
taken with the local scene, Karp soon decided that he wanted to pursue a
doctorate in Germany. It was not an entirely random impulse: the thinkers who
had engaged him the most during college—Kant, Hegel, Weber—were German.
Studying in Germany was also of interest to Karp for another reason: the sense
of vulnerability that he felt as a Jew was an outgrowth of the Holocaust, and he
hoped to gain a deeper understanding of why Germany, a pillar of European
civilization, had descended into barbarism.
Karp considered dropping out of Stanford and relocating to Germany
immediately. But he knew that not completing his degree would anger his
mother and disappoint his paternal grandfather, so he decided to return to Palo
Alto for his third year. While his classmates, including Thiel, pursued federal
clerkships and Big Law jobs, Karp made plans to move to Frankfurt, and within

weeks of receiving his diploma, he left for Germany. (He and Breeze ultimately
traded places: Breeze ended up earning a law degree from Stanford.)
Pursuing a doctorate in Germany was an ambitious undertaking, and
especially so in Karp's case because he didn't speak German. After arriving in
Frankfurt, he enrolled in an intensive German-language class. Within three
months, he was speaking competent German. Isabelle Azoulay, a French-
German graduate student who became a close friend of Karp's, refused to
believe that he had only just learned the language when she heard him speak it
for the first time; she figured he was just a typically boastful American. When she
found out that he wasn't bullshitting, she was astonished. Over time, she came
to believe that he had "a kind of photographic mind."
Karp also seemed to have a preternatural understanding of social dynamics—
even in a country where he was a newcomer. Breeze spoke excellent German but
found that his language skills did not gain him the kind of acceptance he sought.
"I was doggedly trying to be seen as German, to conform," says Breeze. Karp told
him the problem was that while his German was almost flawless, there were
subtleties and "cultural cues" that he couldn't know as a non-native speaker, and
because he was missing these, people assumed he was a "below-average German."
He suggested that if Breeze deliberately mispronounced some words and threw
in a grammatical error here and there, Germans would instead see him as a
supersmart American whose near mastery of their language was indicative of his
respect and affinity for their culture. Breeze says that Karp's strategy worked
brilliantly: once he started mangling his German slightly, Germans embraced
him in exactly the way Karp had predicted.
After completing the language course, Karp enrolled in Goethe University.
At that point, he wasn't sure what he wanted to do his dissertation on, but he
knew with whom he wanted to work. The philosopher Jürgen Habermas was
arguably the preeminent European public intellectual of the postwar era, a
remarkably prolific and wide-ranging scholar whose work focused on developing
and sustaining democratic governance. He was a protégé of Theodor Adorno,
one of the leading lights of the Frankfurt School, an intellectual movement that
arose in the wake of World War II and that was known for its effort to
understand the lure of fascism and its trenchant critique of modern capitalism—

a mode of inquiry that came to be called Critical Theory. It grew out of the
Institute for Social Research, a think tank affiliated with Goethe University.
Adorno and most of the other major figures of the Frankfurt School were left-
wing Jews who had fled the Nazis and who devoted their careers to reckoning, in
one way or another, with the Holocaust. Habermas came from a different
background: he was the son of a Nazi sympathizer and was himself a former
member of the Hitler Youth. Later, appalled by the crimes of the Third Reich,
Habermas moved sharply to the left and became an ardent champion of liberal
democracy. He spent most of his career at the Institute for Social Research and
was considered the second-generation standard-bearer of the Frankfurt School.
As Karp jokingly put it, "If you can get Habermas to work with you for even
two minutes, you can be a tenured professor at Columbia."
Habermas held a weekly colloquium for graduate students. Participants
would discuss their research, and the group, including Habermas, would offer
feedback. It was invitation only. Karp got in mainly on the strength of his
academic record, although the Haverford connection helped: Richard Bernstein
and Mark Gould, two of his former professors, were both close to Habermas.
Karp has claimed that Habermas was his dissertation adviser for a time. The two
did discuss his dissertation, but according to Habermas, it was never a formal
relationship: he was nearing retirement when Karp arrived in Germany and was
no longer advising doctoral candidates. He later turned down Karp's request to
serve as the second reader of his dissertation. Karp had shared a draft with
Habermas, and in a three-page letter explaining his decision, the famed scholar
praised some aspects of Karp's work but was critical of others.
Habermas also expressed doubt about whether Karp's German
comprehension was sufficient to allow him to grapple with some of the texts that
he was drawing on. "Your topic would require a literary approach to a topic that
often overwhelms the linguistic sensibility of us native speakers—and yours, you
won't blame me, even more so," Habermas wrote. "For you, literary German
must be as much a foreign language as literary English is for me. Moreover, it is
not a reproach to remind oneself of the limits of the competencies that we
expect from an educated sociologist." At the end, Habermas struck an
apologetic note. "Please don't be angry with me, Mr. Karp, for my candid

assessment," he wrote, adding, "I would be happy to see you again if the
occasion arises." Not long thereafter, in what was apparently meant as a
conciliatory gesture, Habermas wrote a generic letter of recommendation on
Karp's behalf. "I appreciate Alexander Karp not only as an intellectual but as
well as a sensitive person who is dedicated to the task he has set for himself,"
Habermas said. "He always impresses me by his moral sense, open-mindedness,
and vitality." (Karp continues to maintain that Habermas was his doctoral
adviser for a period. He says that Habermas, now in his late nineties, is
downplaying their connection and that he is at a loss to understand why.)
Karola Brede, a professor at Goethe University who specialized in social
psychology and who herself had studied under Habermas, ultimately served as
Karp's doctoral adviser. She was an ideal mentor for the question that Karp
wanted to explore—what turns ordinary citizens into perpetrators of genocide
and accessories to mass murder? And Karp's timing was fortuitous, as this
question was very much on the minds of Germans themselves in the mid-1990s.
In 1996, while Karp was living in Frankfurt, Daniel Jonah Goldhagen, an
assistant professor of government and social studies at Harvard, published a
provocative book called Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and
the Holocaust, in which he alleged that tens of thousands of everyday Germans,
acting on age-old "eliminationist" antisemitic impulses, had eagerly contributed
to the Nazi effort to eradicate European Jewry. The book was a bestseller in
Germany, where it sparked a ferocious debate about wartime guilt and whether
there was something intrinsically malignant in the German character.
Perhaps the angriest response to Goldhagen came two years later, in October
1998, when the acclaimed German writer Martin Walser gave a speech in
Frankfurt in which he challenged the notion that the Holocaust had been
inevitable and decried what he saw as a relentless effort to tar his generation of
Germans with the sins of their fathers and grandfathers. He expressed
resentment over the "unceasing presentation of our disgrace," as he put it, and
suggested that the Holocaust had become a cudgel that was being used to keep
Germans in a perpetual state of shame—"a moral bludgeon," in his words.
Walser's comments provoked an angry response from Jewish organizations and

others who believed that he was deliberately stoking German resentment and
inverting the roles of perpetrator and victim.
Walser's speech became a focal point of Karp's dissertation, which he wrote
in German and completed in 2002. Its title, translated into English, was
"Aggression in the Lifeworld: Expanding Parsons' Concepts of Aggression
Through a Description of the Interrelationship Between Jargon, Aggression,
and Culture." ("Lifeworld"—Lebenswelt in German—is a philosophical term
that refers to everyday life.) Karola Brede says that it was essentially a study of
what is known as "secondary antisemitism," a concept coined by the Frankfurt
School and that referred to German bitterness over being held accountable for
the Holocaust (an idea mordantly captured in the famous quip "The Germans
will never forgive the Jews for Auschwitz"). Building on the work of the
American sociologist Talcott Parsons, as well as Adorno's seminal study The
Jargon of Authenticity—and drawing on Freud, too—Karp constructed a
theoretical framework for assessing Walser's speech. He argued that the language
Walser used was meant to establish a bond with his audience rooted in collective
grievance over the inescapability of German guilt and that also tapped into a
subconscious desire to commit violence against the perceived oppressor (in this
case, Jewish groups and others who, as Walser saw it, were making the German
people prisoners of their past). In essence, the dissertation was a study of in-
groups, out-groups, and the rhetoric of fascism. Walser, Karp told me, had
engaged in a "parochial form of fascism that occurs by purposely saying things
that are incorrect in speech."
Many years later, after Karp had become a prominent figure, his dissertation
would be a source of curiosity among journalists and scholars. In 2020, Moira
Weigel, now an assistant professor of comparative literature at Harvard
University, published a much-discussed critique of Karp's dissertation, "Palantir
Goes to the Frankfurt School," in which she claimed to see in it a blueprint for
turning big data into an instrument of oppression. But that seemed like a
strained and implausible reading (and phrases like "this repressed insight of his
dissertation" suggested some heavy lifting on her part). When Karp wrote his
dissertation, he had no ambition to work in technology and no inkling of the
turn his life would soon take. Given his improbable path to Silicon Valley, the

desire to find a through line between his doctorate and Palantir was
understandable, but this appeared to be a case of overinterpreting the data. For
her part, Karola Brede sees no connection between Karp's scholarship and the
career that he ended up pursuing.
Interestingly, even as Karp immersed himself in Germany's darkest chapter,
he developed an unexpected affinity for the country, and for the German-
speaking world more generally. "I went for intellectual reasons," he says. "The
reason I stayed was emotional." Culturally and socially, Germany agreed with
him in a way that no other place had; it felt like home. He assumed that this
sense of belonging was rooted in his German heritage—that, in some sense, he
had returned home. He seemed to connect with Germans, and they with him, in
a way that suggested a degree of kinship. "I felt more naturally accepted in
Germany than anywhere else," he says. German women apparently found him
irresistible. To hear Karp tell it—and he was still telling it, proudly, thirty years
later—he couldn't walk out his front door without being jumped by lustful
German women. The sex wasn't just abundant; it was epiphanic. Personal
experience had given him a dim view of marriage and parenthood and, by
extension, monogamy. Germany—Europe, really—offered not just sybaritic
pleasure, but also a sense of liberation. In Europe, there was no shame in
sleeping with someone simply out of desire, nor was there any stigma to having a
complex personal life. If one chose to remain single and found fulfillment in
having multiple partners, that was perfectly fine. Karp abhorred American
hypocrisy on the subject of sex; Americans screwed around just as much if not
more than Europeans, but they maintained an outward Puritanism. Europeans,
he thought, had a more evolved and honest view of human desire.
When not being dragged back to his bedroom, Karp socialized with a wide
circle of people in Frankfurt—some associated with the university, some with
the local Jewish community. One of his friends, a filmmaker named Hanna
Laura Klar, asked him to serve as the narrator of a documentary that she was
doing about Richard Plant, a writer and scholar best known for his 1986 book
The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War Against Homosexuals. Plant was himself gay
and a German-Jewish émigré who had settled in New York in the late 1930s. He

was tangentially linked to the Frankfurt School—as a student, he had known
Adorno, as well as the sociologist and critic Siegfried Kracauer.
The premise of the film was that Karp was intrigued by Plant and was
traveling to New York to interview him. But Plant was in his late seventies and in
poor health, and after initially agreeing to meet with Karp, he changed his mind.
So Klar instead filmed Karp visiting places of significance to Plant, such as the
City University of New York, where he taught for many years. The forty-three-
minute documentary, I Have Two Faces (the title is a reference to the fact that
Plant was both Jewish and gay and that his identity defined his life), culminates
with Karp stopping by Plant's Greenwich Village apartment building to leave a
gift for him. It is an odd film, but strangely watchable. With its moody shots of
Manhattan and music to match, it is evocative of a Woody Allen movie, and the
storyline—young American doctoral candidate on the trail of an obscure,
reclusive German intellectual—seems right out of an Allen film, too. And Karp
could have been playing a character conceived by the famed filmmaker—a
cerebral Jewish guy with a thicket of curly dark hair and Coke-bottle glasses,
walking around Manhattan in a trench coat and with a briefcase tucked under
his arm, speaking mostly German. The only Allen touch that is missing is
comedy: I Have Two Faces is defiantly humorless.
For Karp, part of Germany's appeal was the distance it offered from his
family. Not long after his divorce from Leah, Bob started dating a woman
named Linda Oppenheim, and they were soon engaged. Karp did not take the
news well and refused to attend the wedding. Shortly after Bob and Linda got
married, they adopted a son, a boy from the Dominican Republic. They then
adopted another child, a girl from Ohio who, like Alex and Ben, was biracial.
According to Ben, he and Alex sensed that Bob saw his new family as a fresh
start and regarded them as relics of a first marriage that he very much wanted to
forget. "We felt like castaways," says Ben. For several years, Alex didn't speak to
his father.
Germany was an escape and a balm for Karp. Years later, he would say that "I
only made two good decisions as an adult: going to Germany and starting
Palantir. Everything else was, I wouldn't call it a mistake, but either preparation
for these two decisions or a mistake." Still, while he adored Germany, he

recognized that his racial and ethnic background would always set him apart—
that no matter how long he lived there, he would always be an outsider. And
even as he reveled in the pleasures that Germany afforded him, the shadow of the
Holocaust was inescapable. During one summer weekend, he visited Isabelle
Azoulay and her boyfriend in Berlin. To escape the heat, the three decided to go
to nearby Lake Wannsee. It was there, in 1942, that Nazi leaders, meeting in a
lakeside villa, committed themselves to the eradication of European Jewry. On
the drive to the lake, Karp said to Azoulay and her boyfriend, "If I drown this
afternoon, please don't tell my parents it was in Wannsee." Azoulay says that he
was joking, making light of the location, but that there was an undercurrent of
seriousness to his comment—the idea of swimming in that particular spot
caused him discomfort.
By the time Karp earned his PhD, he had also concluded that he had no
desire to be an academic. Even though Habermas had played a limited role in his
doctoral studies, Karp would later explain his decision by referring to the
German philosopher. "Working with Habermas showed me that I couldn't be
him and didn't want to be him," he said. But what did he want to be? He was
now in his mid-thirties and had little practical experience to speak of—to that
point, he had spent his entire adulthood as a student. He didn't have a wife or
kids, so there was no pressure to become a provider. Even so, after two graduate
degrees, he was still without a direction in life. But soon, he and Thiel
reconnected.
OceanofPDF.com

THREE
THE SILICON VALLEY START-UP WITH A CHIP ON ITS
SHOULDER
Nine days after Karp was born in New York City, Susanne Thiel gave birth to
her first child, a son named Peter, in Frankfurt, Germany, where she and her
husband, Klaus, lived. A year later, Klaus, a chemical engineer, took a job with a
company in Cleveland. Eventually, the Thiels settled in Foster City, California,
outside San Francisco. By then, Peter had a younger brother, Patrick. Like Bob
and Leah Karp, Klaus and Susanne didn't permit their sons to watch television,
although they relented when Peter was a teenager. Peter was a precocious
student and a chess prodigy, too. And as was true of many socially awkward
adolescent boys, he was entranced by The Lord of the Rings and also found his
way to Ayn Rand, whose books Atlas Shrugged and The Fountainhead helped
reinforce the libertarian views that would bring him to prominence.
Thiel enrolled at Stanford University in the fall of 1985, the same time that
Karp started at Haverford, and also majored in philosophy. Their college
experiences, however, were different. While Karp cherished Haverford, in part
because of the refuge it afforded him from his warring parents, Thiel chafed
against the ideological conformity and political correctness that he believed held
sway at Stanford. The Stanford Review, the student newspaper that he
cofounded, pushed back against those prevailing currents, often in ways
intended to cause offense. The paper made light of date rape, expressed scorn for
diversity initiatives, and seemed to take particular delight in gay-bashing (one
headline read: "Homosexuality on Campus: Too Much of a Bad Thing"). In its
early years, the Review's staff was comprised almost entirely of young white men
who felt that Stanford had turned its back on free inquiry and was hostile to
conservatives. All were Thiel groupies who were mesmerized by his intelligence

and ability to articulate the grievances that they shared, and some of them
followed him into business. The Review was a journalistic enterprise, but it also
became a major incubator of tech talent, and its alumni helped launch a number
of start-ups, including Palantir.
Despite his frustrations with Stanford, Thiel excelled academically. He found
an intellectual mentor in René Girard, a French literary critic, historian, and
philosopher who had taught at Stanford since the early 1980s. Girard was best
known for his theory of mimetic desire, which held that human desire was
fundamentally imitative—we want things because other people want them,
which inevitably leads to strife. Girard's work would strongly influence Thiel's
approach to business and investing—notably, in his skepticism about the value
of competition and his corresponding belief that the most compelling start-ups
are those that aim to achieve monopolistic dominance in niche markets. In 2014,
Thiel would lay out these principles in a book titled Zero to One: Notes on
Startups, or How to Build the Future, an entrepreneurial guide that can be read as
an ex post facto blueprint for Palantir.
After earning his undergraduate degree, Thiel attended Stanford Law School,
which frustrated him for a different reason: he felt let down by what he
perceived to be its shallow intellectual culture. In this, he found a kindred spirit
in Karp. But Thiel wasn't as quick as Karp to give up on the idea of a legal career.
After graduating in 1992, he applied for clerkships with two Supreme Court
justices, Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy. He was passed over by both and
ended up clerking for U.S. appeals court judge James Larry Edmondson. Thiel
was then hired as an associate at Sullivan & Cromwell, a leading New York law
firm. But he quit after just seven months; he found the work unsatisfying and
had finally come to the realization that he didn't want to be a practicing
attorney.
A job as a derivatives trader for Credit Suisse, the investment bank, proved no
more fulfilling, and in 1996 he left New York and returned to California with
the aim of becoming an investor in the dot-com boom then sweeping Silicon
Valley. To that end, he launched his own venture capital fund. Two years later,
Thiel met Max Levchin, a twenty-three-year-old computer programmer
originally from Ukraine who wanted to build an online payments system that

could facilitate e-commerce. He and Thiel fleshed out the idea over a number of
months, and their work gave rise to PayPal, a company they cofounded in 1998,
although under a different name: it was originally called Confinity. They
renamed it PayPal in 2000, after the company merged with X.com, an online
payments start-up founded by Elon Musk. Eventually, Musk would be pushed
out, and Thiel served as PayPal's CEO.
In time, PayPal would grow into an $80 billion business and acquire a mythic
status because of the entrepreneurs who had been associated with it—the so-
called PayPal Mafia, which included Thiel, Musk, and Reid Hoffman, among
others—and the companies that it helped give rise to, such as LinkedIn,
YouTube, Yelp, and Palantir. But PayPal was beset with problems in its early
years, none bigger than fraud. Scammers were selling fake merchandise on eBay
and pocketing the money via PayPal accounts. Criminals in possession of stolen
credit card numbers were using fake PayPal accounts to execute transactions;
when victims reported the fraudulent charges, PayPal would be on the hook for
the credit card charge-backs. By 2001, the company was losing millions of dollars
a month due to illicit activity and facing the prospect of bankruptcy.
Levchin came up with two innovative solutions to combat fraud and save the
business. Members of PayPal's security team, which grew to include dozens of
analysts, had discovered that a lot of bogus accounts were being set up by
computer programs. In response, Levchin and another PayPal engineer, David
Gausebeck, developed software that required new PayPal users to correctly
identify a series of images (traffic lights, oddly shaped letters) before allowing
them to set up accounts. Computers were almost always incapable of
performing this task, which was known internally as the Gausebeck-Levchin test
and which became one of the first commercial uses of a concept known as
CAPTCHA, the mercifully short acronym for "Completely Automatic Public
Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart." The software proved to be
so effective at shutting out bots that other tech companies adopted it, and it
became a standard feature of e-commerce security.
But the Gausebeck-Levchin test was just a roadblock for fraudsters; to clean
up PayPal, the company needed to identify and root them out. Through
painstaking detective work, PayPal's head of security, an ex-Marine named John

Kothanek, discovered a web of connections that he could trace back to a
Ukrainian man who conducted transactions under the name "Igor" and who
had allegedly pocketed $15 to $20 million via PayPal. Complicating matters,
Kothanek found that Igor was a canny thief who had also done many legitimate
transactions to create a smoke screen. If PayPal shut down every link to Igor, it
would potentially be hurting lots of merchants who had unwittingly done
business with him. Kothanek spent weeks poring over thousands of transactions
and accounts to separate out the fraudulent ones and to cut off Igor's access to
PayPal without causing unjust collateral damage.
Impressive as Kothanek's sleuthing was, it was clear to Thiel and others that
PayPal couldn't rely on human analysts alone to stop fraud. It was a whack-a-
mole problem; PayPal had over eight million users, and there weren't enough
eyeballs or hours in the day for the security team to replicate Kothanek's effort
on a sustained basis. The solution, Thiel says, had to be a "hybrid human-
computer model." Humans alone couldn't solve the problem, but computing at
that time wasn't advanced enough to solve it, either. "You'd have this AI-type
person building this super-duper computer program that would figure out all
the fraud but take twenty years to build," says Thiel, "and that wouldn't work,
either, because we'd be out of business." But developing a software program that
could analyze large data streams and find suspicious patterns of behavior seemed
doable.
This was exactly the software that Levchin and several of his colleagues
developed. They christened the program IGOR in honor of their biggest
troublemaker, and it proved to be very effective; along with other, even more
sophisticated anti-fraud tools that the company built, it kept PayPal from going
under. After IGOR went live, PayPal experienced a 50 percent decline in fraud,
and several individuals whose illicit activities had been detected by IGOR were
later prosecuted by the U.S. government. The software was so good that FBI
agents, at the invitation of Thiel and his colleagues, began visiting PayPal's Palo
Alto office on a regular basis to test-drive the program and to learn more about
the company's anti-fraud efforts. It was a mutually beneficial relationship: the
FBI went after some of the criminals who had hurt PayPal's business, and the
FBI got greater insight into the world of cyberthieves.

In August 2002, eBay acquired PayPal for $1.5 billion. Thiel walked away
with $55 million, which he used to launch a hedge fund called Clarium Capital.
He also tapped into his PayPal fortune to seed a variety of projects. He
bankrolled a splashy restaurant/nightspot in San Francisco called Frisson (it
didn't last very long) and launched a magazine about NASCAR called American
Thunder (also short-lived). In addition, Thiel used some of his newfound wealth
to invest in tech start-ups. He put $450,000 into Facebook, becoming the social
media company's first outside investor (and gaining a board seat in the process).
After a couple of lean years in Silicon Valley following the implosion of the dot-
com bubble, the tech sector was booming again; Facebook, along with Amazon
and Google, was one of the companies at the vanguard of what was known as
Web 2.0.
But the tech industry's rebounding fortunes came against an ominous
backdrop. The United States was still reeling from 9/11, and it was assumed that
additional, possibly even deadlier attacks—involving dirty bombs or chemical or
biological weapons—were inevitable. At some point—he can't recall exactly
when—it occurred to Thiel that PayPal's anti-fraud algorithms could perhaps be
repurposed to help the government thwart future acts of terrorism. It was an
intriguing idea, not least because Thiel seemed to recognize that the intelligence
failure that led to 9/11 was, at heart, a data integration failure: the CIA and FBI
both had lots of evidence suggesting an attack was imminent, and if that
information had been pooled, it was possible that analysts would have been able
to piece together the plot in time to prevent the nineteen Al Qaeda hijackers
from executing it. The 9/11 Commission, in the final report it issued in 2004,
said government agencies had "failed to connect the dots" in part because of a
"limited capacity to share information both internally and externally."
But the intelligence community didn't need a blue-ribbon panel or Peter
Thiel to tell it that 9/11 happened in no small part because information that
might have prevented the attack wasn't sufficiently disseminated. The Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency, or DARPA, which was effectively the
R&D arm of the Pentagon, launched a program whose purpose was to use the
most advanced technologies on the market to build what amounted to a massive
dragnet that could help protect the country from terrorism. It was called Total

Information Awareness, or TIA, an Orwellian title that signaled, in the view of
some critics, its Big Brother ambitions. The appointment of retired rear admiral
John Poindexter, who had been convicted in 1990 of lying to Congress and
obstructing justice in the Iran-Contra scandal, to oversee the program only
added to concerns that it would be implemented with little if any regard for civil
liberties and privacy. Those fears, coupled with Poindexter's checkered
reputation, ultimately doomed TIA; Congress stopped funding the program in
late 2003. But the government was now looking for software that could integrate
and analyze huge streams of data, and Thiel had identified his next big
opportunity.
Thiel shared his idea about developing counterterrorism technology with two
Stanford Review alums who were now working for Clarium Capital, Joe
Lonsdale and Stephen Cohen. Lonsdale was twenty-one at the time and had
joined the firm after graduating from Stanford with a degree in computer
science. Cohen was then in his senior year at Stanford, finishing his degree in
computer science and interning at Clarium. Lonsdale and Cohen had both
grown up in Fremont, California, on the other side of San Francisco Bay from
Silicon Valley. They didn't know each other as kids; they met at Stanford. But
they had traveled similar paths: they were enamored of computers, had taught
themselves to code, and were intent on pursuing careers in technology even
before matriculating at Stanford. As a teenager, Cohen often hung out at a local
Barnes & Noble, where he would read books on computing. He got to know the
inventory so well that he would offer free buying advice to other shoppers who
were browsing in the computer section; one conversation landed him a coding
job. For a time, he was also a Noam Chomsky devotee.
Thiel asked Cohen and a PayPal engineer named Nathan Gettings to begin
working on a software program that could be pitched to the U.S. intelligence
community. Although IGOR was the inspiration, it couldn't be used for
counterterrorism: it was an internal product that analyzed PayPal's data to solve
problems specific to PayPal. Cohen and Gettings, by contrast, were trying to
build a commercial product that would help government intelligence analysts
make use of their own data. It was a speculative undertaking, in that neither
Thiel nor his associates had ever worked with the government, had no

connections to the intelligence community, and had no clue as to how
counterterrorism analysts wanted information presented. The project, which
was called Palantir, seemed quixotic and hubristic. The federal government had
vast quantities of data, exponentially more than PayPal collected, and while
Thiel had significant engineering talent at his disposal, did he think that he and
his associates could provide the corrective to the biggest intelligence failure in
U.S. history? While the overarching ambition was supersized, the initial goal for
Cohen and Gettings was modest: to build a simple prototype that might
convince prospective users and investors that Palantir was plausible.
While Palantir was still in incubation, Karp moved back to the Bay Area to
take a job as a development officer with an organization called the Jewish
Philanthropy Partnership. He had returned to the United States a few years
earlier, sharing an apartment in New Haven with his brother, who was pursuing
a doctorate in history and African American studies at Yale University. Karp
completed his dissertation while residing in New Haven. He was also
moonlighting as an investor, through a company he had started called the
Caedmon Group (Caedmon is his middle name, after the first known English-
language poet). Using $12,000 he had inherited from his paternal grandfather,
he proved to be a shrewd stock-picker. Word got around that Karp had a knack
for the markets, and some wealthy Europeans gave him money to manage on
their behalf. (Karp says that his PhD was an added selling point for them, as it
would later prove to be with European business leaders interested in working
with Palantir.)
Karp had no interest in spending his career in finance and didn't aspire to
become a superstar hedge fund manager. He later claimed that his goal was to
amass a $250,000 nest egg, after which he planned to settle in Berlin and live as a
highbrow dilettante, reading and writing and enjoying various "forms of
debauchery," as he put it. Given his determination to compensate for what he
saw as the professional shortcomings of his parents and to never experience
economic hardship again, it is difficult to imagine that he would have been
content with such a bohemian existence. It is possible the Berlin story was just a
form of self-mythologizing, a way of underscoring how improbable his success
with Palantir was.

Karp and Thiel had fallen out of touch after law school, but soon after Karp
returned to the Bay Area, they reconnected. At one point, Karp invited Thiel to
attend a meeting of major donors of the Jewish Philanthropy Partnership. "He
thought it would be good to mix it up and have one non-Jewish person in the
mix," Thiel recalls. "Alex had this crazy theory that it would be a better way for
them all to be nicer to each other. They'd get way more done." It became clear to
Thiel that Karp had "a terrific sense for people" and was "incredibly tenacious."
While doing his day job, Karp started raising money for Thiel's Clarium
Capital. A few months later, Thiel asked Karp to join Palantir. He thought Karp
could help market the company to potential customers and investors and also
provide some adult supervision until they hired a CEO. Thiel's initial
inclination was that Palantir would need a Washington insider or a retired senior
military officer at its helm. He figured, not without reason, that Palantir was
going to be a tough sell and that it would benefit from having a CEO with
strong connections in the national security community and on Capitol Hill.
Several people interviewed for the job, but none seemed like a good fit. Cohen,
Lonsdale, and Gettings began to think that perhaps Karp was the right choice.
Like Thiel, they were struck by his moxie, but they also saw something else in
Karp. Although he didn't conceive the idea for Palantir, he spoke about it with
the conviction of a true believer and exuded a spirit of entrepreneurship. "Alex
was a founder; you could feel it," says Cohen. "The other people weren't." He,
Lonsdale, and Gettings told Thiel that they thought Karp should be the CEO.
Thiel didn't need much persuading and dispatched Cohen and Lonsdale to
London, where Karp was meeting with investors, to offer him the position. He
accepted.
On paper, at least, Karp wasn't a great fit himself. For one thing, he was
thirty-four years old, which in the world of Silicon Valley start-ups made him a
virtual geriatric. Start-ups were for kids, a point vividly illustrated in the
memorable zip-line scene in the 2010 film The Social Network. The hope and
goal of many young entrepreneurs was to hit it big early and then settle into a
career backing the next generation of child-inventors. Marc Andreessen
cofounded Netscape not long after graduating from college. When Andreessen
was twenty-eight, Netscape was acquired by AOL for $4.3 billion, and by his

mid-thirties, he had morphed into one of the Valley's most important venture
capitalists. Thiel was following the same trajectory. In addition to his relatively
advanced age, Karp lacked the baseline qualifications for the job: he had no
managerial experience and no background in technology. (Thiel, during one of
our conversations, noted that he had the same gaps in his résumé when he
became PayPal's CEO.)
But although Karp couldn't write a line of code himself when he joined
Palantir, the thinking that guided the company's software engineers wasn't
entirely foreign to him. A key concept in data science is ontology, which, loosely
defined, means how information is organized and structured. This mapping
function is critical to drawing meaningful connections between disparate pieces
of information. Ontology is a term that the tech world pilfered from philosophy.
In the philosophical universe, ontology is a branch of metaphysics that deals
with the nature of being and that creates categories of things (people, places,
objects) to describe reality. For Karp, understanding ontology as it applied to
data science wasn't much of a stretch—indeed, he would later say that Palantir's
software was a philosophical system at heart. And in his view and that of his
colleagues, the critical element in the software is its "dynamic ontology," which
allows users to construct "digital twins" of their own operations that can be
continuously updated and augmented to mirror the evolution of the
organization.
And while Karp might not have been able to discuss the finer points of
programming languages like Java and Python, in certain ways he was an ideal
CEO for a company whose work was bound to arouse suspicion. He seemed
genuinely passionate about privacy protection and could talk about issues
related to civil liberties with a fluency that was rare in tech circles. It helped that
he came out of academia, rather than the military or the intelligence community
—having a trained philosopher at the company's helm signaled that Palantir
took seriously the ethical and moral concerns that its work raised. It helped, too,
that Karp was a self-described leftist; his political leanings would become a kind
of shield for Palantir, especially when Thiel began moving even further to the
right.

Thiel, Cohen, Lonsdale, and Gettings had started Palantir out of Clarium's
office in San Francisco. But the company soon needed more space and relocated
to 3000 Sand Hill Road in Palo Alto. That was where Thiel had launched
Confinity. Initially, Karp wasn't in the office every day; he was residing in San
Francisco and would come to Palo Alto several times a week. Because he didn't
know how to drive, he hired a car to bring him back and forth. In the early days,
Karp was something of a mystery to his colleagues. Some speculated, half-
jokingly, that his German doctorate was a cover story and that he was actually a
spy, possibly for the Mossad. (Years later, Karp hired an ex-Israeli intelligence
officer to serve as a kind of fixer for him.) "We didn't know what to make of
him," recalls Bob McGrew, a software engineer who joined Palantir in 2005. He
describes it as an "impedance mismatch," an artful way of saying that they were
on different wavelengths. To help Karp understand the people who now
answered to him, McGrew and several others gave him a copy of Ray Kurzweil's
The Singularity Is Near, a 2005 book that had instantly acquired canonical
status in Silicon Valley. It was about artificial intelligence; Kurzweil, a computer
scientist and futurist, predicted that the singularity—the moment when
computers surpass human intelligence—would occur by 2045. (Later, new hires
at Palantir would be given several books to read, including Lawrence Wright's
The Looming Tower, about Osama bin Laden, Al Qaeda, and the intelligence
failures that led to 9/11, and Impro, a book ostensibly about improvisational
theater but that acquired a cult following as a guide to creativity.)
While Karp was approachable and entertaining (then as now, he enjoyed
regaling colleagues with stories about German women and their attraction to
him), conversations with him could be difficult. He spit out thoughts and
observations in a nonlinear fashion that sometimes left his colleagues befuddled.
"I don't know that anyone would say he's easy to talk to," says Brian Schimpf,
who was hired by Palantir in 2007 and eventually became its director of
engineering. Joshua Goldenberg, who was Palantir's head of design, recalls that
discussions with Karp were "unstructured" and sometimes seemed "a little bit
incoherent." After all-hands meetings with Karp, staffers would congregate to
try to make sense of what they'd heard. "We would debrief and see if anyone
could divine the signal in the chaos of Karp's speech patterns," says one former

employee. But he says that they all recognized that Karp had a kind of "crazy
charisma" and was exceptionally intelligent.
They were also struck, and not a little freaked out, by his ability to get people
to see things his way and to do things that he wanted. Karp insisted on a culture
of unbridled discourse, in which employees were encouraged to express
themselves with absolute candor. "Alex's attitude was that you should be able to
tell even the CEO to fuck off," says Aki Jain, a software engineer who was
another early hire. "We had open disagreement and debate about everything,"
recalls Schimpf. Even so, it felt to his colleagues as if Karp could almost burrow
into people's minds and implant his ideas. Some Palantirians began referring to
him as "Charles Xavier," aka Professor X, after the character in X-Men who
possesses telepathic powers.
From the start, Karp said that Palantir's mission was to defend the West and
liberal democracy. The company was a creation of 9/11 and of Karp's pessimistic
worldview. Even before 9/11, Karp was skeptical that the end of the Cold War
had ushered in an era of irreversible peace and prosperity; the terrorist attack on
the United States showed that this had been a dangerous delusion and that there
were still lots of people who meant to do us harm. Karp and his colleagues had
no use for the techno-optimism that was so prevalent when Palantir started—the
idea that the online world could somehow make the physical world a better,
happier place. There was nothing utopian about Palantir; if anything, the
company was founded on the conviction that we were facing a bleak future.
Palantir's elevator pitch was that its technology could possibly make apocalyptic
events a little less likely.
Palantir was also different from other tech start-ups in that it rejected the "fail
fast, fail often" mantra that held sway in Silicon Valley—the idea that failure was
not something to fear but was merely a setback that would lay the groundwork
for future success. Karp, because of his relatively advanced age, didn't feel like he
had the luxury of time; he was already in his mid-thirties, and failure was going
to be much costlier for him than for some twenty-two-year-old just out of
Stanford. Moreover, Karp wasn't a techie—if Palantir went bust, it wasn't as if
he would be able to seamlessly move on to another start-up. From his point of
view, failure really wasn't an option or something to be embraced. Karp had no

use for the Beckettian "fail better next time" ethos because there was no
guarantee that there would be a next time, and the urgency he felt permeated
down the ranks at Palantir.
That's not to suggest that Palantir was a morose workplace filled with
survivalists (although many years later, Karp would describe Palantir as "a
prepper company"). In the early days, it looked like any other tech start-up: the
office was full of enthusiastic, dweebish young men (it was a very male culture,
something that has persisted). And although there was no zip line, the
Palantirians did cut loose; a former employee sued Palantir in 2016 for what he
claimed were injuries suffered during a raucous game of beer pong (the case was
settled out of court). But there was a sense that Palantir was serving a higher
purpose than other start-ups—that it was doing work that mattered. Aki Jain
recalls that three of the brightest people in his cohort of Stanford computer
science majors ended up working on Google's "Smart Ass" project—that was
the in-house nickname given to the company's machine-learning ad targeting
program (it directed ads at Google users based on their searches). Jain wasn't
casting judgment or aspersions—he just knew that he preferred to be working
on stuff that seemed more consequential.
Palantir was based in Silicon Valley, but in the minds of Karp and his
colleagues, it was never truly part of the Valley. Karp had particular contempt for
Google and Facebook. He recognized early on that harvesting and selling
personal data was at the heart of what they did and that what he saw as their
ethically dubious business models had the potential to hurt Palantir; if there
were ever a backlash against Big Data, people wouldn't necessarily recognize that
Palantir operated in a fundamentally different way from Google and Facebook
(in that Palantir didn't collect, store, or sell data). In time, Karp became
reluctant to hire people from either company. Exceptions were made, but in
general he believed that Google and Facebook employees, no matter how
talented they were, had internalized a predatory approach to data that was
anathema to Palantir.
Karp especially loathed Facebook. Google, as a search engine, provided
legitimate value. He saw zero value in Facebook; he regarded it as frivolous and
destructive—"a carcinogen," as he put it. Palantir and Facebook were founded at

around the same time, and although they were not competitors, Facebook in
some ways became the company that Palantir defined itself against. That Thiel
was a major investor in Facebook and sat on its board suggested that there was
perhaps also a kind of sibling rivalry at play. Moreover, the two companies always
seemed to be in one another's shadow. Both were headquartered for a time in the
same Palo Alto office park, and when Palantir later expanded in Palo Alto, it took
over a building that had previously been occupied by Facebook. (The Facebook
office there became famous because its walls had been painted by a local graffiti
artist who was paid in Facebook stock; when the company went public in 2012,
his shares were worth around $200 million. After Palantir moved in, it painted
over the walls.) Years later, Facebook and Palantir would each be ensnared in the
Cambridge Analytica scandal.
Palantir did much of its early recruiting by word of mouth. In 2005, a group
of Stanford alums, among them Bob McGrew, were living in a house in Los
Altos Hills that was known informally as Phi Psi South, after a fraternity
popular with computer science majors. Aki Jain attended a party there one night
and had a long conversation with McGrew, who encouraged him to seek a job
with Palantir. Soon thereafter, Jain joined the company. Stanford's proximity
and abundance of engineering talent made it an obvious place for Palantir to
seek new hires. Lonsdale and Cohen put up posters in the computer science
building that said, "Are you part Bill Gates and part James Bond? Palantir is the
place for you." Whether it was personal connections or those flyers or both, a
number of Stanford grads ended up at Palantir.
Thiel seldom visited the office after Palantir moved to Palo Alto (on those
rare occasions when he did drop by, a bowl of pistachios would be put out for
him—he had a taste for them). But he did help with recruiting. In 2004, he tried
to get a young engineer named Garry Tan to leave Microsoft and join Palantir.
He flew Tan to San Francisco, took him to dinner at Frisson, and encouraged
him to come work for his new start-up. Thiel promised him a sizable equity
stake if he joined. At one point, Thiel asked Tan how much he was being paid at
Microsoft. Tan told him $72,000, whereupon Thiel pulled out his checkbook
and wrote him a check in that amount, which was meant as an added
inducement. But Tan declined the money and the offer—he wanted to stay with

Microsoft. Many years later, Tan recounted this story in a short video he made
called "My $200 Million Mistake." The kicker is that not long after he rebuffed
Thiel's overture, he took a job with Palantir, becoming its tenth hire. He even
ended up designing Palantir's logo and would go on to a successful career as a
venture capitalist and as the CEO of Y Combinator, a company that incubates
start-ups. But he would have been hundreds of millions of dollars richer had he
joined Palantir sooner.
To land a position at Palantir, you needed to show enthusiasm for the
company's mission—if a candidate didn't seem gung ho about using technology
to kill terrorists, or appeared squeamish about working with the U.S.
government, he or she had no chance of being hired. Another dealbreaker was
any hint of get-rich-quick ambitions. Thanks to the dot-com frenzy of the late
1990s, the Valley was seen as a place where one could become fantastically
wealthy in a relatively brief time span: you'd spend a few years slaving away at a
start-up, being paid partly or largely in equity, and when the company went
public, you'd cash in. But if a potential hire at Palantir gave off even the faintest
whiff of interest in IPOs and exit strategies, he or she wasn't getting the job.
Shyam Sankar, who was the thirteenth person hired at Palantir and is now its
chief technology officer, says it was a question of "mercenaries versus
missionaries"—of people who were interested in potential windfalls versus those
who were attracted to Palantir because of the work it did. Palantir wanted the
latter and went to lengths to avoid hiring the former.
Palantir didn't pay all that well relative to other tech firms, which helped
weed out the mercenaries. New employees had three compensation options: low
cash/high equity, mid-cash/mid-equity, or high cash/low equity. But "high cash"
wasn't all that high. Salaries were capped at what Karp was paid, and he took a
modest salary: for most of Palantir's first decade, he was paid only around
$125,000 per year. This was true even through the mid-aughts, when the
company had a $20 billion valuation. "I only make money when you make
money," Karp told his colleagues, and he meant it. He also liked to say that his
goal with Palantir wasn't to build the world's most valuable company but,
rather, its most important one. Although Karp wasn't shy about flaunting his
American Express Black Card, he otherwise frowned on displays of wealth or

excessive materialism. One of the few times he expressed anger was when he
noticed a new Porsche in Palantir's parking lot (it belonged to a company
executive).
According to Nathan Gettings, the comparatively low pay, coupled with the
fact that Palantir was an unknown company doing arcane work, initially made it
hard to attract promising job candidates. "It was difficult to hire people, because
why wouldn't you go work at Facebook or some other company that is going to
pay well now and that you can explain to your friends?" says Gettings. He and
the other cofounders would eventually conclude that people who joined Palantir
straight out of college had the best chance of succeeding at the company. Money
wasn't as much of an issue for them, and they generally had an easier time
adapting to Palantir's distinctive culture.
During the early years, Karp, Gettings, Cohen, and Lonsdale all interviewed
prospective hires, and each of them had to sign off on every job offer. Interviews
with Karp were challenging—not because he asked hard questions, but because
he hardly asked any and had neither the interest nor the ability to engage in small
talk. Almost no one ever left the room thinking that he or she had nailed the
interview. Quite the opposite: they would walk out resigned to not getting the
job. But in his odd way, Karp proved to be adept at sizing up software engineers.
Bob McGrew and Aki Jain became sufficiently intrigued by his nose for
technical talent that they began sending him job candidates whom they had
already decided they didn't want, just to see if Karp would also veto them. Karp
had an unerring ability to sniff out the rejects.
But what was perhaps Karp's most notorious interview was with someone
who got the job. Louis Mosley was an Oxford graduate who had hoped to
pursue a political career in Britain. But his family history made that an
impossibility: his grandfather was Oswald Mosley, the British fascist leader
during World War II, and his grandmother was Diana Mitford, one of the
famous Mitford sisters and who is best remembered for her close friendship with
Hitler. A group of historians once named Oswald Mosley the worst Briton of
the twentieth century, and while Louis had rejected his grandparents' views, his
surname proved to be an insurmountable liability—Conservative Party insiders

ultimately made clear that they would never be able to put him up for office
because he was tainted by association.
Through a friend, he was introduced to Palantir, and after several rounds of
interviews, he flew to Palo Alto to meet with Karp. As soon as Mosley took a
seat, Karp began reciting a fiery speech that Oswald Mosley gave in 1939
demanding that Britain seek peace with Nazi Germany. ("Our generation shall
not die like rats in Polish holes. They shall not die but shall live to see above their
heads the English sky, to feel beneath their feet the English soil, and to enjoy the
fair English countryside....") Karp didn't just repeat a few sentences; he went on
for minutes, reproducing the speech from memory. Mosley sat in stunned
silence. When Karp finished, he executed a few tai chi moves and walked out of
the room without saying goodbye. A shaken Mosley figured that his family's
dark past had torpedoed him again. But it hadn't: he was hired and ended up
running Palantir's UK business. (A few years after the interview, Karp was in
London, where he met with Mosley and a retired British military officer who
was consulting for Palantir. Karp asked this person if he was aware of Mosley's
background. He said that he was but added, "Well, we all have skeletons in our
closet." Karp looked at him with disgust. "A skeleton?" he said incredulously.
"That's fucking Godzilla in the closet.")
From its inception, Palantir had a policy of not hiring salespeople. According
to Lonsdale, he and the other founders decided that a sales team would have a
corrosive effect on innovation. "When you hire really strong alpha salespeople,
they take over the culture," Lonsdale says. "They say, 'We're delivering the
revenue, we're bringing the food home, and in order for us to feed you, we need
X, Y, and Z.' The culture becomes really oriented around serving the alpha
salespeople." The Palantirians believed that they could develop truly
transformative technology and wanted to avoid a situation in which there would
be pressure to push products out the door too quickly, and eschewing a sales
force was a way of making sure that short-termism didn't prevail. Plus, Palantir
already had an ace salesman in Karp, who would prove to be as persuasive with
potential customers as he was with his colleagues. The irony was that no one at
Palantir was more disdainful of salespeople than Karp. He once said that the
only way he would ever hire a sales team was if he were "hit by a bus." He finally

relented in 2019, the year before Palantir went public, but even then, he made
clear that he took a dim view of salespeople. It was hard to tell if his antipathy to
them sprang from a (well-founded) belief that they could never sell Palantir as
capably as he could, or if it was an expression of self-loathing. Maybe it was a
little of both.
However, Karp's initial effort to sell Palantir failed. Thiel had put up
$100,000 to start the company and subsequently kicked in another $543,000. A
venture capital firm that Thiel started in 2005, the Founders Fund, also made an
early $856,000 investment in Palantir. But the company needed additional
capital to continue to grow, and Thiel wanted to see if it could attract other
investors. In 2005, Karp met with several leading VC firms. He was able to get
meetings mainly on account of Thiel, whose involvement with Palantir opened
doors that might otherwise have been closed. However, Karp quickly discovered
that along Sand Hill Road, which traversed Palo Alto and Menlo Park and where
nearly all the major VCs were clustered, there was little interest in the concept
that Palantir was selling. The VCs were fixated instead on what Karp would later
disparagingly refer to as "the commercial Internet"—basically, start-ups that sold
things to consumers. They wanted to find the next Amazon.com. There was also
a lot of buzz building around social networks such as Facebook and Myspace.
Skepticism about Palantir ran deep. For one thing, data analytics was as sexy
as it sounded—which is to say, it wasn't at all. The so-called Big Data revolution
was just taking off (and would be driven in no small part by the advent of those
same social networks), and Silicon Valley investors just couldn't muster much
enthusiasm for a data integration business. An additional stumbling block for
Palantir was its focus on government work. While the VCs admired Palantir's
patriotic spirit and agreed that technology being developed in the Valley could
probably help combat terrorism, government contracts were hard to come by
and often didn't pay all that well. From a national security standpoint, Palantir
might have been a worthy, even noble endeavor. But as an investment
proposition, it was unappealing.
The nadir came during a pitch meeting that Karp and some colleagues had
with Sequoia Capital, which was arguably the most influential Silicon Valley
VC. Sequoia had been an early investor in PayPal; its best-known partner,

Michael Moritz, sat on the company's board and was close to Thiel. But Sequoia
proved no more receptive to Palantir than any of the other VCs that Karp and
his team visited; according to Karp, Moritz spent most of the meeting
absentmindedly doodling in his notepad. Karp didn't say anything at the time,
but later wished that he had. "I should have told him to go fuck himself," he
says, referring to Moritz. But it wasn't just Moritz who provoked Karp's ire: the
VC community's lack of enthusiasm for Palantir made Karp contemptuous of
professional investors in general. It became a grudge that he nurtured for years
after.
But the meetings on Sand Hill Road weren't entirely fruitless. After listening
to Karp's pitch and politely declining to put any money into Palantir, a partner
with one venture capital firm had a suggestion: if Palantir was really intent on
working with the government, it could reach out to In-Q-Tel, the CIA's venture
capital arm. In-Q-Tel had been started a few years earlier, in 1999 (the name was
a playful reference to "Q," the technology guru in James Bond films). CIA
Director George Tenet believed that establishing a quasi-public venture capital
fund through which the agency could incubate start-ups would help ensure that
the U.S. intelligence community retained a technological edge. The CIA had
been created in 1947 for the purpose of preventing another Pearl Harbor, and a
half century on, its primary mission was still to prevent attacks on American soil.
Two years after In-Q-Tel was founded, the country experienced another Pearl
Harbor, the 9/11 terrorist attacks, a humiliating intelligence failure for the CIA
and Tenet. At the time, In-Q-Tel was working out of a Virginia office complex
known, ironically, as the Rosslyn Twin Towers, and from the twenty-ninth-floor
office, employees had an unobstructed view of the burning Pentagon.
In-Q-Tel's CEO was Gilman Louie, who had worked as a video game
designer before being recruited by Tenet (Louie specialized in flight simulators;
his were so realistic that they were used to help train Air National Guard pilots).
Ordinarily, Louie did not take part in pitch meetings; he let his deputies do the
initial screening. But because Thiel was involved, he made an exception for
Palantir and sat in on its first meeting with In-Q-Tel. What Karp and the other
Palantirians didn't know when they visited In-Q-Tel was that the CIA was in the
market for new data analytics technology. At the time, the agency was mainly

using a program called Analyst's Notebook, which was manufactured by i2, a
British company. According to Louie, Analyst's Notebook had a good interface
but had certain deficiencies when it came to data processing that limited its
utility. "We didn't think their architecture would allow us to build next-
generation capabilities," Louie says.
Louie found Karp's pitch impressive. "Alex presented well," he recalls. "He
was very articulate and very passionate." As the conversation went on, Karp and
his colleagues talked about IGOR and how it had basically saved PayPal's
business, and it became apparent to Louie that they might just have the technical
aptitude to deliver what he was looking for. But he told them that the interface
was vital—the software would need to organize and present information in a
way that made sense for the analysts using it, and he described some of the
features they would expect. Louie says that as soon as he brought this up, the
Palantir crew "got out of sales mode and immediately switched into engineering
solving mode" and began brainstorming in front of the In-Q-Tel team. "That
was what I wanted to see," says Louie.
He sent them away with a homework assignment: he asked them to design an
interface that could possibly appeal to intelligence analysts. On returning to Palo
Alto, Cohen and Gettings sequestered themselves in a room and built a demo
that included the elements that Louie had highlighted. A few weeks later, the
Palantirians returned to In-Q-Tel to show Louie and his colleagues what they
had come up with. Louie was impressed by its intuitive logic and elegance. "If
Palantir doesn't work, you guys have a bright future designing video games," he
joked. In-Q-Tel ended up investing $1.25 million in exchange for equity; with
that vote of confidence, Thiel put up another $2.84 million. (In-Q-Tel did not
get a board seat in return for its investment; even after Palantir began attracting
significant outside money, the company never gave up a board seat, which was
unusual, and to its great advantage.)
Karp says the most beneficial aspect of In-Q-Tel's investment was not the
money but the access that it gave Palantir to the CIA analysts who were its
intended customers. Louie believed that the only way to determine whether
Palantir could really help the CIA was to embed Palantir engineers in the agency;
to build software that was actually useful, the Palantirians needed to see for

themselves how the analysts operated. "A machine is not going to understand
your workflows," Louie says. "That's a human function, not a machine
function." The other reason for embedding the engineers was that it would
expedite the process of figuring out whether Palantir could, in fact, be helpful. If
the CIA analysts didn't think Palantir was capable of giving them what they
needed, they were going to quickly let their superiors know. "We were at war,"
says Louie, "and people did not have time to waste."
Louie had the Palantir team assigned to the CIA's terrorism finance desk.
There they would be exposed to large data sets, and also to data collected by
financial institutions as well as the CIA. This would be a good test of whether
Karp and his colleagues could deliver: tracking the flow of money was going to
be critical to disrupting future terrorist plots, and it was exactly the kind of task
that the software would have to perform in order to be of use to the intelligence
community. But Louie also had another motive: although Karp and Thiel were
focused on working with the government, Louie thought that Palantir's
technology, if it proved viable, could have applications outside the realm of
national security, and if the company hoped to attract future investors, it would
ultimately need to develop a strong commercial business. In-Q-Tel's mission was
to fund start-ups whose products could help safeguard the United States but
that "wouldn't be captured by the government," as Louie puts it. For Palantir,
terrorism finance could be a springboard to opportunities in the financial sector.
Stephen Cohen and Aki Jain worked directly with the CIA analysts. Both
had to obtain security clearance, and over time, numerous other Palantirians
would do the same. Some, however, refused—they worried about Big Brother,
or they didn't want the FBI combing through their financial records, or they
enjoyed smoking pot and didn't want to give it up. Karp was one of the
refuseniks, as was Joshua Goldenberg, the head of design. Goldenberg says there
were times when engineers working on classified projects needed his help. But
because they couldn't share certain information with him, they would resort to
hypotheticals. As Goldenberg recalls, "Someone might say, 'Imagine there's a
jewel thief and he's stolen a diamond, and he's now in a city and we have people
following him—what would that look like? What tools would you need to be
able to do that?' " Goldenberg says that some of his colleagues became very adept

at conjuring imaginary scenarios that would tell him what he needed without
giving away what they were really working on.
Starting in 2005, Cohen and Jain traveled on a biweekly basis from Palo Alto
to the CIA's headquarters in Langley, Virginia. In all, they made the trip roughly
two hundred times. They became so familiar at the CIA that analysts there
nicknamed Cohen "Two Weeks." The Palantir duo would bring with them the
latest version of the software, the analysts would test it out and offer feedback,
and Cohen and Jain would return to California, where they and the rest of the
team would address whatever problems had been identified and make other
tweaks. In working side by side with the analysts, Cohen and Jain were
pioneering a role that would become one of Palantir's signatures. It turned out
that dispatching software engineers to job sites was a shrewd strategy—it was a
way of discovering what clients really needed in the way of technological help, of
developing new features that could possibly be of use to other customers, and of
building relationships that might lead to additional business within an
organization. The forward-deployed engineers, as they came to be called, proved
to be almost as essential to Palantir's eventual success as the software itself. But it
was that original deployment to the CIA, and the iterative process that it
spawned, that enabled Palantir to successfully build Gotham, its first software
platform.
However, all that makes the story sound tidier than it was. Ari Gesher, an
engineer who was hired in 2005, says that from a technology standpoint,
Palantir was pursuing a very ambitious goal. Some software companies
specialized in front-end products—the stuff you see on your screen. Others
focused on the backend, the processing functions. Palantir, says Gesher,
"understood that you needed to do deep investments in both to generate
outcomes for users." According to Gesher, Palantir also stood apart in that it
aimed to be both a product company as well as a service company. Most software
makers were one or the other: they either custom-built software, or they sold off-
the-shelf products that could not be tailored to the specific needs of a client.
Palantir was building an off-the-shelf product that could also be customized.
In the end, it took Palantir around three years, lots of setbacks, and a couple
of near-death experiences to develop a marketable software platform that met

these parameters. One early challenge: the Palantirians had assumed, incorrectly,
that CIA analysts mainly used structured data—formatted information such as
spreadsheets and charts. What they discovered instead was that intelligence
analysts made heavy use of memos, reports, diplomatic cables, and other written
materials. The engineers were able to solve that problem, but others quickly
arose, and even the most resilient employees experienced doubts. "There were
moments where we were like, 'Is this ever going to see the light of day?' " Gesher
says. The work was arduous, and there were times when the money ran short. A
few key people grew frustrated and talked of quitting.
Palantir also struggled to win converts at the CIA. Even though In-Q-Tel was
backing Palantir, analysts were not obliged to switch to the company's software,
and some who tried it were underwhelmed. Rosa Smothers, who worked as a
CIA counterterrorism and cyberthreat analyst from 2006 to 2017, says that
neither she nor any of her colleagues ever used Palantir. At one point, Smothers
says, she and other analysts were given a weeklong Palantir tutorial. While the
interface was impressive, the program was just too complicated to operate. "It
was such a cumbersome piece of software," she says. "Maybe it was great if you
really knew how to use it, but who had time to get a PhD in Palantir?"
The CIA has at least twenty thousand employees—for security reasons, it
doesn't give a precise figure—and while Palantir met resistance in some corners,
it found a more receptive audience in others. In what would become another
pattern in Palantir's rise, one analyst was not just won over by the technology;
she turned into a kind of in-house evangelist on Palantir's behalf. Sarah Adams
discovered Palantir not at Langley, but rather on a visit to Silicon Valley in late
2006. Adams worked on counterterrorism, as well, but in a different section. She
joined a group of CIA analysts at a conference in the Bay Area devoted to
emerging technologies. Palantir was one of the vendors, and Stephen Cohen
demoed its software. Adams was intrigued by what she saw, exchanged contact
information with Cohen, and upon returning to Langley asked her boss if her
unit could do a pilot program with Palantir. He signed off on it, and a few
months later, Adams and her colleagues were using Palantir's software.
Adams says that the first thing that jumped out at her was the speed with
which Palantir churned data. "We were a fast-moving shop; we were kind of the

point of the spear, and we needed faster analytics," she says. She and her
colleagues found that Palantir yielded quicker results than Analyst's Notebook.
That wasn't all. According to Adams, Palantir's software had a "smartness" that
Analyst's Notebook lacked. It wasn't just better at unearthing connections; even
its basic search function was superior. Often, names would be misspelled in
reports, or phone numbers would be written in different formats (dashes
between numbers, no dashes between numbers). If Adams typed in "David
Petraeus," Palantir's search engine would bring up all the available references to
him, including ones where his name had been incorrectly spelled. This ensured
that she wasn't deprived of possibly important information simply because
another analyst or a source in the field didn't know that it was "Petraeus."
Beyond that, Palantir's software just seemed to reflect an understanding of how
Adams and other analysts did their jobs—the kind of questions they were
seeking to answer, and how they wanted the answers presented. She says that
Palantir "made my job a thousand times easier. It made a huge difference."
Her advocacy was instrumental in Palantir securing a contract with the CIA.
Similar stories would play out in later deployments—one employee would end
up championing Palantir, and that person's proselytizing would eventually lead
to a deal. But the CIA was the breakthrough: it was proof that Palantir had
developed software that really worked, and also the realization of the ambition
that had brought the company into being. Palantir had been founded for the
purpose of assisting the U.S. government in the war on terrorism, and now the
CIA had formally enlisted its help in that battle.
OceanofPDF.com

FOUR
SEEING STONES AND PRYING EYES
In 2013, Forbes published a feature about Karp and Palantir. The story opened
with Karp taking a hike near Stanford University's campus, trailed by a
bodyguard. Karp told the magazine that having full-time protection was a drag.
"It puts a massive cramp on your life," he said. "There's nothing worse for
reducing your ability to flirt with someone." He spoke wistfully of his student
days in Germany, when he "would walk around, go into skanky places in Berlin
all night. I'd talk to whoever would talk to me, occasionally go home with
people, as often as I could. I went to places where people were doing things,
smoking things. I just loved it." He stressed the importance that he attached to
his own privacy: "I didn't sign up for the government to know when I smoke a
joint or have an affair." The article cited a talk that he had given to Palantir
employees, in which he said that part of Palantir's mission and challenge was to
ensure that civil liberties and personal privacy enjoyed strong protection amid
the rise of surveillance technology. "We have to find places that we protect away
from government so that we can all be the unique and interesting and, in my
case, somewhat deviant people we'd like to be."
For Karp, the Forbes piece was an opportunity to try to assuage concerns
about Palantir. In emphasizing how much he valued his own privacy, he was
conveying the message that he valued everyone else's privacy, too, and that
Palantir could be trusted to respect civil liberties. It was clever marketing, but it
wasn't just lip service. From the outset, Karp recognized the danger inherent in
the kind of technology that Palantir was building. Inevitably, a lot of the data
that intelligence analysts waded through was personal—phone records, credit
card bills, and so forth—and any software program that made their work easier
could contribute to the erosion of privacy and civil liberties. The early engineers

at Palantir were generally too young and besotted with coding to consider the
broader implications of their work. But Karp was alert to the risks.
Despite his lack of technical training—or, perhaps, because of it—Karp came
up with a novel idea for addressing worries about civil liberties: he asked the
engineers to build privacy controls into the software. Gotham was ultimately
equipped with two guardrails—users were able to access only information that
they were authorized to view, and the platform generated an audit trail that
indicated if someone tried to obtain material off-limits to them. Karp liked to
call it a "Hegelian" remedy to the challenge of balancing public safety and civil
liberties, a synthesis of seemingly unreconcilable objectives. As he told Charlie
Rose during an interview in 2009, "It is the ultimate Silicon Valley solution: you
remove the contradiction, and we all march forward."
According to Max Chafkin, who wrote an unauthorized biography of Peter
Thiel called The Contrarian, Thiel was initially skeptical of the privacy controls
—even though he was an avowed libertarian. But when I interviewed Thiel at his
office in Los Angeles in December 2019, he touted Palantir's commitment to
privacy and civil liberties. We met in an airy conference room with a wide view
of the Hollywood Hills, and Thiel used a whiteboard to illustrate the privacy
concerns that helped give rise to Palantir. With a black marker, Thiel drew a
graph. At the end of one axis he wrote "Dick Cheney," and at the other end he
wrote "ACLU." Cheney was vice president of the United States when 9/11
occurred and was known for his hawkishness. Thiel explained to me that
Cheney represented "lots of security and no privacy," while the American Civil
Liberties Union, or ACLU, was "lots of privacy but little security." After 9/11,
Thiel said, it seemed likely that the Cheney view would prevail. He drew another
axis, this one with "low-tech" at one end and "high-tech" at the other. "Low-
tech" was a catchall for crude, highly intrusive technology that might be used by
the government in its effort to combat terrorism. "High-tech," he said, was
technology that was far more effective but also less invasive. Thiel's fear was that
we would end up with a combination of low-tech and Cheney, in which case
civil liberties would probably be crushed. He and Karp wanted to build software
that could help the government keep the country safe while protecting privacy

rights. "Maybe there were still trade-offs, but they were at a very different level,"
he said.
Legislation enacted by Congress six weeks after 9/11 reflected the Cheney
view. The United and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools
Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001, otherwise known as
the USA PATRIOT Act, vastly expanded the government's power in the realm
of national security, an increased mandate that extended to electronic
surveillance conducted overseas and domestically. And the Cheney view could
also be seen in the advent a few months later of Total Information Awareness, or
TIA, John Poindexter's controversial (and quickly shelved) program that was
supposed to use sophisticated data analysis tools and predictive behavior
modeling to help the government identify likely terrorists.
In 2005, on a trip to Washington to try to drum up interest in Palantir, Karp
and Thiel met with Poindexter. Richard Perle, a prominent neoconservative
who was serving as an adviser to Palantir, set the meeting up. Poindexter
expressed interest in working with Karp and Thiel, but the feeling was not
mutual. Poindexter seemed unchastened by the blowback that TIA had received;
Thiel says that he was still pushing "harebrained ideas." Plus, he had made a lot
of enemies in Washington and might have been more of a liability for Palantir
than an asset. (According to Thiel, Poindexter wasn't angry about being
snubbed but was unhappy when he later learned that Perle had been given a
generous allotment of Palantir shares while he had received none.)
Ari Gesher, who was one of the first engineers at Palantir to work on privacy
safeguards, says that apart from the justifiable concerns about civil liberties, it
was apparent to him and others that mass surveillance was just not going to be
an effective way of combating terrorism. The needle-in-the-haystack metaphor—
the idea that you would have to go through mountains of information, most of
it extraneous, to find a potential terrorist, was not correct. It was relatively easy
to narrow searches down to potential bad actors; the real challenge was sorting
out the people who truly posed a threat—who were either likely to commit acts
of terrorism themselves or who were the masterminds behind future attacks. "It
was a needle in a stack of needles" problem, as Gesher puts it, and as such, it

required finely calibrated technology to sift through the data being collected by
the CIA and other intelligence services.
Privacy engineering at Palantir was ultimately overseen by Courtney
Bowman. He joined the company in 2010 from Google. Ordinarily, Karp was
loath to hire people from the search giant, but Bowman shared his contempt for
Google's business model. A Stanford graduate who had double-majored in
philosophy and physics, Bowman had worked in data analytics and quantitative
analysis at Google and had come to believe that the company was an advertising
firm "masquerading as a cuddly start-up." Google's technology, he says, "existed
for the purpose of selling advertising and getting people to buy things."
Even more troubling, in Bowman's view, was that Google was stoking
political division. The company was collecting massive quantities of personal
data, and like Facebook, it was sorting people according to their political views
and directing them to content that reinforced their biases and that was often
inflammatory and misleading. This was six years before the 2016 election, in
which disinformation on social media sites played such a critical role, but
Bowman already recognized the potential danger. "There were all these
externalities—the erosion of the political and social fabric, the Balkanization of
society," says Bowman. "It was clear that we were tearing at the fabric of
something that was really important, and this caused me a lot of discomfort. I
had a lot of frustration on a philosophical level—what am I contributing to?"
Adding to the frustration was the sense that most of his colleagues were either
blind or indifferent to the damage Google's algorithms were doing. "I was in this
world of really smart people who were mostly oblivious to this stuff, who were
just happy to be on the Mountain View campus drinking smoothies all day."
Bowman had a friend at Palantir who had tried for several years to interest
him in joining the company. Finally, in 2010, Bowman agreed to interview with
Palantir, and after meetings with Karp, Stephen Cohen, Joe Lonsdale, Nathan
Gettings, and others, he was offered a job. Bowman was not hired for a specific
role, but Karp soon decided that he would lead Palantir's privacy engineering
group. Bowman didn't have any obvious qualifications—he was neither an
attorney nor a software engineer. But Karp was struck by the thoughtfulness
that he brought to the issue of technology and civil liberties and saw him as

someone who could lead a spirited internal conversation and also make a
compelling case for Palantir externally. Under the wiry, intense Bowman, the
privacy engineering group would grow to include not just engineers, but also
lawyers, social scientists, and even philosophers. He also spearheaded the
creation of an outside advisory panel on privacy and civil liberties, comprised
mostly of academics. He came to serve as a kind of resident ethicist and
ombudsman, making sure that Palantir's technology and employees adhered to
legal requirements across a range of jurisdictions, as well as to the company's
own standards for data protection.
And a moral sensibility did drive a lot of the decision-making at Palantir. At
one point, a cigarette manufacturer sought Palantir's help with marketing and
distribution. As Karp and Bowman considered the offer, it became clear to them
that the company was looking to target poor, predominantly minority
communities, and they opted to pass. In 2012, the U.S. State Department gently
pressured Palantir to sell its software to Saudi Arabia. With the Arab Spring
threatening governments throughout the Middle East and North Africa,
American officials were worried about the stability of the Saudi regime and
wanted to furnish it with technology that could help stave off a potential
uprising. The deal would have been lucrative: the Saudis were willing to pay
$100 million. But Karp balked; Saudi Arabia had an abysmal human rights
record, and he did not want Palantir contributing to the abusive treatment of
protesters or dissidents.
But that spurned deal highlighted what was perhaps the greatest risk with
Palantir: that the values that supposedly guided its work wouldn't necessarily be
shared by those who were buying its software. From Palantir's inception, there
was always a question of whether clients would have the same commitment to
privacy and civil liberties. Moreover, Palantir did not police the use of its
software, nor were the controls foolproof; the client decided who within the
organization had access to data and how energetically it wished to enforce those
restrictions. The potential for abuse seemed vast. Lots of personal data would
flow through Palantir's digital pipelines, and that information could be put to
improper use. Karp didn't deny that possibility when I asked him about it.
"Every technology is dangerous, including ours," he said.

When I asked Thiel about the risk of misconduct with Palantir, he answered
by referring to the company's literary inspiration. "The Palantir device in the
Tolkien books was a very ambiguous device in some ways," he told me. "There
were a lot of people who looked into it and saw more than they should see, and
things went badly wrong when they did." But that didn't mean the Palantir itself
was flawed. "The Tolkien point I always make is that at the end of the day, it was
actually a good device that was critical to the plot of the whole story. The way it
worked was that Aragorn looked into the Palantir, and he showed Sauron the
sword with which the One Ring had been cut off Sauron's finger at the end of
the Second Age. This convinced Sauron that Aragorn had the One Ring and
caused Sauron to launch a premature attack that emptied out Mordor and
enabled the hobbits to sneak in and destroy the One Ring. The plot action was
driven by the Palantir being used for good, not for evil. This reflected Tolkien's
cosmology that something that was made by the good elves would ultimately be
used for good."
Bowman, however, couldn't rely on good elves to ensure that Palantir's
software was deployed responsibly. With customers, he tried a combination of
moral suasion and appeals to self-interest to encourage rigorous use of the
privacy controls. He said it was imperative to stress these points at the outset of
the relationship. "There is a limited window of opportunity in which you can
get organizations to contemplate self-regulation," Bowman explained. "The
argument that you can make that we've found to be reasonably compelling is
that if you self-regulate and talk about the ways that you've chosen to self-
regulate, it positions you much better to use that data responsibly and avoid a
backlash that can result in much more expansive regulation."
But Palantir's work with the investment bank JPMorganChase exposed the
danger inherent in its technology. The bank became a client in 2009, enlisting
Palantir's help for cybersecurity. Soon, though, the software was being used to
surveil the bank's own staff, a story recounted in a Bloomberg Businessweek article
in 2018, published under a misleading headline: "Palantir Knows Everything
About You." The title suggested that Palantir had access to all the data filtering
through its software—even sensitive personal information. But that wasn't true.
The only time that Palantir engineers would see that data was when they were

working directly with a client, and that was usually only temporary. The
headline reflected a misconception about Palantir's work and ended up
overshadowing the article, an excellent piece of reporting that highlighted the
risks of Palantir's software, which were alarming enough.
According to Bloomberg Businessweek, the official at JPMorganChase who
oversaw its use of Palantir's software was a former Secret Service agent. He
allegedly went rogue, ignoring internal restrictions on data use to snoop on
scores of employees, including senior figures at the bank. He became a "one-man
National Security Agency," as the magazine put it. The bank discovered his
misconduct after launching an investigation into a leak to The New York Times;
he had apparently used Palantir's technology to unearth the information given
to the Times. A former JPMorganChase cyber expert told Bloomberg
Businessweek that Palantir's software had created a dystopian atmosphere inside
the bank. "The world changed when it became clear everyone could be targeted
using Palantir," this person said. "Nefarious ideas became trivial to implement;
everyone's a suspect, so we monitored everything. It was a pretty terrible
feeling."
The episode illustrated the potential pitfalls with Palantir's software: no
matter how well-intentioned Karp and his colleagues were, it was the end users
who ultimately determined whether the software was employed ethically. And
there were some scandals involving Palantir itself that called into question just
how well-intentioned the company really was. When Palantir first began
working with the CIA, most analysts there were using i2's Analyst's Notebook.
Information sitting in Palantir's software couldn't be exported to Analyst's
Notebook, and vice versa, and the lack of interoperability was impeding
Palantir's effort to gain new users at Langley. Analyst's Notebook was also used
by others in the intelligence community, as well as by the U.S. military. If
Palantir hoped to make inroads across the national security landscape, it was
going to have to solve the interoperability problem.
In 2010, i2 sued Palantir for fraud and industrial espionage. It alleged that in
2006, Shyam Sankar, Palantir's head of business development at the time, had
established a bogus company called SRS Enterprises for the purpose of
obtaining i2's software. According to i2, Palantir used its access to that

technology to "develop new Palantir software products and capabilities designed
to enable Palantir to compete unfairly against i2." Specifically, i2 charged that
Palantir stole trade secrets in order to build tools that would allow users to
migrate their data from Analyst's Notebook to Palantir's software. The
complaint cited other acts of theft and deceit. It claimed, for instance, that
Palantir had copied a number of interface icons from i2. Palantir denied the
allegations, but a year after i2 filed suit, it agreed to settle the case for a reported
$10 million.
Other incidents also stoked concerns about Palantir's trustworthiness. In the
late 2000s, while Karp and his colleagues were focused on deepening their ties to
the intelligence community, the company did pro bono work in the hope of
raising its profile.
It gave its software to the Combating Terrorism Center at West Point to help
analysts there sift through material captured from Al Qaeda fighters in Iraq.
Similarly, the company granted the International Consortium of Investigative
Journalists free use of its technology to try to piece together the network of
individuals responsible for the 2002 kidnapping and murder in Pakistan of Wall
Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl.
In 2008, Palantir provided its software free of charge to Citizen Lab, a
research group associated with the University of Toronto's Munk School of
Global Affairs and Public Policy. Founded in 2001 by Ron Deibert, a political
scientist, Citizen Lab specialized in what he described as "counterintelligence for
civil society"—it was a watchdog that aimed to put a spotlight on digital threats
to NGOs and other entities. It first drew recognition for its study of how Russia
used cyberattacks as a precursor to its invasion of the republic of Georgia in
2008. Soon thereafter, Palantir reached out and offered Citizen Lab the use of
Palantir Gotham. It was an open-ended arrangement; there was no time limit,
nor any obligation to become a paying customer after a certain period. The
Palantirians told Deibert that he and his team could use the software however
they wished. Citizen Lab was a small unit with a limited budget, and Deibert
was happy to give Palantir's technology a try. He and his colleagues decided to
use it for their next major investigation: representatives of the Dalai Lama,
concerned that the computer systems of various Tibetan organizations had been

infiltrated, had asked Citizen Lab for help trying to determine who the
perpetrators were. Two researchers traveled to the Dalai Lama's office in
Dharamshala, India, to gather evidence. They also visited Tibetan consulates in
Europe and the United States.
They discovered that the cyber espionage directed at Tibetan interests was
part of a much larger spying network that they traced back to China. Over 1,200
computers in more than one hundred countries had been targeted. The case was
cracked when Nart Villeneuve, an analyst for Citizen Lab, found some odd
coding that appeared in multiple files that he was examining. Via a Google
search, he figured out that the malware behind GhostNet, as investigators
dubbed the espionage campaign, had originated in a group of servers on China's
Hainan Island. Deibert and his colleagues could not establish whether the
Chinese government itself was behind the attacks, but that seemed like a
reasonable assumption.
In March 2009, Citizen Lab published a fifty-three-page report detailing its
findings. The report included screenshots of several spidergrams that had been
generated using Palantir's software. But according to Deibert, Palantir's
contribution to the project was minimal. While its software helped identify
connections between some domains and IP addresses, the Citizen Lab team
would have found those links with or without Palantir. And apart from that,
says Deibert, Palantir "didn't play much of a role in the investigation." It wasn't
that the software was deficient; it was simply geared to a different kind of
challenge. Palantir's technology was for big datasets; with GhostNet, Citizen
Lab was painstakingly assessing a limited amount of data, and Palantir just
wasn't all that helpful. "It was the wrong tool for us," says Deibert.
A few months after Citizen Lab released its report, someone sent Deibert a
picture of an ad that Palantir had placed in the Washington, D.C., Metro's
Pentagon City station touting the role that it had supposedly played in solving
the GhostNet case. It was a strategic choice of location: with Palantir trying to
win business from the U.S. military, the ad was a direct pitch to Pentagon
personnel. Deibert was dismayed to discover that Palantir had "appropriated our
report for marketing purposes," as he puts it. And it wasn't just that the
company was claiming credit that it didn't deserve; Deibert believed that he and

his colleagues had been played. "We thought, 'So that's how it works,' " Deibert
says. "We felt used, for sure." (During the interview with Charlie Rose, Karp
cited Palantir's work on the Dalai Lama case.)
In 2011, at the same time that it was tied up in litigation with i2, Palantir
became embroiled in a bigger scandal. In February of that year, the hacktivist
group known as Anonymous released thousands of emails from a California-
based company called HBGary Federal, which specialized in corporate
intelligence. Anonymous had obtained the emails after an HBGary Federal
executive claimed that he would publicly unmask members of the group. The
messages implicated Palantir in a plot to wage a disinformation campaign on
behalf of Bank of America. The bank, fearing that it would be targeted by
WikiLeaks, the shadowy online organization that published classified U.S.
military documents as well as internal communications from governments and
corporations, had enlisted the help of the law firm Hunton & Williams to
launch a preemptive strike. The law firm invited HBGary Federal to develop a
proposed plan of action. HBGary Federal recruited Palantir and another
software company, Berico Technologies, to assist in this effort.
The emails revealed an elaborate scheme to undermine the credibility of
WikiLeaks. One idea was to submit falsified information to WikiLeaks, which
would then be revealed as fake to damage the group's credibility. Another was to
target WikiLeaks supporters, notably the lawyer and activist Glenn Greenwald.
The emails showed that HBGary Federal, Palantir, and Berico Technologies,
whose collaborative efforts were referred to internally as Team Themis, were also
involved in a plot against critics of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. The
Chamber allegedly wanted to dig up information that could be used to discredit
its detractors—by finding evidence, for instance, that they were being financed
by unions. Here, too, one solution proposed by Team Themis was to use fake
documents.
When Anonymous announced that it had the HBGary Federal emails,
Palantir quickly sought to distance itself from the controversy. The company
released a statement saying that it "never has and never will condone the sort of
activities that HBGary recommended" and that Palantir had played no part in
conceiving the planned subterfuge. However, the emails suggested otherwise.

For instance, one Palantir employee who was a member of Team Themis
expressed enthusiasm for the idea of trying to damage Greenwald's credibility.
Palantir suspended that employee, and Karp ultimately issued a statement
expressing regret for Palantir's role in the scandal. "We do not provide—nor do
we have any plans to develop—cyber offensive capabilities," he wrote.
"Personally and on behalf of the entire company, I want to publicly apologize to
progressive organizations in general, and Mr. Greenwald in particular, for any
involvement that we may have had in these matters." Karp later told me that he
had no knowledge of the plots to target WikiLeaks and the Chamber's critics,
and he attributed Palantir's involvement to "growing pains."
Two years after that scandal, in May 2013, Greenwald was at the center of
one of the biggest intelligence leaks of the postwar era. He helped the
whistleblower Edward Snowden disseminate thousands of classified documents
that he had illegally taken from the National Security Agency, or NSA. The
purloined files showed that the NSA had conducted mass surveillance programs
that monitored the phone calls and electronic communications of Americans
and other private citizens around the world. As the investigative reporter Shane
Harris noted at the time, it was the realization of John Poindexter's TIA
program, but with two important differences. Poindexter had wanted to
anonymize all personal information and to include an audit trail to guard against
potential abuses, but the NSA spurned both recommendations.
One of the NSA surveillance programs, called PRISM, allowed the agency to
pull data from the servers of Google, Apple, Yahoo!, and other major tech firms.
The companies were adamant that they did not give the government access to
their servers, which raised an obvious question: If they weren't willingly sharing
that data, how did the NSA obtain it? As it happened, Palantir had a tool called
Prism, and not surprisingly, this prompted speculation that Palantir had
somehow helped the NSA hack the databases of its fellow tech companies.
Palantir denied that its Prism program had anything to do with the NSA's
spying. In a statement it released in early June 2013, the company said that Prism
was a data integration tool that it had developed for hedge funds and other
financial institutions.

But what Palantir did not acknowledge at the time was that it had a
relationship with the NSA. While the NSA already had its own data
visualization software, a system called Renoir, it had used Gotham on a trial
basis. A former NSA analyst said Renoir was a flop—"probably the worst piece
of software I've ever used in my life," as he put it. He explained the difficulties he
encountered with Renoir: "I would run twelve different searches in twelve
different databases, and then I would export all of the search results into CSV
files. And then I pull up Excel and run CONCAT functions to connect all of
the spreadsheets together, and then I would run an import into Renoir. But
Renoir would break constantly because I think its max was like ten thousand
rows, but in practice, based on how many columns there were, the memory
might overload at two thousand rows, but you didn't know until you started it.
So you'd kick it off, it would run for two hours, and then it would crash. You
would lose all your work, and you'd have to reboot and start again. And I would
do this for a whole day every week on every targeting package that I was
working." He said that Palantir's software "wasn't magical" but didn't crash or
require the bootstrapping that Renoir did. However, his request to switch to
Palantir was denied; he was told that if his needs were not being satisfied by the
software that was already available to him, he could try to have something new
built in-house.
Apart from the statement that it released regarding PRISM, Palantir never
publicly commented on its work with the NSA. In a town hall meeting with
Palantir employees in 2015—a recording of which was obtained by BuzzFeed—
Karp said that the NSA had ended its relationship with Palantir but didn't
elaborate. He and Thiel both suggested to me that the decision was made by
senior officials who rejected Palantir in part because the software automatically
produced audit logs, and they did not want to leave a trail of evidence that might
indicate illegal conduct. The former NSA analyst believed that there was a
simpler explanation: the NSA had sunk a lot of money into Renoir and just
didn't want to own up to the fact that it was an expensive bust. "Don't attribute
to malice things that can be much more easily explained as incompetence," he
said. Regardless, it was possible that Palantir's software had contributed in some

way to the NSA's dragnet—and the spy agency was under no obligation to let
Palantir know that.
Palantir's foray into domestic law enforcement was an extension of its
counterterrorism work. In 2007, the New York City Police Department's
intelligence unit began a pilot program using Palantir's software. Before 9/11,
the intelligence division had primarily focused on crime syndicates and
narcotics. But its mandate changed after the terrorist attacks. The city tapped
David Cohen, a CIA veteran who had served as the agency's deputy director of
operations, to run the unit, and with the city's blessing, he turned it into a full-
fledged intelligence service employing some one thousand officers and analysts.
Several dozen members of the team were posted overseas, in cities including Tel
Aviv, Amman, Abu Dhabi, Singapore, London, and Paris. "The rationale for the
N.Y.P.D.'s transformation after September 11th had two distinct facets," The
New Yorker's William Finnegan wrote in 2005. "On the one hand, expanding its
mission to include terrorism prevention made obvious sense. On the other, there
was a strong feeling that federal agencies had let down New York City, and that
the city should no longer count on the Feds for its protection." Finnegan noted
that the NYPD was encroaching on areas normally reserved for the FBI and the
CIA but that the federal agencies had "silently acknowledged New York's right
to take extraordinary defensive measures."
Cohen became familiar with Palantir while he was still with the CIA, and he
decided that the company's software could be of help to the intelligence unit. In
what was becoming a familiar refrain, there was internal resistance. "For the
average cops, it was just too complicated," says Brian Schimpf, one of the first
forward-deployed engineers assigned to the NYPD. "They'd be like, 'I just need
to look up license plates, bro; I don't need to be doing these crazy analytical
processes.' " IBM's technology was the de facto incumbent at the NYPD, which
also made it hard to convert people. Another stumbling block was price: Palantir
was expensive, and while the NYPD had an ample budget, not everyone thought
it was worth the investment. But the software caught on with some analysts, and

over time, what began as a counterterrorism deployment moved into other areas,
such as gang violence.
This mission creep was something that privacy advocates and civil libertarians
anticipated. Their foremost worry, in the aftermath of 9/11, was that innocent
people would be ensnared as the government turned to mass surveillance to
prevent future attacks, and the NSA scandal proved that these concerns were
warranted. But another fear was that tools and tactics used to prosecute the war
on terrorism would eventually be turned on Americans themselves. The
increased militarization of police departments showed that "defending the
homeland" had indeed morphed into something more than just an effort to
thwart jihadis. Likewise, police departments also began to use advanced
surveillance technology. Andrew Guthrie Ferguson, a professor of law at George
Washington University who has written extensively about policing and
technology, says that capabilities that had been developed to meet the terrorism
threat were now "being redirected on the domestic population."
Palantir was part of this trend. In addition to its work with the NYPD, it
provided its software to the Cook County Sheriff's Office, the Virginia State
Police, and the New Orleans Police Department (a relationship that was part of a
broader engagement with the city and that would dissolve in controversy).
However, it attracted much of its police business in its own backyard, California.
The Long Beach and Burbank Police Departments used Palantir, as did sheriff
departments in Los Angeles and Sacramento counties. The company's
technology was also used by several Fusion Centers in California—these were
regional intelligence bureaus established after 9/11 to foster closer collaboration
between federal agencies and state and local law enforcement. The focus was on
countering terrorism and other criminal activities.
But Palantir's most extensive and longest-lasting law enforcement contract
was with the Los Angeles Police Department. It was a relationship that began in
2009. The LAPD was looking for software that could improve situational
awareness for officers in the field—that could allow them to quickly access
information about, say, a suspect or about previous criminal activity on a
particular street. Palantir's technology soon became a general investigative tool
for the LAPD. The department also started using Palantir for a crime-prevention

initiative called LASER. The goal was to identify "hot spots"—streets and
neighborhoods that experienced a lot of gun violence and other crimes. The
police would then put more patrols in those places. As part of the stepped-up
policing, officers would submit information about people they had stopped in
high-crime districts to a Chronic Offenders Bulletin, which flagged individuals
whom the LAPD thought were likely to be repeat offenders.
This was predictive policing, a controversial practice in which quantitative
analysis is used to pinpoint areas prone to crime and individuals who are likely
to commit or fall victim to crimes. To critics, predictive policing is something
straight out of the Tom Cruise thriller Minority Report, in which psychics
identify murderers before they kill, but even more insidious. They believe that
data-driven policing reinforces biases that have long plagued America's criminal
justice system and inevitably leads to racial profiling.
Karp was unmoved by that argument. In his judgment, crime was crime, and
if it could be prevented or reduced through the use of data, that was a net plus
for society. Blacks and Latinos, no less than whites, wanted to live in safe
communities. And for Karp, the same logic that guided Palantir's
counterterrorism work applied to its efforts in law enforcement—people needed
to feel safe in their homes and on their streets, and if they didn't, they would
embrace hard-line politicians who would have no qualms about trampling on
civil liberties to give the public the security it demanded. Palantir's software, at
least as Karp saw it, was a mechanism for delivering that security without
sacrificing privacy and other personal freedoms.
However, community activists in Los Angeles took a different view of
Palantir and the kind of police work that the company was enabling. An
organization called the Stop LAPD Spying Coalition organized protests and also
published studies highlighting what it claimed was algorithmic-driven
harassment of predominantly black and Latino neighborhoods and of people of
color. LASER, it said, amounted to a "racist feedback loop." In the face of
criticism, the LAPD grew increasingly sensitive about its predictive policing
efforts and its ties to Palantir. In 2019, when I was working on my story about
Palantir for The New York Times Magazine, I tried to meet with LAPD officials
to talk about Palantir, but they declined.

Six years earlier, however, a Princeton doctoral candidate named Sarah
Brayne, who was researching the use of new technologies by police departments,
was given remarkable access to the LAPD. Over the course of many months,
Brayne went on ride-alongs in patrol cars and helicopters, interviewed dozens of
officers, and saw up close how Palantir's technology was being employed. She
found that it was used extensively—more than one thousand LAPD employees
had access to the software—and was taking in and merging a wide range of data,
from phone numbers to field interview cards (filed by police every time they
made a stop) to images culled from automatic license plate readers, or ALPRs.
Through Palantir, the LAPD could also tap into databases of police departments
in other jurisdictions, as well as those of the California state police. In addition,
they could pull up material that was completely unrelated to criminal justice—
social media posts, foreclosure notices, utility bills.
Via Palantir, the LAPD could obtain a trove of personal information. Not
only that: through the network analysis that the software performed, the police
could identify a person of interest's family members, friends, colleagues,
associates, and other relations, putting all of them in the LAPD's purview. It was
a virtual dragnet, a point made clear by one detective who spoke to Brayne.
"Let's say I have something going on with the medical marijuana clinics where
they're getting robbed," he said. "I can put in an alert to Palantir that says
anything that has to do with medical marijuana plus robbery plus male, black,
six foot." He readily acknowledged that these searches could just be fishing
expeditions and even used a fishing metaphor. "I like throwing the net out there,
you know?" he said.
Brayne's research showed the potential for abuse. It was easy, for instance, to
conjure nightmare scenarios involving ALPR data. A detective could discover
that a reluctant witness was having an affair and use that information to coerce
his testimony. There was also the risk of misconduct outside the line of duty—
an unscrupulous analyst could conceivably use Palantir's software to keep tabs
on his ex-wife's comings and goings. Beyond that, millions of innocent people
were unknowingly being pulled "into the system" simply by driving their cars.
When I spoke to Brayne, she told me that what most troubled her about the
LAPD's work with Palantir was the opaqueness. "Digital surveillance is

invisible," she said. "How are you supposed to hold an institution accountable
when you don't know what they are doing?"
OceanofPDF.com

FIVE
THE COMMERCIAL BREAK
In 2012, journalist Mark Bowden published a book about the U.S. military raid
that killed Osama bin Laden. It was titled The Finish and included a reference to
Palantir. Bowden wrote, "The hunt for bin Laden and others drew on an
unfathomably rich database, accessible to anyone in the world with the proper
security clearance, whether a Marine officer at an outpost in Afghanistan or a
team of analysts working in Langley. Sifting through it required software capable
of ranging deep and fast and with keen discernment—a problem the
government itself proved less effective at solving than were teams of young
software engineers in Silicon Valley. A start-up called Palantir, for instance, came
up with a program that elegantly accomplished what TIA [Total Information
Awareness] had set out to do. Founded... by Alex Karp and Peter Thiel—the
latter the billionaire cocreator of PayPal and an early Facebook investor—
Palantir developed a product that actually deserves the popular designation
Killer App."
Bowden, who was best known for the book Black Hawk Down, did not say
that Palantir had contributed to the daring operation that resulted in bin
Laden's death the year before; he merely cited Palantir as a company producing
the kind of technology that could help America prosecute the war on terrorism.
But some readers inferred that the company's software had been used to track
down the Al Qaeda leader. Soon after The Finish was released, Palantir was being
hailed as the Silicon Valley start-up that helped take out the terrorist mastermind
responsible for 9/11.
When bin Laden was killed, there were murmurings in Palantir's Palo Alto
office that the company had somehow been involved. It was not unreasonable
conjecture: the CIA used Palantir's software, as did the United States Special
Operations Command, or SOCOM, which oversaw the units that conducted

the assault on bin Laden's compound in Pakistan. But neither the military nor
the CIA has ever commented publicly. (The son of Admiral William McRaven,
who was in charge of the raid, ended up working at Palantir, but that didn't
prove anything.) In 2020, I spoke—separately—to two former CIA analysts who
had been part of the hunt for bin Laden, and both insisted that Palantir had
played no part in their work.
But when Bowden's book was published, Karp and Palantir were handed a
PR bonanza. Karp became very adept at answering questions about Palantir's
possible role in a cryptic way that was meant to suggest that it was true. In 2019,
during one of my interviews with him for The New York Times Magazine, I
asked about the bin Laden claim. "People say that," he replied. "I'm very proud
of what people think." Several years later, I raised the topic again and pressed
Karp for proof. He conceded that he had no way of knowing whether Palantir's
technology was used but had come to believe that it had been. By that point,
though, the story was part of Palantir lore.
Karp and his colleagues naturally hoped that the bin Laden rumors would
generate new business, not only in the area of national security and defense but
also in the commercial sphere, where Palantir was having difficulty gaining
traction. What flag-waving company wouldn't want the same technology that
had snagged America's most-hated enemy? Melody Hildebrandt, a forward-
deployed engineer, says that she and her colleagues were not shy about
mentioning the bin Laden link to potential clients. "We dropped it in every
meeting, though sometimes they brought it up themselves," she recalls.
However, Palantir's sudden cachet didn't yield much in the way of new
corporate business. For people in government, Palantir's software was a
revelation—even in its earliest iterations, Gotham was usually better than what
was otherwise available to them. When it came to technology, the government
was a notoriously slow adopter, and much of its hardware and software was, by
Silicon Valley standards, archaic. In the private sector, by contrast, the
technology was more current, and Palantir's software didn't have the same
novelty or wow factor. Moreover, companies tended to believe that they could
meet most if not all of their technology needs through their own IT

departments. But a bigger problem for Palantir was that it didn't yet have a
product that could help corporate users on a sustained basis.
The company's first push into the commercial space was with a software
platform tailored to financial institutions. Joe Lonsdale oversaw the project,
which started in 2006. At the time, he was still employed by Clarium Capital,
and he thought the pattern-recognition technology that Palantir was developing
could be of value to people who traded stocks and bonds for a living. In-Q-Tel's
Gilman Louie had foreseen that possibility when he seeded Palantir; it was with
an eye toward developing a business line on Wall Street that he had the company
assigned to the CIA's terrorism finance unit.
However, at a time when it still wasn't clear that Gotham was even going to
work, some at the company thought it was ill-advised to divert resources and
attention to a second, completely unrelated project. It ran counter to the
prevailing wisdom about tech start-ups: that the likeliest path to success was a
laser-like focus on one product. You didn't spread your bets: you staked it all on
one big thing. But Palantir was not likely to survive on government contracts
alone, and given that it didn't have any government contracts in 2006, it needed
to cultivate a commercial business. Besides, Karp was predisposed to defying
conventional wisdom; he was a contrarian by nature, inclined to go left if
everyone else was going right.
Lonsdale and the team that he assembled—they called themselves the
Hedgehogs—had an ambitious goal: they wanted to build a product that could
rival and supplant the Bloomberg terminal. Named after its creator, former New
York City Mayor Mike Bloomberg, the Bloomberg was a staple of trading desks
around the world, essentially functioning as a one-stop shop for financial
institutions—among its key features, it provided real-time data for global
markets, served as a platform for electronic trading, and allowed users to message
one another directly. The working name for the alternative that Palantirians
hoped to produce was the Thiel Tool. It was a name chosen mainly as a way to
get Thiel interested in the project; Lonsdale and his colleagues thought that his
buy-in would be crucial to their prospects.
However, it was soon apparent that trying to take on Bloomberg was a bad
idea—there was no way that Palantir, with its limited resources, was going to be

able to challenge such an entrenched incumbent. So the Thiel Tool was
abandoned in favor of something more modest: software that could collate
market data in order to identify arbitrage opportunities and that could also help
traders price alternative or distressed assets. But even as the project was scaled
back, the finance team grew in size—at its peak, it had around one hundred
employees—and attracted some notable talent, including Garry Tan, Kevin
Simler, and Andy Aymeloglu. And the Hedgehogs had one advantage when it
came to recruiting: the work didn't require government security clearance.
Unless they were naturalized citizens, foreign-born engineers couldn't be hired
for Gotham, so they were instead steered to the finance side.
But the Palantirians working on the investment software suffered from a
sense of inferiority relative to their Gotham colleagues. "They were saving the
world while we were building something to help rich people get richer," says one
former engineer. He and others also felt that Karp was not as committed to the
finance project as they might have hoped. He developed a deep affection for
some of the people involved with it but showed little interest in what they were
actually building, and while the engineers appreciated his hands-off approach,
they found his detachment unsettling—they took it as an indication that
Gotham mattered more to him (and it did).
Physical separation reinforced the status anxiety they felt. As Palantir
continued to hire new employees, there wasn't sufficient space in the office to
accommodate both teams. Fortunately, there was a solution right outside the
front door. Palantir had relocated to Stanford Research Park, a complex that was
jointly owned by Stanford University and the City of Palo Alto and that had
been home to a number of notable tech companies. The development, located in
a slightly remote part of town, was a fifteen-minute walk to the university and to
the center of Palo Alto. Karp and his colleagues didn't mind being somewhat
out of sight: they were building software for the intelligence community and
thought it best to be working sub rosa. In the courtyard of the complex, there
was a small, eight-sided building known, appropriately, as the Octagon, and the
finance crew moved there from the main office. It gave them the added room
they needed, but they now felt even more alienated from the rest of the

company. "We called ourselves the redheaded unwanted stepchild," says the
former engineer.
Even though the Hedgehogs felt like outcasts, the software platform that they
built, called Metropolis, turned out to be quite good. However, timing had
become an issue: the software was ready to go in 2008, but by then, the global
financial crisis had started, an inopportune moment to be flogging a new
product to banks and hedge funds. It didn't help that Palantir was expensive.
Karp set pricing strategy, and his edict was that Palantir would compete on
quality, not price. In his view, Palantir made the best data analytics software and
was entitled to charge accordingly. But Metropolis was an unproven new entrant
in what was already a competitive market, and its cost deterred some potential
customers. However, Palantir did land a few notable clients. Bridgewater
Associates, the secretive Connecticut-based hedge fund, bought Metropolis, as
did Thomson Reuters, the financial data provider and news service. Credit
Suisse signed on for help tracking insider trading and money laundering.
JPMorganChase also became a customer. Its relationship with Palantir began
in 2009. Bank executives had learned that the New York City Police Department
had recently hired Palantir to assist with counterterrorism; intrigued, they
reached out seeking help in combating fraudsters who were trying to hack
customer accounts and ATMs. Not long thereafter, the bank asked for Palantir's
assistance with another problem: around 10 percent of the mortgages it had
issued were in default at that time, a hangover from the Great Recession. But to
dispose of those toxic assets, the bank had to be able to accurately value them,
which required pulling in and analyzing huge data streams. For this task, Palantir
supplied the bank with Metropolis. As the relationship with JPMorganChase
deepened, Palantir opened a New York office—initially, it was an apartment in
Tribeca that Lonsdale had rented—and a number of forward-deployed engineers
essentially worked full-time at the bank's headquarters.
Although Palantir was not a cybersecurity firm, helping companies defend
themselves against online fraud became a gateway into the corporate sector.
Karp would be brought in to close deals, and by all accounts, he excelled at it. He
seemed to perform the same mind tricks on fellow CEOs that he performed on
his Palantir colleagues—he was offbeat and entertaining and very convincing

without ever lapsing into sales jargon. Melody Hildebrandt sat in on a number
of meetings in which Karp clinched contracts with new Palantir customers. "It
was amazing to watch," Hildebrandt recalls. "We'd be there supposedly to talk
about data and how to get it integrated, and he'd get on a whiteboard and just
draw these circles and smiley faces, and people would be like, 'Yes.' I'd be
thinking, What is happening here? But people were just in awe."
But while Karp was masterful at sealing deals, Palantir often struggled to keep
those deals. In 2014, Home Depot enlisted Palantir's help after its payments
systems were hacked and more than fifty million credit card numbers were
stolen. Soon, the company was paying Palantir $5 million per year to use its
software across a range of activities. But Home Depot ended the relationship in
2017. According to William Alden, a reporter for BuzzFeed, it dropped Palantir
mostly on account of cost—it didn't think it was getting enough benefit from
the technology to justify the relatively high price, and Home Depot's own IT
department had come to believe that it could do the same job for less money. But
some Home Depot executives had also become uncomfortable with how the
Palantir team operated. They were put off by its efforts to solicit business from
different parts of the company. This was standard practice for Palantir—in the
absence of a sales team, the forward-deployed engineers served as salespeople. As
one former employee told Alden, "They try to find a specific problem the
customer is trying to solve, and use that as a fishing expedition to leverage that
into a bigger scope of work." There was nothing inherently shady about this—it
was a smart strategy—but it did seem as if the Palantirians were especially
aggressive with Home Depot—attending a company retreat, for instance.
Price and attitude became consistent complaints. In 2014, Hershey began
using Palantir's software to help it analyze consumer trends at a granular level; it
wanted to know not just how its products were faring in different markets, but
the breakdown in sales between small grocery stores and supermarkets. Hershey
was also deploying Palantir to try to derive greater insight into its supplier
network—to learn more, for instance, about cacao-farming productivity in West
Africa. But Hershey and Palantir also had greater ambitions: they wanted to
establish a consortium of major consumer product companies that would use
Palantir's software to pool and analyze data in order to make all their businesses

more efficient. Karp cast the partnership in lofty terms, suggesting that it had the
potential to transform the global economy. "I think capitalism is flawed," he told
Fortune magazine. "We focus on big problems and finding the best partners to
solve those problems."
Several companies signed on, including Coca-Cola and Kimberly-Clark, the
paper goods manufacturer. Both agreed to do pilot projects with Palantir, with
an eye to signing longer-term contracts. But the relationships quickly foundered.
Kimberly-Clark, which was paying Palantir around $1 million per month,
decided it could develop its own analytic tools for a fraction of that price. Cost
was also an issue for Coca-Cola, but the company had additional complaints.
According to internal Palantir documents that were obtained by BuzzFeed,
Coca-Cola executives found it hard to work with the Palantirians, who were
quite young and too casual for their taste. In addition, they felt that Palantir
didn't have enough understanding of the soft drinks market to make it an
effective partner.
All these concerns—cost, culture clashes, lack of industry-specific knowledge
—were arguably just teething pains, the kinds of problems that were to be
expected for a tech start-up trying to win business from Fortune 500 companies.
The initial thrust into the commercial market did yield some successes, and the
setbacks were valuable learning experiences—Palantir was being paid a lot of
money to figure out what worked and what didn't. "It was a really significant
applied R&D exercise," says Ted Mabrey, who now heads Palantir's commercial
business. And in Palantir's defense, he says that while companies were eager to
embrace Big Data, they sometimes had unrealistic expectations. "There was this
idea that Big Data equals magic, in the same way that generative AI is now seen
as magic," Mabrey recalls. "A lot of customers were just looking for buttons to
make their problems go away—basically, give me the 'find terrorist' button."
Mark Elliot, who led the forward-deployed engineering team, says it was a
"discovery phase," and what he and his colleagues discovered was that, as
challenging as the data integration problems were at government agencies, they
were even more acute on the commercial side. Palantir had one client, a
multinational insurer, whose biggest customer was an international restaurant
chain. It was a lucrative relationship, but astonishingly, the insurer had no idea if

it was actually profitable. "They had a hundred different databases," Elliot
recalls. "They mapped the customer's name a hundred different ways. The
contracts were in many different languages. Their business was fine, they were
getting paid. They just didn't know if they were making a profit on the
relationship. And we were thinking, Man, how can that be? " It was clear to him
and others that even major corporations, despite all the data and resources that
they had at their disposal, sometimes lacked even the most basic information
about their own businesses.
The frustration for Elliot and his colleagues was that Palantir didn't have
software that could solve that problem. Neither alone nor in combination were
Gotham and Metropolis capable of meeting the day-to-day operational needs of
corporations. Gotham was a digital detective board, facilitating investigative
workflows; it was useful for cybersecurity, but it was not software for the entire
enterprise. Metropolis was even more limited in scope; it was a niche product,
tailored to the financial industry. And as Mabrey puts it, the two platforms
could be "tortured" only so much to make them useful for commercial clients.
To the forward-deployed engineers, the work felt like a prolonged exercise in
bootstrapping—they were constantly having to build out new functions because
they would encounter problems that couldn't be solved using the tools available
in Gotham or Metropolis. There was value in that, and the engineers took
satisfaction in devising those fixes. Too often, though, they were spending their
days working around the limitations of Gotham and Metropolis and fashioning
solutions for individual clients. "So much of the product work was just
customized, which is fine, but that just helps you with one customer," recalls a
former employee. It was this bespoke service that led some analysts to suggest
that Palantir was a consulting firm as much as it was a tech company, and to
question whether it could ever scale its business.
The way that Palantir operated—sending teams of software engineers all over
the world, for projects that often took months—was also expensive. Karp had
been promising a turn to profitability since the late 2000s, but by the mid-2010s,
Palantir was nowhere near achieving that goal. True, it was a relatively young
company and was still developing its products and reinvesting for growth. It
took Amazon seven years to book its first quarterly profit, and it was an online

retailer, not a company trying to sell esoteric software to the government. Even
so, Palantir was hemorrhaging money; as late as 2018, it had a net loss of almost
$600 million.
Oddly, despite its financial struggles, Palantir was suddenly finding it much
easier to raise money. A decade after the company was shunned by the venture
capital community, private investors were now eager to back it. Rupert
Murdoch was one of them. The change in sentiment was driven in large part by
recognition that the Big Data revolution was real. No doubt, the bin Laden story
was an added selling point with some investors, giving Palantir a patriotic sheen
or an appealing edginess. After a successful fundraising round in 2015, Palantir
was valued at around $20 billion, which made it one of Silicon Valley's biggest
so-called unicorns (companies with a valuation in excess of $1 billion).
The gap between Palantir's lofty valuation and its fundamentals was
significant, and Thiel, who was exasperated by the slow growth of the business,
saw it as a possible opportunity. In 2016, his friend Michael Ovitz, the famed
Hollywood agent, tried to broker the sale of Palantir to Oracle. Thiel took a
meeting with Oracle cofounder Larry Ellison to talk about the idea. It never
went beyond that—Thiel and Ellison agreed that the two companies were not a
great match. But Thiel told me later that Palantir was wildly overvalued at that
time, and had Oracle been willing to pay $20 billion, the deal would have been a
no-brainer. "We would have taken it," Thiel said. When he sat down with
Ellison, he asked, "Has Oracle ever bought a company for anything like our price
that was losing money?" The answer was no, and that was the end of the
negotiation, such as it was.
As Palantir entered its second decade, there was also growing dissatisfaction
inside the company. Some employees were frustrated by the ad hoc way in which
the business operated—yes, Palantir had a mission, yet it often seemed to lack a
sense of direction. That perception was amplified by the absence of an
organizational structure, which made it hard to discern and pursue career paths.
But while Palantir didn't have a formal hierarchy, a shadow one had emerged,
which added to the unhappiness. According to one former employee, there was
an in-crowd that received preferential treatment—more access to high-level
conversations, more generous equity grants. The lack of transparency when it

came to compensation was also a source of irritation for employees. Amid the
internal discontent, Palantir found itself accused of racially biased hiring
practices: in 2016, it was sued by the Justice Department for allegedly
discriminating against job applicants of Asian descent. Palantir disputed the
claim but ultimately paid $1.7 million to settle the case.
The company couldn't make its problems in the commercial market go away
quite so easily. By the mid-2010s, it was obvious to many Palantirians that their
work in the corporate sector was being handcuffed by the inadequacies of
Gotham and Metropolis. That was Mark Elliot's view. He says the two software
platforms were not going to make Palantir competitive in that space. As he puts
it, "They weren't going to generate enough value for organizations that they'd
want to pay us enough to make it worthwhile for us." While on a deployment, it
occurred to Elliot that some of the data integration and analytical tools that
Palantir had built to compensate for the shortcomings of Gotham and
Metropolis could serve as the foundation for an entirely new system.
Elliot's insight touched off an intense debate within the company. No one
disputed that Gotham and Metropolis were too limited to carry the corporate
business forward. But there were pockets of resistance to change. One was the
finance team, which recognized that if the company developed a commercial
product with broader applications, Metropolis would almost certainly be taken
off the market, which was obviously not an outcome that they wanted. Others,
like Mabrey, were dubious about making such a dramatic shift because, even
with the deficiencies of Gotham and Metropolis, Palantir's commercial side was
booking sales. "My goal was to win, not to be pristine about how I won," says
Mabrey.
But Karp concluded that a new product was needed. He had soured on
Metropolis, and not just because of its limitations: he felt that it was too
narrowly focused, and it catered to a clientele—hedge funds and other
professional investors—that he wasn't really interested in serving. "We didn't get
into this to build things that would make rich guys richer," he says, echoing the
comment of the former Palantir employee. Still, terminating Metropolis was
painful; most of the key figures in the finance group left Palantir as a result of

Karp's decision. "It was like amputating your hand," says Shyam Sankar. "These
people were legitimate geniuses and engineering titans."
Mark Elliot and several colleagues developed the new software in about eight
weeks. It was called Foundry, and it quickly caught on with clients. BP, which
hired Palantir to assist it with well management following the Deepwater
Horizon disaster, began utilizing Foundry as soon as it was available, and it
eventually became the company's operational software, used by thousands of
employees around the world. Something similar happened with Airbus. In 2016,
Airbus brought in Palantir to help solve production problems with a new
commercial jet, the A350.
The A350 was being assembled by hundreds of workers spread across eight
plants and four countries, and the plane consisted of around five million
components. In other words, there was much that could go wrong. Even
something as seemingly trivial as a shipment of defective screws could have a
ripple effect. Faulty parts, missing parts, communications lapses—all these could
cause bottlenecks. But with an operation of that scale, pinpointing exactly where
delays were occurring was not easy. It stood to reason that the answer could be
found in the profusion of data being generated on the assembly line, which was
why Airbus turned to Palantir. The company dispatched five software engineers
to Airbus's headquarters in Toulouse, France. They merged twenty-five data
silos and integrated some four hundred datasets, and the results were almost
immediate. Before, it took Airbus an average of twenty-four days to fix
production glitches. After the company began using Palantir's software, it cut
the turnaround time by a week, which translated into millions of dollars in
savings.
From that initial engagement, a more extensive relationship evolved. Palantir
opened an office in Toulouse, and in time, more than forty thousand Airbus
employees were using Foundry. It ended up wiring the entire Airbus ecosystem:
through a joint venture between Airbus and Palantir called Skywise, around 120
airlines worldwide began funneling data from their Airbus jets into Foundry.
This information was used for everything from improving on-time performance
to preventive maintenance. As with BP, Foundry became Airbus's operational
software. "It had unique capability," said Marc Fontaine, who oversaw digital

operations for Airbus at the time. He added that the company looked at
alternatives to Palantir but had found nothing remotely equivalent. His boss,
Airbus CEO Tom Enders, was even more enthusiastic; he said that bringing in
Palantir was "one of the best decisions of my career."
With Foundry, Palantir finally had a product that could broaden its appeal to
corporate users. However, there was no software solution to the challenge it was
facing in trying to build its defense business. That would require an audacious
lawsuit against the Army, litigation that exposed deep flaws in the Pentagon's
procurement process and that ultimately enabled Palantir to become a major
military contractor itself.
OceanofPDF.com

SIX
THE WAR AGAINST THE ARMY
In June 2024, an organization called Business Executives for National Security
honored Karp at a dinner in Washington, D.C. He was one of two recipients
that night of the group's annual Eisenhower Award, given to public servants and
private citizens who help advance America's interests; the other honoree was
U.S. Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo. Karp was suffering from a cold and
wasn't his usual animated self. But he also seemed humbled to be receiving an
award named for President Dwight Eisenhower, especially as the United States
and its allies had just marked the eightieth anniversary of D-Day, the invasion of
Normandy that he led. Karp told the audience, gathered in a ballroom of the
Ritz-Carlton Hotel, that he didn't feel entirely worthy of the award. "I'm a
civilian and have never served in the military and have not put myself in harm's
way," he said. He talked about Eisenhower's life, then turned his attention to the
soldiers who had been under his command. "Why did young men from Iowa
and Kansas risk their lives knowing that they could die to free Europe and to free
people like me?" Karp asked. He tried to continue, but his voice cracked. "So
moving," he said. The audience, touched by his sentiments, erupted in applause.
Seeing him choke up was a first for most of his colleagues.
His comments that night expressed gratitude, but they also highlighted his
respect for the military, which he saw as a repository of American strength and
decency. Karp liked to point out that it had been at the forefront of
desegregation, and he regarded it as the ultimate guarantor of the American-led
international order. True, the Pentagon was a Palantir customer, and he had an
incentive to lavish praise on the military. But he really did view it as a force for
good. He had grown up with a different perspective. His parents, like many
people of their generation, had protested against the Vietnam War and were
generally opposed to the projection of American military power. At Haverford,

Quaker pacificism remained an animating force on campus, even though the
college was a nonsectarian institution by the time Karp arrived there. His speech
in Washington that evening underscored the distance that he had traveled from
Mount Airy as well as from our alma mater.
But if Karp's reverence for the military was surprising in light of his
upbringing, it might also have seemed surprising for another reason: winning
business from the Pentagon was the hardest fight that Palantir ever waged. It
took years to resolve and was a particularly lurid tale of Washington bureaucratic
scheming, made all the more scandalous by the fact that the United States was
engaged in two wars at the time and that many soldiers had been killed or injured
owing in part to the inadequate technology at their disposal. Palantir ended up
suing the Army over its refusal to allow the company to bid on a contract for a
new battlefield intelligence system, the final twist in a saga that cost Palantir
millions of dollars in lobbying and legal fees and that drew the involvement of
senior military figures and some of Congress's most influential voices, among
them Senator John McCain. The skirmish created ill will in the Pentagon that
lingered long after the dispute was resolved.
When Karp and his cofounders started Palantir, they knew that working with
the military was high on their list of aspirations. As if declaring that ambition,
they salted Palantir's culture with military lingo. Forward-deployed was a term
that had its roots in warfighting. Internally, Palantir referred to forward-
deployed engineers as deltas, after one of the military's most elite special
operations units. Palantir came into being at a time when the tech industry had
little interest in collaborating with the Pentagon, and with its defiantly casual
dress codes, enthusiasm for recreational drugs, and do-no-evil pretensions,
Silicon Valley seemed a world removed from the military and its warrior ethos.
In this way, too, the Palantirians were outliers. But they were also throwbacks,
because in many ways America's tech sector owed its existence to the military.
What had been a sleepy, pastoral corner of Northern California transformed
in the 1950s and '60s into the world's most fertile technology hub, mainly as an
outgrowth of the Cold War and America's determination to keep ahead of the
Soviet Union on land, at sea, and in space. Fairchild Semiconductor, the San
Jose-based company that gave rise to the tech industry as we know it, invented

the silicon microchip in the late 1950s; the first buyer was the Pentagon, which
used Fairchild's microchips for the B-70 bomber and the Minuteman missile
program. Stanford University became the leading incubator of tech talent due to
Pentagon research grants. The Internet began as a defense project: in the 1970s,
the military needed a wireless computer network that troops could access even in
remote locations, and this technology spawned the commercial Internet.
Through the 1980s, defense spending was the lubricant for Silicon Valley
innovation. As historian Margaret O'Mara puts it in her book The Code: Silicon
Valley and the Remaking of America, the Pentagon budget "remained the big-
government engine hidden under the hood of the Valley's shiny new
entrepreneurial sports car, flying largely under the radar screen of the saturation
media coverage of hackers and capitalists."
The end of the Cold War saw a sharp reduction in America's defense outlays.
The Pentagon's procurement budget was cut by more than half following the
collapse of the Soviet Union. In 1993, Deputy Defense Secretary William Perry
hosted a dinner at the Pentagon for the CEOs of the nation's leading defense
contractors and delivered a bracing message: there was no longer enough
business to support all of them, and the industry needed to consolidate. The
gathering became known in military circles as "the last supper," and the
companies did as advised: what had been a core group of around fifty aerospace
and defense companies shrank, through mergers and acquisitions, to just five.
With the United States now firmly established as the global hegemon and
enjoying a so-called peace dividend, the long, mutually beneficial relationship
between Silicon Valley and the Pentagon withered. The consumer Internet was
where the real action was now, thanks to the emergence of companies like
Amazon, which Jeff Bezos started in his garage in 1994.
9/11 shattered the post-Cold War tranquility. But while the terrorist attack
drew comparisons to Pearl Harbor, there was little sense in Silicon Valley that
the Pentagon's money spigot was going to be turned on again; in general, the
tech industry didn't see much opportunity in the war on terrorism and
remained fixated on e-businesses. Palantir may have been a start-up working at
the leading edge of software, but its focus on national security and defense did

not match the times. The frigid reception that Karp got from the venture capital
community reflected a belief that Palantir had meager prospects.
In 2008, Karp hired a former Army Ranger named Doug Philippone to build
Palantir's defense business. Philippone was a West Point graduate with a math
degree who had served tours of duty in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Pakistan. He had
distinguished himself in war, winning three Bronze Stars, two with citations for
valor. General Stanley McChrystal, who led U.S. troops in Afghanistan, wrote
that Philippone was "the single most aggressive and effective combat CDR
[commander] I command." Multiple back surgeries forced Philippone to retire
from the Army, and as he was considering his options, a friend told him that
Palantir was in the market for someone who could help it win business from the
military. Philippone was unfamiliar with Palantir but thought that being a
"terrorist-hunting mathematician" could be interesting. For his part, Karp
believed that a decorated veteran who had won the admiration of senior military
figures could help Palantir make inroads at the Pentagon. He also thought that
Philippone's battlefield skills might translate well to bureaucratic tussles. As he
put it, "Doug is a killer, and he knows it's a zero-sum game."
Philippone was thirty-seven when he joined Palantir. Like Karp, he was an
adult in a company that was otherwise full of kids, and he was the first person
hired at Palantir whose personal experience could inform product development.
From his multiple deployments, he knew what kind of information soldiers in
the field needed and how they wanted it delivered, and although he had no
background in technology (another similarity with Karp), he wasn't shy about
asserting himself.
He saw that his colleagues were unfamiliar with battlefield intelligence and
seemed to assume that the military operated the same way that the CIA did. "All
the founders were thinking about the workflow around 9/11, where you're
trying to connect the dots with all these intelligence agencies and police forces,
and that's not how the military works," he says.
But there was an even more basic problem: the software did not include
mapping capabilities. "In the intelligence world, you read a lot and then you
write cables," says Philippone. "But in the military, everything starts and finishes
with a map. You're always looking at a map, searching and discovering from the

map, planning from the map, and running your battle from the map. You
definitely go into other applications, but the centerpiece is the map." Among
Palantir's engineers, there was some resistance to the idea of maps. It wasn't that
they thought that Philippone was wrong; they just didn't want to add another
wrinkle to the enormous technological challenge of trying to build software that
could make a difference in the war on terrorism.
Philippone prevailed, and the engineers added a map application to Gotham.
But the internal fight turned out to be a prelude to a much bigger battle. Palantir
recorded some early successes in its effort to win military contracts. In 2008, a
Special Missions Unit, or SMU, a designation given to the most elite and
secretive fighting squads (the Navy's SEAL Team 6 is an SMU), began using
Gotham. Shortly thereafter, so did a similar unit, the Army's 10th Special Forces
Group (Airborne). Both the SMU and the 10th Special Forces Group had ample
budgets and enjoyed discretion over how they spent their money. But other,
larger units didn't have the same leeway, and the Army was already supplying
troops in Afghanistan and Iraq with a battlefield intelligence platform.
Distributed Common Ground System-Army, or DCGS-A, known
informally as "D-sigs," had been developed by Lockheed Martin, Raytheon, and
Northrop Grumman, three of the survivors of the Last Supper. Introduced in
2007, it was supposed to give soldiers in theater the same data-collection and
data-sharing capabilities that the intelligence community sought after 9/11. In
an ironic twist, the software component was Analyst's Notebook, which was
now owned by IBM.
But D-sigs had proven to be a clunker. It required hours of training, was
cumbersome to operate even for those who were fully versed in it, frequently
crashed, and was inaccessible in remote locations. Above all, it was failing at its
most critical function: protecting soldiers. Roadside bombs and other
improvised explosive devices, or IEDs, were killing large numbers of American
and allied troops. An article in Fortune quoted one unnamed officer who served
in Afghanistan. "D-sigs was a piece of shit, totally hopeless," he said. "You had to
toggle from one thing to the next. You couldn't see anything as a whole. It was
completely nonintuitive. If you misspelled a name, it would not match up with
the other intel on the same guy or the same place." He went on. "You couldn't

download anything onto a thumb drive, so whatever information you recorded,
no one else had, unless you happened to have a secure broadband connection,
which you rarely did. It was all on your laptop, and if you left the field, the
person who replaced you had none of it. Plus, it pretty much always crashed at
some point when you did get a connection."
That wonkiness contributed to one of the biggest breaches of classified
information in U.S. history. Bradley Manning, an Army intelligence officer based
in Iraq, had been trained to back up all his work, but as he testified during his
2013 court-martial trial, "The need to create backups was particularly acute
given the relative instability and reliability of the computer systems we used in
the field during deployment." Over time, Manning grew disenchanted with the
U.S. wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and because the inadequacies of D-sigs had
forced him to make copies of everything to which he had access, he had a vast
quantity of damaging material at his disposal when he decided to become a
whistleblower. Manning ultimately shared over seven hundred thousand
documents with WikiLeaks. The files included intelligence reports that revealed
battlefield setbacks and human rights violations, as well as embarrassing cables
sent by American diplomats.
Dissatisfaction with D-sigs was widespread, and in 2008 the Army's 5th
Stryker Combat Brigade, Infantry 2nd Division, expressed interest in Palantir's
software. Colonel Harry Tunnell led the unit. He was a colorful and
controversial figure, considered brilliant by many of his colleagues but also
someone with a habit of going rogue. He had been wounded in Iraq in 2003,
sustaining a severe leg injury. On his desk, he kept the metal rod implanted in his
leg during rehabilitation; a fellow colonel later alleged that Tunnell was
determined to avenge his injury and kept the rod as "an illustration" of what the
U.S. military was up against. According to a New York Times Magazine article,
he had been reprimanded several times by other senior officers for what they
regarded as overly aggressive tactics.
Most notably, he refused to embrace the counterinsurgency strategy that had
become U.S. policy under General David Petraeus's leadership in 2007. Petraeus
believed that effective counterinsurgency involved more than just killing enemy
combatants; it required winning the favor of locals, in part by ensuring their

security and helping promote economic development. Tunnell maintained that
the Army was ill-equipped to handle such a broad mandate and that Americans
were not "culturally suited" to take on the role of nation-building. In his view,
the military's job was to eradicate the enemy, even if that required measures that
"political correctness dictates that we cannot talk about," as he put it. Despite
his open dissent from the Pentagon's established doctrine, he remained in
command of his 3,800-troop brigade.
A few weeks after the 5th Stryker Brigade reached out to Palantir, Doug
Philippone went to Fort Lewis, Washington, where the unit was based, to
demonstrate Gotham for Tunnell. Impressed by what he saw, Tunnell invited
Palantir to take part in a field training exercise with his brigade. Philippone
dispatched two Palantir engineers to represent the company. Both were in their
early twenties, had no combat experience, and were kind of ungainly. "You
wouldn't have put a gun in their hands," Philippone jokes. The Palantirians,
equipped with their own software, were pitted against the 5th Stryker's
intelligence analysts, who were using D-sigs. The goal was to see who could
pinpoint with greater speed and accuracy enemy locations and areas where U.S.
troops had been attacked with IEDs. Despite their greenness, the Palantir duo
easily outperformed the Army analysts—another in what would become a string
of Moneyball moments as Palantir tried to win over the military. At the end of
the exercise, Tunnell turned to his colleagues and said of Palantir's technology,
"Does anyone not want this?"
In February 2009, Tunnell's brigade traveled to the National Training Center
in Fort Irwin, California. Located in the Mojave Desert, the NTC was where
U.S. troops went for final preparations before deploying overseas. The 5th
Stryker's intelligence analysts were now using Gotham for their work. The
software had also been updated to solve two of the biggest problems that the
military was encountering in Afghanistan and Iraq (and some core flaws with D-
sigs). Through Gotham, information collected in areas with little or no
connectivity could now be uploaded and synchronized with other data as soon
as a connection was reestablished. Gotham also now included a feature that
Palantir called Nexus Peering that allowed analysts to merge and harmonize data
across different servers, giving everyone in the field the same view. "This was

absolutely the hardest technological work we ever did," says Bob McGrew. It was
a breakthrough, he says, that became "foundational" to Palantir's defense
business.
The 5th Stryker Brigade had been scheduled to go to Iraq, but at the last
minute, it was reassigned to Afghanistan. Just before shipping out, the Pentagon
informed Tunnell that his brigade would not be allowed to use Palantir. Tunnell
was incensed, and after deploying to Afghanistan, he continued to lobby for it.
In 2010, his persistence helped land Karp and Philippone a meeting with the
Army's head of intelligence, Lieutenant General Richard Zahner. McGrew
joined them for the meeting, where the Palantir group showed the latest version
of Gotham. According to Philippone, Zahner responded enthusiastically and
indicated that the Army was ready to award Palantir a contract to provide its
software to a nine-brigade combat team that included Tunnell's unit. But the
contract never materialized: higher-ups in the Pentagon, still committed to D-
sigs, blocked it. It was a devastating setback for Palantir, which at that point had
spent roughly $1.5 million to develop tools for the battlefield. "That's the kind
of thing that can put a start-up out of business," says Philippone. "We had
leveraged the whole company around this."
In the meantime, Tunnell's brigade was taking heavy casualties; in its first
year in Afghanistan, it lost more than thirty soldiers. The Army finally relented
and allowed Tunnell to have Palantir's software. Philippone dispatched several
forward-deployed engineers to Kandahar Airfield, where the 5th Stryker Brigade
was stationed, to help Tunnell's intelligence analysts merge their data and
provide other technical support. There were also Palantirians on the ground in
Iraq. Matt Grimm, who would later cofound Anduril, the multibillion-dollar
start-up specializing in autonomous and semiautonomous weapons, was a
forward-deployed engineer in both Iraq and Afghanistan. He says he and his
colleagues traveled with containers full of servers and laptops. Grimm typically
spent two or three days at an outpost, working with analysts to solve whatever
needs they had—targeting enemy combatants, identifying where roadside
bombs were likely to be located. "I'd hop around between these bases and say,
'Hey, I'm the Palantir guy here to help you out—what are you working on?'
And they'd say, 'I think there's a bomb-making financing network near here, but

I can't quite figure it out, can you help me?' So I'd be like almost an augmented
intelligence analyst sitting next to the intel person, helping find the bad guys."
Getting from one base to another was not easy. Grimm had to hitch rides in
military convoys and helicopters and learned that bartering was the key to
getting a lift. "The currency of war zones is nicotine," Grimm recalls with a
laugh.
The forward-deployed engineers in Iraq and Afghanistan also served a
marketing function: as word spread about Palantir's software, they could visit
troops who wanted to try out the technology. In 2011, an Army officer stationed
in Afghanistan sent an email to Palantir's general mailbox. He wrote:
"The last 72 hours has been rough for the 2-shop here, as we had six
catastrophic IED attacks, including the first three fatalities from IEDs in two
attacks against the new dual-v-hull Strykers, in one week. Our CIED cell was
over a barrel to dig through a lot of data and come up with some answers, and
we barely slept for a couple days doing queries to external data sources, going
through spreadsheets of data, filtering and re-filtering shapefiles in ArcGIS, and
trying to sift out a pattern of what was happening. Total serendipity, we had
made an inquiry about Palantir and their engineer showed up in the middle of
our crisis to do a demo. We gave him a piece of the problem to solve, and what he
was able to turn around in a couple hours compared to what we had spent days
on made our jaws drop. Now that we've seen it, we have to have it."
For Palantir, the backdoor approach yielded some success: individual
battalions that had the budgets and the authorization to make purchases on
their own were able to acquire the software. But these piecemeal gains couldn't
solve the problem that Palantir was encountering at the Pentagon. In 2010, the
Center for a New American Security, a Washington think tank, published a
paper called "Fixing Intel: A Blueprint for Making Intelligence Relevant in
Afghanistan." Its authors were the soon-to-be-infamous Army Lieutenant
General Michael Flynn, who at the time was an intelligence officer on General
McChrystal's staff; Matt Pottinger, a former Wall Street Journal reporter who
had joined the Marines after 9/11; and Paul Batchelor, a senior adviser to
coalition forces in Afghanistan. The gist of the article, which was widely
discussed in military circles, was that the U.S. and its allies were not gathering

and disseminating nearly enough information about the environment in which
they were operating—the political, cultural, and economic factors at play in
various parts of Afghanistan—to wage a successful counterinsurgency. The
authors also acknowledged "severe technological hurdles" to developing that
fuller picture, such as "the lack of a common database and digital network
available to all partners."
Philippone read the paper and decided that Flynn needed to become familiar
with Palantir. Flynn would later gain notoriety as a supporter of Donald Trump
and for his brief, scandal-plagued stint as Trump's national security adviser, after
which he became a QAnon-influenced Christian nationalist. (Years later, when
recounting Palantir's interactions with Flynn, Philippone would preface his
comments by saying, "The old Mike Flynn.") Two Palantir employees who were
in Afghanistan visited Flynn and showed him Gotham. Instantly sold on it, he
wrote to the Pentagon requesting that it supply all the troops under
McChrystal's command with Palantir. "Intelligence analysts in the field do not
have the tools required to fully analyze the tremendous amounts of information
currently available in the theater," Flynn wrote. "This shortfall translates into
operational opportunities missed and lives lost." But the Army rejected Flynn's
request, telling him that D-sigs was sufficient for troops on the ground. Flynn
wasn't alone in requesting Palantir and being denied it. Between 2010 and 2014,
the Army received almost thirty urgent appeals for Palantir from soldiers and
units in Afghanistan and Iraq and turned down all of them.
While Army units were begging for Palantir, the Marines had an easier time
obtaining the software. That was because they weren't stuck with D-sigs; that
was a system only for the Army, and a version being developed for the Marines
wasn't going to be ready until 2013. Peter Dixon, a commander with the 2nd
Battalion, 7th Marine Regiment, had a pivotal role in getting Palantir in the
hands of the Marines. The 2/7, as it was known, was deployed in a volatile part
of southern Afghanistan and suffered heavy casualties. It lost forty men and saw
dozens of others injured. It became known as the "Forgotten Battalion" because
it was often cut off from supply lines and frequently ran low on ammunition
and other essentials. Thirteen members of the unit later committed suicide.

On top of its supply problems, the 2/7 was fighting blind because it didn't
have a common, easily accessible database of battlefield intelligence. "We had
turnover files, and they were very poor quality," Dixon says. "They were
cobbled-together Word documents and PowerPoint presentations, and that
depended on whether some overtaxed platoon commander had found the time
to try and put something together." In the absence of good information, Dixon
and his colleagues had no idea where enemy combatants had attacked in the past.
"We'd be knocking on compound doors, not knowing if previous deployments
had been met with gunfire or tea," he says. "We were paying to relearn the same
lessons over and over, and were paying in blood. Counterinsurgency is a big dirty
data problem, and we had no battle tracking software."
In 2010 Dixon was reassigned to a job at the Pentagon. He was determined to
try to get the Marines who were on combat duty the help that he had so
conspicuously lacked. At one point he led a Pentagon delegation to a conference
hosted by In-Q-Tel in Silicon Valley, where start-ups that it had funded were
demoing their products. Dixon was struck by Palantir's software. He later visited
the company's Palo Alto office and came away even more impressed. "There was
a light-bulb moment when they started mapping a bunch of diverse datasets and
laying them into a heat map," Dixon says. "Being able to see Afghanistan, with
all this information laid into it, what was actually happening on the ground—we
had no collective situational awareness, and this was the tool that could give it to
us."
Dixon returned to Washington and wrote an urgent need request asking that
Palantir be made available to Marines in Afghanistan. The only resistance he
encountered was from an Army colonel who berated him for trying to obtain
Palantir. In all, some thirty Marine units ended up using Gotham. "I believe that
I saved more lives by getting Palantir into Afghanistan than I did leading
infantry and sniper Marines outside the wire," says Dixon. Palantir's impact did
not go unnoticed by senior leadership. One Palantir booster was Marine Corps
General James Mattis, who at the time was the head of the United States Central
Command, which was responsible for American military operations in the
Middle East, North Africa, and South Asia and included representatives of all six
uniformed services. (Mattis, like Flynn, would go on to serve in the Trump

administration; he was secretary of defense from 2017 to 2019. Mattis resigned
over policy disagreements with Trump and issued a blistering denunciation of
his former boss during the George Floyd protests in 2020.)
But of course, it was easier for the Marines to embrace Palantir because,
unlike the Army, they did not have an incumbent system that Palantir might
displace. Jonathan Wong, a former Marine who became a policy researcher at the
RAND Corporation, says Army officials weren't necessarily acting out of malice
toward Palantir—at least not at first. They wanted a more comprehensive
battlefield intelligence system than Palantir was offering at the time, one that
could be used against "what we are fighting today and what we will be facing
tomorrow," as he puts it. But Wong, whose dissertation focused in part on the
early relationship between Palantir and the Pentagon, says that Palantir's
software was better for the counterinsurgency and counterterrorism challenges
that the military was then confronting.
And Doug Philippone concedes that there were missteps on the Palantir side.
The one that still haunts him was a sartorial mistake. He and a colleague had a
meeting at the Pentagon with an acquisitions officer, and, seeking to strike a
balance between Washington decorousness and Silicon Valley informality, they
wore suits but no ties. The decision to forgo ties infuriated their host. "I don't
think he heard a word that we said," Philippone recalls. Not only that: news of
the fashion faux pas spread and caused outrage elsewhere at the Pentagon. "I
heard through the grapevine for years how offended they were that we didn't
wear ties," he says.
The clothing blunder reinforced the hostility that some senior officers already
had toward Palantir. In early 2012, the Army surveyed one hundred soldiers and
contractors to see what they thought of Palantir; ninety-six responded positively
and recommended that the military make wider use of its software. But a few
months later, the Army allegedly spiked a report that cited these results and
issued a new one that omitted much of the praise for Palantir. Representative
Duncan Hunter, a former Marine who was a member of the House Armed
Services Committee and who had become one of Palantir's staunchest advocates
on Capitol Hill, learned of the discarded report and demanded an explanation
from the Pentagon. "The system is broken when your war fighters on the

ground are taking casualties every day and can't get a cheap piece of software
that works wonders," Hunter said at the time. In April 2013, Army Chief of
Staff Ray Odierno, testifying before the Armed Services Committee, got into a
shouting match with Hunter over Palantir. "I'm tired of somebody telling me I
don't care about our soldiers and don't respond," Odierno angrily told Hunter,
adding that D-sigs had given the Army "twenty times" more intelligence
capability than it had a decade earlier.
Hunter, who would be forced to resign from Congress in 2020 after pleading
guilty to misusing campaign funds (President Trump would later pardon him),
was not Palantir's only ally on Capitol Hill. Senator John McCain also expressed
frustration with D-sigs and demanded that the Army make Palantir available to
more units in Iraq and Afghanistan. While Karp and his colleagues would
portray the fight with the Army as a classic David-versus-Goliath tale, with
Palantir in the role of David, the truth was more complicated. Palantir was a
plucky outsider, but the company also spent millions of dollars on powerful
lobbyists who could plead its case with members of Congress. The headline on a
Politico story in 2016—"How Palantir Wired Washington"—reflected the
lengths the company had gone to cultivate support.
Its growing visibility in Washington did pay dividends—during this period,
Palantir landed contracts with a number of federal agencies, including the FBI,
the IRS, the SEC, the Department of Homeland Security, the National
Institutes of Health (NIH), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC). Palantir was indeed wiring much of official Washington now. It just
couldn't break down the Army's resistance. In December 2015, the Army
announced that it was shelving the initial version of D-sigs and invited bids to
build a second, presumably better version, which it referred to as Increment 2.
However, it indicated that it would only accept proposals to build a new system
from scratch—it was not willing to consider off-the-shelf products, which
meant Palantir could not compete for the contract. A few weeks later, Palantir
filed a complaint with the U.S. Government Accountability Office, or GAO,
which evaluates federal programs. Palantir alleged that the Army, in refusing to
allow it to even take part in the bidding, had violated a law enacted by Congress

in 1994 that required federal agencies to consider off-the-shelf products to meet
their needs.
By that point, the Pentagon was no longer denying that D-sigs was a bust. In
April 2016, General Mark Milley, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
acknowledged to the Senate Armed Services Committee that D-sigs had failed
soldiers in Afghanistan and Iraq. Milley was diplomatic; he said the system was
"performing reasonably well at, kind of, echelons above brigade" and that his
own experience with it was "very, very good." But at the tactical level, he said, it
was "more difficult to work with, not quite as fast, and difficult to jump from
location to location on the whole battlefield." He said he had taken "a hard
look" at the issues surrounding D-sigs, was "keenly aware of the various
controversies," and conceded that "there may be some other options out there,"
which seemed like a reference to Palantir.
But a few weeks later, the GAO rejected Palantir's complaint; it said that
Congress had given federal agencies broad discretion when it came to deciding
between commercial products and custom-built ones. At that point, Karp
decided that litigation was Palantir's only recourse. Suing the Army might have
seemed a counterintuitive way to cultivate business with the Army, but there was
a recent precedent, and it involved another company backed by Peter Thiel: in
2014, Elon Musk's SpaceX had sued the Air Force for awarding a no-bid
contract to a rival company, United Launch Alliance, a joint venture between
Lockheed Martin and Boeing, to provide thirty-six rocket booster cores to help
launch national security satellites. The suit was settled the following year when
the Air Force agreed to open up the bidding process for future launches. Palantir
retained Boies Schiller Flexner LLP, the law firm that had represented SpaceX, to
bring its case against the Army.
Karp says he would have pursued litigation even without the SpaceX
precedent. He was appalled by the Army's conduct and couldn't fathom why
officials seemed more interested in protecting a failed program than protecting
warfighters. He met soldiers who had used Palantir's technology in Iraq and
Afghanistan and who considered it a lifesaver, and although the lawsuit against
the Army was a business decision, in Karp's mind it was also a moral imperative.
Beyond that, he said it was not in his nature to walk away from a fight; if

punched, he punched back. When he told me that, I jokingly remarked that it
didn't sound very Haverford-like. "Well, Haverford didn't teach us how to
fight," he replied sharply, a comment meant as an indictment.
In late June 2016, Palantir sued the Army in the U.S. Court of Federal
Claims, which handles disputes over government contracts. Its complaint was
blunt, at times caustic. Palantir accused Army officials of sacrificing the lives of
soldiers in order to avoid having to admit that D-sigs had been a failure. The suit
said that the bidding requirements for D-sigs Increment 2 had "committed the
Army to a failed procurement approach that is unlawful, that benefits no one
but the incumbent defense contracting industry, that irrationally resists
innovation from Silicon Valley, that wastes billions in taxpayer dollars, and that
even risks the lives and effectiveness of our Soldiers in uniform."
Four months after Palantir filed suit, the court handed it a resounding
victory. In her ruling, Judge Marian Blank Horn said the Army had acted
"arbitrarily and capriciously" in setting up a bidding process that effectively
excluded Palantir and had, in fact, violated the law by not giving fair
consideration to an off-the-shelf alternative. She issued a permanent injunction
and said the Army could award the contract only after fulfilling its legal
obligation to entertain commercial options.
Her decision was made public on October 31. Eight days later, Donald
Trump was elected president.
OceanofPDF.com

SEVEN
THE PETER PROBLEM
In 2009, Peter Thiel published an essay titled "The Education of a Libertarian."
It ran in a journal called Cato Unbound, published by the Cato Institute, a
Washington think tank. Sounding more chastened than frustrated, Thiel
declared that his dream of seeing America become a libertarian Valhalla was
dead. The problem was participatory democracy. "I no longer believe that
freedom"—by which he meant economic freedom—"and democracy are
compatible," he wrote. He went on to say that "the 1920s were the last decade in
American history during which one could be genuinely optimistic about
politics. Since 1920, the vast increase in welfare beneficiaries and the extension of
the franchise to women—two constituencies that are notoriously tough for
libertarians—have rendered the notion of 'capitalist democracy' into an
oxymoron." Thiel urged his fellow travelers to join him in withdrawing from the
political arena. "In our time, the great task for libertarians is to find an escape
from politics in all its forms—from the totalitarian and fundamentalist
catastrophes to the unthinking demos that guides so-called 'social democracy.' "
He suggested three possible escape routes: cyberspace, outer space, and
seasteading.
Not surprisingly, the essay sparked controversy, especially the line about
women's suffrage. The backlash was sufficiently intense that Thiel felt compelled
to write an addendum. He didn't apologize—he said that his point about
women was based on a "commonplace statistical observation about voting
patterns that is often called the gender gap." However, he insisted that he wasn't
advocating disenfranchisement but was simply arguing that democracy would
not lead to the libertarian future that he had hoped for. He concluded by saying
that "politics is way too intense.... Politics gets people angry, destroys
relationships, and polarizes peoples' [sic] vision; the world is us versus them;

good people versus the other. Politics is about interfering with other people's
lives without their consent. That's probably why, in the past, libertarians have
made little progress in the political sphere. Thus, I advocate focusing energy
elsewhere, onto peaceful projects that some consider utopian."
But Thiel did not step away from politics. In 2012, he donated $2.6 million
to the presidential campaign of Ron Paul, a Republican congressman from
Texas who was known for his libertarian views and who had published
newsletters in the 1980s and '90s that included virulently racist and antisemitic
content. Paul finished fourth in the delegate count for the Republican
nomination. Four years later, Thiel switched his allegiance to another Texan,
Republican Senator Ted Cruz. When Cruz entered the 2016 presidential race,
Thiel was one of his main supporters. But after winning the Iowa caucuses,
Cruz's campaign sputtered. Most of his colleagues in Congress reviled him
(former House Speaker John Boehner once described him as "Lucifer in the
flesh," and in a 2016 speech, South Carolina Republican Senator Lindsey
Graham joked, "If you killed Ted Cruz on the floor of the Senate, and the trial
was in the Senate, nobody would convict you"), and it turned out that GOP
voters were also put off by his smarminess and general unlikability. At the same
time, Donald Trump was proving to be a more viable candidate than most
people had imagined, and as Thiel recounted during one of our conversations in
the spring of 2023, he found himself increasingly drawn to Trump's message—
that America had lost its way and that elites had betrayed the country's working
class.
For some time, Thiel had been arguing that the United States had become
stagnant—that even Silicon Valley, supposedly a wellspring of world-changing
innovation, was failing to deliver on the promise of the digital revolution. In his
judgment, the output of transformative technologies was declining, not
accelerating. As he famously put it, "We wanted flying cars, instead we got 140
characters," which was a swipe not just at Twitter but at Silicon Valley writ large.
Thiel had come to believe that the political system needed a shock, an upheaval
that would force America to reckon with its shortcomings and spark the
inventiveness that he longed to see. Why he thought that a serially bankrupt
reality TV star who probably wouldn't have known a silicon chip from a silicone

implant could shake America out of this supposed torpor seemed puzzling, and
Thiel would later admit that it had been a miscalculation on his part.
While keeping close watch on the battle for the GOP nomination, Thiel also
had something else on his mind in early 2016: the lawsuit that the wrestler Hulk
Hogan had brought against the website Gawker after it posted a video of Hogan
having sex with the wife of a friend. The case, filed in Florida, went to trial in
March of that year. What was not known at the time—it was revealed only after
the jury delivered its verdict—was that Thiel had bankrolled Hogan's litigation
to exact revenge against Gawker for outing him as gay several years earlier. After
a two-week trial, the jury ruled in Hogan's favor and awarded him $100 million,
the maximum allowed under Florida law. A few months later, Gawker declared
bankruptcy and went dark. Thiel told me that he hadn't expected Hogan to
prevail, and the size of the jury's award shocked him. He said the Hogan verdict
was the moment he realized that Trump could win the presidency—he saw the
court case as auguring a revolt at the polls that November. In his words, "Hogan
was Trump, Gawker was the media, and the jury was the voters."
Cruz dropped out of the race in early May. A week later, the Trump
campaign released its list of delegates for the Republican National Convention,
which was being held in Cleveland in mid-July. Among the Trump delegates
from California was Thiel. This was the first indication that he was getting
behind Trump, and for the ragtag Trump operation, winning Thiel's backing
was a coup, especially since most business leaders, stunned by Trump's rise, were
publicly keeping their distance from the presumptive Republican nominee. The
Trump campaign rewarded Thiel with a prime-time speaking slot at the
convention. He spoke on the last night, prior to Trump's own speech. Thiel,
smiling awkwardly and looking uncomfortable, said that Trump was "a builder"
who was going to "lead us back to that bright future."
Up until then, Thiel's political activities had never been a source of concern
at Palantir; employees rarely ever encountered him, and even people who were
troubled by some of the views he had expressed regarded Thiel's ideological
predilections more as a curiosity than a public relations problem. However, he
was now supporting arguably the most demagogic presidential candidate the
country had ever seen, and it was hard to imagine that this wasn't going to have

implications for Palantir. One former Palantir employee who was personally
fond of Thiel said that it was jarring to observe his trajectory from "being an
unhappy libertarian to being an enthusiastic fascist." In October, four weeks
before the election, the Access Hollywood controversy erupted. Trump had been
caught on tape bragging about how his celebrity enabled him to assault women;
he could, as he put it, "grab them by the pussy." For several days, it was not clear
that Trump would survive the scandal; many Republicans expressed disgust with
his comments, and there were calls for him to quit the race. But then Thiel
stepped forward and announced that he was making his first financial
contribution to the Trump campaign, and it was a substantial one: $1.25
million. His donation outraged many Palantirians (in a subsequent speech to the
National Press Club in Washington, Thiel said that Trump's remarks had been
"clearly offensive and inappropriate").
Karp, for his part, was a Hillary Clinton supporter, and he had made clear to
employees that he was personally repulsed by Trump. In a town hall meeting in
2015, the video of which was later obtained by BuzzFeed, Karp told his
colleagues, "I've had the rare opportunity to meet Trump, which I turned down.
I mean, this is off the record, but I like respect—I respect nothing about the
dude. It would be hard to make up someone I find less appealing." He mocked
Trump's business acumen, pointing out that he would be richer if he had just
invested the money he inherited from his father in the stock market, and he
scoffed at Trump's claim of being a billionaire. Karp called it "fictitious wealth"
and speculated that Trump was worth only around $500 million. He said that
"purely on the vulgar metric" of moneymaking prowess, Trump was a failure.
He also called him a bully.
But Karp says that he took Trump much more seriously than most observers
and was convinced by the fall of 2016 that he would win. He thought that
Trump was skillfully channeling the anger, resentment, and sense of betrayal
that many Americans felt. Karp says he warned the Clinton campaign and
Democratic officials that Trump was heading for victory. He said the same thing
in a private conversation with FBI Director James Comey, who insisted that
Karp was wrong. (In his memoir, Comey acknowledged that he didn't believe
Trump would prevail.) On election night, as it became clear that Trump was the

winner, a Palantir board member said to Karp that the outcome would be a
boon for the company thanks to the Thiel-Trump connection. Karp vehemently
disagreed. "This is all downside for us," he said.
He anticipated, correctly, that any government contracts that Palantir won
with Trump in the White House would be seen as rewarding Thiel for the
support he had given the campaign. The Trump-Thiel-Palantir nexus was in the
spotlight a few weeks after the election, when Trump held a meeting with leaders
of the tech industry. Thiel organized the gathering, held in a twenty-fifth-floor
conference room at Trump Tower in New York. The attendees included most of
tech's biggest names: Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk, Tim Cook, Sheryl Sandberg, Larry
Page, Eric Schmidt, and Satya Nadella. Thiel sat to Trump's left; Vice President-
elect Mike Pence was to his right. Three of Trump's children—Don Jr., Eric, and
Ivanka—were also at the table. Karp was there, too. Thiel had asked him to
attend, and although Karp recognized that the optics would not be good—it
would raise obvious concerns about conflicts of interest—he agreed to go.
The meeting was one of the fruits of victory for Trump, but it was also
significant for another reason: it highlighted the profound transformation of the
American economy. A half century earlier, a president-elect might have met with
the CEOs of the Big Three automakers. Twenty-five years earlier, Wall Street
executives would probably have been at that table. Now, though, it was the
leaders of the tech industry. For better and worse, Silicon Valley had become the
main driver of the U.S. economy (and, really, the global economy), a point
symbolized by the Trump Tower gathering.
Trump started the meeting by profusely thanking Thiel for arranging it and
for backing his campaign. "You're a very special guy," he told Thiel. He then
reached over and awkwardly clasped Thiel's hands in a way that called to mind a
boxing referee declaring the winner of a fight. Thiel looked mortified, and his
hands fell limp as Trump clutched them. The president-elect then turned his
attention to his other guests. "This is a truly amazing group of people," he
gushed. "There's nobody like you in the world. In the world!" Trump had
campaigned as a business maven, a dealmaker of unparalleled skill. In truth, he
was such a bad credit risk that he had been cut off by all the major U.S. banks.
Now, surrounded by some of the most successful entrepreneurs and business

leaders in history, Trump seemed to recognize that he was out of his depth—that
the boasting he had done on the campaign trail wasn't going to work with this
crowd. His tone was solicitous, even supplicatory. In his opening remarks, he
said, "I'm here to help you folks do well," adding, "We're going to be there for
you."
Trump asked everyone to identify themselves, a request that elicited some
nervous coughs and pained smiles—did Jeff Bezos really need to play the Name
Game? Karp was seated across the table from Trump; Eric Schmidt, the CEO of
Alphabet, was to his right, the Trump kids to his left. When it was his turn to
speak, Karp said, "Alex Karp, CEO of Palantir, hoping to help bolster our
national security and reduce waste," a comment that drew an approving nod
from Trump. It was all that Karp said during the meeting, which lasted around
ninety minutes.
As Karp had anticipated, his participation aroused concern. Palantir was the
only privately held company represented there, and it was a minnow compared
to the likes of Amazon and Apple. Purely on a market-capitalization basis, there
was no justification for Palantir, which was valued at around $20 billion, to be at
the same table with companies that were worth hundreds of billions, and many
observers took it as a sign that the firm was going to benefit unduly from
Trump's presidency. CNBC's website ran a story about Karp's presence at the
meeting under the headline "Palantir CEO at Trump-tech Summit Raises Red
Flags." The article quoted government ethics expert Norman Eisen: "I don't like
the way it looks having Karp in that room. Even if [Palantir] had a much larger
market cap or he had a much bigger personality, it still looks as if [Thiel] is using
the transition for personal advancement."
The negative reaction was a foretaste of what lay ahead. Palantir prospered
during the Trump years; after prevailing in the lawsuit that it brought against the
Army, it was awarded a number of Pentagon contracts. But those wins were
regarded with suspicion. To Karp's fury, many observers assumed that they were
the result of political favoritism. Palantir was also embroiled in major
controversies during Trump's first presidency, scandals that caused fissures
within the company, that cast fresh doubt on its ethical and moral standards,
and that put a bright light on the relationship between Karp and Thiel.

From the moment, in June 2015, that Trump descended the golden escalator at
Trump Tower and attacked Mexicans as rapists and criminals, his campaign was
steeped in racism and xenophobia (and long before he announced his candidacy,
the former Democrat had endeared himself to many Republican voters with the
birther smear against President Barack Obama). In December of that year,
following a deadly terrorist attack in San Bernardino, California, Trump called
for a "complete and total shutdown of Muslims entering the United States." He
also made comments suggesting he favored creating a database to track Muslim
Americans. It wasn't a new idea: the Bush administration had created a de facto
Muslim registry after 9/11. But coming from Trump, it seemed especially
sinister and alarming. Facebook, Google, and Apple all issued statements saying
that they would not cooperate with any effort to establish a Muslim database.
Karp didn't address the issue during the campaign but chimed in just prior to
Trump's inauguration, telling Forbes that "if we were asked, we wouldn't do it."
But his words didn't reassure everyone: a few days later, some fifty tech workers
picketed outside Palantir's Palo Alto office, in what amounted to a preemptive
protest.
In the end, the Trump administration didn't create a Muslim registry. But
just a week into his presidency, Trump signed a series of executive orders that
barred people from a handful of Muslim-majority countries from entering the
United States. Trump's so-called Muslim ban (which the U.S. Supreme Court
upheld in 2018 but the Biden administration later rescinded) presaged a broader
assault on immigration. While Trump never delivered on his promise to build a
wall along the southern border and force Mexico to pay for it, he instituted a
"zero tolerance" policy for illegal immigration that included separating children
from their parents. In all, four to five thousand children were taken from their
mothers and fathers. U.S. authorities failed to track the whereabouts of the
children and their parents, and years later, many families had still not been
reunited. Under Trump, there were also mass worksite raids aimed at finding and
deporting undocumented people.

U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or ICE, was one of the
agencies involved in implementing Trump's crackdown. Palantir had a long-
standing relationship with ICE. As with a number of the company's
engagements, Palantir's work with ICE began in a moment of crisis. In February
2011, an ICE special agent named Jaime Zapata was assassinated by a Mexican
drug cartel. Determined to apprehend the perpetrators as quickly as possible but
hobbled by the fact that much of its intelligence was siloed in different places
and could not be easily shared among investigators, ICE turned to Palantir for
help. It took Palantir's engineers just eleven hours to merge all the data, and
within two weeks, Zapata's murderer had been identified and arrested, part of
sweep dubbed Operation Fallen Hero that resulted in over six hundred other
arrests and the confiscation of 467 kilos of cocaine, 64 pounds of
methamphetamine, and 282 weapons.
ICE subsequently awarded Palantir a contract to provide its technology to
Homeland Security Investigations, or HSI, a subdivision of the agency that
handled issues such as drug smuggling, human trafficking, financial crimes, and
cybercrimes. In 2012, HSI began using a Palantir-designed system called
FALCON for investigations. In 2014, ICE paid Palantir $41 million to design
and maintain an electronic case management system for HSI. A privacy impact
assessment conducted by the Department of Homeland Security in 2016 noted
that although this new database, known as Investigative Case Management, or
ICM, was built for HSI, agents from ICE's other major subdivision,
Enforcement and Removal Operations, or ERO, which administered U.S.
immigration laws, would have access to it.
Palantir's work with ICE attracted little notice prior to the first Trump
presidency. But the relationship became controversial when Trump made good
on his campaign pledge to go after illegal immigrants. Privately, Karp had been
scornful of Trump's plans. During that same town hall meeting with Palantir
employees in which he called Trump a phony billionaire, he also attacked his
nativism. "Therefore we should throw out all immigrants—like, who is going to
do all the work? It makes no sense," Karp said. He expressed dismay that
Trump's scapegoating seemed to be resonating with voters: "You have to ask
yourself—something that makes no sense, that is de facto bringing up the worst

that a society can bring up, which is that, like, blame the people who work really
hard and that we need and that are coming here at the risk of their life instead of,
you know, the dysfunction that you may have helped create—why is that person
so successful?"
But when those comments became public, in April 2017, Trump's
clampdown was underway, and immigration advocates and human rights groups
were voicing strong concerns about Palantir's work with ICE. Initially, Palantir
tried to deflect criticism by emphasizing that its contracts were with HSI, not
ERO. "We do not work for E.R.O.," the company said in a statement to The
New York Times in 2018. The implication was that Palantir had no role in
enforcing Trump's policies. But that was not true. A document obtained by The
Intercept, a news site, and Mijente, an immigration advocacy group, showed that
in 2017, HSI and ERO undertook a joint operation using the ICM database to
arrest and possibly deport family members of undocumented children caught
trying to cross the border. Palantir's effort to distance itself from Trump's
immigration policies fell apart in August 2019, when HSI, deploying FALCON,
led a raid on food-processing plants in Mississippi. Nearly seven hundred people
were arrested. In an interview with CNBC a few months later, Karp
acknowledged that Palantir's blanket denials had been misleading. However, he
insisted that the company was not really involved with Trump's crackdown. "It
is a de minimis part of our work, finding people in our country who are
undocumented," he said.
By then, Palantir had become the object of protests nationwide.
Demonstrations were held at its office in New York and Palo Alto, as well as
outside Karp's Palo Alto home. During one nighttime gathering, activists
projected the words "#Complicit with Genocide" and "#Never Again Is Now"
on the façade of the company's Palo Alto headquarters. Palantir also found itself
a pariah on college campuses. Students put up signs saying "No Tech for ICE"
and encouraged their peers to shun Palantir recruiters. For years, Palantir had
cosponsored an annual conference of privacy laws scholars hosted by the
University of California, Berkeley. But in 2019, the organizers, under pressure
from Berkeley faculty and students and outside groups, dropped Palantir as a
sponsor. The company was also removed as a sponsor of the Grace Hopper

Celebration, the largest conference for women in technology. Employees at
Amazon sent two letters to company executives demanding that they no longer
do business with Palantir, which ran its software on Amazon's cloud.
There was also internal dissent at Palantir. Some two hundred employees
signed a letter objecting to the company's relationship with ICE. Another sixty
sent a letter to Karp asking that the money that Palantir earned from its ICE
contracts—around $16 million annually—be donated to a nonprofit charity
(that didn't happen). On the company's Slack channels, as well as in staff
meetings, Palantirians waged a vigorous internal debate about ICE. There were
strong views on both sides. Some employees had no problem working with ICE
and were frustrated by the controversy. "They talk about deportations, but they
never talk about the stuff we've done to stop human trafficking and drugs," one
executive said during an impromptu conversation with several colleagues that I
happened to overhear. Complicating matters, for Karp and for Palantir, was
Thiel's hardline immigration views. In 2019, for instance, he and the right-wing
commentator Ann Coulter hosted a fundraiser for Kris Kobach, the Kansas
secretary of state who was virulently anti-immigration.
Karp and I had a number of conversations about the ICE controversy as it
was unfolding. Our most extensive one was when I visited him at his house in
Vermont in the fall of 2019. It was the Saturday of Columbus Day weekend, and
I figured he'd be staying there for a few days. But he had arrived the previous
night and was heading to a meeting in Boston that evening before leaving for
Europe. He had spent the morning roller skiing. I showed up in time for lunch,
which was prepared by an Italian chef whom Karp had flown in from
Washington. Afterward, Karp and I went for a hike on a nearby cross-country-
skiing trail, two of his bodyguards trailing us as we walked.
Karp noted that other major tech companies, including Microsoft and
Amazon, also had contracts with ICE but were not being vilified the way
Palantir was. He suggested that it was a backhanded compliment—evidence of
the superior quality of Palantir's products. "People understand we have these
powerful platforms and that the platforms actually work," he said, adding that
perhaps protesters were ignoring those other companies because their
technology was "not as effectual." But the opprobrium directed at Palantir

clearly irritated Karp. He was particularly angered by claims that Palantir was
abetting a racist policy. It was during this period that he had disclosed—first to
Palantir employees, then publicly—that his mother was black. But he said that
he was reluctant to answer the racism charge by invoking his background
because he didn't want to "instrumentalize" his mother, and also because he
didn't think that the "emotional argument is as persuasive as people think."
Karp cited his own political views to defend Palantir. He said he was in favor
of legal immigration and wanted the United States to remain welcoming of
newcomers. "There are lots of reasons I don't support the president; this is
actually one of them," he told me, adding that he was "personally very okay with
changing the demographics of our country." But he believed that a secure border
was important. "I've been a progressive my whole life, my family's progressive,
and we were never in favor of open borders," he said. He claimed that
progressives had historically opposed unfettered immigration because it tended
to depress wages for working-class Americans. And even if liberals didn't care
about border security, millions of Americans clearly did, and in Karp's
judgment, Trump had won in part because he took their concerns seriously and
the Democrats did not. "Having no border is the surest way to elect Trump," he
said. It was the same way in Europe: the refusal of center-left parties to deal with
legitimate worries about immigration had fueled the rise of the far right.
Trump's effort to curb illegal immigration, however, was notable mainly for
its cruelty—in particular, the policy of forcibly separating migrant children,
some of them infants and toddlers, from their parents. Many of the children
were detained in steel enclosures—cages—and while thousands were later
reunited with their parents, thousands of others were not. According to The
Atlantic's Caitlin Dickerson, this was because U.S. immigration officials had
often failed to log basic information, such as where a child's parent was being
detained. In 2024, six years after the child separation policy was discontinued in
the face of public outrage, more than one thousand children had still not been
reunited with their parents. Although the full disgrace did not become apparent
until after Trump left office, it was clear enough at the time that human rights
abuses were being perpetrated by immigration authorities.

Karp didn't deny that bad things were being done, although he pointed out
that family separation was not illegal under U.S. law. He reiterated that Palantir
was not involved in the crackdown at the border, but he also said that it had a
duty to fulfill its contractual obligations to federal agencies, including ICE.
Companies were free not to work with the government, but those that did
couldn't renege on their contracts just because they didn't like a president or
approve of certain policies. Trump had been elected in part on his promise to get
tough on illegal immigration, and if Palantir decided to stop working with ICE,
it would be defying the will of the voters and subverting the democratic process,
which Karp was unwilling to do. This argument was Karp's justification for his
decision in the summer of 2019 to renew Palantir's contract with ICE, a deal
that would earn Palantir $50 million over three years.
During our conversation in Vermont, Karp also suggested that terminating
Palantir's relationship with ICE would have jeopardized vital work that the
company was doing with other parts of the government, notably the military.
Karp said that if Palantir walked away from ICE, that might have marked it as an
unreliable partner in the eyes of U.S. soldiers. "Why would a warfighter believe
you aren't going to do the same thing to them when they're in the middle of a
battle?" he asked rhetorically. (Others at Palantir did not share Karp's concern;
several of his colleagues told me that if the company had opted to end its
contract with ICE, it would have no repercussions for its military business.) But
Karp admitted that if ICE had first sought Palantir's technology after Trump
took office, he might have balked. "I'm not sure I would feel strongly about
doing it," he told me. "We probably wouldn't do the contract. But that's
different than pulling the plug."
But not pulling the plug had costs. Normally, Karp and his colleagues took
pride in the idea that Palantir was the one company that didn't flinch in the face
of controversy or run away from morally complicated engagements. "Our
product is used on occasion to kill people," Karp told Axios in an interview in
2020, and his matter-of-fact tone suggested that he had no qualms with that.
However, Karp couldn't show the same defiance over ICE; seizing children from
their parents as a matter of policy was abhorrent, and even if Palantir wasn't
directly complicit in those actions, being associated with the government agency

perpetrating these abuses was a public relations fiasco. In September 2020, on
the eve of Palantir's stock market listing, Amnesty International issued a fifteen-
page report on the company's relationship with ICE. It said that there was "a
high risk that Palantir is contributing to serious human rights violations of
migrants and asylum-seekers by the U.S. government."
In December 2015, Britain's Guardian newspaper reported that a company
called Cambridge Analytica, whose principal owner was Robert Mercer, a
reclusive American hedge fund billionaire, had harvested the personal data of
Facebook users in order to generate "psychographic" profiles of voters. The
scheme involved a personality quiz designed by a Cambridge University lecturer
named Aleksandr Kogan. Participants were told that the results would "only be
used for research purposes" and would "remain anonymous and safe." Those
were lies: the information was not anonymized, and it was shared by Cambridge
Analytica with Ted Cruz's presidential campaign, presumably to help it
microtarget voters. At the time, Mercer was backing Cruz. In addition,
individuals who took the personality quiz unwittingly gave Cambridge
Analytica access to personal information for their Facebook friends. Cambridge
Analytica created profiles of over fifty million Americans.
Like Thiel, Mercer threw his support behind Trump after Cruz's White
House bid sank. Steve Bannon, a senior Trump adviser, was close to the Mercer
family and was a member of Cambridge Analytica's board. The data that
Cambridge Analytica gave to Cruz was later shared with the Trump campaign.
That story emerged in an investigative series published in March 2018 by The
New York Times and two British newspapers, The Guardian and The Observer.
Much of the information came from a Cambridge Analytica cofounder-turned-
whistleblower named Christopher Wylie, who said that the information the
company collected had been used to target individual voters with digital ads that
tapped into their anxieties, anger, and bigotry. There was no way of determining
the degree to which Cambridge Analytica helped Trump's 2016 campaign, but

later studies found that online misinformation played a significant, perhaps
decisive, role in his victory over Clinton.
The Cambridge Analytica controversy was a debacle for Facebook, which was
harshly criticized for its failure to protect users' data. But Palantir was soon
drawn into the scandal. The Times reported that a London-based Palantir
employee named Alfredas Chmieliauskas, working with the Cambridge
Analytica team, had come up with the idea of developing the mobile-phone app
that was used to collect Facebook data. According to documents obtained by the
Times, Chmieliauskas started corresponding with Wylie in 2013. Emails
reviewed by the Times also showed that an unnamed Palantir executive had
discussions with Cambridge Analytica about possibly collaborating on other
election campaigns—even though Palantir had a policy against doing election
work.
At first Palantir denied any connection to Cambridge Analytica. When
reporters confronted Palantir with evidence of Chmieliauskas's activities, the
company retracted its denial and issued a new statement: "We learned today that
an employee, in 2013-2014, engaged in an entirely personal capacity with
people associated with Cambridge Analytica. We're looking into this and will
take appropriate action." But testifying before British lawmakers on the same
day that the Times published its story about Palantir, Wylie alleged that "senior
Palantir employees" had also been involved with Cambridge Analytica. He said
that "Palantir staff would come into the office and work on the data." In an
interview with the Times, Wylie said that he and Cambridge Analytica's CEO,
Alexander Nix, had visited Palantir's London office.
It was not the first time that Palantir blamed a misdoing on a rogue employee;
it made the same claim during the HBGary Federal controversy. And fairly or
not, the fact that Palantir's initial denial turned out to be untrue created the
impression that the company was being evasive. Beyond that, Palantir worked in
sensitive areas; having an employee moonlighting with a shady outfit such as
Cambridge Analytica was a bad look. That his side hustle involved the harvesting
and abuse of personal data, something that Palantir had emphasized over and
over that it never did, made it all the worse. Being implicated alongside
Facebook, of all companies, was especially embarrassing.

A few weeks after the Times story was published, Facebook CEO Mark
Zuckerberg was called before the Senate Judiciary Committee to answer
questions regarding the scandal. Senator Maria Cantwell, a Democrat from
Washington, used her allotted time to question Zuckerberg about Palantir,
which she claimed was now being referred to as "Stanford Analytica."
Zuckerberg said that he knew of Palantir but was unaware of the accusations
against the company concerning the improper use of Facebook's data. He told
Cantwell he was "not really that familiar with what Palantir does," which
seemed like a dubious claim. More likely, his comment was a put-down
masquerading as a plea of ignorance, a way of saying that Palantir was too small
and inconsequential to draw his attention. After years of being swiped at by
Karp, the Senate hearing gave Zuckerberg an opportunity to hit back, and it
appeared he took it.
For people who regarded Palantir as sketchy, the Cambridge Analytica
imbroglio was just more evidence that the company was untrustworthy. Its
connection to the scandal also fed into a broader narrative about Palantir being
in the service of Thiel's political agenda. The immigration issue was seen in that
light, and now Palantir had been linked to a plot to manipulate millions of
people into voting for Thiel's chosen candidate. Meanwhile, in return for his
support of Trump, Thiel had gained vast influence in Washington. Several of his
acolytes got senior positions in the Trump administration. Michael Kratsios,
Thiel's former chief of staff, was appointed chief technology adviser in the
White House. Kevin Harrington, another former aide, was named to the
National Security Council. Some people in Thiel's orbit referred to him as the
"shadow president." And as Palantir began winning lucrative Pentagon
contracts, many observers wondered if it, too, was benefiting from Thiel's
donation to Trump.
Three weeks before the Cambridge Analytica scandal broke, the Army awarded
Palantir and Raytheon a ten-year, $876 million contract to build the
replacement for D-sigs. It was a surprising conclusion to Palantir's long and

costly battle with the Pentagon, and it wasn't the only contract that the
company got from the Army during Trump's first presidency: a year later, it won
a $440 million contract to build Vantage, the database that tracked troop
preparedness and supply availability. Palantir also landed an $80 million deal to
aid the Navy with logistics.
Palantir executives bridled at suggestions that the White House was steering
contracts their way. "Donald Trump wouldn't know how to spell Palantir," one
said. According to Doug Philippone, the allegations of cronyism were
unfounded. The Pentagon procurement process had its problems—no one
knew that better than him—but between stringent rules governing how
contracts were to be awarded and normal bureaucratic inertia (and with over
three million employees, the Defense Department was the world's largest
bureaucracy), it really couldn't be manipulated by blatant political interference.
"That's just not how it works," said Philippone. For his part, Karp pushed back
against the idea that Palantir was benefiting from Thiel's links to Trump. He said
it was "completely ridiculous" and bemoaned the "unfairness it creates towards
us." Whatever favor that Thiel enjoyed with Trump, said Karp, was more than
offset by his own opposition to the president. "I think they already know my
views at the White House," he said. "It's true that Peter is chairman, [but] I'm
running the company, I don't have close ties with the Trump administration."
There were no specific allegations of impropriety regarding the military
contracts awarded to Palantir. And certainly, it would have been hard to argue
that the company didn't deserve the contract to replace D-sigs, given that its
technology had proven to be superior on the battlefield. But Thiel's White
House connections caused every Defense Department deal that Palantir won to
be viewed with skepticism. Moreover, a lawsuit that Amazon brought against
the Pentagon in 2019 alleged that Trump had indeed corrupted the
procurement process.
Amazon claimed it had been passed over for a $10 billion cloud-computing
contract with the military because of pressure from Trump. The president had
repeatedly attacked Amazon's founder and chief executive, Jeff Bezos, and had
publicly stated that he did not want the company to get the deal. He had
supposedly conveyed the same message in private: Amazon's lawsuit cited a

comment by Defense Secretary James Mattis's former speechwriter, who said
that Trump had personally ordered the Pentagon chief to "screw Amazon."
When Microsoft won the contract, Amazon decided to sue. In May 2020, the
U.S. Court of Federal Claims, the same court that had found in Palantir's favor
in its complaint against the Army, ordered the contract be put on hold until
Amazon's case could be adjudicated. Just over a year later, the Pentagon
announced that it was scrapping the deal and reopening the bidding process. It
attributed the decision to "evolving requirements, increased cloud conservancy,
and industry advances." However, in a press release, Microsoft indicated that the
Defense Department had spiked the contract because it feared "a years-long
litigation battle." For its part, Amazon issued a statement hailing the reversal but
reiterating its charge that the contract had been awarded as a result of "outside
influence that has no place in government procurement." Ultimately, the
military split the new contract among four vendors: Amazon, Microsoft, Oracle,
and Google.
As it happened, Google essentially handed Palantir what was arguably the
most consequential military contract it won during Trump's first presidency. In
2017, the Pentagon started a program called Project Maven, which aimed to
bring artificial intelligence and machine learning to the battlefield—specifically,
for drone targeting. Google was awarded a $10 million contract to help the
Defense Department build out this capability; it was a relatively meager amount
as military contracts go, but Google executives thought it would lead to more
lucrative opportunities. However, thousands of Google employees objected to
the company's involvement. They believed that weaponizing AI was inherently
wrong and ran counter to Google's ethos, expressed in its famous tagline,
"Don't be evil." A handful of people quit in protest. For the better part of a year,
internal protest racked Google. In June 2018, the company announced that it
was pulling out of Maven.
For Karp, the controversy over Maven was an opportunity to try to shift
some of the opprobrium that was being directed at Palantir to Google, and he
lashed out at the search giant. He called it "borderline craven" and disparagingly
referred to the employees who had protested as "super-woke engineers." Thiel
joined in the criticism. Speaking at a conservative conference in Washington, he

noted that while Google had backed away from its Pentagon contract, it had set
up an AI lab in China, which was almost certainly going to be used to help
China's military. He called Google's behavior "borderline treasonous," suggested
that the company had been infiltrated by foreign agents, and called on the CIA
and FBI to investigate that possibility in "a not excessively gentle manner."
In September 2019, Karp published an op-ed in The Washington Post
excoriating Google and the rest of Silicon Valley over what he claimed was their
betrayal of the U.S. military and, by extension, American democracy. He
suggested that Google's decision to bail on Maven had undermined national
security and had subverted the will of the voters. "The U.S. marine serves; the
Silicon Valley executives walk," Karp wrote, adding, "This is wrong." He noted
that Palantir, by contrast, had stood by its contract with ICE in the face of
protests because it was not its place to try to thwart decisions that had been
made by elected officials. He said tech companies could not be permitted to
exercise veto power over actions taken by the government. "This is not the way
consequential policy decisions should be made," Karp argued. "I don't believe I
should have that authority." He said policy belonged to policymakers, not
"unelected engineers running global businesses in a precious corner of a golden
state."
When I visited Karp in Vermont a few weeks later, he was still bashing
Google. In his view, Maven was nothing less than the Manhattan Project of the
twenty-first century—as with the atomic bomb, the country that gained a
military edge with AI would "determine the world order tomorrow," as he put
it. Alluding to China, Karp said the choice was a stark one: "Do you want the
world order to be materially shaped by people who do not have a significant
commitment to human rights? It's an alternative worldview, but it doesn't
include free speech, it doesn't include the rule of law, it doesn't include a
protection of minorities, it doesn't include an independent judiciary, it doesn't
include a sense of radical liberty." Karp's answer—Palantir's answer—was an
emphatic no; the company was all-in when it came to defending the West.
"We're making Western institutions strong and, in some cases, dominant," he
said. "That's our narrative. Now, that's probably not a popular narrative in the
Valley. It's a very popular narrative in the rest of America. What's Google's

narrative? We destroy the media, we divide the country, we take away your job,
we get rich, and by the way, when the country needs you, we're nowhere to be
found." He added that if the "Google standard takes hold, the single biggest
strategic asset America has, which is our ability to produce software platforms,
will be taken out of the hands of our warfighters. And that de facto means our
adversaries are in a much stronger position."
At that point, it was unclear if any other tech company had assumed Google's
role in Maven. But as I listened to Karp, a thought occurred to me: Had Palantir
replaced Google? Nothing Karp had said gave any hint that Palantir was working
on Maven. Maybe it was just the added vehemence with which he spoke—he
was always animated, but this topic had him especially riled—plus the fact that
Maven was exactly the kind of project that would appeal to Palantir. As we
walked along the cross-country-skiing trail, I asked him if Palantir had taken over
for Google. "Well, I can't really comment on that," Karp replied. I took his
answer to be a non-denial and later confirmed that Palantir was indeed now
involved with Maven. In addition to the Maven news, I learned something else
that afternoon in Vermont. I realized that Karp's diatribes against Google were
not purely a strategic ploy; the guy also just liked to argue.
But if his aim, in repeatedly attacking Google, was to try to take some of the
pressure off Palantir, it didn't work; the company remained an object of scorn
and mistrust. This feeling was due in no small part to Thiel, as even many
Palantirians acknowledged. "Peter is our biggest problem," one Palantir
executive told me. And it wasn't just Thiel's support for Trump that was causing
difficulties. A month after I saw Karp in Vermont, I attended a conference in
Washington where he was one of the keynote speakers. During his talk, Karp
was asked about facial-recognition technology and gave an unequivocal answer:
he thought it should be used by the police only for exculpatory purposes, to
exonerate people who were suspected or falsely accused of crimes. A few months
later, The New York Times reported that Thiel had secretly backed a start-up
called Clearview AI, whose facial-recognition app was being used by police
departments nationwide to charge individuals. Thiel's investment in Clearview
AI contradicted Karp's position and also raised doubts, not for the first time,

about the sincerity of the views that Thiel had expressed regarding civil liberties
and privacy.
For a long time, the perception that Karp and Thiel were ideological
opposites had redounded to Palantir's benefit: it suggested that the company was
a broad church internally and was doing work of such critical importance that it
transcended partisanship. That Karp, a self-declared progressive, was the CEO
helped assuage concerns about Thiel's involvement with Palantir. But that was
before Trump. Now some Palantirians wondered how Karp, having claimed that
fascism was his biggest fear, could abide his cofounder's embrace of right-wing
populism. It puzzled Karp's family, too. They understood that Karp and Thiel
were friends, but a lot of friendships had splintered over Trump—and Thiel, of
course, was no ordinary Trump supporter. (Every time he heard his brother
railing against "wokeism," Ben Karp couldn't help but wonder if that was the
way one needed to talk to be part of the so-called Thielverse.)
Moreover, if you took Karp at his word, he and Thiel were now working at
cross-purposes. Karp insisted that keeping the far right out of power was part of
Palantir's mission. Yet its chairman of the board was now using his wealth and
influence to promote the far right, and this wasn't a Hegelian contradiction that
could just be ironed out. Palantir was devoted to the defense of the West, but
Thiel appeared to have a different view than Karp about what that meant—
about what was worth defending. Based on what he had written and said, as well
as the candidates he had supported, it could be surmised that Thiel thought of
the West principally in terms of cultural identity—as a group of nations bound
by their Judeo-Christian heritage and, in varying degrees, by a commitment to
free enterprise. For him, defending the West was about protecting these
bedrocks of Western life; it clearly did not mean safeguarding multiracial,
pluralistic democracy. Karp might have been fine with America's changing
complexion, but judging by his support for highly restrictive immigration
policies, Thiel plainly was not.
Thiel recognized that he had become a public relations liability for Palantir,
and not long after Trump took office, in 2017, he told Karp that if he ever
wanted him to step down from the company's board, he would. But Karp had
no interest in asking for his resignation. As he later explained to me, he benefited

enormously from Thiel's counsel and believed it was essential that he remain
formally involved with Palantir. "I think Peter is invaluable as an intellectual
asset," Karp said. "He's an irreplaceable intellectual asset." He said Thiel was also
a cherished friend and that he was not going to let a spate of bad press come
between them. In addition, he felt indebted to Thiel and thought it would have
been an act of betrayal to part ways with him just because it might have been
expedient. "Peter brought me into the game; no one else would have brought me
in as a cofounder, no one else would have supported me as CEO," Karp said.
When I suggested to Karp that the conversation about Palantir might have
been a little different had Thiel not been associated with the company, he
rejected the premise. In his view, the better question was: Where would Palantir
have been without Thiel? Karp believed that Palantir had profited not just from
Thiel's business savvy but also from his fame, including the controversy that he
generated. Palantir, particularly when it was still a fledgling start-up, needed to
establish a strong brand identity; Karp, by virtue of his leadership role in the
company, had obviously contributed more than anyone else to building
Palantir's brand. But Thiel's name recognition and notoriety had helped.
Beyond that, Karp thought that people were reading too much into Thiel's
support for Trump. During our conversation in Vermont, he suggested that
Thiel had embraced Trump in 2016 because it was an opportunity to épater les
bourgeois—to shock the establishment. "Peter is a provocateur," Karp told me.
Backing Trump reflected the same impulses that had guided Thiel when he
edited The Stanford Review. Karp refused to believe that Thiel was attracted to
the darker aspects of Trumpism, specifically the bigotry that had animated his
candidacy. A year after I visited Karp in Vermont, on the eve of the 2020
presidential election, it was reported that Thiel had met with several well-known
white nationalists during the 2016 campaign. When I asked Karp about those
claims, he dismissed it as a nonissue and suggested that the fact that he, a biracial
Jew, was Palantir's CEO was proof that Thiel was not himself a white
nationalist. "I wouldn't be in this position if it were true, would I?" he said.

Trump's presidency brought even greater scrutiny to Palantir's work with police
departments. Fears about civil liberties were now joined to concerns that the
police would be enlisted to help with the immigration crackdown. Those
worries were not unwarranted: in 2019, the ACLU of Northern California
released the results of an investigation it had conducted that found that around
eighty police departments in that region alone had shared with ICE data
gathered from automatic license plate readers. According to Bloomberg
Businessweek, ICE detained at least two immigrants in Chicago because their
names were in a police database of gang members, even though neither man
belonged to a gang. Chicago was a sanctuary city, and it was unclear how ICE
obtained the erroneous information. Bloomberg Businessweek suggested one
possibility: Palantir had a contract to help the Cook County Sheriff's Office pull
in additional data, including gang lists compiled by police departments
throughout Illinois.
But it was Palantir's work with the New Orleans Police Department that
became a particular flashpoint during Trump's first presidency. As with ICE, the
relationship predated Trump. It started in 2012 and was brokered by James
Carville, the Democratic consultant and a native of Louisiana. Palantir, as part
of its effort to win more government business, had hired Carville as an adviser. It
was an unlikely match: Carville was a campaign operative, the mastermind
behind Bill Clinton's 1992 presidential run, with no background in technology.
But he was a popular figure in political circles and was seen as another person
who could possibly help Palantir navigate Washington.
However, he ended up leading Palantir to an opportunity in his hometown.
Carville was appalled by the violence plaguing New Orleans at the time. While
the city had largely recovered from the devastation of Hurricane Katrina, it had
the highest per capita murder rate in the United States. It had been that way for
years, defying all manner of effort to reduce the number of homicides. But
Carville thought that Palantir's technology could possibly succeed where human
intervention had failed; it seemed worth a shot, anyway, and he arranged for the
city's mayor, Mitch Landrieu, scion of a Louisiana political dynasty, to meet
with Karp. They spoke for about an hour; at the end, Karp said he thought that

Palantir could help and offered the city free use of the company's software,
which Landrieu accepted.
New Orleans looked to be a particularly challenging engagement. On the one
hand, there was wide agreement among scholars that data-driven policing,
dependent on algorithms developed by human beings, tended to reflect and
reinforce existing biases—which is to say, it inevitably involved racial profiling
and often led to even more of it. On other hand, 90 percent of the homicide
victims in New Orleans were black, and 90 percent of the perpetrators were
black. If the goal was to reduce the city's murder rate, there was no getting
around the fact that it was overwhelmingly a problem of black-on-black
violence. And at least according to some people in Karp's orbit, his decision to
assist New Orleans was rooted to a degree in his own identity: he wanted to help
a black community in need.
Palantir made its technology available to New Orleans with the stipulation
that it could not be used for predictive policing, but rather, only for preventive
policing. It might have seemed like a hairsplitting distinction (and in the view of
many civil libertarians, it was), but there was a difference. Predictive policing is
primarily about identifying places where crimes are likely to be committed—so-
called hot spots—and upping the police presence there in the hope of thwarting
robberies and murders. Preventive policing, by contrast, uses data to intervene at
an earlier stage—to identify individuals who, because of where they live, whom
they associate with, or their previous behavior, seem at greater risk of
committing or falling victim to violent crimes. The police attempt to guide these
individuals away from potential trouble—by, for instance, offering those with
known gang connections inducements to steer clear of trouble. Courtney
Bowman, Palantir's head of privacy and civil liberties, says that preventive
policing is "more ameliorative than punitive."
Between 2012 and 2015, the murder rate in New Orleans fell by 25 percent.
But according to Jeff Asher, who worked as a crime analyst for the City of New
Orleans from 2013 to 2015, it had little to do with Palantir. Much of the
violence in New Orleans was gang-related, and Asher, a former CIA analyst, was
attached to what was known as the Multi-Agency Gang Unit. In that capacity,
Asher made frequent use of Gotham, the software platform that Palantir was

supplying the city. At the CIA, he had used Analyst's Notebook and had no
difficultly figuring out how to operate Gotham. But he said he was the only
person he knew in the gang unit who used Palantir. While the software
performed well, it did require some technical skill and training to operate. "It
was intuitive," said Asher, "but not for cops." The detectives he worked with
would attend tutorials with Palantir engineers, but they didn't really need the
software for their work and also struggled to understand how to use it. "It was
like trying to teach your grandfather," he quipped. In his view, the drop in the
city's murder rate was mostly the result of the successful prosecution of gang
members on racketeering charges, which had a deterrent effect, at least for a
time. He said the fundamental problem for Palantir in New Orleans was that the
police department didn't have a dedicated team of analysts; it was just him. A
bigger department that had more analysts and that took data-driven policing
more seriously would have been a better fit for Palantir.
In 2018, three years after Asher left his job, the online tech magazine The
Verge published an article that alleged that the New Orleans Police Department
was operating a secret anti-crime program with the help of Palantir and that the
company was using New Orleans as a testing ground for developing predictive
policing technology. The article was marred by some erroneous claims.
Although a number of New Orleans officials insisted that they were unaware of
the city's relationship with Palantir, it wasn't a secret: Palantir's 2015 annual
report discussed its work in New Orleans, and the mayor's office likewise noted
Palantir's involvement on a website it had set up that detailed its effort to combat
violent crime. The Verge's allegation about predictive policing technology was
also wrong. It was based on a patent that Palantir filed in 2014 for what it called
a crime risk forecasting system. However, Bowman says that the patent was for a
program that Palantir had developed with a European law enforcement agency
and made no use of the company's work in New Orleans.
Palantir also disputed The Verge's claim that it had facilitated predictive
policing in New Orleans. In a seven-page response to the article that he posted
on Palantir's in-house blog, Bowman said the company "did not develop or
deploy any predictive policing algorithms or capabilities" during its
collaboration with the city of New Orleans and had, in fact, rejected a request

from the police department for help in that regard. He pointed to an email
exchange, cited in The Verge article, that he had with a department crime analyst
(not Asher), who had compiled a "gang member scorecard" in which individuals
were ranked according to the number of gun-related incidents they had
previously been involved with. In one email, Bowman explained to the analyst
that he had "serious concerns about instituting a ranking or numeric scoring
approach" and that "an opaque scoring algorithm substitutes the veneer of
quantitative certainty for more holistic, qualitative judgment and human
culpability." Bowman told me that the analyst wanted help integrating the
scorecard into the data pool that Palantir had created for the police department
but that he turned down the request precisely because Palantir was unwilling to
abet anything that smacked of predictive policing.
But The Verge article caused an uproar among civic organizations in New
Orleans, and within days of its publication, the city announced that it was
terminating its relationship with Palantir. The controversy infuriated Karp.
When I brought it up several years later, he remained bitter. "I will go to my
grave never accepting the critique of our work in New Orleans as being anything
but an abysmal embarrassment for the people who made it," he said. He insisted,
pace Asher, that Palantir's software had helped cut the murder rate and said that
the company's critics were "very misaligned with the people they claim to
protect."
Contrary to what some of his colleagues had told me, Karp denied that his
own identity had factored into his decision to help New Orleans. He said that
while he was "very happy to stop black-on-black genocide," it was simply a
humanitarian gesture, something he would have done for any other community.
Karp said he was still dumbstruck that something that had been so well-
intentioned and—at least in his telling—effective had been portrayed in such a
nefarious light. "How do you make saving lives into anything other than what it
was?" he asked. "It is mind-boggling to me that the advocates of human rights
are so theologically attached to their view that they would rather that the
genocide continues than to have a mild intervention that largely was around
meeting with the friends and of people who are likely to engage in violence and

calming them down. Shutting down that program, I'm certain, between now
and then, cost hundreds of lives."
To Karp, the New Orleans fracas was emblematic of what he saw as the left's
descent into mindless dogmatism. He said that many liberals now seemed "to
reject quantification of any kind. And I don't understand how being anti-
quantitative is in any way progressive." They also appeared more interested in
posturing than in improving the lives of the people they were ostensibly seeking
to assist. Karp said that he was actually the true progressive. "If you are
championing an ideology whose logical consequence is that thousands and
thousands and thousands of people over time that you claim to defend are killed,
maimed, go to prison—how is what I'm saying not progressive when what you
are saying is going to lead to a cycle of poverty?"
He conceded, though, that partnering with local law enforcement, at least in
the United States, was just too complicated. "Police departments are hard
because you have an overlay of legitimate ethical concerns," Karp said. "I would
also say there is a politicization of legitimate ethical issues to the detriment of the
poorest members of our urban environments." He acknowledged, too, that the
payoff from police work wasn't enough to justify the agita that came with it.
And in truth, there hadn't been much of a payoff; indeed, Palantir's technology
was no longer being used by any U.S. police departments. The New York City
Police Department had terminated its contract with Palantir in 2017 and
replaced the company's software with its own data analysis tool. In 2021, the Los
Angeles Police Department had ended its relationship with Palantir, partly in
response to growing public pressure. (Palantir still had contracts with police
departments in several European countries.)
But as fraught as Trump's first presidency was for Palantir, it yielded what
became arguably the company's most consequential deployment. During the
Covid-19 pandemic, Palantir's software was used by the U.S. government to
track the spread of the disease and to manage the distribution of personal
protective equipment, or PPE, such as gloves and masks. It was also an integral
part of the vaccine roll-out. The pandemic became Palantir's ultimate proof-of-
concept moment and a transformative event in the life of the company, a point

accentuated by Karp's decision to take Palantir public at the height of the global
health emergency.
OceanofPDF.com

EIGHT
PROOF OF CONCEPT
On a weekend morning in late February 2020, Karp was cross-country skiing
near his New Hampshire home. He was joined by one of the Norwegians, but
there was little conversation; in general, Karp liked to be alone with his own
thoughts when he was skiing, and there was a lot on his mind that day. A novel
coronavirus that had started in China a few months earlier was spreading around
the world. In Europe and North America, the first deaths had been reported,
and the data indicated that the doubling rate—the number of days that it took
for the case count to double—appeared to be getting smaller, which meant the
virus was propagating at an increasingly rapid pace. As Karp contemplated these
developments, it became clear to him that it was no longer possible to prevent
Covid-19 from becoming a global pandemic.
As soon as he returned to the house, he called other Palantir executives and
told them that he was closing the company's offices indefinitely and that
employees were to begin working from home. Karp had been accompanied to
New Hampshire by two of his Austrian assistants, Gabriel and Günter, as well as
several bodyguards. Karp was a germophobe, and he was already requiring
everyone to wear surgical masks and to keep their distance from one another
(and, most importantly, from him). Now he told them that they were all going
to have to hunker down in New Hampshire, possibly for some time. On Karp's
instructions, members of the security team drove to a nearby supermarket and
bought several months' worth of canned foods, which after being wiped off with
disinfectant were stored in the basement of the house. Karp, worried about
possible civil unrest, also had them stock up on ammo. "We bought a lot of
bullets," he says.
Over that same weekend, Dr. Deborah Birx was in Johannesburg, South
Africa, for a conference on AIDS. Birx was the U.S. global AIDS coordinator

and oversaw PEPFAR, which stood for President's Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief. This $100 billion program, started under President George W. Bush,
funded AIDS treatment, prevention, and research in Africa and other parts of
the developing world. But although AIDS was ostensibly the focus of the
meeting in Johannesburg, Birx and other attendees were keeping close watch on
Covid-19. While in South Africa, she received a call from White House aide
Matt Pottinger, who worked on the National Security Council (he had
previously been a Marine and had coauthored with Lieutenant General Michael
Flynn the "Fixing Intel" report that had caught Doug Philippone's eye). Birx
and Pottinger were friends, but this was not a social call: he asked if she would be
willing to serve as the White House coronavirus response coordinator, a position
created to help the Trump administration handle what was rapidly metastasizing
into a crisis.
Birx agreed to take the job and flew to Washington to assume her new duties.
She knew that the only hope of containing the virus was to marshal as much
data as possible as quickly as possible. "You control pandemics through the use
of data," she said. "That's how you do it." But it would not be easy. Despite
being the world's most prosperous and technologically advanced nation, the
United States had a Rube Goldberg system when it came to health care data—
every state did things a little differently, and between antiquated and
disconnected reporting systems, inconsistent or incomplete data gathering, and
enormous disparities in how data was collected, formatted, and stored, trying to
accurately track the spread of the virus was going to be difficult. A New York
Times article about the case of an Alaska woman who caught Covid described
the challenge:
After the woman was tested, her workplace transferred her nasal swab to
the Fairbanks state laboratory. There, workers manually entered basic
information into an electronic lab report, searching a state database for
the woman's address and telephone number. The state lab then forwarded
her case report to the state health department's epidemiology section,
where the same information had to be retyped into a database that feeds
the C.D.C.'s national disease surveillance database. A worker logged in

and clicked through multiple screens in yet another state database to learn
that the woman had not been vaccinated, then manually updated her file.
The epidemiology section then added the woman's case to a spreadsheet
with more than 1,500 others recorded that day. That was forwarded to a
different team of contact tracers, who gathered other important details
about the woman by telephone, then plugged those details into yet
another database. The result was a rich stew of information, but because
the contact tracers' database is incompatible with the epidemiologists'
database, their information could not be easily shared at either the state or
the federal level. For example, when the contact tracers learned a few days
later that the woman had been hospitalized with Covid, they had to
inform the epidemiology section by email, and the epidemiologists got the
hospital's confirmation by fax.
This was one case in one sparsely populated state, involving a virus that
would sicken millions of people across all fifty states.
After Birx's appointment was announced, Julie Bush, who ran Palantir's
health care business, emailed her offering the company's assistance. Bush and
Birx were acquainted because Palantir had supplied its technology free of charge
to PEPFAR, which used it to analyze the efficacy of its work down to the level of
individual clinics. Birx had found Palantir to be a valuable resource, and she
arranged to see Bush. They met on March 7 in the Old Executive Office
Building, next to the White House, where Matt Pottinger joined them. Birx was
blunt: she needed help, urgently. The Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, or CDC, was trying to track the virus, but the decrepit and slapdash
state of America's health data infrastructure—including the CDC's own
systems—made it almost impossible to generate accurate numbers. (A joke in
public health circles was that CDC stood for "Can't Do Computers.") It was so
bad that Birx and others had decided that open-source information was more
reliable. "I'm getting my data off CNN," Birx told Bush.
A few days later, Bush returned to the Old Executive Office Building, this
time accompanied by two colleagues: Aki Jain, who now oversaw Palantir's U.S.
government operations, and Hirsh Jain (no relation), a forward-deployed

engineer. The three Palantirians met with Birx and the team she had hastily
assembled. One of the people she had recruited was Amy Gleason, a former
nurse who worked for the United States Digital Service. USDS was an office of
the executive branch established by the Obama administration in the wake of the
bungled rollout of Healthcare.gov, the online portal for Obamacare. USDS
provided information technology consulting for federal agencies and was staffed
in part by outside experts who would join the government for a few years before
returning to the private sector.
Gleason specialized in healthcare technology, with a focus on interoperability
—making it easier for health care professionals to obtain and share data. For her,
it was a personal issue: her daughter had a rare disease that required her to see a
dozen physicians spread over six different health systems in three states, and the
difficulty those doctors encountered when trying to share information with one
another electronically had led Gleason to change careers. She, as much as anyone
else, was acutely aware of the data challenge that Covid posed. Gleason had
never heard of Palantir and was, by her own admission, "extremely skeptical"
going into the meeting with Bush and her colleagues. Palantir had limited
experience in the health care sector, and this was a once-in-a-century pandemic
in a country that struggled to collect and disseminate population-wide medical
data. Gleason had come to see that even basic information—how many total
beds a hospital had, for instance—was not readily accessible. "We had no way to
know anything about our health care system," she says. The self-assurance of the
Palantirians only deepened her skepticism. She says, "Everything I asked, they
were like, 'Yeah, we can do that,' and 'Sure, we can do that.' And I was like, 'No,
that's impossible.' "
But the Palantir team hadn't overpromised. Using Foundry, the software
platform that had replaced Metropolis, around sixty Palantir employees began
integrating the data that Birx's team needed to find emerging hot spots and get
resources to them. The data they pulled in included case counts, testing
numbers, hospitalizations, and hospital bed availability, as well as supplies of
ventilators, personal protective gear, and therapeutic treatments. The
Palantirians broke up into teams—one group for cases, another for supply chain
issues—and worked around the clock (employees in Australia and Europe

contributed to the effort). Most worked remotely, but Julie Bush and Hirsh Jain
were on-site with Birx's team—first at FEMA headquarters, later at the
Department of Health and Human Services, or HHS. Bush, who was pregnant
at the time, says it was a harrowing experience. "There was a lot we didn't know
about the virus, there was no vaccine yet—it was scary," she says. For social
distancing, they used microphones to talk to one another.
The raw data, gathered from all three thousand counties in the United States,
was often a mess, and there was no consistency in how it was reported. It came
via Excel spreadsheets, PowerPoints, and PDFs. Palantir's engineers harmonized
the data into a standardized structure. "It was one of the hardest technical
challenges I've seen," says Jain. Even so, within a matter of days, Palantir had
built a dashboard, later christened HHS Protect, that was yielding daily,
comprehensive updates for Birx and her team. By the third week, the system had
incorporated around three hundred different data sources, merging roughly two
billion data elements, and had become the most up-to-date and reliable gauge,
public or private, tracking the spread of the virus and efforts to contain it.
Gleason was struck not just by Palantir's efficiency, but also by the "intelligence"
of the company's software. There was a lot of bad data coming in, which was
often just the result of typing mistakes or clerical errors. "Someone would fat-
finger a daily case count," says Gleason. Foundry would flag numbers that
seemed off, which was critical to ensuring that the totals were correct.
This work took place in the background. What the public saw was a daily shit
show in the White House briefing room, in which President Trump, surrounded
by members of the Covid response task force, including Birx, downplayed the
severity of the outbreak and peddled quack remedies, such as UV lighting ("it
will kill it in one minute," Trump said) and a drug used to deworm horses and
other livestock. Sadly for Birx, one of the defining moments of the Covid crisis
was at a briefing on April 24, 2020, when Trump turned to her and asked her to
investigate whether injecting disinfectant into the body would eliminate the
virus. Birx was seated in a chair to the side of the podium, and the pained
expression that fell across her face went viral. By that point, Birx had the data she
needed to mount an effective response to the pandemic; what was missing was
competent leadership at the top.

It was public knowledge that the government was using Palantir's software to
manage the pandemic. However, some of the reporting was erroneous or
incomplete. Claims that Palantir had been brought in at Trump's behest, as
another gift to Thiel, were untrue—it was Birx who enlisted Palantir's help, and
it was her decision alone (and Gleason says that among civil servants, there was
some resistance to Palantir—she says that she received messages from a handful
of colleagues urging Birx's team not to use Palantir because they thought that
the company was shady and also because of the ICE controversy). Some critics
noted that the two contracts that Palantir was awarded to assist with the Covid
response, worth a combined $25 million, were not subject to competitive
bidding. That was partly correct—the country was facing an unprecedented
public health emergency, and there was no time to follow the normal
procurement process. But Palantir was initially hired on a thirty-day trial basis,
and Birx's team considered several other software vendors before going with
Palantir. Meanwhile, immigration activists raised concerns that patient
information that was being funneled through Palantir's software could be used
to apprehend undocumented workers. That did not happen, nor was it possible:
the Covid data was anonymized.
Amid all the craziness with Trump (and the scrutiny that it brought to
Palantir), the effort to track and contain the virus became ever more refined.
Hirsh Jain says that despite the sometimes unhelpful messaging from the White
House, behind the scenes, among the civil servants at HHS and other
government agencies who were drawing on insights derived from Palantir's
technology, there was a level of "operational excellence" that remained
undiminished. This proved especially true during the vaccine rollout, which also
involved Palantir and was a resounding success. In June 2020, the company was
contracted to build a dashboard for Operation Warp Speed, the public-private
joint venture to expedite the creation of a Covid vaccine. As with HHS Protect,
Foundry was the software for the dashboard, which was called Tiberius and that
was provided to all fifty states to help them manage vaccine supplies and
distribution, as well as to monitor vaccine uptake.
The United States was not the only country that used Palantir's software
during the pandemic. The company provided Foundry to around twelve other

nations. Initially, Palantir gave it to most of them at no cost, which in addition
to being an altruistic gesture was also a shrewd one—a way of potentially
drumming up business amid crisis. Palantir charged Great Britain's National
Health Service, or NHS, £1 for the software, which it used for the same
functions that the U.S. government did—to trace the spread of the virus, to
collect testing and hospitalization data, and to help with the disbursement of
critical supplies. The British likewise turned to Palantir's technology for their
own vaccine program. The British government later rewarded Palantir with a
nearly $600 million contract to revamp the NHS's data infrastructure.
Palantir also played a central role in the most important humanitarian effort
undertaken during Covid. In early 2019, the World Food Programme, or WFP,
signed a five-year, $45 million contract with Palantir. The collaboration grew out
of a pilot project that Palantir did with the WFP involving a supply chain
optimization tool. According to the WFP, the program yielded nearly $30
million in savings, and on the back of that success, it entered into a long-term
agreement to use Palantir's technology in its operations. Several aid groups
denounced the deal, citing Palantir's ties to the CIA, as well as the Thiel
connection. They also expressed mistrust of Palantir and questioned whether it
would keep the data anonymized. Some suggested that the company, stung by
the controversy over ICE, was trying to launder its reputation through the tie-up
with the WFP.
But officials at the WFP were undeterred. Pierre Guillaume Wielezynski, the
WFP's chief of digital transformation services, says that it was clear to him and
his colleagues that Palantir was genuinely interested in helping with its relief
efforts. Through experience, he had developed a good sense for when potential
partners were looking to reap a PR benefit. "We've had folks who have wanted to
partner with us because they want the press release, the tweet, the photo,"
Wielezynski says. "But with Palantir, that never came across as one of their
objectives. They never asked us for a communications campaign, they never
asked us for visibility."
Palantir's software proved to be a critical asset when Covid hit. As the global
economy came to a halt, supply chains froze, disrupting shipments of wheat,
corn, and other staples. There was grave concern that the pandemic would cause

mass starvation across large swaths of Africa. But through its use of Foundry, the
WFP had a comprehensive view of where food supplies were located, where they
were needed most urgently, and the most expeditious way to get them there, and
it was ultimately able to prevent widespread famine. Not only that: the WFP's
ability to deliver emergency assistance was so robust that the World Health
Organization (WHO) used it to send personal protective gear to health
professionals throughout Africa. While there is no way to calculate how many
lives the WFP saved during Covid, the number was enormous, and Palantir
proved essential to this effort. "Without Palantir, we wouldn't have pulled it
off," says Wielezynski. In October 2020, the WFP was awarded the Nobel Peace
Prize for its work on combating hunger. The Nobel committee cited the Covid
response as one of the reasons it had selected the WFP as that year's recipient.
While all this was happening, Karp was in isolation in the woods. He had
personal assistants with him as well as his security detail, but in his mind, he was
effectively alone. He didn't like running the company remotely—it was
antithetical to his management style, which was built around making himself
accessible (that was why he insisted that he needed to be on the road some three
hundred days a year). But Palantir continued to function well even though all
3,500 employees were working from home.
While the pandemic was wretched for most people, Karp found it blissful.
He recognized that millions were suffering, and he was sympathetic (and took
pride in the help that Palantir was providing). But he savored the downtime that
Covid gave him, as well as the quiet. "In the beginning, it wasn't clear whether
everyone was going to die," he says. "But once I knew that I wasn't going to die,
I was in heaven. It was the best thing ever in my adult life. I was so happy, and it
underscored my certitude that I am a deeply introverted person." Had he not felt
a strong attachment to his colleagues and the company, he would have happily
remained in seclusion.
As he was enjoying this solitude, Karp decided that the time had come to take
Palantir public. While it was a move that was likely to make him extraordinarly
rich, it had the potential to undermine the company's culture. Palantir was
nothing if not idiosyncratic; it had been built in Karp's image, and

unconventionality was arguably its greatest strength. Now, though, Karp was
prepared to put that at risk.
In early April 2020, as Covid was ravaging much of the planet, Palantir held a
virtual board meeting. As soon as the executive session was over, Karp called
Dave Glazer, Palantir's de facto CFO. In typical fashion, Karp skipped the
pleasantries and got right to the point. "Oh, hey," he said, "we're going to need
to go public in two months." Glazer, a lawyer who had specialized in IPOs
before joining Palantir, suppressed the urge to laugh and told Karp it couldn't
happen that quickly. "Well, what about three months?" Karp asked. That would
also be impossible, Glazer explained, adding that the Securities and Exchange
Commission, or SEC, would ultimately determine the timing. But by that
point, it was clear to Glazer that Karp, after resisting the idea for so long, was
suddenly ready to take Palantir public.
It had occurred to Karp that the pandemic might actually be an ideal time for
such an offering. He recognized that the company was an oddity: it derived
around 50 percent of its revenue from government contracts, and much of its
work involved matters that couldn't be disclosed publicly. Moreover, Wall Street
still struggled to make sense of Palantir and whether it was truly a technology
company or a consulting firm masquerading as one. On top of that, Palantir had
been in business for seventeen years and had yet to turn a profit. Under normal
circumstances, it might have been a hard sell. But Karp figured that other
companies that had been contemplating IPOs were likely to put off going public
until the pandemic was over and that amid a dearth of new listings, perhaps
investors would be more inclined to overlook or downplay what they didn't like
about Palantir. "In this environment, maybe our warts mattered a little less
now," as Glazer put it. (As it happened, though, other companies also saw
opportunity in the Covid crisis, and the second half of 2020 brought a wave of
IPOs.)
Another factor was that year's presidential election. Between Thiel's support
for Trump and the controversy over ICE, Palantir had incurred the wrath of

many people on the left, including prominent figures like U.S. Senator Elizabeth
Warren and U.S. Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, and there was
concern that the company's business might suffer under a Democratic
administration. (On the eve of Palantir's public listing, Ocasio-Cortez wrote a
letter to the SEC asking it to delay the stock's debut and to investigate a broad
range of problems that she identified with the company. The SEC did not
comply with her request.) In June 2020, The Intercept noted that an online
biography of Avril Haines, one of Joe Biden's chief foreign policy advisers, no
longer noted that she had served as a consultant to Palantir; the implication was
that Palantir was now so toxic that Democrats were afraid to be associated with
the company. Going public before the election seemed like a wise move given the
blowback that Palantir might face if the Democrats reclaimed the White House.
But Palantir also had some points in its favor. Its government business was
booming—between all the defense contracts that it had won and its frontline
role in the battle against Covid, the company was reaping a bonanza in
Washington. On the commercial front, its relationships with Airbus and BP
continued to deepen. By 2020, Palantir was approaching $1 billion in annual
revenue and was still privately valued at around $20 billion; it was a flourishing
business, if not yet a profitable one. It had also had a significant technological
breakthrough, via the introduction of a software platform called Apollo, which
enabled Palantir to deploy and update its technology remotely, thereby reducing
—or, in some cases, eliminating—the need to dispatch engineers to work in situ
with clients. Apollo had been in development before Covid, but it was rolled out
during the pandemic, when most workplaces were shuttered and it was difficult
to send forward-deployed engineers out into the field. But more than just solving
the problem posed by the Covid lockdowns, Apollo seemed to hold the key to
answering a long-standing critique of Palantir—that its products were not
scalable.
Still, the decision to go public marked an abrupt reversal for Karp. Even just a
few months earlier, he had still been resistant to the idea. In September 2019,
when I was working on the Palantir article that I wrote for The New York Times
Magazine, I met with Karp in Paris, where the company was hosting a
conference for its European corporate clients. He and I took a walk one

afternoon from Le Bristol Paris, the hotel where he was staying, to the
Luxembourg Gardens, where he planned to do tai chi. As we cut through the
Tuileries, Karp explained that he remained hesitant to take Palantir public
because he worried that it would undermine the company's egalitarian spirit,
which in his view had been essential to its success. "My main skepticism is
whether it could be done while maintaining Palantir's culture," he said.
From the earliest days of Palantir, he had effectively asked employees to accept
a trade-off—in exchange for the opportunity to work on consequential issues,
they'd earn less than they might have at other tech companies. But it stood to
reason that going public would be lucrative for Karp and other executives, and
he worried that this would diminish the sense of shared purpose that had always
prevailed. Karp also thought that going public would be a distraction: employees
would inevitably follow the daily gyrations of the company's stock price, which
itself might have a corrosive effect on Palantir's work.
Privately, Thiel had been pushing for an IPO for several years. Publicly,
though, he expressed solidarity with Karp. A few months after I saw Karp in
Paris, I met with Thiel at his office in Los Angeles. He said it was still too soon
for Palantir to seek a stock market listing. "There's always a question of who
benefits from an IPO," he told me. "The investment bankers benefit massively,
as do all the people who help you with the process. Then certainly early investors
and early employees benefit, but then if you think of the company itself as an
entity or as a person—maybe that's too anthropocentric—but if you think of
what's actually in the interest of the company, it's not at all clear that IPOs are
the best thing for companies."
Thiel acknowledged that there were upsides to going public, and not just the
potential financial reward: it imposed a greater degree of transparency on
companies and also obliged them to adopt better managerial and corporate
governance practices. He said that IPOs made sense "once you're at a certain
scale, when you have all these customers locked in, and it's sort of a steadily
growing business." But Palantir was still innovating and was "nowhere near"
achieving its potential market share. He noted, as well, that Palantir was not the
only tech company that had put off going public: in the two decades since the
dot-com bust, companies had been much slower to seek public listings. They

could raise the money they needed privately and could let their businesses
mature without having to submit to the exigencies of the quarterly earnings
cycle.
Indeed, since the 1990s, the number of publicly traded companies in the
United States had fallen by more than half—from a peak of around 7,500 in
1997 to around 3,500 in 2020. This decline happened even as the U.S. economy
had doubled in size over the same time period. Some companies had gone out of
business, and others had been swallowed up through mergers and acquisitions.
But the decline had also been driven by the growing allure and financial muscle
of private capital. Private equity had become a $4 trillion business, an eightfold
increase since the early 2000s, and the U.S. venture capital industry had around
$1 trillion in assets under management. Start-ups—even mature ones like
Palantir—could now easily obtain the funding they needed without having to
meet the strict regulatory requirements of the public equity markets or answer
to Wall Street analysts. Many young companies were now opting to stay private
for longer, a shift in sentiment reflected in the dwindling number of IPOs. In
the mid- to late 1990s, there were five to six hundred IPOs a year. In retrospect,
that was arguably excessive, a byproduct of the dot-com boom and the irrational
exuberance of that era. But by the late 2010s, there were fewer than two hundred
IPOs annually, and what was once a cherished rite of passage for companies—
and a symbol of the enduring vitality of American capitalism—had become
almost an option of last resort.
In this regard, at least, Palantir was not an outlier. But Karp knew that he
couldn't continue to put off an IPO. Investors who had backed the company
were clamoring for one, and while his cofounders had generally been supportive
of his decision to keep Palantir private, they were not going to wait forever. Nor
were Palantir employees, especially those who had been with the firm a long
time. "When you are twenty years into a company, people start to get antsy
about equity and the equity value of the company," Karp said that afternoon in
Paris. "And the thing I'm most sensitive to is, how do you ensure that the people
who are building Palantir now are fairly compensated, and that really does
presuppose a liquidity event." He understood why his colleagues were eager to

see the company go public. "How do you explain to your kid that he can't go to
the college of his choice because Karp won't IPO?"
Karp, of course, didn't have kids and was seemingly content with being an
undercompensated CEO—on a relative basis—and a paper billionaire. For him,
the whole notion of an "exit strategy"—the idea that the ultimate aim for a start-
up was to go public or be acquired—was anathema. Palantir was his life's work;
it was the only place he could imagine working, and he had no desire to cash out
and move on. It seemed, too, that becoming a plutocrat just didn't fit his self-
image as a scrappy outsider (or his desire to be seen as such) and also didn't quite
square with his political leanings. As we were exiting the Tuileries, there was a
commotion in front of us: a bunch of street vendors were scrambling to pack up
their knockoff Gucci and Dior handbags because the police were apparently
coming. Watching the merchants racing to avoid the gendarmes, Karp quietly
remarked, "I'm on their side."
But just seven months later, in April 2020, Karp decided that it was time to
take Palantir public. The company's investors were delighted, and Thiel was, too.
When he and I spoke again in 2023, he said that Karp's previous resistance to the
idea had been "actually somewhat charismatic," in that it showcased Palantir's
determination to walk its own path. But he now acknowledged that he thought
it had taken too long to go public. He had come to feel that Palantir would
benefit from the discipline imposed by having to answer to shareholders. He also
believed it would help the company's bottom line. Thiel suspected that some
clients had been hesitant to enter into bigger, longer-term contracts with
Palantir because they worried about its staying power—the company's
reluctance to go public inevitably raised questions about the quality of its
business and its financial viability. A stock market listing would give Palantir
added legitimacy.
Major investment banks had long hoped to underwrite a Palantir IPO. But
even though two of them, JPMorganChase and Credit Suisse, had been Palantir
clients, Karp hated Wall Street, animus rooted in the frosty reception that
Palantir had received from Silicon Valley's venture capital community. Karp still
nursed a grudge over the way Palantir had been treated, and it colored his view of
investment bankers and institutional investors more generally. Several

investment banks wrote pitchbooks for a Palantir IPO, but the prospectuses all
fell flat with Karp. He claimed that he even burned one of them because it
seemed indistinguishable from the dealbook for WeWork, the scandal-plagued
office-sharing company that had to cancel its IPO in the face of investor
skepticism. "I'm against burning books because I'm from a progressive Jewish
family," he said. "I've actually only burned a book a couple times in my life. I
took the draft that the bankers wrote, and I went to my massive fireplace and I
dumped it in."
Karp ultimately opted to take Palantir public not through an IPO but,
rather, via a direct public listing, or DPO. In a DPO, the company doesn't issue
new shares; it just makes it possible for the public to buy existing ones. Spotify
had gone public through a DPO in 2018, and Slack did the same the following
year. Investment banks play an advisory role in DPOs but earn much less in fees
—millions less—than they do from IPOs. Karp also made another important
call: after years of excoriating Silicon Valley, he decided that Palantir would use
the occasion of its public listing to move its headquarters from Palo Alto to
Denver.
The company's footprint in Palo Alto had already been declining. In the mid-
2010s, Palantir was the single-largest tenant in the city, renting space in seven
different buildings. ("There's more Palantir paraphernalia in downtown Palo
Alto than there is Patagonia," a local venture capitalist told CNBC in 2016.) But
by the time the pandemic struck, New York, Washington, and London had
become the company's hubs, and Palantir was using just a single office building
in Palo Alto. However, moving the headquarters to Denver, as opposed to, say,
Washington or New York, was also a statement, a way of signifying that Palantir
was in sync with Middle America in a way that the rest of Silicon Valley was not
(even if Denver was a fairly progressive enclave in a state that had been trending
Democratic). In 2018, Thiel moved from the Bay Area to Los Angeles because
he was frustrated by what he regarded as Silicon Valley's "monoculture" (never
mind that Los Angeles was a liberal stronghold, too). Now Palantir was also
bailing on Northern California.
Internally, the push to take Palantir public was referred to as "GN," which
supposedly stood for "Go Now." But Karp told several associates that it actually

meant goyim naches, a Yiddish phrase that loosely translates as "goyish games"—
a gentile pursuit. It was his way of expressing the mixed feelings he had. The
actual prep work was done over the summer, at Karp's house in New
Hampshire. A number of employees relocated there to strategize and draft the
necessary paperwork. Dave Glazer, who brought his family with him, said that it
was "kibbutz-style living." During breaks, he used Karp's front yard as a driving
range.
One priority was devising a share structure that would allow Karp, along
with Thiel and Stephen Cohen, to retain a controlling interest in Palantir. This
practice was now common among tech companies. In Silicon Valley, founders
were kings, and most felt that they should be able to continue running their
businesses as they saw fit even after taking their companies public. Prior to its
2004 IPO, Google created dual-class shares for its cofounders, Larry Page and
Sergey Brin, to ensure that they could never be outvoted by other shareholders.
Facebook did the same for Mark Zuckerberg before it went public in 2012. But
Palantir already had a special category, so-called B shares, whose holders enjoyed
ten times the voting power of people who owned regular shares. While Karp,
Thiel, and Cohen held most of the B shares, some had been granted to other
Palantir executives as well as several outside investors, and the three cofounders
now controlled only around 30 percent of the company's outstanding stock.
In the lead-up to the DPO, Palantir created a third category of shares, which
were awarded only to Karp, Thiel, and Cohen. These so-called F shares had a
variable number of votes—in essence, they gave the three of them as much
voting power as they needed in any given moment to ensure that they controlled
49.999999 percent of the total vote on any issue put before shareholders (and
yes, it was exactly six 9s in the decimal place). While it wasn't quite 50 percent, it
was enough to guarantee that the three would almost certainly never lose a
shareholder vote (and Thiel, in addition to his personal stake in Palantir, also
owned shares through Clarium Capital, his hedge fund, and Founders Fund,
one of his venture capital funds). This structure would remain in place until the
last of the three died, and their voting power would remain determinative even if
their total share of Palantir stock declined to the low single digits. Insiders
jokingly referred to the F shares as "fuck-you shares."

The F shares were controversial. Michael Weisbach, a professor at Ohio State
University's Fisher College of Business, suggested that Palantir was seeking all
the benefits of being a publicly traded company without the responsibilities—
but like other commentors, he evidently believed that Thiel, not Karp, headed
Palantir. "They set it up so Peter Thiel can still sort of run it like a private
company and still have the advantage of being public," Weisbach told Bloomberg.
Beyond that, the creation of the F shares seemed like another swipe at Wall Street
—a statement that Palantir made its own rules. (After Palantir went public, a
disgruntled shareholder filed a lawsuit in Delaware, where the company was
incorporated, challenging the legality of the F shares and alleging that the share
structure had turned Karp, Thiel, and Cohen into "emperors for life." The case
was settled in 2022, when Palantir agreed to change its bylaws to ensure that any
future sale of the company as well as certain transactions involving the
cofounders would have to be approved by other members of Palantir's board of
directors and a two-thirds vote of all the company's shareholders.)
The process of taking Palantir public became just one extended middle finger.
In keeping with its very male culture, the company had always had an all-male
board. But under California law, publicly traded companies based in the state
needed to have at least one female director, and since Palantir would still be
headquartered in Palo Alto at the time its stock began trading, it had to add a
female director. In June 2020, it announced that Alexandra Wolfe Schiff would
be joining its board. The daughter of the novelist Tom Wolfe, she was a Wall
Street Journal reporter; more significantly, she was a close friend of Thiel's and
had written a book about Silicon Valley that portrayed him in glowing terms.
According to Thiel's biographer, Max Chafkin, someone in Thiel's orbit
reached out to him to ask about Schiff's nomination to the board, and he replied
with a wink emoji.
As a precursor to going public, Palantir was required to file a document called
an S-1, which formally registered the company's shares with the SEC. For Karp,
the S-1 was an opportunity to enunciate Palantir's worldview, and the document
that he and his team drafted would become, in their minds, a canonical text.
"Our work and the use of our software present difficult questions," it said. "The
construction of software platforms that enable more effective surveillance by the

state of its adversaries or that assist soldiers in executing attacks raises countless
issues, involving the points of tension and tradeoffs between our collective
security and individual privacy, the power of machines, and the types of lives we
both want to and should lead. The ethical challenges that arise are constant and
unrelenting. We embraced the complexity that comes from working in areas
where the stakes are often very high and the choices may be imperfect. The more
fundamental question is where authority to resolve such questions—to decide
how technology may be used and by whom—should reside."
In the S-1, Palantir disclosed that it was relocating its headquarters to Denver,
and it took aim at Silicon Valley: "Our society has effectively outsourced the
building of software that makes our world possible to a small group of engineers
in an isolated corner of the country. The question is whether we also want to
outsource the adjudication of some of the most consequential moral and
philosophical questions of our time. The engineering elite of Silicon Valley may
know more than most about building software. But they do not know more
about how society should be organized or what justice requires." The S-1
included broadsides against Facebook and Google: "From the start, we have
repeatedly turned down opportunities to sell, collect, or mine data. Other
technology companies, including some of the largest in the world, have built
their entire businesses on doing just that.... For many consumer internet
companies, our thoughts and inclinations, behaviors and browsing habits, are
the product for sale. The slogans and marketing of many of the Valley's largest
technology firms attempt to obscure this simple fact."
The S-1 went on to suggest that Palantir was aligned with American interests
and values in a way that other tech companies (read: Facebook and Google) were
not: "The bargain between the public and the technology sector has for the most
part been consensual, in that the value of the products and services available
seemed to outweigh the invasions of privacy that enabled their rise. Americans
will remain tolerant of the idiosyncrasies and excesses of the Valley only to the
extent that technology companies are building something substantial that serves
the public interest.... Our software is used to target terrorists and to keep soldiers
safe. If we are going to ask someone to put themselves in harm's way, we believe
that we have a duty to give them what they need to do their jobs. We have chosen

sides, and we know that our partners value commitment. We stand by them
when it is convenient, and when it is not."
Palantir's DPO brought additional scrutiny to the company and also
highlighted a stark divide among its detractors. Many observers—immigration
activists, civil libertarians, politicians such as Ocasio-Cortez—believed that
Palantir's technology was every bit as effective as Karp claimed and saw the
company as uniquely menacing for that reason. They regarded its public listing
as an ominous bellwether—capitalism concretizing the emergence of a
surveillance state. Other critics, however, suggested that Palantir's software
wasn't as good as advertised and that the company was essentially peddling pixie
dust. A few weeks before the DPO, New York magazine ran a story that all but
called Palantir a sham. In a blog post, Scott Galloway, the influential podcaster
and a New York University professor, slammed Palantir as a "shitty" business
and said it had "all the calories of Facebook (scaled sociopathy) with none of the
great taste (profits)." He later told CNN that Palantir was "crap being flung at
tourists to the unicorn zoo."
Palantir went public on September 30, 2020, opening at $10 per share. The
DPO got off to an inauspicious (and ironic) start: trading in Palantir shares was
delayed for several hours because of a software glitch. However, it wasn't
Palantir's technology that malfunctioned; rather, the snafu involved an online
trading platform operated by Morgan Stanley. Despite the interruption and the
fact that the stock finished slightly down on the day, at $9.50, it was a
triumphant debut in the minds of Karp and his senior colleagues. They had all
gathered in Germany, where Karp was attending a conference. The Palantirians
celebrated with champagne. Shyam Sankar said later that it was the first time in
his almost twenty years with Palantir that he felt completely confident that it
would survive as a business.
For Karp, the DPO was both validation and vindication. It conferred
legitimacy on Palantir—it could no longer be called a start-up, a label that always
implied a risk of failure, but was truly an established company now. The public
listing was proof, as well, that Karp had succeeded on his own, highly
differentiated terms. When he and I first started talking, in 2019, he projected
confidence, but there was also an undercurrent of anxiety. Although he was

convinced he was the right person to lead Palantir internally, he worried that in
his public-facing role he was more of a liability than an asset. He was clearly not
a standard-issue CEO, and he believed this was detrimental to Palantir. "We're
an enterprise company with enterprise clients," Karp said. "You think it is
helpful having a fluorescent praying mantis coming into their office, telling them
about German philosophy? Do you think that's helpful? I can tell you, it's not
helpful." He freely admitted that from an image and messaging standpoint,
Palantir might have been better-off with a more conventional CEO—someone
who actually looked and sounded like a captain of industry.
His lifestyle fed into the anxiety that he felt. He recognized that it was
unorthodox, and he seemed almost apologetic about it. During one of our first
conversations, he confessed that he wished he could be more "norm-
conforming." When asked what exactly that meant, Karp replied, "The way I see
your life." It was true that I had a fairly bourgeois existence—I resided in a
suburb and had a wife, two kids, and a dog. Did he think he could ever have a life
like mine? He shook his head. "I fantasized about being norm-conforming, but I
don't know how to do that," he said. "I just don't know how to do that, I don't
know how it works, I wouldn't know how to be not transgressive. I try. I try
really hard, really I do, but it's not working out." It was a surprisingly candid and
raw comment.
But after Palantir's public listing, Karp no longer felt the need to express
regret for his unconventionality. It was a lifestyle that suited him, and he had
come to believe that it suited Palantir, too—that, far from being a burden, it had
actually benefited the company. He was now convinced that Palantir would not
have been as successful with a more typical CEO—the job was too demanding
to be done by someone with a full life outside the office, or at least could not be
done as well.
Likewise, he now recognized that his distinctive personality was good for
Palantir's brand. That became clear to him in the months following the DPO.
While Wall Street continued to express doubts about Palantir, retail investors
piled into the stock, mostly on account of a sudden infatuation with Karp.
Participants in the subreddit known as wallstreetbets found Karp very
entertaining and began referring to him as "Daddy Karp" and "Papa Karp."

Palantir became a so-called meme stock—a stock that soars in value thanks to
social media. In its first three months of trading, it nearly quadrupled in price,
peaking at $35 per share in late January 2021. Karp liked the nicknames and
delighted in the adulation (and the effect it was having on Palantir's share price).
That the wallstreetbets crowd shared his contempt for the professional
investment community made it all the sweeter. Karp regarded Palantir as a kind
of pirate ship, and the fact that its stock had surged thanks to small-fry investors
who prided themselves on their own iconoclasm played into that image. It was
also confirmation, in Karp's mind, that in contrast to investment bank analysts,
the man on the street had no trouble understanding Palantir: it was the company
defending America and the West.
With the DPO, Karp officially became a billionaire, and even as he reveled in
—and played up—his sudden populist appeal, Karp also took pleasure in the
enhanced stature that he now enjoyed in elite circles. Since the mid-2010s, he
had faithfully attended the annual Allen & Company conference in Sun Valley,
Idaho, a gathering of media and tech moguls referred to as "summer camp for
billionaires." But Karp sensed a change in how his fellow tycoons perceived him
when he took part in the 2022 edition (the conference had been canceled the
previous year because of Covid). While he hadn't necessarily felt like a gate-
crasher before, he could tell that he was now seen as one of their own. He was
also a figure of curiosity in a way that had not been the case previously; other
Sun Valley stalwarts seemed more eager to talk to him and to make his
acquaintance.
Karp's biggest indulgence after Palantir went public was buying his own
airplane, a Bombardier Global 7500 for which he paid over $50 million. He had
leased a business jet for years before deciding that he wanted to own one. He also
used his windfall from the DPO to add to his collection of homes. He purchased
a place in Boulder, to be close to Palantir's new headquarters in Denver, and also
the house near Washington, D.C. In addition, he acquired a home near
Anchorage and one in Sun Valley (he had grown to love the area), and he added
1,500 acres to the New Hampshire property. But none of the homes were
palatial—most were modest—and despite his enormous wealth, Karp continued
to lead a fairly streamlined existence. Apart from the plane, he evinced little

interest in billionaire trophies, which didn't surprise those who knew him best.
His cousin Mat Johnson said Karp had always had a "total lack of material
obsession" and jokingly suggested that his vast riches were wasted on him.
But if Karp wasn't necessarily as avaricious or acquisitive as other billionaires,
he also didn't seem to have any moral qualms about his extreme wealth. That
billionaires were generally scorned by the intelligentsia and other liberal elites
only enhanced the satisfaction that Karp derived from his economic status; it
brought out his innate contrarianism. When Palantir's board of directors
awarded him $1.1 billion in total compensation in 2020, making him the
highest-paid CEO of a publicly traded company that year, he took some pleasure
in the controversy that it kicked up. (A billion-dollar pay package was
outrageous under any circumstances, but it was especially provocative amid a
global pandemic.) It played into his self-image as a renegade. And while he never
boasted of his net worth, in the wake of the DPO he discovered a favorite new
word: tendies. It was a term popularized by wallstreetbets that essentially meant
profits, gains, getting paid. Karp loved the phrase and began making
promiscuous use of it.
In contrast to other freshly minted billionaires, Karp did not establish a
charitable foundation; he told associates that the philanthropic phase of his life
would come later. Privately, though, he was generous with his personal fortune.
Over the years, he had given a lot of Palantir stock to his parents and his brother
and had created trusts for all three. He took particular care of his mother, who
never remarried. He bought her an apartment in suburban Philadelphia. Beyond
the financial benefits, Palantir's public listing had yielded another dividend for
Leah. She liked to check Palantir's stock price each morning—not so much
because she wanted to see how the company was doing, but rather because she
thought Alex would be checking it, too, and the idea that they were sharing this
daily ritual gave her a sense of connection to her son. "It makes me feel closer to
him," she said.
For Karp, the wealth he reaped from Palantir's public listing also afforded
him the opportunity to repay some debts from the past. To express his gratitude
to the family friends who took in Leah and Ben after Bob refused to pay for an
apartment for them, Karp made an anonymous donation in the family's name to

a Philadelphia-area university. Leah and Ben were eventually able to get their
own place because a landlord was willing to give her a lease even though she
couldn't show sufficient income. The landlord owned a jewelry shop in the town
of Bryn Mawr, and the store was still in his family; as a thank-you for the
kindness shown his mother, Karp began periodically dispatching an assistant to
the shop with instructions to make large purchases. His affluence also came in
handy when he made an unusual request of the people who now resided in the
house that he grew up in on Lincoln Drive in Mount Airy. Karp's childhood
dog, Rosita, had been buried in the yard, and he wanted to rebury her on his
New Hampshire property. The homeowners, both college professors, initially
balked but then agreed to have the dog exhumed, and Karp subsequently made a
donation to the university where they taught.
One thing that Karp's financial success couldn't get him, however, was an
invitation to speak at our alma mater. In his years at the helm of Palantir, he had
never been asked to talk at Haverford, and now that he had taken the company
public, the college's apparent unwillingness to recognize his accomplishments
formally became a source of extreme irritation for him. He was also baffled by
Haverford's failure to cultivate him as a donor. He joked about it, but there was
an undercurrent of bitterness. "Maybe next year they can get the librarian at
Northwestern to speak at graduation," he remarked sarcastically during one of
our conversations.
He assumed that Haverford was shunning him because Palantir was
anathema to many students and faculty. (Karp did visit Haverford during the
summer of 2022; he was seeing his mother, who lived just up the road, and
dropped by to look around. He ran into his old professor Mark Gould while
there, but otherwise seemed to go unnoticed.)
Haverford's reluctance to embrace Karp fed into his growing disenchantment
with the left—over what he saw as its censoriousness, its refusal to take seriously
issues like immigration and border security, and its fixation with identity
politics. At the same time, his relationship with his own identity seemed to grow
more complicated in the wake of the DPO. Media outlets now routinely listed
him among the world's black billionaires, but he had no interest in putting
himself forward as someone representative of the black experience in America.

He told me that he was proud of his mother's heritage and would be "happily
claimed by the black community" if it wanted to claim him. However, he didn't
believe that blacks saw him as one of their own. Partly, it was a function of
appearance: he looked "mostly Jewish with a tan," as he put it, and also had a
Jewish surname, so his authenticity would inevitably be called into question. He
also thought that people would suspect that he was embracing his black identity
"to get some benefits I didn't deserve. I do think descendants of slaves from the
underclass of our country deserve special benefits, but do I?" He added, "If I
went out there and said, 'Yeah, I'm a black man,' it would be uncomfortable for
the black man, justifiably. It would be like proxy saying that I'm going through
the same thing the black community's going through, but I'm not."
His unwillingness to identify himself more fully and enthusiastically as black
puzzled his brother. In early 2023, Karp was in Davos for the World Economic
Forum, where he was interviewed by David Rubenstein, the billionaire founder
of the Carlyle Group. Rubenstein made a joking comment about Karp's hair.
"So do you comb that or it just goes that way?" he asked. "It just goes that way,"
Karp replied. "I have this hair naturally." Rubenstein, not quite ready to move
on, asked if Karp's mother ever called him to tell him to comb his hair. Karp
didn't answer the question but replied instead that his parents wished he had
become an academic. Ben Karp watched the interview and thought his brother
should have responded by saying that his hair was that way because his mother
was black. Karp did, however, mention his German Jewish heritage, and
Rubenstein, engaging in some billionaire-on-billionaire fluffing, noted that "a
very, very smart German, Albert Einstein, had a hairdo not unlike yours."
Ben had also hoped to persuade his brother to be a guest on Harvard
professor Henry Louis Gates's PBS show Finding Your Roots. Given Karp's
prominence, there seemed little doubt that he could have snagged a guest slot,
and with their family's rich history on both sides, Ben thought that Alex would
be a particularly intriguing subject. The history on their mother's side was
especially compelling, and profoundly American. Karp was, in fact, the
descendent of a slave: his great-great-grandfather William Alonzo Janes, a native
of Tennessee, was a slave who resettled in central Illinois after being freed. He
was also a highly accomplished fiddler and banjo player whose songs were later

popularized by Mel Dunham, an acclaimed bluegrass musician who befriended
Janes. But Alex had no desire to be on Gates's show, and even though he was
closer to his mother than his father, the curiosity he had about his German
Jewish roots did not extend to his African American heritage. "For him, it sort
of ends with our mother," Ben said.
Ben kept in touch with some of his brother's black friends from Haverford,
but Alex showed no inclination to reconnect with them. The issue wasn't a
source of tension between the two; Ben just didn't understand why Alex was
downplaying half his lineage. This rejection stood in contrast not just to Ben,
but to their cousin Mat Johnson—also the son of a black mother and white
father—who had won acclaim for his incisive explorations of race and identity in
novels such as Loving Day (a title drawn from the 1967 U.S. Supreme Court
decision striking down prohibitions against interracial marriage) and Drop. Over
the years, Alex and Ben had had candid exchanges about race. Alex thought that
Ben had a stronger claim to being black in part because he was more
knowledgeable about African American history and black culture. But at one
point, he suggested that identity was as much a choice as it was a matter of
bloodlines. "You've overdialed the blackness," he told Ben. "I've dialed it back."
OceanofPDF.com

NINE
THE BATSHIT-CRAZY CEO
It was a chilly March morning in Washington, D.C., in 2022, war had broken
out on the other side of the world, and Karp couldn't suppress his triumphant
mood. While Russia's attack on Ukraine horrified him, it was also, in his mind, a
moment of vindication. For one, it affirmed the wisdom of the decision that he
had made years ago to not do business in Russia or with any Russian companies
—to treat Russia as an enemy of the West. But he was also feeling ebullient
because Palantir's technology was being used to help the Ukrainians stymie the
Russian offensive. "Bad times are good for Palantir," he had said during an
earnings call a few weeks earlier. As if on cue, bad times had arrived, and Karp
had a bounce in his step that morning.
Dressed in his standard attire—ski pants, a ski jacket bearing the insignia of
Team Veidekke Vest, the Norwegian professional cross-country team whose
clothing he liked to wear—Karp had arrived at the office just after daybreak. The
office was coming back to life after two years of remote work, and Karp was
eager to catch up with his colleagues. However, the first item on his agenda was
finalizing a salvo that he was aiming at, well, anyone who had doubted Palantir.
Karp planned to release a letter saying that Ukraine was proof that history had
not ended in 1989, that it was time to wake up from the delusion that sweet
reason and soft power would inevitably prevail, and that he and Palantir had
been right about basically everything.
As he walked into his office, Karp summoned his usual ghostwriter, Nick
Zamiska, from down the hall. Zamiska, a lawyer who headed up corporate affairs
for Palantir, grabbed his laptop and hustled across the room, accompanied by a
lanky Swiss-British employee. Karp had met him a few months earlier in the
Zurich office, and struck by his ability to craft elegant sentences, had drafted him
into some writing duties. But he couldn't remember the young man's name;

instead, he referred to him as "our Swiss friend" and "our Yeats." As Zamiska
read aloud the latest version of the letter, Karp slumped slightly in his chair,
listening intently. Early-morning sunshine filled the room, and the Washington
Monument was visible through one of the windows.
The letter was a curious document—it was the sort of thing that a veteran
diplomat might publish under a pseudonym in some starchy foreign policy
journal, but it also had a slight Unabomber vibe. It was full of sweeping
declarations ("the war in eastern Europe stems from a collective suspension of
disbelief by those whose overconfidence in recent decades in the raw power of
their ideals enabled the balance of power in Europe to shift") and self-
congratulatory asides ("Our business has grown over the years precisely because
we refused to build what the market thought it wanted and make real the
misguided fantasy of an omniscient state"). It included a nod to Karp's academic
background, citing—in German—Max Weber's dictum about the state's
monopoly on the use of force (das Monopol legitimer physischer Gewaltsamkeit).
The most noteworthy part of the letter was the third-to-last sentence, which
read, "Our software is in the fight in Ukraine."
After Zamiska finished reading, Lisa Gordon, Palantir's head of
communications, suggested that the letter was too long. Karp disagreed—he said
its length and somber tone were virtues and indicated that he saw it as another
way in which Palantir would be distinguishing itself. "We're going for a new
frame," he explained. "The last frame is Elon [Musk] and Trump. It's short. It's
tweets. We're doing something unique. It's long, dense, unique and can't be
copied—that's valuable in business." He instructed Zamiska to get the letter
posted on Palantir's website that morning, and also to email it to journalists in
the United States and Europe.
A short while later, Karp needed to retrieve something from his hotel room,
which was near the office. (He hadn't yet purchased a home in Washington.) As
he and I walked along the C&O Canal, his bodyguards following us, I was
hoping to ask him about Ukraine and the exact role that Palantir was playing
there. But Karp had a more pressing matter that he wanted to discuss:
Haverford. He told me that someone from donor relations had finally written to
him, but the outreach was "so lame" it would have been better had they not even

tried. At this point, he had pretty much given up on our alma mater. "I don't
even want to speak at graduation there," he said. "But what kind of idiotic
institution does not invite me to speak?" Trying to humor him, I said that it
seemed a little crazy. He cut me off. "It's not crazy—it's suicidal."
Back at the office, I saw that Karp's letter had been published on Palantir's
website but that the reference to Ukraine had been changed. Instead of "Our
software is in the fight in Ukraine," it now read, "Our software is in the fight
around the world." The revision was done out of caution: at that point, it didn't
serve the interests of either Ukraine or the United States to tell the world what
assets were being utilized against the Russians. But Karp's desire to trumpet
Palantir's role was understandable. It was the first time in a while that Palantir's
work in the realm of national security and defense was not bound up in
controversy or ambiguity. The failed war efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan,
coupled with human rights violations and concerns about privacy and civil
liberties, had tainted the fight against terrorism. The Trump years had been
fruitful but challenging for Palantir. With Ukraine, however, there were no
complicating factors (so far)—it was good versus evil, and Palantir was
unequivocally on the side of good.
Karp was also eager to talk about Palantir and Ukraine because it was a way of
deflecting attention from the company's sagging stock price and Wall Street's
deepening skepticism. After trading as high as $45 per share in early 2021,
Palantir's stock had steadily declined, and by the time Russia invaded Ukraine, it
was barely above $10. True, it had been swept up in a general sell-off of tech
stocks, but it was also the case that the market just didn't see Palantir as a
winning investment. A headline in the Financial Times took Karp's words and
used them against the company: "Palantir: Built for Bad Times (But Maybe Not
These Bad Times)." The disconnect between the importance of the work that
Palantir was doing and the value that the market placed on that work was large—
and, for Palantirians, not a little maddening.
For Karp, the war in Ukraine was an opportunity, as well, to rally his own
troops. The company was still full of industrious, ambitious people, but two
years of Covid lockdowns, as well as the controversies that had dogged Palantir,
had sapped morale—that was how Karp felt, anyway. The challenge on this

front was evident in a town hall meeting he held that afternoon in Washington.
With the pandemic still causing widespread illness, the meeting took place under
a tent in the courtyard of Palantir's office. As his colleagues ate lunch, Karp,
using a handheld microphone, riffed on a variety of topics, including himself.
"Everyone thinks I'm insane," he said. This perception, he went on to explain,
had contributed to Palantir's success. "The thing about being viewed as bonkers
is that people don't want to compete with you." He continued in this vein for
around forty minutes. His quips drew polite laughter, but he seemed to struggle
to connect with his audience. True, it was early March and a little chilly for an al
fresco lunch (there were heaters in the tent, but they weren't offering much
warmth), which might have muted the response. Still, it felt as if there was
distance now between Karp and the rank and file, a point he acknowledged in
his talk. "We've been separated for two years," he said. "It's very hard to build a
culture, to keep a culture, when you don't interact with people in person." He
added, "We just have to try to get back together in the office." Much had
changed during Covid: the company had gone public, work habits had been
altered, and Karp had officially become a billionaire. He was also now a lot older
than most of his employees. Could he still relate to them? Could they still relate
to him?
Three years before Russia invaded Ukraine, Palantir started working on Project
Maven, the Pentagon's artificial intelligence program, taking over for Google.
According to Doug Philippone, Defense Department officials approached other
tech companies first and reached out to Palantir only as a last resort because they
were put off by the turmoil surrounding the firm at that time. For his part,
Philippone was wary of getting involved with Maven. While the future of
warfare undoubtedly revolved around AI, Maven had become a costly flop—the
AI technology just wasn't good. Philippone says that the algorithms that were
supposed to be able to identity, say, objects being surveilled by a drone were not
up to the task: a sheep standing in a field would be mistakenly flagged as a man

—that sort of thing. "The dirty secret of Maven was that this shit didn't even
work," says Philippone.
Palantir didn't solve the AI problem—that task fell to other companies that
were contributing to Maven. Instead, Palantir filled other gaps. Initially, it
provided the project with a sophisticated mapping tool called Gaia. Not long
thereafter, it occurred to Philippone and some of the engineers he worked with
that Foundry could possibly deliver the data integration and analytic capabilities
that Maven still lacked. That proved to be the case, and Foundry soon became
Maven's operating system. Philippone says that Palantir "built the infrastructure
that would allow the AI to be useful" and gave the officers who were running
Maven "breathing room" until the AI technology was workable.
By the time Russia invaded Ukraine, Maven had become a formidable asset,
dramatically improving the military's situational awareness in combat zones and
accelerating the so-called kill chain, the time between the identification of a
target and its destruction or liquidation. The Biden administration sought to aid
Ukraine without putting the United States in direct conflict with Russia, and
Maven was integral to this strategy. Operating out of a secret site in Germany
known as "The Pit," the Army's 18th Airborne Corps, under the direction of
Lieutenant General Christopher Donahue (who would later oversee the
evacuation of Kabul Airport), used Maven to track Russian troop movements.
The system ingested and analyzed vast quantities of satellite and drone imagery
to show where Russian forces were attacking or massing in preparation for an
assault; where Russian munition depots were located; and other vital
intelligence. The U.S. shared this information with the Ukrainians, which
helped them mount unexpectedly effective resistance during the first months of
the war.
But via Foundry, Maven was able to deliver much more than just an
exquisitely detailed view of the battlefield. Palantir's technology also enabled
Donahue's team to pull in cellular data. As it happened, many Russian soldiers
—including, it turned out, commanding officers—were using their personal cell
phones to communicate because their military-issued phones didn't work. This
allowed the Americans to identify their precise locations, information then
shared with the Ukrainians. "It was the war on terror all over again," Philippone

says. "I mean, the one thing we know how to do, we know how to pinpoint you
anywhere in the world and kill you. The terrorists who learned to live without
their phones survived. Those who couldn't, didn't." A number of Russian
generals were dispatched to the front to try to salvage the sputtering war effort,
and Ukrainian forces killed several of them in the first months of the conflict.
They were located with the help of Maven, too, but the American military was
cagier about how it passed along that information. The Ukrainians were given
coordinates and told, in so many words, that they would be pleased with the
result.
Karp was not quite as circumspect. "Palantir is responsible for most of the
targeting in Ukraine," he said at a conference that the company hosted in Palo
Alto. Karp had grown tired of having to always be so discreet about what he
considered Palantir's most important work. In the past, he had talked only in
vague terms about the terrorist attacks that Palantir had supposedly helped foil.
His inability to offer specifics meant that the company never got the credit that
he believed it deserved. It was, he said, a "twenty-year frustration." But after
deleting that passage in his letter referencing Palantir's involvement in Ukraine,
he had now decided that it was time for Palantir to get the recognition that it
deserved: the world would know that it was helping Ukraine. (The Pentagon was
not thrilled about his outspokenness and eventually asked him to dial it back,
which he did.)
In May, I joined Karp at the World Economic Forum in Davos. The WEF was
normally held in January, but the organizers had decided to delay the 2022
edition until spring in the hope that Covid would be subsiding by then. It was a
hectic few days for Karp—he had a couple of speaking engagements, a number
of private meetings with current and prospective clients, and also put in an
appearance on CNBC's Squawk Box. During previous visits to Davos, he
decompressed by escaping to nearby cross-country skiing trails. But the only
snow in May was on the mountaintops.
Ukraine dominated the discussion at Davos. Although he was now in his
early nineties, Davos stalwart George Soros was back in the Swiss Alps to give his
annual state-of-the-world address, and his message was basically: hide under
your bed. Russian government officials and businessmen had been barred from

attending the WEF, and Russia House, the building on the main thoroughfare
that had served as the Kremlin's de facto consulate in Davos, a place where
members of the Russian contingent threw back vodka and cut deals, had been
rented out by a Ukrainian tycoon named Victor Pinchuk and renamed Russian
War Crimes House. It now contained a gruesome photo exhibit documenting
atrocities that had allegedly been committed by Russian troops during their
initial assault.
In Davos, Karp met with several Ukrainian officials. He told me later that he
was considering traveling to Ukraine. He said it offhandedly, and while he was
clearly serious, I figured he meant that he might go when things had settled
down. But it turned out that he was intent on going sooner than that: a few days
after the WEF ended, Karp was in Kyiv, meeting with Ukrainian President
Volodymyr Zelensky. The trip to Ukraine was an odyssey. To get there, Karp
flew to Poland and was then was driven in a three-car convoy to Kyiv. It took
around ten hours to reach the Ukrainian capital. Although Karp had left his
electronic devices behind and was accompanied by a group of Ukrainian soldiers
and his own security detail, he assumed that the Russians were aware of his
presence and admitted that the drive to Kyiv was nerve-racking. "I was pretty
worried," he said.
Louis Mosley, the head of Palantir's London office, organized the trip and
accompanied Karp. He said the Ukrainians that Karp met with in Davos had
issued the invitation. While they seemed trustworthy, Mosley was worried about
whether they could deliver on a promised visit with Zelensky. His concern grew
when they arrived in Kyiv and were told that the president was unable to see
Karp that day. Karp had not planned to spend the night; he wanted to return to
Poland as soon as the meeting was over. But he agreed to stick around until the
following day. He and Mosley stayed in a hotel in central Kyiv. With the city
under curfew, they couldn't go anywhere. Karp passed some of the time doing
tai chi and didn't seem all that troubled about the delay. Mosley, however, was
stressed: he had put Karp at some physical risk, and if a visit with Zelensky didn't
happen, it was going to look bad. But the next morning, his Ukrainian
interlocutors told him that the meeting was on, and a group of security officials

arrived at the hotel and brought Karp and Mosley to the fortified presidential
compound.
Karp and Zelensky spent about an hour together. While Karp could be an
excellent conversationalist, he didn't normally bond with people—even in his
most engaging moments, you never had the sense that he wanted to form a
connection. But he immediately felt a sense of kinship with Zelensky, rooted in
their shared Jewishness. He saw in the Ukrainian leader a recognizable figure—
the "gruff but genial Jewish businessman you'd meet in synagogue," as he
described him. Karp was also drawn to Zelensky because he viewed him as the
embodiment of the Tough Jew—someone with no illusions about how the
world worked and who did not shrink from a fight (which was how Karp saw
himself). Karp was struck, too, by Zelensky's intelligence: he later said the
Ukrainian leader had the kind of agile mind that would have made him a
successful entrepreneur.
At one point during the drive back to Poland, Karp's security team thought
that their convoy was being tailed, which made for some harrowing moments.
But it was a false alarm, and six hours after leaving Kyiv (they made better time
on the return trip), Karp was safely in Poland. By then, news of his trip—and
photos of his meeting with Zelensky—had broken, generating headlines
worldwide. The visit to Kyiv was Karp's way of highlighting Palantir's support
for Ukraine and also its commitment to defending liberal democracy. The West
was on the side of Ukraine, and Palantir was on the side of the West. The
unstated reason for the trip was because Karp wanted it known that Palantir was
indeed in the fight in Ukraine. (Later that year, Karp would find a novel way to
demonstrate that Palantir stood with Ukraine: the company began sponsoring
the Ukrainian tennis star Elina Svitolina.)
A few weeks after Karp saw Zelensky, Palantir began supplying its software to
the Ukrainians free of charge. (As the war dragged on, it became harder for
Palantir to continue providing the technology at no cost; ultimately, four
European governments paid the company $55 million per year on Ukraine's
behalf.) The Ukrainians used the software for a range of activities. They
deployed it on the battlefield, to do their own targeting, independent of the U.S.
military. They also used it to try to clear the country of land mines, to collect

evidence of Russian human rights violations, to help resettle civilians displaced
by the war, and to try to keep the country's schools open and students safe amid
the ongoing conflict. "It's like a superpower," is how one Ukrainian official
described Palantir's software to Time.
Louis Mosley started traveling to Ukraine on a monthly basis. Other
Palantirians were also sent in to help train the Ukrainians on the company's
software. In addition, Palantir hired a number of locals. There was a lot of
technical talent in Ukraine, and it was not hard to find software engineers eager
to contribute to the war effort without being put in harm's way, although some
of them ended up there anyway: on several occasions, Palantir employees were
present at Ukrainian military facilities when those sites were struck by Russian
missiles (none were injured). Palantir was also directly targeted by the Russians:
it was the object of a spear phishing attack that the company traced back to
Russia. A handful of accounts were compromised.
Karp's visit to Kyiv thrust him into a new and somewhat unique role: the
statesman CEO. When he traveled to the Baltics, heads of state met with him
and he was given police escorts. Amid fears that Russian President Vladimir
Putin had designs on their countries, the Baltic republics were eager to obtain
Palantir's software, thus the VIP treatment. And Karp recognized that he was
now seen in a different light—as a person of gravitas. For years, he had played up
his image as an oddball. He took pleasure in the idea that people considered him
"batshit crazy," a phrase that he regularly invoked to describe how he thought he
was regarded. To Karp, it was a backhanded compliment, an acknowledgment
that he was a mad genius.
But after the trip to Kyiv, he decided to ease up on the "batshit-crazy"
schtick. Perceptions of him had changed, he realized, and the faux-self-
deprecatory stuff was now off-key. Putin's invasion of Ukraine had destabilized
the world, and the moment demanded a different kind of public engagement on
his part. His reputation was also enhanced because he projected seriousness at a
time when other figures in the tech world were seen as increasingly absurd.
While Karp was talking about war and peace, Mark Zuckerberg was trying to
transport humanity to the metaverse, and Elon Musk was embroiled in a soap

opera over his proposed acquisition of Twitter. The contrast with Musk and
Zuckerberg flattered Karp.
But the one place where Karp could not bring himself to show a different face
was during quarterly earnings calls. He made no effort to hide his disdain for
Wall Street analysts, and with Palantir still not turning a profit and investors
growing more dubious, the stock price continued to plummet even as the
company was playing a central role in the biggest land war in Europe in nearly a
century.
In early May 2022, Palantir released its first quarter earnings. Karp was in
London for the earnings call. It did not go well. Dressed in off-white jeans and a
skin-hugging white undershirt, he seemed distracted, even a little rattled. In the
not-so-distant past, Karp's casual garb and stream-of-consciousness riffing,
which often included an expletive or two, was entertaining. Now, not so much.
Investors wanted a reason to believe in Palantir's prospects. What they got
instead was an orgy of free association and strange digressions. "We at Palantir
are not flying to a different world," Karp said, "whether the metaworld [a dig at
Facebook] or a theological world or a financial version of a theological world or a
grad school version of a theological world, which isn't even actually academic
because academic presupposes interacting with the object from a theoretical
perspective, differentiate from the object, not importing a theological
preconceived version of the object onto the theory and reimporting that onto
the object." Within minutes, Palantir's stock had dropped another $2 and was
trading below $10, the price at which it had debuted in 2020.
The pace of Palantir's deal flow—the amount of time it took to develop and
close deals—concerned investors. They worried, too, about scalability, and
whether Foundry, the software platform that was now central to Palantir's long-
term prospects, could really become a dominant product in the corporate sector.
This anxiety was tied to the perennial question of whether Palantir was a
software company or a consultancy—if clients still required lots of hand-holding
from Palantir's forward-deployed engineers, it was going to be difficult for

Foundry to achieve the kind of market penetration that Karp insisted it would.
But it also seemed that professional investors were souring on Karp, and while he
was expounding on the fate of the West, he was doing nothing to assuage the
concerns they had about his leadership.
A few months after the London earnings call, a viewer asked CNBC's Jim
Cramer for his thoughts about Palantir. Cramer recommended selling the stock
if it got back above $10 and said, "They are just not a company that I think can
be relied upon. When they appear on TV, they make me feel like it's just a big
joke and I'm not in on it." Following Palantir's third-quarter earnings call, in
November 2022, another viewer asked Cramer about Palantir. Cramer cut him
off before he finished his question. "Sell!" Cramer bellowed. He then chastised
Karp for using obscenities during earnings calls. "By the way, you don't curse,
especially when you're doing lousy. Hey, maybe you can curse when you're
doing well. But when you're doing lousy, SHUT UP!"
Cramer was speaking, loudly, for a lot of Wall Street. Even among investors
and analysts who thought well of Palantir, Karp's routine was becoming
tiresome. One analyst with a major investment bank, who insisted on anonymity
when we spoke, said that he was a Palantir true believer: he was convinced that
the software was transformative and that Palantir was, on balance, a force for
good. "I tell people this is Tesla all over again," he told me. "What they are doing
is so different and unique. No one has ever seen this." But he was increasingly
put off by what he regarded as the arrogance and juvenile attitude of Karp and
those around him. "You look at this company—they have this mission to protect
the world, to do these things that no one else does, and yet they act like they are
in college," the analyst said. This disconnect was killing Palantir with investors.
He had pitched Palantir to his hedge fund clients as an attractive long-term play,
but they wanted no part of it. "They tell me, 'This management team is
absolutely crazy, I can't be near this,' " he said. He couldn't understand why
Karp had no interest in changing this perception and said it called into question
whether it made sense for Palantir to be a publicly traded company. "It is like
they spray repellent all over their bodies," he said. Maybe the company's
executives had made so much money from the stock market listing that they
didn't care. Whatever the case, the analyst was exasperated. He compared Karp

to the super-antihero Deadpool and suggested that a change at the top would
benefit Palantir—that investors might be more willing to get behind the
company if it had a "professional CEO," as he put it.
But Karp had no interest in placating institutional investors: in his opinion,
they didn't understand Palantir, and he was not going to waste any more time
trying to help them make sense of the company. He said he cared only about
retail investors—"my fans," as he called them—and Palantir's clients. He
acknowledged that some clients were not charmed by his persona, either, but
had remained customers because Palantir's software was too good to give up.
During one earnings call in 2022, Karp said that the company had clients who
"quite frankly, didn't like us" but who had signed new contracts anyway. "The
product brought them back," he said.
It did appear that Palantir was difficult to replace. In 2021, ICE had
announced that it was not renewing its contract with Palantir because it was
developing its own, similar technology. For Palantir, it was a bitter coda to the
immigration imbroglio. But a year later, ICE reversed course and signed a new
deal with the company. And despite the controversy over Palantir's work with
ICE, the Biden administration had continued to use the company's software to
track Covid-19 and to expedite the distribution of vaccines. One online
commentator observed that when Karp touted Palantir's indispensability, he
sounded a lot like Colonel Nathan Jessep, Jack Nicholson's character in A Few
Good Men. ("My existence, while grotesque and incomprehensible to you, saves
lives.... You want me on that wall, you need me on that wall.")
In addition to frustration with Karp's attitude, Wall Street had legitimate
concerns about how Palantir was being managed. In 2021, the company
purchased around $51 million worth of one-hundred-ounce gold bars. Shyam
Sankar told Bloomberg that this was to hedge against "black swan events." At the
time, some companies were dabbling in bitcoin—in 2021, Tesla bought $1.5
billion worth of the cryptocurrency and also made it possible for customers to
pay in bitcoin. While gold was a more traditional store of value than bitcoin,
Palantir's bullion investment struck many observers as bizarre, even suspect.
"Give me your best conspiracy theory," one CNBC host asked some panelists.
"It feels kind of CIA-ish," one replied. During an earnings call in November

2022, Karp proudly described Palantir as "a prepper company." It was a
comment that played well with his retail investor fanboys, but not with Wall
Streeters. The CEO of a major investment management company shuddered
when I mentioned Palantir. "It's just so dark," he said.
In late 2022, Palantir found itself in the spotlight over another unorthodox
move. Starting the year before, the company had invested $450 million in
around two dozen start-ups that had gone public via special purchase
acquisition companies, or SPACs, which are essentially shell companies created
for the purpose of buying other companies or merging with them. Palantir gave
all the companies it invested in free access to its software, on the understanding
that they would eventually purchase the technology. The start-ups included a
German flying taxi company and a grocery delivery service. It was a growth hack,
a way of superficially boosting Palantir's commercial business at a time when it
was trying to reduce its dependence on government contracts.
Unfortunately for Palantir, it backfired: by late 2023, one of the companies
had gone under, and nearly a dozen others were running short of cash.
Bloomberg calculated that Palantir had lost some $330 million on the
investments. While no one claimed that Palantir had acted illegally, some
corporate law experts thought the company had behaved in an ethically dubious
way, and several activist investors threatened to bring class-action suits against it.
When Lisa Gordon learned that The Wall Street Journal was planning to run a
feature about the SPAC investments, she and others at Palantir went into crisis
mode. Peter Thiel even dispatched his own spokesperson, Jeremiah Hall, to New
York to help Gordon and her colleagues fashion a response. Privately, Thiel had
grown tired of Palantir's inability to book a profit and had made his frustration
known to Karp and other members of the board. The Journal story noted in
passing that short sellers had pocketed more than $1 billion betting against
Palantir's stock over the previous year.
The night before the Journal piece ran, Karp and I talked about the SPAC
debacle in his New York office. It was just after 5 p.m., and he was eating dinner.
He was more annoyed than distressed about the situation. He said that he had
farmed out too much authority in this instance and hadn't done enough due
diligence himself to see the potential pitfalls to these investments. He said that

"the negative side of my unusual cognitive structure" was a tendency to assume
that problems obvious to him would be equally apparent to others. He readily
took the blame for the SPAC mess. "It's an indictment of me," he said.
Karp was still struggling to reanimate Palantir's culture in the aftermath of
the pandemic, a task made harder by the DPO. Karp had feared that taking
Palantir public might undermine its cohesiveness, and when the company filed
the S-1, some employees were irritated to learn just how much senior
management had been paid. While no one expected rank-and-file engineers to be
making as much as Karp and other executives, the gap between their
compensation and everyone else's was jarring, and all the more so because it was
at odds with the egalitarian vibe that Karp had cultivated. One longtime
Palantirian, who by any measure had made out well from the DPO, spoke
bitterly of the leadership's haul. While he knew their paydays would exceed his,
he was surprised by how much more equity they had received and admitted that
he felt suckered.
Now, in a company that had prided itself on its nonhierarchical structure,
there was a hierarchy, and it revolved around wealth. The money was a source of
resentment and also became a cudgel. In the fall of 2022, Palantir's London
office was in turmoil after the company said that it was considering slashing the
amount that it contributed to the pensions of some UK employees. During a
conference call that Shyam Sankar held with the London staff to discuss the
proposed change, several participants cited the windfall that he and other
executives had reaped from the DPO. The angry response—and a spate of
unfavorable press—ultimately prompted Palantir management to drop the idea.
For Karp, the wealth effect was also playing out in more subtle ways. His
status as a confirmed billionaire seemed to be coloring his interactions with
junior colleagues. When, in the past, he had tried to persuade Palantirians who
were thinking of leaving the company to stay, he didn't always succeed, but his
efforts were taken in good faith—the employees knew that he really did believe
that it would be better for them to remain at Palantir. Now, however, he sensed
that some people were more skeptical of his advice. " 'Oh, here's Moneybags,
telling me what to do with my life,' " Karp said, describing the way he thought
they were responding to him now.

Karp admitted that something had changed in the company's culture. He
spoke wistfully of the "cult spirit" that he and others had nurtured during
Palantir's early years, and he wanted to rekindle it. The company had planned to
resume HobbitCon, an annual retreat in which employees from all over the
world gathered for a weekend of parties and team-building exercises; the last one
had taken place before the pandemic. But Karp scrapped the idea: with the stock
price still below $10 and the company under mounting pressure to show a
profit, he couldn't justify the expense, and it might have raised more concern
about how Palantir was being run.
His frustration over company morale became apparent on a weekend in
November 2022, when he was in New York to prepare for the release of
Palantir's quarterly earnings that Monday. Karp spent all of Saturday and
Sunday in the office, as did other senior executives. But it was hard not to notice
that they and their staffs were the only ones around; otherwise, the office was
empty. On Sunday, Karp dipped into a conference room to join a pre-earnings
call with a journalist. It had just been reported that Meta, the parent company of
Facebook, was laying off eleven thousand employees, or around 13 percent of its
workforce, which gave Karp an opportunity to take a shot at Mark Zuckerberg.
"It's cold in the metaverse," he exclaimed in a singsong voice as he walked down
the hall. A bit later, Karp told several colleagues that Zuckerberg had "picked a
fight with us; he had a special operation going to make Palantir more hated so
that people would focus on us and not him. He denied it to Peter [Thiel], but I
have this on very good authority." Karp didn't identify his source, nor did he
provide any details about the alleged scheme. He suggested, in a joking/not-
joking way, that Zuckerberg had made a big mistake. "Don't pick a fight with
us," he said. "It's like prison, we're going to be shanking you every day."
(Through a spokesperson, Zuckerberg said that he was "not aware of any such
operation and if such a thing did exist at Facebook, he definitely didn't support
it.")
Karp spent twenty minutes on the call with the reporter. Afterward, he
lingered in the doorway. He had also noticed the dearth of people around the
office and was ticked off. He thought the rows of empty desks showed a lack of
commitment. "When people complain," he said, "I'm going to tell them that

you can complain as much as you want, but how many weekends did you work?
Every other weekend? Three weekends of every four? What's so exciting about
going out with your friends? You can be here, which is much more
entertaining." Karp was puzzled by the apparent lack of careerism—from a
purely opportunistic standpoint, why would Palantirians not want to be in the
office that weekend? Lisa Gordon interjected to say that Covid had changed
people's ideas about work-life balance and that employees had also gotten out of
the habit of turning up when he was in town. Karp wasn't buying it. "You have
this company that has succeeded for over twenty years, and every single person
who built it is here," he said. "What could be more interesting than that?"
The next day, Palantir reported that it had failed to turn a profit yet again. It
would be the last time that the company fell short. Three months later, Palantir
announced that in the fourth quarter of 2022, after almost two decades in
business, it had finally turned profitable. Nor was that a one-off: Palantir went
on to notch profits in all four quarters of 2023, which helped lift its stock price
and, more importantly, erased what had become almost a stigma for the
company. No one was happier than Karp, but the pleasure that he took in the
achievement, and the peace of mind that it conferred, proved fleeting. The world
was about to become a vastly more dangerous place in his eyes.
OceanofPDF.com

TEN
A SURVIVAL SITUATION
It was several days after Hamas murdered 1,200 Israelis, and Karp planned to
issue a statement reaffirming Palantir's support for Israel. He was intent on
striking a hawkish tone, and the original draft included a line that read, "Certain
kinds of evil can only be fought with violence." But his aides suggested replacing
"violence" with "force"—it would convey the same thought but without
sounding quite as bloodthirsty. Karp agreed to the edit, and shortly thereafter,
the message was posted on X, the social media platform formerly known as
Twitter that Elon Musk had purchased for $44 billion the year before. Although
it was a public declaration of solidarity with Israel, the audience that Karp was
really addressing was an internal one: he was signaling to any Palantirians who
disagreed with his position on Israel to keep it to themselves. The X post was "a
way of putting up a guardrail," he told me later. He had tolerated the spirited in-
house debate over Palantir's work with ICE because employees, unnerved by
Trump, needed the chance to vent, and also because he agreed there were
legitimate ethical and moral concerns. But in his mind, there was no ambiguity
when it came to the terrorist attack in Israel, and he wanted it understood that
open disagreement would not be permitted. "If you don't like it," Karp said,
"then I would say that Palantir is probably not the right place for you."
As important as the war in Ukraine was to Palantir, the October 7, 2023,
pogrom in Israel was far more consequential in Karp's view. It was certainly
more personal. He had been haunted from the time he was a kid by the
precariousness of Jewish existence. He had always staunchly supported Israel
precisely because it seemed to represent a safe harbor for Jews. He didn't approve
of every policy or prime minister, but because of his anxiety about his own place
in the world, Israel's security and well-being mattered greatly to him. "If you're
me, you recognize the danger of fascism and the importance of having a place to

go," he said. But now, Israel had been the scene of the deadliest massacre of Jews
since the Holocaust. For Karp, it was a shattering event, but also a galvanizing
one. A few days after Karp's message on X, Palantir took out a full-page ad in the
Sunday New York Times that said, "Palantir Stands with Israel."
The company also had a business relationship with the Israeli government.
For nearly a decade, the Mossad had been using Palantir's technology. The spy
agency had sought out Palantir, a request that surprised Karp. After all, Israel
had a robust tech sector, and the Mossad was famously resourceful (and lethal).
Karp was so sure the Israelis didn't need Palantir that he suggested they try
Gotham before purchasing it. When they came back and said they wanted it, he
sold them the software at a discount. Some employees objected to the contract,
citing Israel's treatment of the Palestinians. Karp tolerated the pushback because
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict was at a low boil then and Israel didn't seem to be
in mortal danger. But after October 7, its continued existence was very much in
doubt, at least in Karp's mind.
The Mossad is Israel's equivalent of the CIA—it focuses on external threats.
Israel's domestic intelligence service, Shin Bet, did not have Palantir at the time
of the Hamas attack, nor did the Israel Defense Forces, or IDF, the country's
military, and this quickly became a source of recriminations. A few weeks after
the massacre, at a memorial service in Jerusalem for the wife of Dan Meridor, an
influential political figure (her death was unrelated to October 7), one attendee
sharply commented to several senior Israeli officials that the massacre "wouldn't
have happened" if Shin Bet and the IDF had been using Palantir. That was
debatable, but both services sought to obtain Palantir's software in the wake of
October 7. The demand for Palantir's assistance was so great that the company
dispatched a team of engineers from London to help get Israeli users online.
Palantir ended up having to rent a second floor in the building that housed its
Tel Aviv office to accommodate the intelligence analysts who needed tutorials.
Palantir's software was also used by a large group of retired Israeli intelligence
analysts who offered their services following the massacre. The ad hoc effort was
organized by Joab Rosenberg, who had been the IDF's deputy head of
intelligence before leaving the military and launching an AI-focused start-up
that was backed in part by Mithril Capital, one of Peter Thiel's investment

funds. In 2014, while still with the IDF, Rosenberg had been part of a pilot
program using Gotham. He thought that the technology was good but was
missing certain higher-level analytical functions that he believed it needed, and in
the end the IDF decided to stick with a software system developed internally.
Now Rosenberg and his fellow volunteers were equipped (free of charge)
with Foundry, and he was struck by how easy it was to learn and operate and also
by its advanced capabilities. "It was a much better machine," he says. He and his
colleagues had an urgent task. In recent years, the Israelis had scaled back their
open-source intelligence gathering. But the Hamas militants, using their phones
as well as GoPros that they had attached to their bodies, had filmed their
murderous rampage, and many of the videos were being posted to social media.
These were important pieces of evidence as the Israelis tried to identify the 250
or so people kidnapped by Hamas and taken to Gaza. There were also a lot of
messages and still pictures posted on sites like X and Telegram, some of which
yielded clues.
Rosenberg's team supplemented the data that they scraped from social media
with commercially available satellite imagery. The volunteers were a source of
critical intelligence early in the crisis. They reconstructed the attack on Kibbutz
Nir Oz, where around one hundred residents were killed or kidnapped.
Rosenberg was the group's liaison to the IDF, and the results that he and his
team produced convinced active-duty intelligence analysts that they needed
Palantir, too. "They really wanted it for themselves," he says. In this, there were
echoes of Palantir's experience with the U.S. military, when it was American
troops on the ground in Iraq and Afghanistan who led the push to get the
company's technology. But in the case of the IDF, the top brass was more than
happy to oblige in the aftermath of October 7. Josh Harris spearheaded
Palantir's work in Israel, and as he listened to Israeli military officials marveling at
the speed with which the company's technology merged and analyzed data, he
couldn't believe that the software was such a revelation for them. He recalled
thinking, "Are you guys being paid to say this?"
While Palantir scrambled to help Israel, Karp was perturbed that he seemed
to be the only American business leader speaking out forcefully. A week after the
Times ad ran, he and I talked by video. He was at his place in New Hampshire;

he was seated at his desk, wearing a knit cap and drinking tea. There were two
Rubik's Cubes on the desk. For the first time that I could recall, he appeared
deflated, and he admitted that he was "a little depressed." Like many people, he
was appalled by the brutality of the Hamas attack, and while he said that he was
never under any illusions about how Jews were perceived, the outpouring of
antisemitism following the massacre had surprised him. "It's worse than I
thought, and I thought it was worse than anyone I know," he said. He expressed
disappointment over what he saw as the failure of other tech executives to
defend Israel. He didn't name names, but clearly referring to Musk, a prolific
poster on X, he said he found it "weird" that "certain people in tech who
comment online about everything that moves" had nothing to say about what
had happened in Israel. Karp was certain that most tech moguls supported
Israel, but their reticence annoyed him. "Why am I the only one defending the
Jews?" he asked.
He was irked, too, by the silence of other Jewish business executives. He said
that we had all grown up hearing the phrase "never again," but now, in the face
of a slaughter that had, on a per capita basis, claimed the equivalent of fifty
thousand American lives, he was the only Jewish head of a publicly traded
company who was standing up for Israel and denouncing antisemitism. Apart
from him, it was "like crickets out there." He put the silence down to cowardice.
"My personal view is that they don't want to be yelled at and unpopular," Karp
said. He speculated that some of them also didn't want to risk falling out "with
their progressive friends. And their progressive friends do not like Israel. And a
higher proportion than anyone wants to admit don't actually like Jews."
The reticence of Jewish business leaders was a recurring theme for him in the
weeks following the Hamas attack. In private, he acknowledged the contempt
that many American Jews felt for Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu
and his far-right government and said that he had no inclination to defend
Netanyahu. "If Netanyahu got pushed out of a helicopter, I wouldn't ask any
questions," he commented to a friend. "If I had the chance to push Netanyahu
out of a helicopter, I might." But however repugnant the Israeli leader was, that
didn't account for the spasm of antisemitism, nor was it an excuse to keep quiet.
Karp was planning to go to Israel as soon as possible. He wanted to demonstrate

his support for the embattled nation, but he admitted that he also wanted to
embarrass others in the American Jewish community who were in positions of
power and authority but were being cravenly silent.
With the outbreak of war in Gaza, Karp put off traveling to Israel. In early
November, he attended a summit on AI security hosted by the British
government. He did Palantir's third-quarter earnings call while in London. He
used his opening remarks to claim, again, total vindication for the dystopian
outlook that had always guided Palantir's work and to reiterate the company's
pro-Israel stance. "Obviously, current events and the performance of our
business are absolute validation of our strategy of building the world's most
aligned and powerful enterprise products," he told analysts and investors before
launching into a peroration about October 7. "We have been building products
for a world that is violent, disjointed, and irrational, a world in which you have
to show strength, a world in which if you do not show strength, people who are
biased, xenophobic, dare I say it antisemitic, will rear their head [sic], a world in
which you really have to pick sides," Karp said.
He went on to say that it was no longer tenable, or defensible, to sell products
to friends and enemies alike. "Palantir is the first major company, in my view, to
have said from the beginning a thing that is obviously true—there is no such
thing anymore of being on all sides. Palantir only supplies its products to
Western allies. We've never supplied our products to enemies. We proudly
support the U.S. government. I am proud that we are supporting Israel in every
way we can. And we also support plain English speaking. So when people are
massacred to the equivalent of almost fifty thousand people, in Israel, we view it
as a terror act. We call it terrorism. We supply our product to people who are
fighting terrorism and we have no problem with describing it as it is or sticking
up for our allies, and we don't provide false context. All of a sudden, you need a
lot of context for describing what it means to kill Jews or persecute Jews across
the world. I believe in context, in places where you actually need to provide it.
But at Palantir, we have seen that our view of the world, which is that there really
are people that are violent and not conformant with morality need to be
fought."

In a sense, October 7 brought Palantir back to its roots. The company had
been founded for the purpose of combating terrorism, and specifically jihadism.
But Islamic terrorism hadn't proven to be as cripplingly pervasive as many had
feared in the wake of 9/11, and with the damage that the United States and its
allies had inflicted on Al Qaeda and, later, ISIS, it was possible to imagine that
the danger had been mostly neutralized. In the meantime, Palantir had expanded
into realms far removed from the war on terrorism. The Hamas attack was
horrifying proof that the terrorism threat had not been extinguished. For Karp,
it also showed that the world was still okay with the slaughtering of Jews and
that it remained a perilous place for Alex Karp. Even with his phalanx of
bodyguards, he felt personally threatened. "This is a survival situation," he said.
In early December, two months after the atrocities in Israel, Karp attended the
annual Reagan National Defense Forum, held at the Ronald Reagan Library,
near Los Angeles. He had become a regular at the event, which brought together
cabinet secretaries, members of Congress, senior Pentagon officers, and
representatives of the defense industry. Karp took part in a panel discussion and
used the opportunity to talk about antisemitism. "There were unfortunately
way too many people on October 7th who were happy, and we have to
acknowledge we have a huge problem in the Western world with antisemitism,"
Karp said. "Not all criticism of Israel is antisemitism, but a larger portion of it is
than we realized. We have to call it out. And I'm one of the largest donors to the
Democratic Party, and quite frankly I am calling it out and I'm giving to
Republicans and if you keep up this behavior I'm going to change and a lot of
people like me are going to change."
That comment went viral; Republicans were trying to appeal to disaffected
Jewish Democrats, and here was a major Jewish donor telling the Democratic
Party that he was about to stop. In truth, even though Karp continued to call
himself a progressive, he had been drifting away from the Democrats for a while.
He rarely had anything positive to say about them and his criticisms often
echoed right-wing talking points; if Karp wasn't watching Fox himself, it seemed

as if he was getting some of his information from people who were. For instance,
he blamed President Biden for the inflation spike that started in 2021, even
though it was a global phenomenon caused mainly by supply chain disruptions
during the pandemic. Sometimes, Karp strained to find reasons to dump on the
Democrats. Noting that anti-vaxxers had appropriated the "my body, my
choice" slogan used to defend reproductive rights, he suggested that the backlash
against Covid vaccine mandates was a case of liberals having their own argument
turned against them. It was a surprisingly poor analogy coming from Karp,
whose logic was usually unimpeachable even if you disagreed with the point that
he was making. Covid was a public health emergency that threatened the lives of
millions. Abortion was a private decision that posed no such danger.
His estrangement from the Democrats had nothing to do with his personal
wealth, at least not directly. He wasn't resentful of the taxes that he had to pay,
nor was he one of those whiny plutocrats who thought that the Democrats were
trying to punish him for his success. To the extent that being a billionaire was a
factor, it was mostly because he spent much of his time now surrounded by
other extremely rich people, and in those circles, expressing contempt for the
Democrats was almost a rite of initiation. But Karp's main grievance with the
Democrats wasn't economic, it was ideological. He thought they were generally
weak on foreign policy and that the party had been captured by the identarian
left and "wokeism" (and his animus toward both had increased as a result of the
ICE controversy and the furor over Palantir's work in New Orleans). The anti-
Israel protests that erupted after October 7 caused Karp to feel even more
alienated from progressives. By contrast, he praised the Republican Party for its
strong support of the Jewish state. "I'm now very willing to overlook my
disagreements with Republicans on other issues because of the position they
have taken on this one," he said. Karp had soured on the Democrats in part
because of identity politics. Yet it was his own identity politics that was now
driving him even further away.
At the same time, though, some powerful voices on the right had embraced
nakedly antisemitic views after October 7. In mid-November, Elon Musk had
finally weighed in on events in the Middle East, via a discussion on X. Someone
posted a comment saying that Jews had been "pushing the exact kind of

dialectical hatred against whites that they claim to want people to stop using
against them. I'm deeply disinterested in giving the tiniest shit now about
western Jewish populations coming to the disturbing realization that those
hordes of minorities that [they] support flooding the country don't exactly like
them too much." The implication was that Jews were behind the so-called Great
Replacement—the alleged plot to make whites a minority in the West, a
conspiracy theory that had become an article of faith in far-right circles. Musk
responded with a pithy "You have said the actual truth."
His comment sparked outrage. After months of speculation about whether
Musk was an antisemite—conjecture prompted by his attacks on George Soros
and the Anti-Defamation League, as well as his re-platforming of neo-Nazis on
X—many observers concluded that they now had an answer. As Musk sought to
defuse the controversy by traveling to Israel to meet with Netanyahu and to visit
a kibbutz that had been attacked by Hamas, two leading right-wing
commentators, Tucker Carlson and Charlie Kirk, chimed in with sentiments
similar to those expressed by the poster on X. Carlson claimed that wealthy
Jewish Americans had been bankrolling people who advocated for "white
genocide." Kirk, in his daily radio show, seconded Carlson's comments. "The
philosophical foundation of anti-whiteness has been largely financed by Jewish
donors in the country," Kirk told his audience.
When I brought up these comments to Karp, he didn't deny that they were
troubling—or, indeed, antisemitic. But he didn't think that they sprang from
genuine hostility to Jews. Carlson's main grievances were immigration from the
developing world and a belief that the left was sanctioning discrimination
against white people. As Karp saw it, Carlson had a problem with Jews only to
the extent that some of them provided money to groups that promoted
immigration, and also to universities and other institutions that had become
platforms to inveigh against white privilege. And Karp had a problem with those
Jews, too: the people they had thought of as allies had turned on them viciously
after October 7, and at the same time, their actions risked inviting the wrath of
those who actually were their friends. "The least antisemitic people in the
history of civilization are white Americans," Karp said.

While he wasn't suggesting that Carlson spoke for all white Americans,
millions of them clearly shared his views, and to Karp, it was self-evidently not in
the interest of Jews to make enemies of these people. Before October 7, he had
considered the border crisis bad for the Democrats; now he saw it as bad for the
Jews. He said that 80 percent of Americans thought well of Jews (he didn't cite a
source for this claim). "They might not want to hang out with Jews, but they
respect and admire them," he said. In his opinion, the health of a society was
commensurate with its tolerance of "Jewish overachievement," as he put it, and
Karp believed that most white, Christian Americans were disposed favorably to
Jews. By almost any measure, Jews had themselves become an in-group. But
Karp surmised that the people trying to enter the United States now were
probably more hostile toward Jews, or at least not as friendly, which in his mind
was all the more reason to secure the border and keep them out.
Karp had been convinced for some time that Donald Trump would win the
2024 election. He thought that immigration had become an almost
insurmountable liability for Biden. Karp saw Vice President Kamala Harris as a
further drag on the Democrats: she was not popular, and because there was a
good chance that the eighty-year-old Biden would be unable to serve out a
second term, the election was likely to be as much a referendum on Harris as it
was on him. Karp also believed that the effort to prosecute Trump for crimes
that he had allegedly committed was a mistake and had backfired, only
strengthening his hold over the GOP. He assumed that the October 7 massacre
would likewise redound to Trump's benefit: it had put terrorism back on the
front page, and when voters felt scared, they usually turned to the right.
Despite his frustration with the Democrats, Karp was still giving money to
Biden's campaign, in part because of the support that his administration had
shown for Israel. He said he couldn't vote for Trump because of the turmoil that
he would inevitably unleash—it would be four more lost years for the country.
In his judgment, the biggest problem with Trump wasn't his malevolence but,
rather, his shambolic personality. To me, at least, Karp had always insisted that
Trump wasn't as dangerous as he was made out to be and that people were too
easily triggered by "the orange man," as he called him. He also went to lengths to
credit Trump for what he believed the former president got right, such as his

claim that the pandemic had been caused by a lab leak in China, a view that
Karp shared. Privately, though, Karp didn't always project the same equanimity
toward Trump. Over the years, he had encouraged several colleagues to seek
second passports, as a form of insurance.
But following the massacre in Israel, Karp was even more intent on
downplaying the threat posed by Trump. When I saw him in Washington a week
after the Hamas attack, Trump's name came up. "I don't think Trump is a
fascist," Karp said, explaining that he was too obsessed with money to be one. In
an increasingly defiant tone, he added, "I don't think Trump is an antisemite. In
fact, I don't think he's a racist." Karp usually spoke with total conviction—it
was part of what made him such an effective salesman—and maybe he really did
believe that Trump wasn't any of those things. However, his unprovoked
combativeness suggested that it wasn't me he was trying to persuade but, rather,
himself—that he needed to believe that Trump, despite abundant evidence to
the contrary, wasn't a bigoted authoritarian. Perhaps it was his way of bracing
for Trump's possible return to power and of preemptively justifying whatever
that might require of Palantir.
On December 5, 2023, the presidents of Harvard, MIT, and the University of
Pennsylvania appeared before a congressional committee to discuss antisemitism
in academia. When asked if statements calling for Jews to be killed violated the
codes of conduct at their universities, all three gave legalistic, carefully hedged
answers. Their evasiveness sparked outrage, and Penn's president, Liz Magill, was
soon out of a job. A few days later, Karp announced via X that Palantir was
creating 180 positions for students who "because of antisemitism fear for their
safety on campus and need to seek refuge outside traditional establishments of
higher education." The statement added, "our software embodies our values and
commitments. These include high performance, efficiency, transparency,
fairness, and a rejection of narrow thinking, including fear and skepticism of the
other and outright bigotry." It went on to condemn "the egregious levels of
antisemitism in our society, especially at our most elite educational institutions.

Some of these organizations seem structurally incapable of taking any steps to
reform themselves."
I was with Karp that morning. He had told me a few minutes ahead of time
that he was about to make some headlines ("keep an eye on X"), and when the
statement went live, he was ecstatic. He clearly found pleasure in piling on the
Harvards and Penns and putting Palantir at the center of this particular news
cycle (later that day, Fox Business would have him on to talk about the unusual
jobs program, as well as other topics). He acknowledged that the recruitment
effort, which would soon be christened Operation Safe Haven, was possibly
illegal—presumably, one had to be Jewish to apply, but it was against the law, of
course, for companies to discriminate on the basis of race, religion, or ethnicity.
As far as Karp was concerned, Palantir's legal team could sort that out. "My
lawyers are having heart attacks," he said with a satisfied grin.
Karp believed that DEI was at the root of the problems on campuses. DEI—
diversity, equity, and inclusion—was a framework, adopted by universities,
corporations, and other organizations, to redress the insufficient representation
of minorities in their ranks. At the heart of DEI, Karp said, was a belief that
America's claim to being a meritocratic society was a lie—that for all the social
progress that we had made as a country, systemic discrimination against women,
blacks, gays, and other out-groups was a persistent factor in American life and
could be remedied only by imposing DEI standards on institutions. But Karp
said that Jews stood as inconvenient evidence to the contrary—they had "started
below anyone else" and were now "arguably the most successful group in
America," a distinction they had achieved without assistance and often in the
face of great hostility. "Jews unravel the whole ideology of DEI," he said, and
this, in his judgment, accounted for the hatred now being directed at them on
campuses. Karp claimed that DEI was "the precursor to antisemitism" and
needed to be dismantled.
He went on to say that the self-made success of American Jews was the reason
for the rift between Jews and blacks; blacks, in his view, resented and envied
Jews. This wasn't just true of blacks, he added—there were competing narratives
between Jews and people of color more generally, which was why hostility to
Jews was so much more intense than that directed at "normal white males," as he

put it. I told him that this was an odd thing to hear from someone who was
biracial. Karp admitted that his views were complicated and perhaps
controversial. But he insisted that he was as aligned with blacks as he was with
the Jews; the difference, he said, was that "the Jews know it." He suggested that
fighting antisemitism was beneficial for blacks, too. "The health of a society is
most easily measured in inverse proportion to the level of antisemitism," he said.
"If you want a strong black community, you fight antisemitism."
The conversation about colleges led to more dunking on Haverford. Karp
said that our alma mater was probably doomed now. Jewish students nationwide
were going to be suing colleges and universities for discrimination. Harvard,
with its $50 billion endowment, could withstand a wave of lawsuits, but a place
like Haverford was vulnerable. "This could end Haverford permanently," Karp
said. "It could take their endowment down to two hundred million dollars.
They would drop out of the top fifty. It would basically become an annex of
Bryn Mawr." (Bryn Mawr is an all-women college closely affiliated with
Haverford.) He asked if I had seen the latest alumni email from Haverford; it
was about upcoming events at the school, with no reference to the situation in
the Middle East or the turmoil engulfing academia. "Are they fucking nuts?" he
asked, growing agitated. "For universities, this is a moment like Martin Luther
King walking through Memphis and being attacked by dogs—you can't send
out something like this." (Haverford did end up getting sued by a group of
students, parents, and alumni for allegedly creating an environment that was
hostile to Jews.)
According to Karp, the college was foolish not to seek his counsel. "If you are
Haverford, you need someone like me to explain how the world actually works,"
he said. But Haverford's president, Wendy Raymond, had never reached out to
him personally, and he assumed she wouldn't be doing so now. He figured it was
because she feared having him become to Haverford what his fellow billionaire,
the hedge fund manager Bill Ackman, had been to Harvard. Following that
disastrous congressional hearing, Ackman helped lead the (ultimately successful)
effort to oust Harvard's president, Claudine Gay.
In Karp's view, Haverford wasn't just guilty of moral obtuseness; it was also
being daft. The college's endowment was $600 million; Karp said that he and

Howard Lutnick, a Haverford grad who was the CEO of the financial services
firm Cantor Fitzgerald and who would serve as commerce secretary during the
second Trump administration, had a combined net worth significantly larger
than that. Any rational institution would try not to piss off people who could
write hefty checks (Lutnick, though, was already a major donor to Haverford).
Karp had long ago concluded that Haverford's administrators were inept, but
what he saw as their failure to adequately denounce terrorism and to confront
antisemitism on campus had destroyed any chance that he would make a gift to
the school. "They will never get a dime out of me," he said.
Nor, it seems, were Haverford students going to be landing jobs at Palantir.
During his appearance at the Reagan National Defense Forum, Karp took aim
not only at the Democrats, but also at student protesters who were
demonstrating against Israel. "I am not a legislator," Karp said, "but I am
running one of the coolest companies in the world, and I'm telling young
people, you are breathing the vapors of a dangerous new fake and self-
destructive religion when you are sitting at your elite school pretending because
you watched TikTok twice and got an A-plus on some crazy paper because your
professor couldn't get a job anywhere else that you actually understand the
world. And you are not welcome at my company." The last line elicited laughter
and loud applause.
In early January 2024, Karp finally made it to Israel. He had decided to call
attention to Palantir's support for the country in a dramatic way: by holding a
board meeting in Tel Aviv. Not every board member could attend in person, but
the most prominent one did: Thiel joined Karp in Israel. Before the board
convened, it met in Jerusalem with Israel's president, Isaac Herzog, who
expressed his gratitude for Palantir's assistance. Karp and Thiel also met privately
with Netanyahu, a meeting that neither Palantir nor the prime minister's office
publicly disclosed. During the trip, Karp, along with other Palantir executives,
visited Kfar Aza, a kibbutz near Gaza where over sixty Israelis were murdered
and nineteen were taken hostage. The group also toured an Israeli military

installation. While in Israel Karp signed a contract with Israel's Ministry of
Defense, formalizing a relationship that had started in the weeks after the
terrorist attack. Karp's trip received a lot of local coverage, but didn't get much
press back home, although Bloomberg published a story under the headline
"Thiel's Palantir, Israel Agree Strategic Partnership for Battle Tech." A film crew
had been hired to follow Karp in Israel, and several of his aides wanted to post
the video on Palantir's website. But Lisa Gordon talked him out of it; she said it
would seem crass.
The World Economic Forum took place the following week. Davos had
become such a punch line that Karp would have preferred to skip it. But he
recognized that it was another opportunity to highlight Israel's suffering. To that
end, he hosted an event in which several former hostages of Hamas, along with
the families of a couple of Israelis still being detained in Gaza, discussed the
horrors they had experienced. (Karp covered the group's travel costs.) Karp got
several fellow CEOs to take part: Amazon's Andy Jassy, Salesforce's Marc
Benioff, and Dell Technologies' Michael Dell were among those in attendance.
The front display of Palantir's pavilion in Davos showed pictures of all 150
Israelis who were still being held hostage, along with the message "Bring Them
Home Now."
Almost from the start of the war in Gaza, there was speculation about the
role that Palantir was playing in the conflict. In April 2024, the Israeli online
magazine +972 published a lengthy investigation into a trio of AI-driven
targeting programs that Israel was allegedly using in Gaza: one was called
Lavender, the other two were called The Gospel and Where's Daddy? Citing
military sources, the magazine said that the IDF had essentially outsourced
decision-making to the algorithms and that thousands of innocent Palestinians
had been killed as a result.
Although the +972 article made no mention of Palantir, suspicion
immediately fell on the company, with some analysts and critics suggesting that
it had furnished technology for Lavender, The Gospel, and Where's Daddy? But
according to people at Palantir who were intimately involved with its work in
Israel, that was untrue; the company did not contribute to any of the targeting
systems. In the spring of 2025, the UN special rapporteur on the Palestinian

territories, Francesca Albanese, prepared a report that accused major tech
companies of being complicit in what she characterized as Israel's genocidal war
in Gaza, and an early draft repeated these claims about Palantir. In response, the
company enlisted the British attorney Anthony Julius (best known for
representing Princess Diana in her divorce from Prince Charles), who wrote a
strongly worded letter accusing Albanese of recycling falsehoods.
But Palantir was assisting Israel in other ways. Its software was used by the
Israeli military in several raids in Gaza in which hostages were freed, and it also
helped facilitate the handover of detainees who were released by Hamas. In
addition to hostage extraction, the company's technology was deployed by the
Israelis during military operations in Lebanon in 2024 that decimated
Hezbollah's top leadership. It was also used in Operation Grim Beeper, in which
hundreds of Hezbollah fighters were injured and maimed when their pagers and
walkie-talkies exploded (the Israelis had booby-trapped the devices). Via the U.S.
military's Project Maven, Palantir also helped repel large-scale Iranian missile
attacks on Israel in October 2024 and June 2025.
Back in the United States, meanwhile, Palantir hired dozens of students
under Operation Safe Haven. To ensure that the program was legal, the
company had opened it to Jews and non-Jews alike, and a number of non-Jews
received offers. Safe Haven was not dissimilar to a program that Thiel had started
some years earlier, in which he paid students to drop out of college to pursue
innovative projects. The idea was born in part of Thiel's disdain for academia, a
contempt that Karp shared even before October 7. With Karp, however, it
seemed deeper and more personal. He had chosen not to become a professor, yet
when he talked about the universities, he often sounded like someone who had
been denied tenure—there was an undercurrent of rancor.
But while Palantir was welcoming the refugees from Columbia, Dartmouth,
and other schools, it was facing some in-house dissent over its support for Israel.
The debate on Palantir's Slack channels grew so heated at one point that the
company shut down the discussion. Palantir executives made some effort to turn
the controversy into a teachable moment. They announced that the company
would initiate a speaker's series to help educate Palantirians on the history and
nuances of the Israel-Palestine conflict. But the first guest was John Spencer, a

scholar at the Modern War Institute, a think tank affiliated with West Point and
one of the staunchest defenders of Israel's military campaign in Gaza. In opinion
columns and media appearances, Spencer argued that Israel was not committing
war crimes and was, in fact, showing excessive restraint. He believed that
pressure from the United States and other Western countries was hindering
Israel's ability to defeat Hamas and, as such, was putting Gaza residents at even
greater risk. By no means was Spencer a crank, but choosing him to be the
inaugural speaker served only to reinforce the impression among some
employees that Palantir wasn't interested in having a robust discussion about
Israel and the role the company was playing there—and, of course, Karp wasn't
interested in having a debate. While very outspoken publicly, he was
conspicuously silent internally: he didn't hold any town hall meetings or
otherwise address the misgivings that Palantirians might have had about the
company's work with Israel. Some colleagues thought he was remiss in not
speaking directly to employees, but others believed that it was probably just as
well that he didn't—that he was apt to say things that would aggravate tensions.
In Karp's inner circle, there was unabashed support for Israel, and the non-
Jews seemed especially strident. Several executives wanted to fire the more vocal
dissenters. But even though Karp had previously signaled his unwillingness to
countenance any protests, he vetoed the idea; he thought the optics would be
bad and that people who couldn't abide the company's position would quit. A
handful did. One circulated a letter explaining his decision. "After 5 memorable
years as a Hobbit, today is my last day at Palantir," he wrote. He spoke of his
affection for his colleagues and of the pleasure that he took in the work before
getting to the heart of the matter: "This is who our Palantir leadership has
officially chosen to ostentatiously support: a government that is and has been in
clear violation of international law, and an army that has been actively carrying
out war crimes with complete impunity. While rightfully condemning the
atrocious October 7th terrorist attacks, mourning Israeli civilian lives, and
calling for the release of Israeli hostages, they had absolutely no word of
sympathy for Palestinians, no condemnation of the attacks on the civilian
population of Gaza, and no denunciation of the tens of thousands of
Palestinians held illegally in Israeli detention and subject to systematic abuse. It

is as if Palestinian lives are worth less than Israeli lives: the selective indignation is
so obvious, and these double standards are unacceptable." He suggested that
Palantir was acting in a way that contravened its own mission: "This is not what
supporting the West should be about. Our stance and involvement are only
aiding administrations and special interests who are betraying western and
universal values of human rights, human dignity, and the right to freedom,
justice and a lasting peace."
But Karp was unmoved by that argument or any other opinions that diverged
from his own. In his view, Israel's fight was the West's fight—the battle against
Hamas was a battle for the civilized world and in defense of the values that the
West enshrined and represented. And Karp was convinced that those values
weren't just under assault in the Middle East, but also on American college
campuses. In May 2024, he spoke at an AI conference in Washington. He was
joined onstage by Eric Schmidt; General Mark Milley, the former chairman of
the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and David Cohen, the deputy director of the CIA.
CNBC's Andrew Ross Sorkin moderated the conversation, and Karp used
much of his time to once again rail against the students protesting the war in
Gaza. He said they were in thrall to a "cancerous, corrosive ideology" that
rejected Western thought and that if their ideas were not challenged and
defeated, the West would be disarming itself. "If we lose the intellectual debate,
we will not be able to deploy any army in the West, ever," Karp said.
The next morning, CNBC's Squawk Box aired a clip of his remarks.
Afterward, an amused Joe Kernen, one of the cohosts along with Sorkin,
commented that Karp was "an enigma wrapped in a riddle. He always
emphasizes 'I'm a progressive' and then he goes on to sound like just a huge
right-winger."
OceanofPDF.com

ELEVEN
THE REBELS WIN
Before Palantir went public, Thiel was careful never to openly air any concerns
that he had about how it was being run. He expressed faith in Karp's leadership
and gave every indication that the two of them spoke with one voice when it
came to Palantir. But after the stock market launch, he was more willing to
acknowledge that there had been points of disagreement between him and Karp
and that certain things about how the company operated had troubled him. He
admitted, for instance, that he had wanted to take Palantir public sooner than
Karp. He conceded, too, that he had been frustrated by the company's struggle
to land deals—"It shouldn't have taken ten years to get the D-sigs contract,"
Thiel said, referring to the Army's battlefield intelligence system—and its
inability to turn a profit. "If you had told me in 2004 that our first profitable
quarter of business would be in the fourth quarter of 2022, that would've been
very surprising," he said.
Thiel thought that the company had been hindered at times by its own
underdog mentality. He said there was a "self-narrative" that Palantir was on this
"very heroic" quest in which everything had to be an epic struggle, even if that
wasn't necessarily true. Although he didn't use this exact metaphor, he was
saying that given a choice between walking through the front door and trying to
squeeze down the chimney, Palantir had always opted for the chimney. Thiel
suggested that this pattern of behavior was rooted to some degree in Karp's
personality. "My riff on Alex is that's he working out some psychological issues
where he has to do things in this really, really hard way versus the
straightforward, easy way," Thiel said. He didn't downplay the challenges that
Palantir had faced but believed it shouldn't have been so difficult to achieve
sustained success. "In theory, there were ways to build this that would have been
far better, far faster, far less chaotic," said Thiel. The chaos, he added, had

extended to the pursuit of new revenue streams: "There were ways that we
pivoted too much from sector to sector."
He made that comment just weeks after Karp had announced that Palantir
was plunging into another area that suddenly seemed full of promise. In early
April 2023, Karp published a letter touting the imminent debut of Palantir's
Artificial Intelligence Platform, or AIP. Six months earlier, OpenAI had released
ChatGPT, a chatbot that brought generative artificial intelligence—algorithms
that can create new content, be it text, images, video, music—to the masses.
ChatGPT was at the vanguard of a group of bots—Google's Bard, later renamed
Gemini; Microsoft's Copilot—that were trained on large language models, or
LLMs. They had hoovered up enormous quantities of data (books, newspaper
and magazine articles, photos) to learn human speech and thought patterns and
were capable of giving increasingly sophisticated answers to complex questions.
LLMs were widely regarded as a massive leap forward in the quest to achieve
artificial general intelligence, or AGI, the long-anticipated moment when
machine cognition might surpass human brainpower.
In his letter, Karp hailed LLMs as revolutionary. "At the most foundational
level," he observed, "software provides an interface, a means of interacting,
between the human mind and a computational machine. There has always been
some degree of friction in translating the desires and creative instincts of a
human operator into direction that a computational system can understand and
apprehend. The development and refinement of large language models alongside
our existing machine learning capabilities has now opened up a whole new
means of interacting with machines that has never existed." He said that for
business and industry, "the deployment of these new technologies will be
transformative." But he also acknowledged that AI carried enormous risks for
humanity. "It is clear that the sophistication and complexity of these latest
systems will only continue to increase," Karp wrote. "The challenge will be to
ensure that such technologies remain subservient to our collective will. We must
impose our values on the software that we create."
The introduction of AIP was another instance of Palantir chasing the new
new thing, but in this case, it paid off to a degree that even Karp hadn't
anticipated. AIP led to an unprecedented surge in business, consistent

profitability, and a run-up in the company's stock price that ultimately led to
Palantir's ascension to the S&P 500. Karp had once told me that he believed
Palantir was poised to become the new IBM—to achieve the kind of market
dominance that IBM had enjoyed in the 1960s and '70s, when its mainframe
computers were the backbone of corporate America and the U.S. government.
At the time, Palantir's stock was under $10, and his confidence seemed, if not
delusional, then at least fanciful. However, AIP proved to be a moon shot for
Palantir, and the idea that the company's software might indeed become the de
facto operating system of the West's most important institutions no longer
sounded quite so far-fetched.
Along with Karp and Thiel, Stephen Cohen was one of the three cofounders
who was still actively involved with Palantir when it went public. Joe Lonsdale
left Palantir in 2009, eventually launching a venture capital firm. Nathan
Gettings stayed at Palantir until 2012, when he quit to start a consumer lending
company with Max Levchin, his old PayPal colleague. Cohen, by contrast, opted
to remain, becoming Palantir's president. Even though the DPO had also made
him a billionaire, Cohen personally had never gotten out of start-up mode. He
wore the same outfit pretty much every day—a black polo shirt and jeans (shorts
in warmer weather). He normally ate the same lunch, too: peanut butter and
jelly on Wonder Bread. Like Karp, he was quirky. He preferred his room
temperature ice-cold, and his office in Palo Alto felt like a meat locker. His
discipline was legendary: he would sequester himself in a conference room and
not emerge for hours—not even for bathroom breaks. He still pulled all-
nighters.
Cohen had a long-standing interest in artificial intelligence, which he called
"the final frontier in computing." He said that his biggest regret, upon
graduating from Stanford, was that he had not taken a popular course on
natural language processing. (He later audited the class.) While intimately
involved in Palantir's product development, which included a number of
machine-learning functions, he kept close watch on the AI research being done

by companies like Google, Meta, Microsoft, OpenAI, and Anthropic. When
ChatGPT came out, Cohen was struck by how much it seized the public's
imagination. "The thing about ChatGPT wasn't just the technological progress,
which was sublime," Cohen says. "Seeing the way the whole world got excited
about it, seeing the human element awaken at such a collective scale—it was
electric."
Bob McGrew, one of Palantir's original engineers, was now OpenAI's chief
of research. Not long after ChatGPT was released, he stopped by Palantir's Palo
Alto office and met with Karp and Cohen. They had a simple question: Was
there true intelligence to ChatGPT, or was it just persuasive mimicry? McGrew
couldn't tell them that OpenAI would soon be releasing an updated version of
ChatGPT that had shown the ability to reason, but he said the intelligence was
coming. "I just kept repeating that the models are going to get better, this stuff is
real, and Palantir should prepare," says McGrew. Karp and Cohen, joined by
Shyam Sankar and other Palantir executives, began brainstorming. It seemed
clear to them that, as Cohen puts it, "a giant technological revolution" was at
hand, and that this presented Palantir with an opportunity. Corporations and
other institutions were going to want to integrate LLMs into their workflows
and their broader digital infrastructure, and Palantir seemed ideally positioned
to play an intermediary role.
But building an entirely new set of tools that would enable organizations to
take advantage of LLMs was going to require a significant investment of time
and money, and would also pull people away from other work. "You have to
stand up teams—it's turning the ship," says Akshay Krishnaswamy, Palantir's
chief architect. Karp made the decision to proceed. It was a risky move, a two-
pronged wager: it was a bet that generative AI would fundamentally alter how
companies manage their businesses, and it was a bet that Palantir could become
the dominant enterprise software provider in the age of AI. In an earnings call,
Karp announced that ambition with characteristic bravado, saying that
Palantir's "strategy on AI is just to take the whole market."
AIP was developed in a matter of weeks and was incorporated into Foundry.
Through AIP, companies could utilize LLMs for a host of functions—from
financial modeling to communications and marketing to data analysis. In June

2023, Palantir hosted the first of what would become a quarterly event known as
AIPCon, which drew dozens of attendees to the company's Palo Alto office for a
day of demos and testimonials. It also began holding "boot camps" for existing
and potential clients; Palantirians would visit companies to provide AIP
tutorials for employees and allow them to experiment with it. Ultimately,
Palantir did more than one thousand boot camps, which underlined its
commitment to the new product and also the intense demand for AI capabilities
—demand that yielded a trove of business.
During that first year, Palantir signed up around 150 new U.S. commercial
users, roughly doubling the number it had before AIP. The new customers
spanned a range of industries: they included Lowe's, the home improvement
chain; General Mills; United Airlines; CBS; Aramark, the food services giant; the
American Association of Retired Persons, or AARP; and Selkirk Sport, which
manufactures pickleball equipment. Two companies that had dropped Palantir
years earlier, JPMorganChase and Coca-Cola, became clients again. Several
major hospital groups, among them Cleveland Clinic, also signed on; by the end
of 2023, almost 20 percent of the nation's hospitals were using Palantir's
software, an outgrowth not just of AIP, but also of the company's central role
during the pandemic.
Palantir's year-on-year revenue increased by nearly 30 percent after AIP was
introduced, and the company continued to report quarterly profits, a winning
streak dating back to the fourth quarter of 2022. Some perennial Palantir
skeptics on Wall Street were still unpersuaded: they saw AIP as little more than a
sugar high and remained doubtful about the company's longer-term growth
prospects. One analyst, Rishi Jaluria of RBC Capital Markets, suggested that
Palantir was trying to hoodwink people. "Palantir messages that they are this
cutting-edge generative AI company and very deliberately targets retail
investors," Jaluria told Yahoo Finance. "It's a good data pipeline, it's a good data
ontology company, I'm not saying it's not a useful company, but it is not what
they claim it is." Jaluria found himself frozen out by Palantir—the company
wouldn't take his calls or let him attend AIPCon. Other dubious Wall Street
analysts were likewise shunned.

However, Wall Street's most prominent Palantir bear seemed to be changing
his mind. In October 2023, Jim Cramer was asked by a Mad Money viewer for
his thoughts about the company. "Palantir actually has real business," he said. "I
was a little skeptical about those fellas... but they had a really good quarter and
actually lived up to their hype. So I'm reluctant to say anything bad about them,
and they are going to make money. So two cheers for Palantir." Several weeks
later, he went further. "I disliked these guys for a long time, but not anymore,"
he told his audience. "I am on the Palantir team. I am Mr. Palantir." A few
months after that, Cramer reiterated his bullishness and said he wanted to
attend an AIP boot camp. He added that he hoped Karp or another Palantir
executive would appear on his show. "I'm not begging them to come on," he
said. "I'm simply imploring them to come on." (Neither Karp nor anyone else
from the company took him up on the invitation.)
But Palantir's army of Karp fanboys didn't need Cramer to tell them that the
stock was a buy, and partly on the backs of retail investors, the company's share
price rallied sharply in the months following AIP's launch. When Palantir
released AIP, its stock was under $8. A year later, it was $22 and rising; by late
summer 2024, it was trading at over $35 per share. Palantir had seen an even
bigger jump in its share price back in 2021, when it topped out at $39 before
plunging back below $10. But Palantir was just a meme stock in that instance,
driven higher by wallstreetsbets participants, their infatuation with "Daddy
Karp," and their desire to stick it to professional investors. The Karp cultists
were responsible in no small part for the stock's AIP boom, but in this case the
fundamentals seemed to justify the price action—Palantir was now delivering
solid numbers.
For his part, Karp was putting Palantir at the forefront of the debate over AI.
In July 2023, three months after AIP debuted, Karp wrote an op-ed for The New
York Times about AI. The film Oppenheimer had just been released, and Karp's
article was titled "Our Oppenheimer Moment." But the headline really should
have been "My Oppenheimer Moment," because the clear subtext was Karp's
desire to be a thought leader on AI. At the time, more than a thousand tech
executives, researchers, and scholars, including Elon Musk, had called for a six-

month moratorium on AI development, citing the potential danger posed by
these new technologies, not least the risk of human extinction.
Karp, in his Times piece, dismissed calls for a pause. He claimed that the
United States and its allies were in a new global arms race, the outcome of which
hinged on whoever could achieve dominance in the realm of AI. He said that
America should not "shy away from building sharp tools for fear they may be
turned against us" and that "a reluctance to grapple with the often grim reality
of an ongoing geopolitical struggle for power poses its own danger. Our
adversaries will not pause to indulge in theatrical debates about the merits of
developing technologies with critical military and national security applications.
They will proceed." He urged against complacency, writing, "The ability of free
and democratic societies to prevail requires something more than moral appeal.
It requires hard power, and hard power in this century will be built on
software."
While the essay was thought-provoking, Karp's snarkiness undermined his
case. He took aim yet again at what he called the "wunderkinder of Silicon
Valley" who he said had "drifted meaningfully from the center of gravity of
American public life" because of their reluctance to work with the U.S. military.
He added, "The preoccupations and political instincts of coastal elites may be
essential to maintaining their sense of self and cultural superiority but do little to
advance the interests of our republic." That line caused consternation in
Palantir's Washington office; it was seen as a needless swipe that undoubtedly
alienated a lot of readers and might well have also ticked off some people on
Capitol Hill.
But any irritation that may have been felt on the Hill was quickly forgotten.
Two months later, Karp was among the tech executives invited to take part in a
daylong summit on AI regulation convened by Senate Majority Leader Chuck
Schumer. When Karp joined other tech moguls at the Trump Tower meeting in
December 2016, he seemed out of place—Palantir was a relatively small
company, and while it arguably punched above its weight in reach and
importance, it didn't merit inclusion alongside the likes of Apple, Amazon,
Alphabet, and Microsoft (and Karp admitted as much). Just seven years later,
though, no one questioned why Karp had been asked to join Musk, Bill Gates,

Mark Zuckerberg, and other luminaries to discuss AI. Indeed, he was given a
place of particular prominence, next to Musk.
Karp had a dyspeptic take on the seating arrangement. As he and the Tesla
and SpaceX CEO made small talk during the press gaggle that preceded the
conference, he asked Musk if he knew why they were next to one another. Musk
said he had no idea. "It's because the shotgun blast radius will only take out the
two of us," Karp said with a laugh. Whether Musk got the joke and found it
funny was unclear. But it was an attempt at humor that reflected Karp's desire to
be seen as an inconvenient, resented interloper, as someone the "establishment"
would gladly off if only it weren't so dependent on his software. Even at an event
that affirmed his insider bona fides, Karp still wanted to tell himself (and Musk)
that he was an outsider.
In fact, though, he was now a major figure in Washington, a point vividly
demonstrated when I caught up with him one day at Palantir's office there. It
had been an exceptionally hectic morning for Karp, and he said the only
opportunity for us to talk would be if I joined him for his midday workout. So
just after noon, we piled into two cars and were driven to the start of the Capital
Crescent Trail, by the Georgetown waterfront. From there, Karp roller skied five
miles to the house he had recently purchased in the Maryland suburbs. I
accompanied him on bike, as did a bodyguard; one of the Norwegians roller
skied alongside Karp. It was not the easiest way to conduct an interview—I held
my phone in one hand to record his comments and used my other hand to steer
the bike, trying to avoid cyclists and joggers coming in the other direction and to
keep my front tire from running into Karp's ski poles. But we made it to his
house without any spills. As we walked inside, he mentioned that former CIA
director George Tenet would be dropping by shortly. That Tenet, without
whom Palantir might not have existed—Tenet, after all, created In-Q-Tel—was
paying a visit to Karp rather than vice versa seemed emblematic of the stature
that Karp now enjoyed.
When Tenet arrived, Karp was showering. I chatted with the ex-spymaster as
one of Karp's assistants set a single place at the dining room table—Karp was
going to multitask and eat lunch while meeting with Tenet. A short time later,
Karp came downstairs, his hair still dripping. I joined them as Karp gave Tenet a

quick tour of his library, but I wasn't allowed to sit in on their conversation. As I
showed myself to the door, I heard Karp offering Tenet some of his hummus.
Karp's profile wasn't just rising inside the Beltway. In 2024, the German
filmmaker Klaus Stern released a documentary called Watching You: Die Welt
von Palantir und Alex Karp (translation: The World of Palantir and Alex
Karp). It premiered at the Munich International Documentary Film Festival
and drew a lot of press coverage in Germany. Karp did not cooperate with the
film, but Karola Brede, his doctoral adviser, was among those who spoke to
Stern. Karp, it seemed, was transcending the business world and becoming, like
Musk if not quite to the same degree, a figure in the culture. In the summer of
2024, he was the subject of a flattering Maureen Dowd profile in The New York
Times. A few weeks later, Karp was a guest on Real Time with Bill Maher.
While in Los Angeles, Karp met with entertainment lawyers to discuss a possible
feature film about him and Palantir. At around the same time, Karp's
importance was acknowledged in another, different way: the Russian Foreign
Ministry banned him from entering Russia.
For Karp and for Palantir, signs of validation—and of vindication—were
everywhere. Following Palantir's lead, other tech companies, including OpenAI,
were now hiring forward-deployed engineers of their own. Even more significant
—and from Karp's view, gratifying—was the emergence of a Palantir Mafia, the
growing number of start-ups founded by people who had previously worked at
Palantir. While the list wasn't yet as illustrious as the PayPal offspring (LinkedIn,
YouTube, and more), it was impressive and increasingly extensive. It included
companies such as Affirm, OpenSea, Handshake, and Ironclad, all of which had
attracted significant venture capital money. But the biggest success of the
Palantir Pack, as it was called, was a company called Anduril (another Tolkien
name; in the Lord of the Rings trilogy, Anduril is a sword with magical powers).
Anduril specialized in defense technology; it produced autonomous and
semiautonomous weapons. It was founded in 2017 by Palmer Luckey, a colorful
entrepreneur who made his original fortune with the virtual reality headset
company Oculus, and a trio of ex-Palantirians: Brian Schimpf, Trae Stephens,
and Matt Grimm. Peter Thiel's Founders Fund was a major investor in Anduril,
which by 2025 was valued at over $30 billion.

It was no exaggeration to say that Palantir spawned Anduril, and not just
because it supplied three of its cofounders; the slew of military contracts that
Palantir was awarded in the years following its lawsuit against the Army
encouraged other tech players to launch defense-oriented start-ups. The
disruption wrought by Palantir gave rise to a subindustry of new tech companies
seeking to win business from the Pentagon, a renewed gold rush accelerated by
the war in Ukraine. Between 2021 and 2024, venture capital firms poured
around $130 billion into firms developing hardware and software for the
battlefield, part of Silicon Valley's pivot to "patriotic capital."
The news, in the summer of 2024, that Eric Schmidt had started a company
producing military drones seemed symbolically important. While Schmidt had
long been an advocate for closer ties between the Valley and the Pentagon, his
move into weapons manufacturing highlighted the degree to which warfare was
now in vogue in tech circles—and it was largely due to Karp and Palantir. The
scramble for Pentagon dollars was fueled in part by hawkishness regarding
China, and on this score, too, Karp could claim vindication. For years, Palantir
had been an outlier in the Valley because of its unwillingness to do business in
China. The VC community, by contrast, had no hesitation about backing
Chinese start-ups, and tech giants such as Apple and Google had major
investments in China.
But by 2024, the mood had shifted. It was partly in response to political
pressure: first under Trump and then under Biden, there was a growing
recognition that the U.S. relationship with China was fundamentally
antagonistic and that giving China access to strategically important advanced
technologies was not in America's national interest. The Biden administration
also placed restrictions on U.S. investments in certain Chinese tech sectors, such
as AI and quantum computing. In Washington, there was now bipartisan
consensus that the United States and China were at the dawn of a new Cold
War. The defense tech sector was eager to play up the China threat because it
was good for business, and no one played it up more than Karp. But in his case,
it wasn't just opportunism at work; he had been dubious of China for two
decades and had long believed that conflict was inevitable.

And Karp was now at the center of the debate over AI, China, and U.S.
national security. In May 2024, he attended a dinner in Washington that capped
a daylong conference devoted to that topic. The dinner, held in an ornate room
in the Library of Congress, drew a sizable number of U.S. senators and members
of the House of Representatives, including JD Vance, Kyrsten Sinema, Joe
Manchin, and Lindsey Graham. But Karp was the star attraction. Chuck
Schumer delivered remarks during the cocktail reception and lauded Karp for his
leadership on AI (while also needling him about his hair). Later, Karp was the
interviewee in a fireside chat with U.S. Representative Richie Torres, a
Democrat from New York. The acoustics were terrible, which made it
impossible for many guests to hear what Karp was saying, but the fact that
Torres was interviewing him, rather than vice versa, spoke to the kind of power
and influence that he now wielded. Not long thereafter, one of Torres's
colleagues, Mike Gallagher, a Wisconsin Republican known for his hard-line
stance on China, resigned from Congress and joined Palantir as the head of its
defense business, replacing Doug Philippone, who had left to focus on his own
defense-focused venture capital fund. Gallagher had been frustrated by
legislative gridlock and by extremism in his own party. Even so, that a sitting
member of Congress would quit to take a job with Palantir said something
about the cachet that the company now enjoyed.
Yet Palantir still had the spirit of a start-up. It employed fewer than four
thousand people, a head count that had essentially remained unchanged for
almost a decade. And in contrast to Apple, Amazon, Google, and Facebook,
which had fueled their continued growth mainly by buying other companies—
as of 2021, according to The Washington Post, the four tech giants combined
had swallowed up at least six hundred other firms—Palantir's growth remained
almost entirely organic. In its two decades of existence, it had quietly acquired a
few companies, but every new product that it kicked out was developed in-
house, by people who had been hired by Palantir (and many of whom had only
ever worked for Palantir).
And, of course, Palantir was still headed by one of its cofounders. Karp was
now fifty-seven. Some of the biggest names in tech—Jeff Bezos, Larry Ellison—
had remained at the helm of the companies they started long after they had

earned their fortunes. But they were exceptions, and Karp was, too. Although he
was busier than he had ever been as CEO—he was back to traveling as much as
he had before the pandemic, and taking Palantir public had greatly increased his
workload—he was giving no thought to stepping away. When I asked him if
there was a succession plan, Karp broke into a broad grin. "Are you trying to tell
me something?" he asked in mock horror. "Am I, like, going to get hit by a bus
tomorrow?" Turning serious, he said he didn't have a designated successor
because he had no intention of dying or retiring anytime soon. In truth, it was
hard to imagine Palantir under a different CEO, given the degree to which the
company's identity was bound up in Karp's, and also because it was difficult to
believe that anyone else would have the singular focus that Karp brought to the
job.
Near the end of the summer of 2024, Paul Graham, a prominent Silicon
Valley investor, published a blog post in which he said that the most effective
corporate leaders were those who remain in what he called "founder mode"—
who stay intimately involved with nearly all aspects of their businesses no matter
how large their companies grow to be. Graham contrasted this with "manager
mode," in which CEOs, as their enterprises increase in size and complexity,
provide instruction and guidance to their lieutenants but leave the
implementation up to them. He claimed that founder mode had proven to be
the more effective approach—there was no substitute for the vision, knowledge,
and experience that a founder could bring to the factory floor, as it were.
Graham's observation immediately became received wisdom in Silicon Valley, as
entrepreneurs and investors alike affirmed the advantage conferred by founder
mode. And while Graham didn't name-check Karp, few people in the tech
industry embodied the idea more than Palantir's CEO.
A few weeks after Graham's post went viral, Palantir was added to the S&P
500. For Karp, this was incontrovertible proof that he had led Palantir wisely and
well. He released a video to mark the occasion. It was filmed on a cross-country-
skiing trail, but there was no snow; he and the Norwegian accompanying him
were running, using ski poles to push off between strides. When Karp addressed
the camera, he talked about the long journey that saw Palantir go from a start-up
shunned by venture capitalists to membership in what he called the "most elite

institution in economic life," the S&P 500. He threw the usual jab at Wall Street,
saying that it had wrongly dismissed Palantir as a "Frankenstein monster
powered by a freakshow leader, me." Karp said that he was "really, really fucking
happy" and was proud that the company had forged such an unconventional
path. "We did it our way," he exulted, adding that Palantir employees and the
retail investors who supported the company had reason to feel triumphant. "The
rebels won," Karp said. "The rebels won."
In April 2023, I met with Peter Thiel twice—first, at his home in Los Angeles,
then just over a week later at a hotel on Maryland's Eastern Shore. I had assumed
he was there for a political event, but it turned out he was hosting a symposium
on René Girard, his old Stanford professor. When he and I spoke that
afternoon, Thiel told me that he was stepping away from politics. He said he had
been shaken by the hostility that he had drawn because of his previous support
for Donald Trump and that it had been even more stressful for his husband,
Matt Danzeisen, who was now insisting that he sit out the 2024 presidential
election. "Matt is of the strong view that I'm not allowed to do anything at all,"
Thiel said. "He wants no more. I am really, really determined to stay out of all of
it in 2024. We'll see if I can. I'm really, really determined to do it. I'm married,
he's really put his foot down, and I have to listen to what he's saying."
But Thiel went on to tell me that he was done with Trump regardless. While
he didn't regret his decision to back the real estate developer in 2016, it had
proven to be a mistake. Even though he had recognized that Trump was a flawed
figure who said things that "had a very bad relationship with the truth," as he
put it, Thiel had thought that his campaign slogan, "Make America Great
Again," could serve as a call to national renewal. However, winning an election
was one thing, governing was another, and Thiel said that Trump had failed as
president. He brought disruption but did little to cure the country of the
lethargy that Thiel believed was plaguing it. "We needed to stop being distracted
from the important problems, and Trump ended up being a terrific way to
distract us from the important problems," Thiel said. He did not donate to

Trump's 2020 reelection campaign and turned down an invitation to speak at
that year's Republican National Convention. "The criteria was that I had to say
something that was basically truthful, basically positive, and moderately
impactful, and I couldn't figure out anything," he said. "I think even one of
those things was hard, all three was impossible."
Thiel said that he was not supporting Trump's 2024 White House bid and
wanted to see the GOP move on from the twice-impeached former president.
He had contributed to a handful of Republican candidates during the 2022
midterm elections, but said that only two races had mattered to him: the U.S.
Senate campaigns of JD Vance and Blake Masters, friends and former protégés of
his, who were running in Ohio and Arizona, respectively. He suggested that the
backing he gave to other candidates, notably Harriet Hageman, who defeated
Representative Liz Cheney, a Trump nemesis, in the Republican primary for
Wyoming's lone congressional seat, was purely strategic: he wanted to placate
Trump in the hope that he would endorse both Vance and Masters (which he
did). Masters lost in the general election, but Vance won, helped in no small part
by the $15 million that Thiel donated to his campaign. But Thiel indicated that
his checkbook was now closed, especially to Trump.
For Karp, Thiel's break with Trump was as unhelpful as his support for
Trump had been in 2016. Karp was convinced that Trump was going to be
returned to the White House, and the former president was nothing if not
vindictive. Soon after I met with Thiel in Maryland, Trump reached out to him
asking for a contribution. Thiel said no, and Trump replied that he was "very,
very sad to hear that." Thiel told The Atlantic that Trump, in a subsequent
conversation with Blake Masters, called him "a fucking scumbag." The rift
between Thiel and the once-and-possibly-future president seemed like bad news
for Palantir.
When 2024 arrived and Trump swept the early Republican primaries and
caucuses, Karp decided that he had to move proactively in anticipation of a
Trump restoration. "I've got to get the company ready for Trump," he told me.
Palantir had become a more MAGA-friendly place in the years since Trump had
left office. It employed even more ex-servicemen now and had also hired a
handful of former Republican congressional staffers and political appointees.

The changes to the rank and file were reflected in Karp's decision not to impose
a vaccine mandate at Palantir (this even though he still wore a mask whenever he
stepped into an elevator). He knew there were anti-vaxxers on staff now, and he
didn't want to cause internal friction.
With Thiel inactive, Karp sought to establish links to Trump World in other
ways. At his direction, employees in the Washington office fanned out across the
capital seeking to build ties to people who were likely to score jobs in a second
Trump administration or wield influence over it. They attended conferences at
right-wing think tanks, cocktail receptions with conservative luminaries, and
other events where they could chat up former and possibly future Trump
officials. And it wasn't just Washington employees: in March, Louis Mosley
traveled to Palm Springs to spend a weekend at the BNP Paribas Open tennis
tournament with Robert C. O'Brien, who had served as one of Trump's
national security advisers and who owned a home in the area. O'Brien was one
of the few "conventional" appointees who had left the White House on good
terms with Trump, and he was thought to be in line for another senior position
if he won back the presidency.
As Trump moved closer to claiming the Republican nomination, there was
other bridge-building. Joe Lonsdale, who was now based in Austin, had hosted a
fundraiser for Florida Governor Ron DeSantis's presidential bid, in part because
he was skeptical that Trump could win the general election. But after DeSantis
stumbled, Lonsdale set aside his doubts and became an enthusiastic Trump
supporter. Even bigger help came in May when Jacob Helberg donated $1
million to Trump's campaign. Helberg was a foreign policy analyst who served as
a paid consultant to Karp. He was linked to the PayPal Mafia and the Thielverse;
his husband was the venture capitalist Keith Rabois, a Stanford Review alum
who had gone on to work at PayPal and, later, at Thiel's Founders Fund.
Helberg and Rabois had married in 2018; OpenAI CEO Sam Altman had
officiated.
Helberg had recently been the focus of a New York Times story about the AI
arms race. Some people at Palantir were troubled by the article: they thought
that he was trading off the company's name and had overstepped his bounds.
But it seemed that he was useful for Karp: he was well-connected in Washington,

especially on the Republican side, and he also now had Trump's ear. Helberg
organized the conference on China and AI where Karp was the keynote speaker,
and he got Trump to deliver a videotaped message. The former president recalled
meeting Helberg and urged attendees to "keep your chin up." A few weeks later,
Helberg announced his $1 million contribution to Trump. On X, he posted a
link to a Washington Post article about his donation and wrote, "This one's for
Israel." From Palantir's perspective, his seven-figure check made up for the one
that Thiel was not writing this time around. In contrast to Thiel, Helberg was
not given a speaking slot at the Republican National Convention, but he did
address a Trump rally in Georgia in October.
At the cocktail reception following the China and AI conference, Karp
huddled with JD Vance. Two months later, after an intense lobbying effort by
some of Silicon Valley's biggest names, including Elon Musk, Trump selected
Vance as his running mate. Thiel, who had introduced Trump to Vance in 2021,
reportedly also pushed hard to have the Ohio senator added to the Republican
ticket. In August, Thiel told The New York Times that he was thrilled that
Trump had chosen Vance, who prior to entering politics had worked for Thiel's
Mithril Capital, and that he was warming to the idea of a second Trump
administration. He was also so certain now that Trump was going to triumph
that he didn't think a donation was needed. "Trump is locked on a massively
winning race," he said. "And the Democrats are locked on a massively losing
race. And that's why the money doesn't matter."
By that point, Biden had dropped out, and Vice President Kamala Harris had
replaced him as the Democratic nominee. When I visited Karp at his suburban
Maryland home in August, he was less caustic than usual about Harris. He
acknowledged that she had performed well at the Democratic National
Convention earlier that month and that she seemed to be generating real
enthusiasm. He still thought that Trump was likely to prevail, but it was now
going to be a much closer race, and despite the misgivings that he had previously
expressed about Harris, he intended to contribute to her campaign. When I
asked him about Vance, he demurred. "I'm not going to comment on that," he
said.

The Sunday before the election, Karp was back in Washington; Palantir was
releasing its third-quarter earnings the following afternoon, and he needed to
prepare (it was another stellar quarter, and Palantir's stock would jump $10 on
the news, to $51.13, a record-high close). Karp was now certain that Trump was
going to reclaim the presidency; immigration was a toxic issue for the
Democrats, and he said that Harris had also failed to adequately distance herself
from the unpopular Biden. I was confident enough in a Harris victory that I
suggested a bet: if Trump won, Karp would get half of my net worth; if Harris
won, I would get half of his. Fortunately, he didn't take me up on the offer.
A few days after the election, Karp called me to gloat about his correct
prediction and to discuss the result. I said that if Trump made good on his threat
to launch an even bigger immigration crackdown, Palantir would inevitably face
another backlash. Karp professed not to care—he was not backing away from
ICE this time, either. I was curious, too, to know what he made of Trump now.
Trump's campaign had been marked by incendiary rhetoric. He called his
political opponents "vermin" and spoke darkly of "the enemy within," language
that in the judgment of many scholars was not just fascistic, but evocative of
Nazi Germany. Karp had written his dissertation on the rhetoric of fascism and
could claim legitimate expertise in this area—and as someone who said that his
greatest fear was fascism, he surely had a keen ear for what it sounded like. So I
asked Karp if he still believed that Trump was not a fascist. He ignored my
question and said only that he was uncertain about what the next four years
would bring.
OceanofPDF.com

EPILOGUE
In early December 2024, a few weeks after the presidential election, Palantir
hosted an AIP event in its New York office. When I arrived that morning, Karp
was deep in conversation with Amit Kukreja, an amateur stock commentator
who was possibly Palantir's (and Karp's) biggest fan in the retail investment
community. He was now regularly invited to the company's events and had
become its de facto human mascot. As Karp chatted with Kukreja, he noticed a
woman approaching from across the room and exclaimed, "Oh, to what do we
owe this honor? I hear congratulations are in order." Reaching Karp, the woman
gave him a peck on the cheek. Feigning disappointment, Karp insisted that she
give him a kiss on the other cheek, as well, which she did. The woman was
Monica Crowley, the Fox News commentator who had just been nominated by
President-elect Trump to be the Chief of Protocol of the United States. She had
also served in the first Trump administration. As a pundit, she had amplified
conspiracy theories about President Obama—suggesting, for instance, that he
was a Muslim seeking to impose sharia law on the United States. Karp
considered her a friend; they knew each other from the Sun Valley conference
and other events. But Crowley was also a star in the MAGA firmament, MAGA
was reascendant, and Karp's effusive greeting seemed emblematic of a change in
attitude. This time around, he and Palantir were going to accommodate
themselves to Trump unapologetically, even enthusiastically.
A few hours after seeing Crowley, Karp headed uptown for a live interview
on Fox Business. Two days earlier, not far from the Fox studio, the CEO of
UnitedHealthcare had been shot and killed, and his assailant was still at large.
Karp's security detail was bigger than normal that day, and his bodyguards were
noticeably on edge. They weren't thrilled when Karp, frustrated by Manhattan
traffic, got out of the car and walked the last few blocks. Karp used the interview
to reaffirm Palantir's patriotism—"Palantir exists to serve this nation"—and to

crow about the company's success. "To all the people who hated on us, enjoy
your coal," he said, eliciting laughter from Liz Claman, the Fox host. Asked
about Trump's appointment of Elon Musk to head up a cost-cutting initiative
called the Department of Government Efficiency, or DOGE, he was ecstatic. "I
wholeheartedly support what they are doing, and God knows, you could not
have a better person than Elon doing it," he replied.
From New York, Karp traveled to Los Angeles for the annual Reagan
National Defense Forum. He was joined in California by Shyam Sankar, who
was reportedly under consideration for a senior job in the Pentagon. Joe
Lonsdale was also there, as was Doug Philippone. The conference was crawling
with defense tech people, who seemed ebullient: the consensus among them was
that the second Trump presidency was going to be good for business. Karp took
part in a panel discussion. Claiming that Trump had won "a massive mandate,"
he heaped his usual scorn on the Democrats, whom he referred to as "my
sometimes former party." He said the Democrats had lost the election in part
because "people don't want to hear your woke, pagan ideology" but instead
"want to know they are safe, and safe means that the other person is scared.
That's how you make someone safe. The average American person understands
this. Unfortunately, many of the intellectually captured institutions...
intellectually owned by the Berkeley faculty, do not." On X, Musk reposted a
clip of Karp's comments with an approving one-word summary: "Based."
A few days after the Reagan event, Trump rewarded Jacob Helberg for his
$1.25 million campaign contribution by picking him to serve as under secretary
of state for economic growth, energy, and the environment. In mid-December,
Karp quietly made a $1 million personal donation to the Trump Vance
Inaugural Committee. He skipped the inauguration, however, even though the
festivities included a party that Thiel hosted at his Washington mansion. It drew
a number of notables, among them JD Vance, Mark Zuckerberg, Sam Altman,
Joe Lonsdale, Donald Trump Jr., and House Speaker Mike Johnson. Separately,
some senior Palantirians held a cigar party at a Washington hotel. But one
company executive was left off the invite list because he was deemed
insufficiently MAGA. Karp spent the weekend skiing.

In February, a couple of weeks after the inauguration, Karp published a book.
It was called The Technological Republic: Hard Power, Soft Belief, and the Future
of the West and was coauthored with Nick Zamiska, Palantir's head of corporate
affairs. The book was an explication of Karp's worldview, a rehashing of some of
his pet grievances (expressed less vituperatively than was normally the case), and
a brand manifesto for Palantir. It took a lot of detours, but its central argument
was that the cultural relativism that supposedly held sway on college campuses,
coupled with Silicon Valley's consumerist focus, had undermined the American
Project and that a new, tech-driven nationalism was needed to keep America,
and by extension the West, dominant.
The Technological Republic received mixed reviews. The Wall Street Journal
hailed it as a "new treatise in political theory." The conservative columnist
George F. Will wrote, "Not since Allan Bloom's astonishingly successful 1987
book 'The Closing of the American Mind'—more than 1 million copies sold—
has there been a cultural critique as sweeping as Karp's." But the book was
savaged by others. The political commentator John Ganz, writing for Bloomberg,
said that it was "full of bad ideas, ranging from the merely dubious to the
execrable and disturbing.... It heralds a dark and disturbing future." Some critics
regarded the book as a pitch for techno-authoritarianism that happened to arrive
just as Karp and other Silicon Valley oligarchs had effectively captured the state.
But the naysayers didn't hurt sales: The Technological Republic reached number
one on the New York Times bestseller list. On Palantir's X account, the company
celebrated the achievement: "The insurgents have broken through the gates," it
said. The book also gained Karp a fan in the Oval Office. In February, as part of
his publicity tour, Karp was the subject of a feature in The Wall Street Journal,
under the headline "Alex Karp Wants Silicon Valley to Fight for America." A few
days later, Karp received a copy of the Journal article autographed by Trump.
"Alex—great!" Trump wrote just above his signature.
For readers familiar with Karp's dissertation—a very small number of people,
to be sure—The Technological Republic contained a jarring passage. The book
references Martin Walser's 1998 speech decrying what he saw as the continued
use of the Holocaust as a cudgel against the German people. Karp, in his
dissertation, had cast Walser's speech in a sinister light, citing it as an example of

fascistic rhetoric. But in the book, he and Zamiska hail Walser as a free-speech
warrior who had courageously pushed back against the thought police. "He had
articulated the forbidden desires and feelings of a nation," they write, "and in
doing so relieved an immense amount of internal dissonance for his audience,
most of whom had been immersed in a culture in which speech had been tightly
patrolled and monitored for even the slightest signs of deviation from the
received wisdom, the national consensus."
Karp's reappraisal of Walser reflected what appeared to be a broader change
in his thinking. It was striking to note that a book ostensibly about the future of
the West had little to say about liberalism and completely ignored the rise of the
populist right and the threat that it posed to democratic governance in the
United States and Europe. In the past, Karp had said that defending the West
meant safeguarding its political order. As recently as 2020, in Palantir's S-1, the
company declared that its mission was "to support Western liberal democracy
and its strategic allies." But The Technological Republic gave no indication that
Karp regarded democracy and its underpinnings, such as the rule of law, as
essential to the West's success and continued prosperity.
Instead, he now seemed to hold a different opinion about why the West had
flourished. In a letter to shareholders in February 2025, he cited approvingly the
late political scientist Samuel Huntington's observation that the West had
become dominant not because of "its ideas, values or religion" but rather
because it was more proficient at "applying organized violence." During an
appearance on CNBC's Squawk Box to promote The Technological Republic,
Karp suggested that Western civilization was somehow just innately better. "The
West, as a notion and as a principle upon which it is executed, is obviously
superior," he said. It appeared that Karp was now delinking the fate of the West
from the fate of liberal democracy. Perhaps he had come to believe that the two
were not, in fact, inextricably bound. Or maybe, with Trump back in the White
House, he was just being a savvy CEO and bending to the prevailing winds.
As Karp promoted his book, Palantir was again mired in controversy over
ICE. In April, the online tech publication 404 Media reported that Palantir had
signed a $30 million contract with ICE to provide software for a new platform
called ImmigrationOS, which would expedite deportations. 404 Media obtained

an internal Palantir Wiki page that explained to employees the rationale for
signing the contract. It said that the "national conversation around immigration
enforcement, both at the border and in the interior of the United States, has
shifted" and that this presented Palantir with "an opportunity to do good
work." The site also published Slack messages in which Aki Jain, the head of
Palantir's U.S. government business, said that the firm would be addressing any
questions and concerns that employees had. "I recognize this is a topic of interest
for a lot of hobbits," he wrote. "We recognize that as this becomes more public
you will probably be asked about what's fact vs. fiction from friends, family,
candidates and customers." John Grant, a member of Palantir's privacy and civil
liberties team, posted a link to an internal FAQ titled "Can it be right to support
a customer who you think is wrong?"
By then, videos of masked ICE agents grabbing people off the street were
proliferating, and the individuals being apprehended included not just
undocumented immigrants but also international students who had participated
in protests against the war in Gaza or who had merely spoken out against it.
Some U.S. citizens were reportedly also picked up by ICE. Those arrested were
sent to ICE detention facilities. Immigration lawyers and elected officials who
visited these holding centers alleged that they were overcrowded and unsanitary
and that food, water, and medical attention were in short supply. Some detainees
claimed that they suffered physical abuse at the hands of guards.
ICE also deported hundreds of men who it said were members of a
Venezuelan gang; they were sent to El Salvador, where they were incarcerated in
a notoriously brutal prison. However, investigations by The New York Times and
The Washington Post found that many of those individuals had no gang links. A
federal judge accused the Trump administration of defying his order forbidding
the government from sending two planeloads of detainees to El Salvador because
they had been denied due process. In an interview in July, Tom Homan,
Trump's border czar, told Fox News that constitutional norms didn't apply
when it came to enforcing immigration laws. "Look, people need to understand,
ICE officers and Border Patrol, they don't need probable cause to walk up to
somebody, briefly detain them, and question them," he said. "They just need
totality of the circumstances, right? They just go through observation, get our

typical facts." Homan also indicated that racial profiling was part of ICE's
strategy—he said that it was targeting people "based on the location, the
occupation, their physical appearance, their actions."
While ICE was expanding its dragnet, Elon Musk and DOGE were
ransacking the federal bureaucracy, supposedly in an effort to cut government
spending and to identify and root out alleged instances of waste and fraud.
DOGE dispatched software engineers, most of whom were in their twenties
(one was a teenager), to different government agencies. The engineers
commandeered computer systems, in some instances gaining access to data they
were not authorized to see. A number of lawsuits were filed challenging the
legality of DOGE's actions. One engineer had previously interned for Palantir.
According to Wired magazine, two former Palantir employees were helping
recruit for DOGE. Wired also reported that DOGE was planning to use
Palantir's Foundry to merge all the data collected by the IRS and to make it
accessible to other government agencies.
Despite the controversy swirling around DOGE—and mounting evidence
that it was a ham-fisted operation that was imperiling essential government
functions—Karp insisted that it was performing a necessary service for the
country. In another appearance on Fox Business, he said, "Palantir is very pro-
DOGE, I'm pro-DOGE, I believe it is going to be great for America." Given that
Karp had spent two decades emphasizing the importance of data protection, it
was odd to hear him cheerleading for a massive data breach that was certain to
sow even greater mistrust of the tech industry, and of Palantir in particular.
Karp also went out of his way to defend Musk. On the day of Trump's
inauguration, Musk had addressed a rally in Washington and concluded his
speech by giving what was almost universally interpreted to be a Nazi salute.
Asked about that during an interview with CNBC, Karp didn't comment on
the gesture itself but noted that Musk had traveled to Israel after October 7 to
demonstrate his solidarity with the Jewish state and said that any suggestion that
the Tesla CEO was a Nazi sympathizer or an antisemite was "completely absurd
and a complete rewrite of history." Musk expressed his appreciation for the
support. "Alex Karp is awesome," he wrote on X, adding a heart emoji.

Meanwhile, Karp's own rhetoric was becoming increasingly bombastic.
During an earnings call, he said that DOGE was "a revolution" in which "some
people get their heads cut off," an apparent reference to the tens of thousands of
federal workers who had quit or been fired at that point. In February, while
promoting his book in a talk with Andrew Ross Sorkin at New York's 92nd
Street Y, Karp fantasized about humiliating the Wall Street analysts who had
been skeptical of Palantir. "I love the idea of getting a drone and having light,
fentanyl-laced urine spraying on the analysts who tried to screw us," he said.
Palantir's marketing also took on a harder edge: the company's new tagline was
"Software that dominates."
All this was too much for some ex-Palantirians. In May, thirteen of them
published an open letter titled "The Scouring of the Shire," in which they
accused the company of betraying its founding principles (the protection of
democracy and human rights, the defense of scientific inquiry) and of
"normalizing authoritarianism under the guise of a 'revolution' led by
oligarchs." The signers included Ari Gesher, one of Palantir's original software
engineers. In response, Palantir said that while the former employees were
"certainly entitled to express their views on these matters," they should have
spoken to current Palantirians to "better understand that which they sought to
protest."
Around this same time, Palantir posted a four-minute video on its X account
in which employees who had left the company only to return explained what
brought them back. The clip was very odd, and all the stranger because of the
creepy background music. One boomeranger said that "I made it roughly six
months out of Palantir" before realizing that leaving had been a mistake. The
video seemed clearly intended to stave off an exodus of employees troubled by
the company's work on immigration and other issues.
But one Palantirian who quit over ICE encouraged others to follow suit.
Writing on her LinkedIn page, Brianna Katherine Martin said that for "most of
my time here, I found the way that Palantir grappled with the weight of our
capabilities to be refreshing, transparent, and conscionable. This has changed for
me over the past few months... with the erosion of due process and institutions,

this is not the time to erect a Maginot line of justifications based on comfort and
compliance. If it feels wrong to you, it probably is."
In late May, more controversy erupted when The New York Times alleged
that Palantir was helping the Trump administration build a master database
containing personal information on Americans. This effort was supposedly tied
to an executive order that Trump had signed in March to consolidate data
collection across government agencies. During his first presidency, Trump had
made clear that he wanted to use the powers of the office to punish his perceived
enemies; his thirst for retribution was even greater now, and the construction of
a central repository of personal data alarmed not only Democrats but also civil
libertarians and privacy advocates. Historically, much of this information had
been kept siloed precisely to avoid abuse—and with Trump, the potential for
abuse seemed vast.
Palantir reacted with fury to the Times article. On X, it said that the story was
"blatantly untrue" and that "if the facts were on its side, The New York Times
would not have needed to twist the truth." It took additional swipes at the
Times, including one that said, "Democracy dies in ineptitude," a play on The
Washington Post's "Democracy dies in darkness" slogan. The company also
published a four-thousand-word blog post rebutting the Times piece (which was
less than half that length). Palantir said that the story betrayed fundamental
misconceptions about the nature of its work and insisted that there was nothing
nefarious about its role in helping merge government databases. The goal was
simply to make the federal bureaucracy more efficient. The blog post did not
address fears that Trump would exploit access to private information to hound
his opponents.
In response to the Times article, a group of congressional Democrats,
including Representative Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez and Senator Elizabeth
Warren, sent a letter to Palantir demanding more information about the alleged
database and advising the company to preserve emails and other
communications "in anticipation of future litigation and congressional
oversight." But the reaction on the left was of little concern to Karp; what
alarmed him and other Palantir executives—and part of what prompted the very
aggressive pushback against the Times—was anger among MAGA influencers

who were dismayed that Trump, supposedly a victim of the so-called deep state,
was now, in their view, ceding it even more power. Nick Fuentes, the antisemitic
white nationalist who had dined at Mar-a-Lago, said on X that Trump's work
with Palantir was "the ultimate betrayal of his own people," adding, "if Palantir
isn't the Deep State, then what is?" The Palantirians were adamant that the
Times piece was incorrect, but they were also seeking to prevent the far right's
outrage from metastasizing into something that could threaten their business.
One prominent MAGA voice did speak up in Palantir's defense: Alex Jones, the
veteran conspiracy theorist, said that it was no more untrustworthy than other
tech firms and was being singled out because it had been "supportive of Trump."
Indeed, Karp now seemed to be all in on Trump. In May, he was among some
thirty U.S. corporate leaders who joined Trump on a visit to Saudi Arabia.
There, he chatted amicably with Trump and Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed
bin Salman and took part in a traditional sword dance. A few weeks later,
Palantir was one of the sponsors of Trump's military parade in Washington,
D.C., contributing $5 million to the event marking the Army's 250th
anniversary but that also happened to coincide with the president's seventy-
ninth birthday.
However, that was a small investment relative to what Palantir had gained
during Trump's first months back in office. According to the Times, the
company had already been awarded over $100 million in new contracts and
extensions of existing ones. Its stock price had nearly tripled in value since the
election, a surge driven by a belief among investors that Palantir was uniquely
positioned to profit from the second Trump presidency. In the first two quarters
of 2025, Palantir outperformed every other stock in the S&P 500. By mid-
August, it was pushing $200 per share, its market capitalization had ballooned to
around $430 billion, and it was among the 20 most valuable companies in the
world. Karp's net worth was now well in excess of $10 billion.
I caught up with Karp over the Fourth of July weekend. There was a lot to
talk about. Palantir was once again the object of protests. Demonstrators had
gathered outside its Denver and New York offices, as well as in the lobby of
Thiel's building in Los Angeles. They cited Palantir's work with ICE, but also its
support for the war in Gaza and its alleged role in helping the Trump

administration expand government surveillance. Musk, meanwhile, had stepped
back from DOGE, reeling from the harm he had done to his own reputation
and to Tesla's share price, and his relationship with Trump had promptly
dissolved in acrimony. Trump wasn't much more popular: his approval rating
had slumped to around 40 percent, and a majority of Americans now
disapproved of his immigration policies.
But Karp was full of praise for Trump, lauding the president for the recent
U.S. attack on Iran's nuclear facilities (an operation in which Palantir's software
had played a part via Project Maven). He said that Iran's pursuit of the bomb
was a "fork in the road" moment for civilization and claimed that no Democrat
would have displayed the same courage and resolve. Karp told me that he was a
single-issue voter now, national security was his issue, and preventing Iran from
developing nuclear weapons was an existential necessity. Trump, with the help of
Israel (and Palantir), had made the world safer, and Karp expressed admiration
and gratitude for his decision to order the strike on Iran.
When I brought up ICE and immigration, Karp (ignoring the shift in
sentiment reflected in the polls) said that voters, in returning Trump to office,
had made clear that they wanted not only to secure the border, but to maintain
America's demographic balance, and he insisted that nothing Trump had done
to that point was unconstitutional. He suggested that concerns about the fate of
democracy were overblown because the United States still had a "fully
functioning judiciary." He said he had no patience for Trump's critics and that
panicked and disconsolate Democrats had only themselves to blame for
Trumpism. "I don't want to have endless conversations about Trump, because
the other side is totally irresponsible," he said. "They won't do anything on
immigration or Iran. They talk all the time about racism but won't talk about
antisemitism. I'm sick and tired of left-wing people fostering right-wing populist
movements because they won't be adults about these issues."
Karp acknowledged that liberals would probably hate him for saying that,
but it was the hard truth, and he now welcomed their scorn. The left's contempt
for Palantir seemed to be good for the bottom line. Even though the company
had never been more controversial, it continued to attract new clients and its

stock was at a record high and still climbing. "Being unpopular pays the bills,"
Karp said.
OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
A book is a leap of faith for any publisher, and I am so glad that Ben Loehnen
took the leap on this one. Ben is a terrific editor, a sage guide with a wonderful
sense of humor, and it was a pleasure to work with him. Thanks, as well, to
Carolyn Kelly, David Kass, and the rest of the team at Avid Reader Press. Avid
Reader is a dynamic imprint, and I am proud that this book is part of its stable.
I am fortunate to be represented by David Black and Gary Morris, two of the
finest literary agents in the business. They are tireless advocates and
indispensable sounding boards, and I am grateful for their support,
encouragement, and friendship. Gary has been a partner on this project, and the
book benefited enormously from his wisdom.
I appreciated the willingness of so many current and former Palantirians to
speak with me and to share their thoughts and recollections. A special thanks to
Lisa Gordon for all that she did to make this book possible.
It is a privilege to be a writer for The New York Times Magazine, and I am
indebted to Jake Silverstein, Bill Wasik, Dean Robinson, and their colleagues.
A handful of people read all or part of the manuscript and offered valuable
feedback. My thanks to Peter Steinberger, Tobias Rees, Joel Fishman, Eric
Tagliacozzo, Virginia Van Natta, and Rahul Jacob.
Thanks, as well, to Brian Shames and other cherished friends: Wilf Jaeger, Bill
Klapp, Dickon Pownall-Gray, David Vos, Julie Ma, Gary Rosenberg, John
Stocker, George Nouaime, David Cox, and Bob Cox.
I would be remiss in not mentioning my tennis crew. They are excellent
sparring partners and even better friends, and our hits were a welcome break
from the grind of book writing.
I am grateful, as always, to my parents, John and Rita Steinberger, and my in-
laws, Joseph and Keiko Brennan, as well as to the extended Steinberger and
Brennan families.

My son, James, and my daughter, Ava, delight and inspire me every day, and
they fill me with hope.
Even after all these years, I still get a rush whenever my wife, Kathy Brennan,
walks in the room. I love her, and I love the life that we have made together.
OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
MICHAEL STEINBERGER is a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine.
AvidReaderPress.com
SimonandSchuster.com
www.SimonandSchuster.com/Authors/Michael-Steinberger
@avidreaderpress
OceanofPDF.com

We hope you enjoyed reading
this Simon & Schuster ebook.
Get a FREE ebook when you join our mailing list. Plus, get updates on new releases,
deals, recommended reads, and more from Simon & Schuster. Click below to sign up
and see terms and conditions.
CLICK HERE TO SIGN UP
Already a subscriber? Provide your email again so we can register this ebook and
send you more of what you like to read. You will continue to receive exclusive offers in
your inbox.
OceanofPDF.com

AVID READER PRESS
An Imprint of Simon & Schuster, LLC
1230 Avenue of the Americas
New York, NY 10020
www.SimonandSchuster.com
For more than 100 years, Simon & Schuster has championed authors and the stories they create. By
respecting the copyright of an author's intellectual property, you enable Simon & Schuster and the author
to continue publishing exceptional books for years to come. We thank you for supporting the author's
copyright by purchasing an authorized edition of this book.
No amount of this book may be reproduced or stored in any format, nor may it be uploaded to any website,
database, language-learning model, or other repository, retrieval, or artificial intelligence system without
express permission. All rights reserved. Inquiries may be directed to Simon & Schuster, 1230 Avenue of the
Americas, New York, NY 10020 or permissions@simonandschuster.com.
Copyright © 2025 by Michael Steinberger
All rights reserved, including the right to reproduce this book or portions thereof in any form whatsoever.
For information, address Avid Reader Press Subsidiary Rights Department, 1230 Avenue of the Americas,
New York, NY 10020.
First Avid Reader Press hardcover edition November 2025
AVID READER PRESS and colophon are trademarks of Simon & Schuster, LLC
Simon & Schuster strongly believes in freedom of expression and stands against censorship in all its forms.
For more information, visit BooksBelong.com.
For information about special discounts for bulk purchases, please contact Simon & Schuster Special Sales
at 1-866-506-1949 or business@simonandschuster.com.
The Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau can bring authors to your live event. For more information or to
book an event contact the Simon & Schuster Speakers Bureau at 1-866-248-3049 or visit our website at
www.simonspeakers.com.
Interior design by Carly Loman
Jacket design by Pete Garceau
Jacket photograph by Aaron M. Sprecher/Bloomberg/Getty Images; digital texture by Aleksandra
Konoplia/Getty Images
Author photograph © Ambre Payne
Library of Congress Control Number: 2025945130
ISBN 978-1-6680-1295-6

ISBN 978-1-6680-1297-0 (ebook)
OceanofPDF.com

