In this our last session, I want to ask an odd question.
What's love got to do with it?
Does negotiation have anything to do with love, and vice versa?
That is a strange question for a negotiation course.
After all, negotiation seems to be all about satisfying our own needs.
Love is all about being concerned for others.
But if love and negotiation are in conflict, that's a serious problem.
What do you do when the other person is being a jerk?
When you're in serious conflict?
When one of you badly needs something, but the other doesn't want to give it up?
If the two approaches give different answers, then we face a serious choice.
For example, what if your spouse is sick and asks you to dump the garbage, but you really
don't want to?
Love might say, do it anyway.
Negotiation might seem to recommend this comeback, well will you to walk the dog?
So can we reconcile love and negotiation?
Maybe not.
And if not, then we should probably drop negotiation.
And anything else that keeps us from loving others, please dump the garbage.
But in this session, I want to argue the deep concern for others can illuminate and enhance
everything else we've talked about in the course, and that negotiation and conflict
management skills can help us love better.
I first want to look at one of the problems I just mentioned, the challenge of dealing
with someone who's acting very badly.
That is, the situation where you need to get someone to change unilaterally.
In other words, confrontation.
We've seen examples of compassionate confrontation, and its remarkable power has amazed us.
Mahatma Gandhi in India confronting the British, Martin Luther King in the American South confronting
white segregationists.
Now their goodness and courage can seem like an impossible ideal that we can't use in
our own lives.
But the approach they practiced isn't reserved for the few, it's something anyone can practice.
As we'll see, there is a way to confront well, so well that it can help you win unilateral
change without damaging the relationship.
And curiously, it draws heavily on insights we've developed before because like King
and Gandhi's approach, it's hard on the problem, soft on the person.
So we'd like you to imagine that you manage a new cell phone operation in Pennsylvania
with about 20 employees.
You need to meet a key deadline four months away, and for that you need a critical piece
of software.
So you're depending heavily on your key programmer, Bob.
Employers like Bob are scarce, so you're glad to have him.
But there's a problem.
Recently, Bob's secretary Anita came to you in tears saying that Bob has been once again
using foul and sexist language with her.
He's done it for months, she says.
Anita adds that Helen has had similar problems with Bob and several women are thinking of
quitting.
A few days earlier, you'd overheard two other employees, women employees, talking
about what they call Bob's pigish language.
You've recently gotten a memo from the general counsel warning management about sexual harassment
issues.
Concerned, you decide to confront Bob to get him to clean up his act.
Okay, so what do you do?
Imagine you've asked Bob to come see you.
You take a couple of minutes to think about it, and then wait for his arrival.
Finally, you hear a loud banging on the door, and in walks Bob.
He slowly stalks around, turns the chair around away from you, sits with his back to you,
and yawns loudly.
Then he looks over his shoulder and says, yeah?
What's up?
As you start to talk, he starts to pick lint off his clothing, paying no attention to
you.
You tell him, Bob, I've been hearing that you've been using bad language towards
several women colleagues, and I have to ask you to change your attitude and stop it.
At this point, Bob looks up.
What did you say?
You repeat it.
He goes ballistic.
What?
And then he starts arguing with you.
What are you talking about?
What bad language?
It's a lie.
Who told you that?
It's Anita, right?
Figures.
I suppose you never challenged her story, did you?
And I guess you don't care what I say about it, right?
Obviously, you've made up your mind what happened.
You're trying to fire me, right?
Well, let me tell you, I get a recruiter calling me every couple of days, and I can have another
job in a half hour if I want.
I definitely don't need you.
You want me out?
Fine.
I'm done.
So long.
And he stalks out.
Now, it's tempting to say, good riddance, except that you won't find a replacement
anytime soon and the deadline is looming.
And by the way, what if it turns out that there actually is more to the story than you
first thought, regardless?
Is there any way things might have gone better?
Quite possibly.
Now, let's face it, confrontation is usually challenging no matter how you approach it,
but the good news is that there is a way to confront someone that can be a lot more
effective, that can win changes in the other's behavior without crippling the relationship.
In essence, the task of principled confrontation boils down to five steps.
Get perspective, start with humility, thoughtfully confront, focus on the future, get perspective.
Let's briefly consider each step.
I'll trust that you can adapt what I suggest to the specific culture you're working in,
just as Gandhi and King adapted a common approach to theirs.
First, get perspective.
Rushing into a confrontation is usually a prescription for disaster.
The emotions are too raw, the risks of misjudgment too great, the chances for saying the wrong
thing are just too high.
In our story, we imagine that you took a couple of minutes to think about the situation, probably
not enough, so the first task is to slow down and decide, is it worth a confrontation?
Or is this a small matter you can overlook?
Here, the stakes are too high to ignore Bob's apparent behavior, but it's a good idea to
first seek mature counsel, someone wise you can confide in who can confirm or correct your
judgment and coach you for the confrontation ahead.
Then it's a good idea to prepare well, gathering facts and thinking or role-playing the encounter
so you know what you do and don't want to say.
Preparing also means finding your best alternative so you know what you'll do if Bob won't
agree to change.
That includes thinking about things that will worry Bob, and learning about ways to live
without him.
Lastly, it's a good idea to remember the last time someone confronted you.
We've all been there, and remembering being confronted can help us confront without sounding
arrogant or condescending.
Next, start the conversation with humility.
Now don't worry, this doesn't mean taking a groveling approach far from it.
It does mean first scheduling the conversation in private.
Why?
Because a public confrontation may make you look tough, but it will probably work against
your goal.
Chances are it'll humiliate Bob and make him dig in or blow up.
So you might call Bob and say, I have something fairly important I need to talk with you about.
Can we meet in my office for a few minutes tomorrow morning at 9?
Don't say the topic because that will start the confrontation.
When you meet, offer courtesy and, if necessary, request it.
Probably Bob was being discurteous, and you won't be able to talk substantively until
you've handled that.
Bob, I wonder if we can sit facing each other.
I need to be sure we're communicating well.
You probably want to raise the topic early, briefly, and factually without prejudgment.
A lot of rapport building here may not be wise because it may make Bob feel set up.
So you might say early on, Bob, I need to talk with you about something difficult.
I've heard that more than one person says, say recently, I've heard more than one person
say recently that you've been using strong, troubling language when you've spoken with
some of the women in the office.
I'm concerned.
What's going on?
Notice that you're not saying, notice what you're not saying.
You're not accusing or prejudging.
You're simply raising the issue and asking about it.
That's crucial.
Bob can't say you're biased or unfair, you're just seeking important information.
Then it's time to practice humility another way, by listening.
That way, you're signaling open-mindedness, fairness, and respect, and you may well learn
things that will help you see the situation better.
If Bob denies everything or adds shocking new facts that change everything, you can
ask follow-up questions.
Not sure what to do next?
That's okay.
You can say, okay, let me think about what I've learned from you, and let's talk again
if I think it makes sense to.
Thanks for coming by.
But if you find things are pretty much as you've gathered, it's time to thoughtfully
confront.
Thoughtfully?
Yes.
That's a key to your success.
If you just confront, you may wail on Bob, make him feel belittled or resentful as he
felt in our vignette.
But if you're just thoughtful and kind, you may lose the force of your point.
Fortunately, you don't have to choose.
You can do both.
To confront thoughtfully, you first want to confront his behavior, not his character,
not his attitude, or his personality.
After all, you can't change or measure those things, but you can change and measure his
conduct.
In short, you want to focus on the problem, not the person.
So you might say, Bob, I expect professional language and conduct here at the office.
That means treating everyone, including women colleagues with respect, and not using sexist
language.
It's okay to express anger if necessary, but not in a way that's demeaning.
One way to frame the message without provoking needless resentment is to rely more on I statements,
since you statements sound more threatening.
Regardless though, you have to expect Bob will be defensive.
How to cope?
A good way is to use active listening when he gets defensive.
To show him you're understanding him, then correct him if necessary.
So you might say, I get it, Bob.
You think I'm setting you up to be fired, but I'm not.
In fact, I wouldn't be having this conversation with you in private if I were.
It's your language I'm talking about.
And if that changes, the future can be really good.
You'll probably need to be ready to say your message several times in ways.
Some psychologists say it takes four to ten repetitions for a confrontational message to
get through.
Stressful, isn't it?
Good thing you really prepared.
Good thing you rehearsed and practiced saying the point well several ways.
As you focus on the future, you want to press for concrete measurable change now, not vague
assurances.
Bob, what can we do about this now to be sure things will change starting today?
Let's think about some ideas.
Inviting Bob's participation may help him buy in more to the solution.
Even if his ideas aren't great, you can use your training to encourage him.
Bob, I kind of like your suggestion about communicating face to face more, more often
instead of by email.
Let's keep it as one possible solution.
What else could we do?
But notice that you're not going to allow trades and deals here.
If Bob says, I'll act better, if you give me a new secretary and a new computer, that
will send a terrible signal that you're rewarding bad behavior.
That's why this is a confrontation, not a negotiation.
To encourage Bob the change is worthwhile, it will be helpful to talk about your sincere
hopes.
Bob, if things change, I'm confident you have a real future here.
I wouldn't be talking with you about it if I didn't think so.
That's important because even if Bob seems cocky and indifferent, he's probably scared
and unhappy.
Building him a golden bridge can help bring him to his senses, not his knees.
But you also need to be ready to warn and escalate if Bob is unwilling to change.
Fortunately, you've thought about this carefully and identified the most credible and least
coercive things you can do that will get Bob's attention.
Bob, I hope I won't have to bring this problem to our general counsel's attention.
I'm concerned he'll note it in reference checks if you ever go with a future employer.
I will share it with him if I must, but I don't think we need to go that way.
Your goal is to win Bob's commitment to specific action, with a plan to follow up
so you know he's changing.
With that in hand, you can end with a handshake, or whatever seems appropriate.
Bob, you might say, I know I can count on you to do what we've agreed to.
I'll follow up with a private email recapping what we've said, let's plan to talk again
in a week to see how it's going.
Now, I guarantee you that it won't go perfectly.
I've done confrontations myself, and it is not easy.
So it's a good idea, again, to get perspective by debriefing with your confidant, reviewing
the conversation, spotting mistakes and corrections you may need to make, and then following up
with Bob if necessary to clarify any points of confusion.
The Latin origin of the word confrontation is a word meaning to face in defiance or
hostility.
That's how we started with Bob, and it's a high-risk approach that can often backfire.
Here we're doing something different.
We're facing with gentle strength.
We're open to learning, pressing, and encouraging, so we don't just win, but also begin to win
over to our side the Bob's in our life.
But now I want to turn to a more searching side of our session.
I want you to do a thought experiment with me.
Often you find yourself negotiating with great skill and power with a business counterpart.
After a while, you strike an agreement that's extremely favorable to your side.
The other negotiator was grudgingly willing to settle on those terms.
Then you wake up and discover that somehow the roles have reversed and that you are the
business counterpart.
You've been the one who settled for the tiny slice of the pie.
Now the more favorably you negotiated in the dream, the more you gave up in real life.
It's as if the two negotiators in the room were you and you.
Suddenly, your euphoria turns to dismay.
You find yourself experiencing the very feelings your counterpart experienced in the dream sequence.
There's a theory proposed by the great American physicist David Bohm, a student of Albert
Einstein's, that the universe is a hologram and that in essence every part of it is so
thoroughly connected to the whole that there's really no such thing as separate particles
or beings.
Rather that the universe, like a hologram, contains within every part the whole of itself
that in a sense you can see the entire universe in a single grain of sand.
There's no telling at this moment if this understanding is true, in fact most physicists
are critical of it, but there is very suggestive evidence.
Physicists have found that they can take two subatomic particles, place them in a state
known as quantum entanglement, separate them by vast distances in theory even to opposite
ends of the universe, measure the spin of one, and instantly know the spin of the other.
Yet no known force in the physical world can account for this behavior.
After all, the speed of light is too slow to allow one particle to communicate with the
other that quickly at such distance.
Bohm suggests that we're looking actually not at two particles, but two aspects of the
same particle.
Even though by conventional examination the particles are separate and distinct.
Just as it seems obvious the two people in a room are separate and distinct.
Growing up, my father would often say to me, if I were you, and I am, you know.
And for years I puzzled over what he meant by that odd phrase, but our thought experiment
and Bohm's idea are a hint that that puzzling phrase might be worth paying attention to,
yet we are, at least metaphorically, in a sense, each other.
In an earlier session, we met a top salesman I called Clement.
As you may recall, before he became a salesman, Clement had been a practicing Buddhist monk
for twelve years.
He said his success was largely due to ideas he learned as a monk.
In essence, Clement's focus was not on selling, but on mindfulness, on becoming deeply aware
of the other person and himself, of approaching the conversation with an open mind and a sense
of compassion and identity with the other, almost as if the two people were reflections
of each other.
If you walk through Clement's specific practices as a salesman, you find they closely match
ideas we've explored in our negotiation course.
For negotiation training, we've looked at practical ways to foster greater mindfulness
and harmony when at first it seems the negotiators are completely at odds.
We talk about asking dumb questions, going slow to go fast, being hard on the problem,
soft on the person, bringing them to their senses and not their knees, creating mutually
satisfying agreements, and reframing to speak with intentional respect.
A rich word, whose origin, means the act of looking back or often at another.
We talk about dumb listening.
When we seek to clear our minds and understanding non-judgmentally, that is, without necessarily
agreeing, an act of listening where we show the other that we've heard them.
We look intentionally for ways to go below the surface of conflicts and disagreements
and discover hidden unities and harmonies.
We approach the conversation with intentionality, seeking to learn and think well, well before,
and during the talks.
We don't always agree, but we seek to disagree without anger, and even when we find ourselves
fighting with the other side, we cultivate the ability to do that in ways that require
the least coercion necessary, that fosters face-saving, trustworthiness, and mutual respect.
To further build trust, we sometimes look for ways to surrender a measure of control
to the other.
When we must seek more, we do it first as advocates where our service to others demands
that we achieve favorable outcomes.
Even when we're advocating for ourselves, we seek to moderate ambitions at least slightly,
seeking a just and justifiable outcome, recognizing that the other person needs a profit margin
and that a reputation for greediness tends to backfire, and we're open in other situations
to intentionally compromising, satisfacing, or even sacrificing.
In all of these ways and others, it can seem superficially as if we're merely developing
negotiation skills that can serve us individually, and in a sense, that is true.
But there is a deeper aspect to this work, to the practical ability to see beyond ourselves
to the other person, the undiscovered continent, and discover hidden harmonies and unities.
That's prudent in a world where we may not be as disconnected as we first think, where
we may, at least metaphorically, in a sense be both people at the table.
Curiously, practices within many meditative and prayer traditions parallel practices skilled
negotiators use during negotiations.
Specifically, the meditator or prayer practices a kind of dumb listening, paying quiet attention,
not to the other negotiator, but rather to her own thoughts or breath or her sense of
the divine.
Like a skilled negotiator considering others' thoughts, she seeks to notice her own thoughts
without judgment.
Also, like a skilled negotiator, she goes slow, slowly, and quietly, and is comfortable
with silence.
In fact, these practices may be an additional way, besides preparation and role-playing,
to help you be more calm in difficult negotiations and confrontations.
But there's curious evidence that practices such as these, meditation and prayer, may
do more than merely prepare you to deal more effectively with conflict and negotiation,
they may also help you handle them better.
For example, much has been said about the civil rights movement, but relatively little
has been said about the reliance of the movement on prayer, meditation, and what Gandhi called
soul force, or satya graha.
These practices complemented vigorous demonstration and negotiation by civil rights activists.
Without them, it's hard to envision how the civil rights movement might have otherwise
succeeded.
Separately, a recent empirical study found that those who practiced meditative prayer
had measurably greater levels of intercultural competence.
Several other studies have found that prayer appears to be a significant softening event
for religious couples, facilitating reconciliation and problem-solving.
Mindfulness, meditation, prayer, and entanglement all speak to an idea that seems far removed
from the work of conflict management and negotiation, but which may actually be at
the heart of the matter, the idea of deep compassion, or more technically, love.
As we've said, that word seems utterly foreign to such things as business negotiation.
The language we use in that realm often suggests something quite altogether different.
We talk about hard bargaining, nuts and bolts, brass tacks, and other terms that fit nicely
in a solid, mechanistic Newtonian universe of separate beings.
But ancient wisdom, modern science, and more, suggest that we may be missing something about
reality and ourselves the more we insist on emphasizing our separateness and hardness.
As we saw in a previous session, my colleague, economics professor Robert Frank, found that
the more economics training you have, the more uncooperative you may tend to be.
As he and his colleagues put it, economists may believe that self-interest often dictates
self-seeking, but that response may simply be untrue.
As Frank and his colleagues note, several researchers have suggested that the ultimate
victims of non-cooperative behavior may be the very people who practice it.
The direct pursuit of material self-interest may indeed often be self-defeating.
As the economic outlook, with something we've seen earlier, the deep compassion and identity
that horse trainer Buck Branneman has for his horses, that approach enables him to consciously
see the animal's need for respect and understanding, especially abused and difficult horses.
There are many words for what Buck is doing, but one word for it is love, the act of showing
kindness, compassion, and concern for another.
Strangely, horses cooperate with him in ways that leave ordinary horse owners and riders
astonished.
As we've seen in the course, giving similar things to children, hostage takers, and business
colleagues often has a similar effect.
There's a sense in which we are always negotiating with ourselves, that we are always both people
in the room for better or worse.
The negative qualities we often see in others as often as not are reflections of our own
negative qualities.
That's an idea as modern as the psychotherapeutic notion of projection, but it's also as
old as ancient wisdom.
You therefore have no excuse, you who pass judgment on someone else, for at whatever
point you judge another, you are condemning yourself, because you who pass judgment do
the same things.
Further, the way we treat others seems in many ways to ultimately redound to us for
better or worse.
An idea found in Eastern ideas such as karma and the Judeo-Christian tradition that you
reap what you sow, that in a sense it is we ourselves we are punching, gentling, haggling,
lovingly confronting, and making peace with, that we are always entangled with the other.
But come on, isn't all this talk of compassion and empathy getting a bit much, let's be
honest.
As Adam Smith noted, that it's self-interest, not just altruism, that causes the butcher
to make you meat and the baker to make you bread.
How far are we going to go with this discussion about love in a course about negotiation?
That is an excellent question, and Martin Luther King would agree that we are in danger
at the moment of going off the deep end.
King would not align himself with those who, like the Beatles, would say, all you need
is love.
As he put it, love without power is sentimental and anemic.
Fortunately, if you think about it, much of what we've looked at in our course has been
about the wise acquisition and use of power.
We've looked at the power of satisfying your own interests creatively, the famous idea
that knowledge is power.
We've seen the power of preparation, the way that coming to the meeting with many options
helps you become powerfully pleasantly persistent.
We've seen the persuasive power of reframing, appealing to common interests, setting limits
or walkaways, appealing to the other person's needs and worries, bringing people to their
senses not their needs, setting ambitious targets, and using independent criteria, moves
away from the table, and even setting and scheduling, among many other things, to shape
the outcome.
And earlier in this session, we've developed the power to confront well.
But how can we make sense of these two seemingly conflicting ideas?
How can we understand the interaction of love and power?
Let's turn to Dr. King again.
Quote I shared a moment ago is part of a larger point he made on that very question, so let's
now consider the full quote.
Power without love is reckless and abusive, and love without power is sentimental and anemic.
Power at its best is love implementing the demands of justice, and justice at its best
is power correcting everything that stands against love.
So let me tell you a student story that illustrates the point.
To protect her privacy and give her my highest respect, I'm going to change some names
and facts, but the heart of the story is quite true.
My student Maggie began a memo to me with this.
On September 11, 2001, my fiancée Paul was murdered at the Pentagon in the terrorist
attack that day, and my life spiraled into darkness.
Months later, searchers found Paul's body, but his grief-stricken mother Brenda treated
Maggie as if she did not exist, and as fiancée, Maggie had no legal rights at all.
Now frankly, if I'd been in Maggie's place, I doubt I could have gotten out of bed in
the morning to face such grief, anger, and anguish.
But remarkably, Maggie saw this as an occasion for loving confrontation and principled negotiation.
So no kidding, she prepared systematically with the eye foresaw at preparation mnemonic.
Then she contacted Brenda, who reluctantly agreed to see her.
When they first met on Brenda's couch, Maggie said as she'd planned Brenda,
How are you?
How are you doing?
And slowly at first, Brenda shared some of her own grief at the loss of her son.
Then, after listening a long time, Maggie said this as she'd intended, Brenda, I want
to thank you for raising Paul so well that he became the man I wanted to spend the rest
of my life with, and we have some other things I need to talk with you about, and very gently
Maggie talked with Brenda about the things she needed to help with her own mourning.
She asked for information about how searchers found his body.
She asked for information about the funeral arrangements.
She asked for personal items as keepsakes, and she even asked to purchase at a fair price
the small boat he'd quartered her in.
By the end of their conversation, not only had Brenda agreed to all of Maggie's requests,
but she added this completely on her own, Maggie, we're dedicating a soccer field in
his honor, and I've only invited his closest family and friends, I'd like you to be there
with me.
Now, frankly, I have no idea if I could negotiate as well as that, but my students can.
Maggie's story illustrates how negotiation skills can let you combine power and love,
how they can help you achieve justice and reconciliation, even in outrageous situations
that most would find impossible to deal with.
Her story bears out the idea that we can use practical skills to enhance our empathy, even
for others we may be furious at, and win them over.
As Abraham Lincoln said in the middle of the Civil War, don't I destroy my enemy when
I make him my friend?
Maggie's story also illustrates one of the reasons I've been passionate about teaching
negotiation for 20 years.
It illustrates how the skill can help people work out seemingly impossible problems with
others in kind and constructive, hope-giving ways.
At its best, principal negotiation can be part of the larger task of winning warmly, of having
power and love, of fighting for justice, and loving our neighbors as ourselves.
And let me invite you again to aspire to put this remarkable skill of negotiation to
full and high use, to seek more, not less, than the ability to do well in the short run
economically, though it certainly can do that for you in several ways, but also to use negotiation
skills to be a better teammate and leader, a better family member and citizen, even at
times a peacemaker, as one who can find hope in very practical ways.
To understand others more than you thought you could, and do it with power that serves
both of you well, who would have thought we could do that, but in this life, what could
be better?
