In the movie The English Patient, Ralph Fiennes promises to save his badly injured mistress,
Kristen Scott Thomas.
It's 1939 and World War II has recently begun.
He leaves her in a cave and walks as fast as he can across the desert to get help.
After three days he reaches an English military outpost and immediately demands the officers
at the desk to quickly get help for a wounded woman in the desert.
When the officers begin to ask questions of this strange, disheveled man with a foreign
accent that might be German, Ralph Fiennes becomes increasingly agitated, provoking
the officer and his team until they arrest him, handcuff him, and carry him away to a
train.
Desperate, Fiennes manages to break free and return to the cave to find his mistress dead.
So dramatic, so tragic, so compelling, and far be it from me to quibble with the plot
line of a celebrated romantic movie.
But Fiennes' actions illustrate a classic mistake we make when we need someone to give
us something we focus only on our needs and we give little or no thought to the situation
from the other person's perspective.
In fact, studies find that like Fiennes, new negotiators tend to focus on their needs,
their problems, their demands, and say the other person should worry about himself.
But skilled negotiators know it's essential to understand the other negotiator for at
least four reasons.
It builds trust, it lets you avoid needless misunderstanding, it lets you discover the
other's strengths and weaknesses, and it lets you discover hidden solutions.
So in this session, we'll look squarely at the other negotiator, that undiscovered continent.
We'll look at the high and demanding art of really getting where the other person is
coming from in the conflicts, transactions, and negotiations we face.
As we'll see, it can illuminate almost everything we do in negotiation.
A starting point for that crucial task is the idea that there are some things that every
negotiator wants.
These include respect, face-saving, and the chance to be heard.
Studies find that skilled negotiators spend much more time looking for ways to give their
counterparts these things than mediocre negotiators do.
Let me illustrate their importance with a story.
Years ago, a colleague of mine received an assignment from the New York City Tax Authority.
Their tax collectors were having a lot of difficulty with an obscure charge called a
sidewalk great tax.
It turned out that if you own a small store in New York City, you typically have a metal
door on the sidewalk itself leading down to the basement where you store supplies.
Incredibly, the city charged a $10,000 a year tax on each owner's sidewalk great.
Who knew?
Every three years, the tax authority would send to Lincoln Store owners a collection
letter informing them that they owed the city $30,000 for the great tax.
At the bottom of the letter was this.
If you wish to discuss the matter, please contact this agent at this number.
And surprisingly, many store owners called and demanded a meeting.
They were outraged and embarrassed by this tax.
Of course they hadn't budgeted for it and they were potentially about to be driven out
of business by this very kind of tax.
Now as my colleague learned, the open secret among the tax collectors was that they knew
this was a bogus and unfair tax and it really wasn't worth suing over.
So when a store owner came to meet with a tax collector, before the owner even said
anything, the tax collector would routinely say, look, while you do owe us the full $30,000,
I'd be willing to settle today for $15,000.
But to the collectors this May, the store owners would routinely refuse.
Often the tax collectors reported the store owners seemed stubborn, obtuse, pugnacious.
What was wrong with these people the collectors wanted to know?
They were offering them 50% off of a debt that they clearly owe.
What more do they want?
Why are we making so few settlements?
As the consultant investigated the problem, she soon discovered the underlying problem.
Even more than money, the store owners wanted someone in authority to get how outraged
they were at such an obscure, ridiculous and painful tax.
Put yourself in their position, she counseled.
You're barely making it in business.
You're harried by a dozen hidden costs and taxes every month it seems, then one day you
open up a scary looking official letter from the tax man that makes you feel like a dead
beat for failing to pay some fee that no one in his right mind would ever expect, a tax
that could kill you.
How would you feel?
Mere money wouldn't mollify you, you'd want someone to take the time to hear how furious
you are and respond accordingly.
So when the tax collector doesn't even listen and just jumps to a settlement offer, it may
only further humiliate and frustrate you and deny you any sense of victory.
No wonder they're telling you to stick it.
Her advice?
Make any settlement offer you want, but first let the store owner blow off steam for a while,
show him you really get his frustration, then discuss the numbers.
In all likelihood, not only did this advice actually accelerate the settlement process,
it quite probably meant that the tax collectors didn't need to offer such big discounts.
In contrast, consider the unfortunate consequences of talks between Mexican and American officials
in the 1950s over access to Mexican natural gas fields.
Mexico at the time was in a political and economic crisis and badly needed money.
U.S. representatives, knowing of this crisis, came to Mexico City with a very weak offer,
so weak in fact, that the Mexican officials protested, saying it was so insulting that
they couldn't bring it back to their own people.
The American representatives were unmoved, we are strong, wealthy and powerful, no one
else can buy the amount of gas we are offering to purchase.
What other choice do you have?
So the Mexican government began burning off its own gas, and any chance for a deal at
a low price became politically impossible.
Now, you might say that turning down such offers is irrational, but that's precisely
the point.
When other people feel disrespected, ignored and mistreated, they can act in ways that
make little sense to an economist, but that make plenty of sense to normal human beings,
and I can prove it.
I'm going to briefly describe a simple game I've played with students literally around
the world, called the ultimatum game.
Imagine that I have $10,000 to give away, and that I'm willing to give it to you and
a stranger standing next to you if the two of you can agree on a split.
I will let you propose a division of the money to that stranger, that is, you'll say to
her, I will get X% and you will get Y% deal?
The stranger will decide whether to accept or reject your offer.
If she says yes, then I will give you the money to divide as you've agreed.
Then neither of you will get, but if she says no, if she says no, then neither of you will
get anything.
You both know that $10,000 is at stake, and you both know these rules.
How much will you offer her?
Now, I have an economics degree, and I've taught economics at the graduate level, and
I can tell you that classical economics theory makes a very clear prediction.
It predicts and recommends that you should make a rational offer where you keep $9,999
and offer the stranger $1.
After all, $1 is more than $0, and if your stranger is rational as economists define
the term, then it's better to have more material wealth and less, and so yes, to the $1 would
be the right answer.
But what do people in the real world do?
Overwhelmingly, I find that my students in America, China, and France, and elsewhere,
typically divide the money evenly, 50-50, and almost always their counterparts say yes.
Some offer to keep 60% and give 40%.
Usually their counterparts say yes, but not always.
A few propose to keep 70 and give 30%.
Some say yes, but some say no.
Usually a couple of students propose to keep 90% and give 10%.
More often than not, their counterparts say no deal.
When I ask why the counterparts turn down $1,000, $3,000, even $4,000, their answers
are invariably the same, because it's not fair.
No matter how I press them, arguing the economist's point that some money is worth more than no
money, they're invariably unmoved.
I would rather go hungry than see that guy get so much, they say.
And it turns out that studies of the ultimatum game by social scientists around the world
show generally similar results.
True, there are some variations depending on culture and income levels, but most people
walk away from what they perceive to be unfair deals, even if the deals are nominally profitable.
You might think that this result is simply due to the fact that imaginary money is involved.
But in one experiment, Indonesian villagers were offered the equivalent of 20% of their
annual income, that is, they played for about $60 in real money.
Remarkably, they still walked away from deals they felt were unfair.
Similarly, studies find the job candidates often care more about fairness than money.
Imagine you have two offers, one for a salary of $100,000, where peers will receive $120,000.
The other offer is for $85,000, where, like you, peers receive $85,000.
Most job candidates select the lower paying job, in large part because they perceive that
they are being treated with less respect and fairness at the higher paying job.
None of these findings mean that you have to offer the other negotiator a simple compromise
that divides everything in half.
Quite the opposite, what these studies more suggest is that something more than just money
matters to people and that they will often accept less financially if they feel that
they are being treated more respectfully.
Now this point hardly means that you can and should bamboozle people with charm to get
over on them financially.
We all know how little credibility we give smarmy salesmen with slick smiles and glad
hands who seem to be trying to be our instant friend.
What the ultimatum game means is that your awareness of the other person's humanness
and of the intangible needs that he has may be as important in a negotiation as anything
else.
One implication is that it's a very good idea to spend time seeking to empathize with
your counterpart in the negotiation, as skilled negotiators do.
Understanding means deeply seeing things from the other person's perspective.
It's not the same thing as a slick salesman's approach, because it's about understanding
the other in their world, not fashioning your own slick appearance of friendship.
A student of mine bought some roses, just to illustrate this point, I'll share this
story with you.
He bought it for his girlfriend for Valentine's Day from a local florist shop and had them
delivered to her that evening.
She received them with gladness, put them in a vase, and within six hours every petal
was on the floor dead.
So of course she told him about it, and the next evening after work he went back to the
flower shop ready to complain bitterly.
But as he approached the shop he noticed a line of other young men out the door all
angry and muttering about how she won't take my calls anymore, she thinks I'm cheap and
so on, and he quickly realized that something had gone wrong with this flower shop.
Then he remembered from his negotiation training the importance of empathy, of psychologically
stepping out of one's own shoes and walking around in the others for a while.
And so he remembered from summer jobs what it's like to be a clerk and to be wailed
on by unhappy customers, and he realized that the last thing this clerk needs is to hear
yet another customer angrily saying that the clerk has ruined the customer's relationship.
Chances are he already knows that the customers are angry.
So when it was finally my student's turn he said to the clerk, or rather he said later
on he said you should have seen the look on the clerk's face as the clerk braced himself
for yet another attack.
But surprisingly my student simply said it looks like you're having a really hard day.
The clerk was stunned.
Oh my gosh, his face seemed to say, finally here's someone who doesn't see me as a speed
bump who actually sees a little of my humanity, and the clerk started to pour his heart out
to my student.
It was a big mix up, the clerk said, the supplier promised better quality at lower prices and
delivered lower quality flowers instead.
I'm new here, the owner of the store isn't here, the policy says, the sign says that
our policy is no return without receipts, and of course who has receipts for a Valentine's
Day purchase?
In response my student simply said, I wonder what we can do about this, not what will you
give me or I'll kill you, but let's collaborate.
And so they started to work together and after a while they began to realize that the refrigerator
had some fresh flowers that were from another supplier.
The clerk said, I think your girlfriend will like them even better and I think I can convince
my boss to use them as a replacement.
The store delivered those flowers to my student's girlfriend that afternoon and she really liked
them and they lasted for several days.
Now again, the idea is not to butter people up hoping they'll give us things, you and
I can tell when someone is trying to do that and often they seem as phony as a three dollar
bill.
But can we actually see the other person's humanity and his deep needs?
I believe this is a wise thing to do even if it profits us nothing and here let me take
my negotiating professor's hat off and speak personally with you for a moment.
I believe this is one of the most important things we're called to do in this world and
you may very well do it better than I do and I hope I'm getting better at it as I go along
even if it profits me nothing.
I just think it's an intrinsically meaningful and important thing to do.
But as I put my negotiating professor's hat back on, I'll observe that it's a happy
coincidence that doing this work is also extremely effective as a way to discover the other person's
hidden interests, to discover important research questions, to discover creative options, and
to build leverage and rapport among other things.
In the English patient, Ralph Fiennes had hours, days really, to think about his situation
from others perspectives as he struggled through the desert.
Now I don't mean to kill a romantic story and yes I really get that Fiennes was distraught
and exhausted by the end of his desert trek, but let's face it, if you really want to
save your mistress, then thinking about how others might see you when you reach civilization
and what questions they might have and why they might hesitate could only help matters.
The same is true when we're standing in line waiting to get satisfaction from a clerk,
it's tempting to stress out and fume, it takes discipline to go beyond that.
But one simple but powerful way to practice empathy before an important negotiation is
to simply speak in the voice of the other negotiator as he might confide in a close
friend.
How does the situation look to you now?
What are you worried about?
Why does that other person, that is, why do you, seem so difficult?
What are your fears, hopes, needs?
If you find it really is difficult to do this work, that discovery itself is valuable, it
means you probably need to understand him better and maybe useful to speak with someone
who has been in the counterpart's situation.
In my student's case, if he had no experience as a clerk himself, he might have been wise
to call a friend who had been a clerk himself and asked, what's it like to be a clerk
in a situation like this?
Regardless, as you empathize, you want to take special note of surprises that give you
deeper insight into the situation.
Now you might hear all this and say, if I start to empathize with the other person,
I'm afraid I'm going to give away the store.
But in that case, you're not really empathizing at all, you're sympathizing, you're pitying
her and you're probably paying a needless price for it.
As New York Police Department hostage team negotiator Dominic Messino puts it, it's
all about empathy, not sympathy.
As he says, hostage negotiators, all negotiators for that matter, aren't aiming to sympathize
with the person on the other side of the barricade.
In a hostage situation, understanding that a person is angry about, say, the fact that
his wife wants to leave him, gives the hostage negotiation team a great deal of information
and ways of influencing his behavior.
All of which brings us back to the idea of skilled empathy.
The ability to see things from the other person's perspective does not require us to make ruinous
concessions.
In fact, you and I may be alive today because somebody was very good at practicing real empathy
toward a potentially annihilating enemy.
In the outstanding documentary, The Fog of War, former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara
gives 10 lessons that he learned from his service to President John F. Kennedy and President
Lyndon Johnson.
Rule number one, empathize with your enemy.
To illustrate, he tells the story of the Cuban Missile Crisis.
There for 13 days, the United States and the Soviet Union were locked in a crisis over
the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba targeted at the United States.
As McNamara recounts, in the first days of the mid of the crisis in mid-October 1962,
the Kennedy government mobilized 140,000 Marines and came under tremendous pressure
from senior leaders to invade Cuba.
Despite his initial more cautious response, by October 27th, Kennedy was convinced that
we are not going to be able to get these missiles out through negotiation.
He was poised to offer an invasion within 48 hours.
But there at the meeting with Kennedy and other advisors was Tommy Thompson, former
U.S. Ambassador to the Soviet Union, who had actually lived with Soviet Premier Khrushchev
and his wife on two occasions.
I disagree, Mr. President, Thompson said, I think there's still a chance.
That he'll back down, said Kennedy.
The important thing to Khrushchev, it seems to me, said Thompson, is to be able to say,
I saved Cuba.
In effect, Thompson was urging Kennedy to ignore an aggressive message from the Soviets
that the Americans had received hours earlier, and instead respond to a more conciliatory
message from the Soviets that they had received the previous day.
As McNamara points out, in Thompson's mind was this, Khrushchev has gotten himself into
a hell of a jam.
If we can find a face-saving way for him to get out and declare victory, he'll accept
that, and Thompson was right.
McNamara concludes, we've got to listen to our enemies and understand the thoughts
and motivations behind their actions.
It turns out that if we had invaded, we would have discovered that nuclear missiles there
were operational in Cuba, and that the Soviets and the Cubans were prepared to use them on
our troops, which would almost certainly have led to a cataclysmic nuclear war.
One story reaffirms the age-old wisdom Sun Tzu, famously shared in his book The Art of
War, Know Your Enemy.
All of which means that empathy is not about being a wuss, it's a critical task.
So critical, in fact, that in a sense the entire Cold War was governed by a mathematical
effort to crystallize empathy using a method known as game theory, in which you intentionally
try to play out your choices and how they will affect the choices of your adversary.
We can use Thompson's story as the occasion to discover a systematic method for empathizing
with others that we're in conflict with, a method known as the Currently Perceived
Choice Chart.
The Currently Perceived Choice Chart is a tool advanced by negotiation experts Roger
Fisher, Billy Urie, and Bruce Patton.
It's essentially a grid that quickly helps you to see how things look from the other's
perspective and use the insights to develop a persuasive response.
I've adapted it slightly to make a couple of points a bit easier to convey.
The first step is simply to ask, what is the choice my counterpart thinks he has to make?
In the Cuban Missile Crisis, Kennedy's counterpart was Nikita Khrushchev, and the question Khrushchev
faced was this, shall I agree to withdraw the missiles from Cuba?
The second step is to ask, why would my counterpart feel it was bad to say yes to my proposal?
If we imagine that we are in the Cuban Missile Crisis and that we are Nikita Khrushchev, then
you can see immediately why if you're Khrushchev there's a lot to worry about if you agree
to withdraw the missiles.
You risk losing Cuba to an invasion by the U.S., you lose face with the Politburo, Russians
generally, and Russia's allies by backing down, hawks in the Politburo might try to
sack you from losing Cuba, and you gain nothing.
The third step is to ask why saying no seems to be a good idea to your counterpart.
In Khrushchev's case, refusing to withdraw the missiles seems to protect Cuba from a
U.S. invasion.
If you're Khrushchev, it lets you look good to your side because you're hanging tough.
It likely protects you from losing power, and you save Cuba and get respect.
Now the critical insight is that when we make such lists, we're actually discovering the
other person's driving interests.
Each of the fears and hopes that Khrushchev had, that we've just enumerated, comes down
to some key interests.
As Thompson put it, the important thing for Khrushchev is to be able to say, I saved Cuba,
I stopped an invasion.
With that insight, a solution starts to come into focus, help him in effect declare victory
by agreeing not to invade if he takes the missiles out, an attractive offer because
it addresses the felt needs, fears, and hopes that we've just identified.
Another powerful way to deeply understand the other negotiator is to do a role simulation
of the upcoming talks where a friend pretends to be you and you pretend to be the person
you're getting ready to negotiate with.
That is, you do a practice round of negotiation in which you act as the other negotiator and
a friend acts as you.
Studies of top negotiation instructors suggest that doing a role simulation helps you predict
the other person's actions better than almost any other preparation you can do.
It also helps you produce better, more attractive options and enhances support, trust, and buy-in.
To do it, try using this approach outlined by Professor Stuart Diamond of Wharton.
First, find a teammate and share all the basic facts of the upcoming negotiation with
her.
Second, next, have your teammate prepare as if she were you while separately you prepare
as if you were the person you're going to negotiate with.
As we'll see, preparation can take some time, though you can take less time in an emergency.
Third, meet in character with your teammate, playing you and you playing the other person.
Negotiate, staying in character, and making the best case you can for the side you are
pretending to be.
Fourth, take occasional breaks to talk about how the talks are going, but stay in character,
then resume.
Do the simulation for at least 45 minutes.
Finally, drop your roles and reflect together on the experience.
Ask each other what helped and what didn't, trade preparation notes, and combine them.
As Professor Diamond notes, you don't need people who are experts, you need a fresh pair
of eyes, because most of negotiation is about the people in the process, not expertise.
But beyond empathy, there are other things you can do at the meeting itself that can
help you better understand the other person and so be more effective.
One powerfully valuable task is skilled question asking.
One of the most efficient ways to learn a lot from the other person with just a few
questions is to use a method called funneling.
Here, you start by asking very simple, broad, open-ended questions, that is questions that
don't permit a yes or no answer.
The broader the better.
For example, let me just listen first and get your perspective on the matter.
Or I'd like to understand your situation.
Or tell me about your needs.
Or tell me about the apartment, the position, the problem.
The advantage is that broad, open questions help you avoid making false assumptions and
lunging at the wrong answer.
They help you learn a lot about the other person's thinking.
Now, it's certainly true that not everyone you negotiate with wants to share a lot of
information, but most of us warmly value a listening ear.
And even if the other side is seemingly reluctant to say very much, insights can emerge from
what they do share and what they don't.
After a while, it's useful to follow up with somewhat narrower open-ended questions.
For example, you could say, you said you're concerned about the upfront costs.
Can you say more about that, please?
Now you're getting into the details, but you're still not assuming a lot.
You can keep this approach up for a while and then, when you have a clear idea of the
situation, you can follow up with the most narrow questions, close questions, that is,
questions that do permit a yes or no or numerical or one-word answer, such as, do you have other
buyers?
How many miles does the car have?
And so on.
Funneling is a method used widely by helping professionals such as lawyers, doctors, and
psychologists.
But what if you genuinely cannot empathize with the other side, or what if they have
grave doubts that you can ever truly understand them?
One way to cope is to enlist the help of a third party who can empathize.
For example, consider the book Religion, the Missing Dimension of Statecraft by Douglas
Johnston and Cynthia Sampson.
In it, the authors demonstrated that it is possible to improve relations between Westerners
and Muslims in an unexpected way, by intentionally involving clergy from other faiths.
They recount a variety of case studies where bringing believers of different faiths together
helps prevent or resolve conflicts by demonstrating deep connection through shared religious values.
In about 2007, Johnston, as head of an NGO, went to Karachi, Pakistan and visited several
Muslim Madrasas that were closely identified with terrorism.
One in particular was known to be the chief supplier of fighters in Kashmir and Chechnya,
and members of the most violent anti-Shia terrorist groups.
He and his colleagues met with Madrasa leaders who were filled with rage against U.S. foreign
policy in the Middle East.
To defuse that rage, he first acknowledged the leader's anger.
He noted two reasons why Muslim nations might also be criticized, and then said this.
We're here to try to build on religious values that we have in common to see if we can improve
our relationship.
Then he quoted from the Koran, which he summarized says this, O mankind, God could have made
you one had he willed, but he didn't.
He made you into separate nations and tribes that you may know one another, cooperate with
one another, and compete with one another in good works.
Johnston proceeded to challenge the Madrasa leaders to a friendly competition in good
works.
Within an hour, their rage had turned to a remarkable spirit of near fellowship.
The leader of a similar Madrasa was so moved by a similar encounter that he led the school
to sponsor seminars in peacemaking and conflict resolution.
A third leader came to Johnston and said, You have made me so very, very happy.
We thought all Americans hated us.
One reason the surprising approach seems to have worked is that these Muslim clerics
apparently assumed that Westerners were all decadent rationalists who have no understanding
of the spiritual life or devotion to scripture and therefore would be hard pressed to understand
Muslim values and feelings.
Involving people with faith traditions who understood religious life and who, like the
Muslims, have an abromic tradition actually helped build bridges most thought impossible
to build.
This idea that an ally who gets the other side can help you when you can't get them
yourself lies behind the old tradition of using a liaison who figuratively and literally
speaks the other's language.
One implication?
Choose a teammate, an agent, or involve a third party who deeply understands your counterparty,
who really gets them and who can show them that someone on your side understands.
Here then is my challenge for this session.
Let's call up the What does the other person want and why challenge?
The next time you're gearing up for an important negotiation, see what happens if you intentionally
spend time listing the other person's likely interests, doing some research about her,
speaking in her voice, perhaps even playing her part in a role play with one of your allies,
and intentionally seeking to learn about her needs early on in the talks.
What does it take to do that and what effect does it have on your results?
Any efforts to understand the other person is incomplete unless we add that most skilled
negotiators consider to be one of the most important negotiating skills of all, and that
is skilled listening.
In fact, that skill has so many other benefits and advantages that we can almost call it
a secret weapon.
In our next session, we'll see why, and we'll discover what makes skilled negotiators
listening skills so much more effective and how you can develop them too.
