You
You
Your lecture is Professor Seth Freeman. Professor Freeman is an adjunct professor at New York
University Stern School of Business and at Columbia University. He holds a BA in economics from
Cornell University and a JD from the University of Pennsylvania. Professor Freeman has taught
negotiation around the world and routinely trains business executives, engineers, law students
and United Nations diplomats. His insights on negotiation have been featured on Bloomberg TV
and in The New York Times, The Washington Post, USA Today and other major media outlets. He is the
author of The Ready and Able Negotiator.
Hi, I'd like to tell you a brief story. A few years before I took my negotiation course, a student of
mine who I'll call Steve bought a car together with a warranty against rust. If the car rusted,
they'd fix it for him at no charge. Four years later, while he was taking my course, Steve
noticed that the car had rusted. So he took it back to the dealer and said, Hi, here's my car. You
can see the rust, so would you please fix it for me? But to his surprise, the dealer said, I'm sorry,
kid, but we can't help you. Why not? Here's the paperwork. There's your signature. No, no, no, no,
no, kid, you don't understand. We didn't sell you this policy. A third party warranty company did.
And unfortunately, they've gone bankrupt. We wish we could help you, but of course it's not our
responsibility, so buy. Now, whenever you're in a conflict like Steve was, you have an autonomic
reaction. The adrenaline rises and with it comes the fight or flight response. You either want to yell
and hit someone or you want to go and run and hide under a bridge somewhere. But from his training,
Steve knew that there was a third choice, negotiate. And he also knew he wasn't ready to solve the
problem because as we will see, one of the keys to excellent negotiation is excellent preparation.
So Steve practiced one of the most important and simple ideas a negotiator relies on. Steve got out of
there. That is, he left, or as we say, he went to the balcony. Doing that permitted him to do a number
of preparation tasks, including research, which included calling a friend of his, Bob, a bankruptcy
attorney. Steve explained the problem and asked Bob to learn about the warranty company. A couple
of days later, Bob called Steve back and said, you know, I learned something interesting about the
warranty company. It's owned by the car dealer. So Steve returns to the dealer and he said you
should have seen the look on the dealer's face when I walked in. Total contempt, total disdain,
looks at the dealer. I thought I was clear. We can't help you. To which Steve calmly replied,
I understand, and please correct me if I'm wrong, that your firm owns the bankruptcy warranty company.
Is that true? Tassid implication? Either you work with me fairly now, or you'll hear from the attorney
general of the state of New York. In response, the car dealer looked away, went red in the face,
started speaking quickly, and changed the subject. All of which signaled to Steve that something
dramatic had just shifted. And within a few minutes, Steve left that dealership with a check for the
full amount he needed to properly repair the car. A just and fair result achieved calmly when others
would have been shouting in effectively or running away. Now Steve would probably be the first to tell
you that his success did not come naturally. He was not a born negotiator. But boy, how well he
learned. And that's why I wanted to share his story with you as we begin our course on negotiation,
because it illustrates that negotiation is learnable, and that it actually depends in part on things
you already do well, like learning things, and that like Steve, you can be much more effective
than you may first think. In the process, negotiation training can help you achieve justice, peace,
and prosperity, and do it in respectful, principled ways. These are some of the reasons why I am so
passionate about this subject, which I've had the pleasure of teaching for twenty years. Another is
because I'm like Steve. I'm not a natural negotiator either. I teach what I want to learn, and I want
to learn how to turn impasses into satisfying agreements, how to deal well with conflicts
and do it wisely, how to be an effective advocate for justice, how to collaborate when everyone
thinks it's impossible, even at times how to make peace. And so I want to warmly welcome you,
especially if you don't enjoy negotiating. Secret most of us don't initially, and I can prove it.
It turns out that the word itself, negotiate, comes from the Latin root, neg, which means not,
and otium, which means leisure. That's right. For two thousand years, people have said that
negotiation is many things, but leisure is not one of them. So welcome. Most of us discover that
as the etymology implies, negotiations simply demand some work. As Steve showed, work that you
ultimately can learn to do well. But that said, I want to share one of my concerns about teaching
negotiation. It's possible to receive negotiation training in a way that makes you think of people
instrumentally as a means to your end, so that whenever your significant other says,
will you dump the garbage? Your comeback line is, well, will you walk the dog? That's a good way to
get to the say, you know, ever since you took that negotiating course, it's like there's some string
attached. Why can't you do something for me for a change because you love me? And she'll be right
to ask. So throughout our course, I'll be challenging you to take a high view of negotiation,
to aspire to do more, not less, than to master simple transacting, to not see every interaction
as a short run transaction, but to see how you can use your skills in remarkable ways.
Wait till you see. I've seen students use their training to talk friends out of killing
themselves, to save businesses that were collapsing. Of course, I've seen them negotiate many, many
times for fair and favorable salaries and prices. And I've seen them save families that were falling
apart at the grave site, convince donors to wisely give more in the middle of recessions,
to get alienated teams to collaborate well, and generally to be effective yet gentle on other
people in ways that very often enhance their relationships. These are the abilities we want to
develop. And let me linger briefly on that word develop. This is not one of those courses where
the professor knows everything and you know nothing. The truth is you've been negotiating
since shortly after you left the womb and you have a lifetime of experience doing it.
So part of our challenge here will be to discover many of the things you already are doing well,
so that you can choose to do them more intentionally and so that much more successfully. But also
to discover things that may be getting in the way for you, so that you can choose not to do them
and so be that much more successful. But regardless, to add to the mix a group of skills,
principles, concepts, frameworks, and ideas, the together can dramatically improve your ability
to negotiate wherever you feel you are with it right now. In our course, we'll spend the first
several sessions putting together the elements of the tool kit, a framework really, that we'll
bring together in session 14. With that framework in place, we'll be able to explore a wide
range of important advanced topics in later sessions. And so we'll answer a host of big
questions. What does it take to be an excellent negotiator? What should you strive for? How do
you cope when you're emotional? What if you feel weak and the other person seems like Godzilla?
Can you really negotiate with irrational people? Should you make the first offer? Can you negotiate
when trust is low? Can you negotiate with people from other countries, with children? And how does
an understanding of negotiation help you to be more effective as a leader, friend, spouse,
consumer, family member, colleague, citizen, student of history, and more?
The starting point for our work is to consider that there are really two basic ways to negotiate.
One way is called distributive bargaining. That term refers to competitive negotiating,
hard bargaining, haggling, win-lose negotiating. For many of us, distributive bargaining is what
negotiation is all about. Small wonder, many of us don't like it. Now as we'll see,
distributive bargaining very definitely has a place in our work. If you don't know how to do it,
the other negotiator may be able to take real advantage of you, and indeed justice may require
us to be skilled in that work. Later in the course, we will meet with people who accepted
very unfair salaries because they didn't know much about how to negotiate distributively,
and that makes me angry. I don't want that for you or anyone I care about to be treated
unfairly. But all that said, it is true that the distributive bargaining and distributive
thinking can lead to serious problems. This morning on the news, you woke to reports of
places all around the world that are filled with violence because everyone there is stuck
in a distributive outlook. The belief that the only way we can be happy is at your expense,
and so they spiral down in a cycle of conflict. Is negotiation mainly about being tough and
aggressive? Al Capone put it this way, you can get much farther with a kind word and a gun
than you can with a kind word alone. But is it true that negotiation is the continuation
of war by other means? Do you have to treat negotiation as a fight where the only way to
do well is to bargain hard and claim lots of the pie at the other's expense? Or is there
a way to negotiate that satisfies both sides well? In this session, we'll look at a second
way to negotiate, an alternative to distributive bargaining, a way that often lets you find
agreements that both sides are very happy about. It's called interest-based bargaining.
Interest-based bargaining doesn't always work and has real limitations, but often it
can help you create peace and prosperity that seemed impossible at first, and for that reason,
I think it's a great idea. Specifically, let's look at three questions.
First, what is interest-based bargaining? Why is it so valuable and how do you do it?
Second, what are its limitations? And lastly, how can you put it into practice immediately?
So what is interest-based bargaining and why is it so valuable? It's an approach to negotiation
that lets you be hard on the problem, soft on the person. In other words, it lets you fight hard
for what you really care about and yet do it in a way that lets you be generous, flexible,
and trustworthy toward the other person. All your life, you've wondered, should I be tough
or nice in negotiation and you've gone back and forth on it, haven't you? First, you think,
I'm going to be nice to make sure that you don't hurt the relationship, but then you
wind up feeling taken advantage of and giving away the store and you think, okay, no more
Mr. Nice Guy, I'm going to be tough so that you get a healthy share of the pie. But then
you find you're alienating people and you're having serious breakdowns. So what do you do?
Should you be nice or tough? Interest-based bargaining says the answer is yes, be both.
Fight for what you care about and yet find a way to do it that serves the other well too.
We'll see how in a moment. But interest-based bargaining is also valuable because it helps
you wisely bridge seemingly unbridgeable gaps and discover hidden opportunities. Today's
world sure seems to have lots of scarcity and limited opportunity, but you can enter into
that world and say, I see opportunity and I'm not just whistling a happy tune, I actually
know a way to find it. So how do you do it? Well, here's the one-line summary, the bumper
sticker thesis statement. Get the next sentence I say and you've got the gist of this entire
session. Focus on interests, not positions and then reconcile them with creative options.
Let me say that again. Focus on interests, not positions and then reconcile them with
creative options. Now, I could tell you what I mean by that, but instead of telling you,
I'd like to show you by sharing a story called The Parable of the Orange.
Imagine that earlier today I was in a cafeteria and I saw that they had this one last orange
on the counter. I went to reach for it, but at the very moment I grabbed it, a guy named
Bob grabbed it too. So now we're both holding the orange and we're staring at each other
and I tried to politely signal to Bob that I think I saw it first and Bob tugged back
as if to say no, it was his. So I tugged a little harder and so did Bob and before you
knew it, we were both on the floor struggling over it until I finally said, okay, okay,
I'll cut the stupid thing in half. At which point Bob let go, I took out a knife, cut
it in half, dividing it evenly and gave him half. I took my half of the orange, peeled
it, threw the meat away, took the rind and made marmalade with it. Meanwhile, Bob took
his half of the orange, threw the rind away, took the meat and made orange juice with it.
Now, if we had asked each other just one question, yes, even a seemingly dumb sounding
question, we could have literally doubled what we each wound up with. What was the
question? As you probably guessed, it was, wait a minute, why do you want the orange?
What do you want to do with it? Bob had asked me that simple question, I would have
said, what? That's a dumb question. What other possible reason could there be for wanting
an orange other than to make marmalade? And then Bob would have told me and suddenly
the little light would have gone on over my head and I would have said, wait a minute,
you're saying that the rind is garbage to you and that there's an easy way to make you
happy? That you actually like the meat? Wait, I would have said retrieving the parts that
we'd just thrown away? Here, you can have the meat and I'll take the leftover rind
and now reach twice as well off, thanks to your excellent question.
Now, let's take a closer look at that story because it can tell us a lot about interest
based bargaining. At the start of this conflict, Bob and I were so divided that it was as if
we were on opposite sides of a canyon. Each of us was saying, I want the orange. We were
taking positions. What's a position? A position is the thing you say you want. It's your
demand. It's the one and only one thing you think will make you happy. There's nothing
wrong with taking a position, sometimes you have to, but there is a danger and the danger
is that we can easily fall into a positional impasse, as we did in the first part of the
story, a deadlock over our conflicting demands.
The persistence of violence around the world that we read about and despair of is often
driven by the fact that people have fallen into positional impasse and you know people
who are locked in bitter litigation or broken relationships because of positional impasse
and wars and street shootings can stem from the same problem.
Positional impasses are driven by a simple dilemma. If the only way to make me happy is
to give me something that you can't or won't give me, then what can I do? I can demand
it more loudly, I can turn it into a test of rights or power, and for a while Bob and
I did just that, fighting it out on the ground. Alternatively, we can agree, as we eventually
did here, to a mediocre compromise. But what if we asked the seemingly dumb but actually
brilliant question that you may well have suggested earlier, why do you want it? When
you ask that question, you're going below the level of positions to the level of interests.
What's an interest? It's the reason why I want what I say I want. It's my underlying
concern, my deeper need, my motivation, my drive, and it turns out that at the level
of interests there's often no conflict at all, because our interests, though different,
may well complement each other. That is, it may well be that there are several ways to
satisfy my interest, some of which are very easy for the other to give me, and by subversive
there may be several ways to satisfy the other's interest, some of which are very easy for
me to give. We call these complementary interests, and when we find them, it suggests the possibility
that a creative option, a non-obvious way to trade or deal, can help us both. Here, what
if you take the meat and I take the rind? And what do you know? We're both happy to
say yes, happy to swap the cheap for the deer, and we're both far better off.
Now, you might hear this and say, Professor Freeman, that's a nice story, but can this
idea of focusing on interests, not positions, and then reconciling them with creative options,
can it work with the difficult and complex negotiations we see in the real world? And
that's a fair question. So let's test it out. Let's take it to the most conflict-ridden
place in the world and see if it can work there. And my nomination for that sad distinction
is the Middle East. Can interest-based bargaining work there? And the answer is not only can
it, but twice in the last several decades, it has been essential. Let me illustrate with
one example, the Camp David Peace Accords. In 1973, Egypt and Israel fought the Yom Kippur
War, and after several weeks of fighting, they entered a fragile truce. But for several
years after, they were this close to going back to war. Then, in 1978, President Anwar
Sadat of Egypt and Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel flew to Camp David to meet
with President Jimmy Carter to talk about a possible peace accord. Everyone at the time
knew this was a fool's errand. No Arab state had entered into an individual peace treaty
with the State of Israel, and sure enough, on the first day of the conference, the two
sides reached an impasse over the status of the Sinai Peninsula, that triangular piece
of desert between the two countries. Egypt said, we want the Sinai. Israel said, no,
we want the Sinai. Sound familiar? They were taking positions. But then, someone asked
the seemingly dumb question, wait, why does Egypt want the Sinai? To which Anwar Sadat
replied, we want sovereignty. Someone also asked, wait, why does Israel want the Sinai?
And Menachem Begin replied, we want security. Then someone asked an even more seemingly
dumb question, what do you mean? Not what is that supposed to mean, but rather, really,
what do you mean when you ask, when you use that word? When you ask that question, you're
actually going even deeper below the surface of the conflict into the realm of interests.
So, Mr. Sadat, what do you mean by sovereignty? To which Sadat replied, we mean we want our
flag to fly over the territory. We want the maps of the world to say this is Egyptian
soil, and we want our civilians to settle there. Do you care whether you have military
power? We'd like it, Sadat said, but it's not essential to us.
Mr. Begin, what does Israel mean by security? To which Begin replied, we mean no surprise
attack. We want a buffer zone. We don't want to die in our beds. Do you care if the Egyptian
flag flies over the territory, or if the maps of the world say it's Egyptian soil? Whether
the Egyptian civilians get to settle there? No, Begin said, we're concerned about life
and death. Those won't kill us, but there can be no military.
Wait a minute, do you see a possible deal here? What if we agree that Egypt gets to
fly its flag over the territory, the maps of the world will say it's Egyptian soil,
and that Egyptian civilians get to settle there, but that there'll be no military from
either side there, making the peninsula a demilitarized zone, thus creating a buffer
zone that will protect Israel from surprise attack. Oh, and the U.S. will provide Israel
with real-time satellite images to guard against Egyptian troop movements. In response to
which Anwar Sadat and Menachem Begin both said, OK, then we had our first breakthrough.
And after several more days of difficult talks, the three leaders flew to the White House
where they signed the Camp David Peace Accords for which all three men eventually won the
Nobel Peace Prize. But more importantly, that treaty, although it's certainly been
tested in recent years, has never been broken. The two sides never went back to war even
decades later, which by some measures makes it one of the greatest diplomatic achievements
of the 20th century. How did they do that? One of the keys was focusing on interests,
not positions, and satisfying them with creative options. Now here's my modest proposal. If
this idea is so powerful that it can bring about peace in the Middle East, then maybe,
just maybe, it can help us handle the difficult negotiations we're grappling with in our
own lives. There's good evidence that thinking about such things can make a big difference
for you. In 2010, Professor Karen Walsh, a scholar from Thunderbird School of Management,
published a three-year study of 250 negotiators, half systematically prepared, thinking intentionally
about interests and options, among other things. The others prepared casually, without intentionally
focusing on such things. Walsh found that those who thought systematically about interests
and options created over 11% more wealth for themselves than the casual negotiators did.
More remarkably, she found the intentional negotiators also created over 6% more wealth
for their counterparts than casual negotiators did. They measurably satisfied both sides much
better, creating total pies that were over 17% larger.
So how can an interest-based approach work in our own daily lives? Let me illustrate,
with one of the hundreds of examples my students have produced over the years, a story I call
in-pass 4.0. My student, who I'll call Mike, was at his office one day, the software firm
he worked for when he got a call from Brenda, an executive at his firm's biggest client.
Brenda asked him if his firm would deliver two weeks, a full two weeks early, the custom
software that the client had ordered. He was stunned, but politely said he'd check with
his engineers, who told him it was impossible and he relayed the news to Brenda.
Unhappy, Brenda told her boss, Betty, who immediately called Mike's boss and gave him
a serious warning, if we don't get that software in two weeks, you'll lose us, and we need
an answer in 15 minutes. So the boss called Mike and the engineers to an emergency meeting
and explained the challenge. Immediately the engineers were in an uproar. We told Mike
we can't finish the software in two weeks, we can't do it. You don't understand, so
the boss, this client can shut our lights off, we've got to do it in two weeks, we can,
we got to, can't, got to, sound familiar? Mike realized they were stuck in a positional
impasse. So he asked our dumb question, wait he said, why can't we do it in two weeks?
The engineers were outraged at the question, don't you get it, there are ten different
features to the software, each is interconnected and it'll take four weeks to test them all.
Oh okay, said Mike. Why do you suppose they want the software in two weeks? Huh. Suddenly
the room went quiet, they weren't sure. But as they each traded facets of their understanding,
they started to see it, the client needed the software to launch and run a telephone
marketing campaign in two weeks. Well said Mike, is there any way we can help the client
successfully launch the telephone marketing campaign, even if we can't deliver the
software in two weeks? And now they started to think and develop a few ideas. Whoops,
time's up, got to call her back, and now with Mike's coaching, the boss says, Betty,
we think we have something for you, but before we share it with you, can you tell us why
you need the software so soon? As they suspected, it was because of the telephone
marketing launch. Well said the boss, again with Mike's coaching, if you really need
the software itself in two weeks, I got to tell you, no reputable firm could promise
it by then. But Betty, if your goal is to launch the telephone marketing campaign in
time, we can help. We have a couple of colleagues here who can manually do the functions the
software will eventually do, and we can lend them to you until the software is ready to
take over. Would that help? You would do that for us, Betty asked? Of course, said the boss.
Thank you, thank you. This gives me something good, I can give my bosses. You guys are great.
A few hours later, Betty called back saying, we may take you up on your offer, but regardless,
you'll be hearing a lot from us. You're the kind of supplier we prize.
Now do you see the arc of that story? We'll all get a call like the one Mike got. You pick up the phone
and suddenly your career is going down the tubes. But somehow, Mike did something that not only
turned things around, but actually put them in a better place eventually. His firm's
relationship with its key client wound up being stronger thanks to the way he handled the
conflict, and Mike was a hero. Because the client saw that even when you can't do what we say we want,
you find a way to meet our needs, and that's valuable. How do you do something like that? You focus on
interests, not positions, and satisfy them with creative options. How then can you do an
interest-based bargaining, can you do interest-based bargaining more effectively and more confidently?
Here is a simple step-by-step set of suggestions. First, if you can, prepare by thinking carefully
about your interests, the other negotiators, and some creative options that might satisfy them.
Second, do some research to deepen your understanding of the interests and options. Then start the
talks by taking time to build trust and rapport and set a positive tone. It can be a good idea to note
that you have real hope that together you'll find something you both feel very happy with. That's
important because the other person is probably anxious and worried too. Your encouragement can help
foster real hope and collaboration. Fourth, instead of talking about price and demands early on,
ask questions and listen for insights about the other's interests. For example, you can say,
let me first listen and get your concerns here. If he makes demands, you can use some of our famous
dumb questions like why and what do you mean? As we've seen, the more you learn about his
interests, the better you can find solutions that serve you both. Regardless of his willingness
to share information, share some information about your own interests. True, it's not necessary
or wise to reveal everything like desperation. For example, look, if I don't sell this car today,
I'll lose my job. Not good. The other negotiator will be tempted to say, oh, I'm so sorry, I'll
give you a dollar for it. But by sharing your interests, you can actually invite the other
negotiator to help you solve your problem creatively. Sixth, once you've discussed interests,
you can invite conversation about creative options. First, suggest one or two and invite
the other negotiator to suggest options as well. That way, you're practicing a ready,
aim, fire approach that most likely will help you find a well-suited solution. No success
initially, try suggesting more options. Interest-based bargaining is, as we said, a powerful idea,
but it's really just one side of the coin. And again, we'll need to understand distributive
negotiation, too, the challenge of dividing the pie in wise, fair, and often favorable
ways. And we will. But for now, let's summarize what this session on interest-based bargaining
means for you in your real-life transactions, conflicts, relational issues, and other important
negotiations. Focus on interests, and not positions, and satisfy them with creative
options. Remember, this lets you bridge gaps and satisfy both sides well. To practice that,
take the interests and options challenge. This week, the next time you're in a difficult
conflict or negotiation, see what happens if you slow down. Think about your interests,
learn about the other persons, think about a few creative ways to satisfy her needs and
yours, and then negotiate. One of the biggest surprises in interest-based bargaining is the
importance and power of understanding the other person. Surprisingly, skilled negotiators
spend far more time thinking about the other person than mediocre negotiators do, so it's
to that figure the undiscovered continent that we turn next.
