My wife is an actress and some years ago she wanted to audition for a part in a play
with a certain production company, but there was a problem.
Even though they'd worked together before and loved each other, the producers felt she
wasn't right for the new play.
Now my wife knew that she could play the part well, and her first reaction was to write
a very sharp letter.
I was so surprised and disappointed.
I think you're making a real mistake.
I know I can play this part well.
But we realized it wasn't going to change their minds.
So we rewrote the letter.
Within 24 hours after sending it, my wife got word that the producers wanted to see her,
and when they saw her for the audition, they told her, you know, we really didn't think
it made sense to have you in for this audition, but we changed our minds when we got your
letter.
That experience illustrates the thing that we'll be focusing on in this session, persuasion
tools, simple, powerful ideas and approaches that can help you get past no and turn a negotiation
impasse into a more constructive discussion.
That is, things that can help you turn a difficult counterpart to an agreeable and committed
one.
As we'll see, many of these tools draw on an understanding of interests and options.
Others rely on proven influencing principles and time-honored ways to win a real hearing.
None require flimflam, dishonesty or subterfuge, quite the opposite.
Each has the ability to be gentle on the person, hard on the problem.
So how did my wife change her producer's minds?
She relied on two magic words, your right.
One of the best ways to win credibility, attention and consideration for your ideas is to show
up front that you genuinely agree with something the other person says or thinks, that you
find it to be true, valid, justifiable.
Truthfully saying you're right is powerful because it demonstrates that you respect the
other person, see her reasonableness, affirm her concerns and demonstrate that you're
not going to ride roughshod needlessly over them.
It also lets you connect her belief to your point.
Here essentially is what my wife wrote.
Hey, Judy and Bob, I understand you didn't want to audition me because you didn't feel
I was right for the part of Karen in Dinner with Friends.
I understand you need someone who can play the qualities of X, Y and Z.
You're right.
If I was the casting director and I thought an actress couldn't play X, Y and Z, I wouldn't
cast her as Karen either.
It might interest you to know that I recently finished a very successful run of A Little
Night Music at another excellent regional theatre, playing the role of Charlotte, a part that
emphasizes X, Y and Z.
Since I might have just what you're looking for, I wonder if an audition might make sense
for us.
The challenge is to put aside our natural temptation to disagree, disprove, or but in
short to argue with the other person.
Instead, the idea is to intentionally listen carefully to anything she says or cares about
that you can truly affirm.
You can then build on what she already believes to make your point.
That takes discipline.
I know, I'm an attorney, and I spent three years training to counter the other guy's
argument.
I have to put that impulse aside and look for places where the other person is being
reasonable.
So for example, imagine that the other person says, we can't go to the reunion because
that's the day Grandpa has his bingo event.
You might say, you're right, Grandpa's routines and his happiness are very important.
I noticed that he's gladly missed bingo three of the last ten weeks for local family
events he's attended, and he's often said he loves a reunion, but he can be fussy, so
I wonder if we can find a way to invite him that he'll gladly accept.
Saying you're right doesn't mean that you have to agree with everything or even most
of what the other person says.
It doesn't mean that you automatically foreclose your own argument or simply suck up to the
other person.
It's quite the opposite really.
What you're simply doing is looking for grounds on which you can build an argument, showing
that at least to some degree you're in sync with the other person's thinking, so it's
much easier and less threatening for the other person to hear you out and consider your ideas.
Your right is closely related to a second persuasion tool that allows me to share one
of my favorite stories, the story of someone you've probably never heard of before, a man
named Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., the son of the famous president.
He went by the name Ted.
In 1944 Ted Roosevelt was a Brigadier General serving as an Army General for the American
Army in World War II.
By all accounts Ted Roosevelt was a heroic and capable leader of men who was very cool
under fire.
Unfortunately he was a friend of someone who was persona non grata with senior officers
who held Ted guilty by association.
So by 1944 Ted was sidelined, basically given a desk job.
Now Ted Roosevelt knew that the military was planning the D-Day invasion and he wanted
very much to be in the thick of it.
In fact he wanted to be in the front lines, so he went to his commanding officer, Tubby
Barton, and said, I want to be one of the first in one of the first landing craft to
land on Utah Beach.
Not surprisingly Barton turned him down cold and you can see all sorts of reasons why he
did.
First of all, for goodness sake Roosevelt, you're walking around with a cane.
You were injured in combat, that's laudable, but this is no place to be walking around
wounded?
Second, have you noticed your persona non grata?
Third, you're the son of a president, if you get killed how do you think I'm going
to look?
Fourth, let's face it, this is basically a suicide run.
Most of the men in that first landing craft wave are not coming back.
Fifth, there's no general in any theater of combat anywhere in World War II who's
in the front lines for goodness sake, so your request is ridiculous, don't even think about
it.
Roosevelt came back a few weeks later and asked again, but again Barton turned him down.
But then Ted Roosevelt wrote a letter to Barton.
In response to it Barton summoned Roosevelt and said this, Roosevelt, everything within
me still argues against agreeing with your request, but I can't refuse a letter like
this, so I'm going to grant it, and God be with you.
And sure enough Ted Roosevelt really did land in one of the first landing craft on Utah
Beach on D-Day, and it turned out Barton had made a brilliant choice, because Ted Roosevelt
so proved himself there that he was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor, the highest
military honor for service in the U.S. military.
How did Ted Roosevelt change Barton's mind?
In essence, Ted used a persuasion technique we can call, help me serve your interests.
That is, show how your request helps you meet the other's needs.
So what was in Ted Roosevelt's letter?
In essence, this is what it said.
The invasion depends on the performance of the first soldiers who land.
They are inexperienced, if they stumble under heavy gunfire then their fear and failure will
communicate itself inevitably to all the next waves of landing soldiers and the whole invasion
will be in jeopardy.
But I can steady them.
If they know that I'm there, they will be able to act under fire.
That confidence and success will communicate itself to the next wave and the next and the
next, and the invasion will have a much better chance of success.
Also, I can be there to give you a clear sense of what's actually going on when you land,
which you'll need to further prosecute the invasion.
And lastly, they know who I am.
They're familiar with me.
They're comfortable with me.
They have confidence in me, so I really can steady their nerves.
In short, you need the first wave of troops to be steady in the invasion.
If the invasion is going to succeed, so give me a frontline command to help me steady them
for you.
Help me serve your interest is powerful because it speaks directly to the listener's felt
needs.
It connects your request to his goals.
It's particularly effective when you're working with people who oversee you.
But there's a related method that can work in any situation.
To introduce this next persuasion tool, I want to share with you something that happened
to a student of mine named Greg.
Greg wanted to be a guest on a televised radio call-in show hosted by famed shock jock Howard
Stern.
He called Howard's show one morning after waking up and said he wanted to make sound
effects for Howard.
The call-screener said, all right, let's hear you do one.
So Greg did his impression of a chainsaw.
I've heard it.
It's great.
The screener said, wow, that was great.
Hold for Howard.
Now, remember, Greg wanted to actually get on the show, live, on camera.
So when Howard came on, Greg did his routine and Howard liked it and he said, let me hear
some more.
And after a while, Howard said, OK, thank you very much.
Then Greg said, Howard.
How about if I come into the studio and do even more for you?
Howard wasn't particularly interested.
He said, frankly, we've got the basic idea over the phone.
Then Greg said this, Howard, I'm down the street and you wouldn't want to disappoint
your fans.
I know you need guests on the show today.
I'm ready and able and I can be there in 20 minutes.
Howard said, are you going to do the same sounds or are you going to do different ones?
And Greg said, oh, I can do different ones that are even better.
Look, Howard, your show is the best and so are you.
Just put me on for five minutes.
And Howard Stern said, OK, come on down.
Within half an hour of waking up that morning, Greg was on national television and he did
a great job, so great, that they gave him a second gig on another TV show.
I've seen it.
It was really good.
How did Greg do that?
How did he manage to pull that off?
He used a persuasion tool called If We Agree, If We Disagree.
If we agree, if we disagree, works like this.
You first state why your proposal is good from the other person's perspective, what
specific interest it serves, then you show why saying no would actually hurt the other
person's interest and might actually create concerns or problems for them.
You do that tactfully, but you make that clear.
The reason this approach is powerful is two-fold.
First, it builds on an idea that skilled negotiators know well, doubts drive deals.
Often, one of the reasons we say yes is because we're worried about what will happen if we
don't say yes, if we're left without any agreement at all.
When you say if we disagree, you bring forth the power of that point.
There are real worries you may not have considered.
Let me tactfully bring them to your attention.
At the same time, you're saying if we agree, this is good for you.
Don't worry about my needs right now, let me show you why this serves your needs.
You can walk through them one by one.
That's exactly what Greg intentionally did.
No kidding, Greg jotted these points down in a couple of minutes as he waited for Howard
to pick up the phone.
Not bad.
Oh, and by the way, how did Greg know that Howard had no guests that day?
He actually asked the screener.
Nice research, Greg.
Beyond ideas that build on the power of interests, what other persuasion methods are there?
Let me tell you a story.
Several years ago, I was teaching a four-day negotiation course in a city in France.
I taught there annually for years, but for some reason that year, the students were talking
so much in class that I could barely hear myself.
Students were coming and going with impunity.
Some were surfing the web.
Two women were reading a magazine, and it turns out I wasn't alone.
Most of my colleagues were experiencing the same problem that year, and whenever you're
in a situation like this where your audience is just all over the place, your overwhelming
temptation is to just stand there and say, look, if you don't like it, leave, but either
give me your full attention or get out.
I actually had a colleague who said those very words, and you know what happened?
The students got up and left.
They stood up, they walked out, and he was left with an almost empty classroom.
But I discovered a magic sentence, and when I spoke that magic sentence, suddenly all
of the students looked up.
They leaned forward.
They gave me their full attention, and this lasted for several minutes, and whenever they
started to lose it, all I needed to do was speak that magic sentence again, and they
were back.
I'd never seen anything like it, but I've since discovered that it doesn't just work
in that one city.
That same magic sentence works exactly as well in Guangzhou, in Beijing, in Geneva, in Colombia,
in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and right here, right now.
Here's how you're listening a little more closely to me.
What was that magic sentence?
It's what I started this with.
Let me tell you a story.
When I use that sentence, you probably paid more attention.
My students do.
Whenever I share this experience, my students look up.
They get quiet.
They lean in.
They give me their full attention.
I don't know what it is about stories, but we just can't live without them.
Students find that about 35% of our conversation over drinks, or dinner, or lunch with friends
is exchanging stories.
Right now, most nonfiction writers rely heavily on the power of story.
It's called creative nonfiction, and it's based on the idea that you want to string
together story after story after story, mostly in novelistic form, to craft a more engaging
narrative.
Speakers will tell you that most of what public speaking is amounts to connecting stories
together with principles in between.
They sometimes refer to this idea as a string of pearls.
And think about the great teachers of old, Confucius, Esop, the Sages, Jesus.
Much of what they relied on as teachers were great stories.
The same is true for famous leaders like Lincoln, Reagan, Lyndon Johnson.
Coincidentally, they were powerfully persuasive and also were highly skilled storytellers.
It was almost a signature feature of their political careers.
Why is storytelling so powerful?
For several reasons.
First, it engages, almost like a movie creating a vivid, memorable experience.
Also, it cuts tension.
It humanizes.
It entertains.
It's memorable.
And it illustrates ideas in a face-saving way that invites the listener and lets the
listener draw his own conclusions.
In contrast, telling someone facts about this or that or the other thing often prompts them
to argue.
There's evidence, even, that the human mind is wired to grasp stories more quickly, easily,
deeply, and lastingly than can grasp abstraction.
Studies find, for example, that fundraising appeals draw twice as much money when they
emphasize one person than when they emphasize facts and figures about many people.
Other studies suggest that stories produce greater learning than factual presentations
do.
And so now I can let you in on a secret.
These are some of the reasons why I start most of our sessions and most of my classes
with a story and use them throughout my talks.
I've used four already in this one.
Here are a couple of things that can help you when you use stories to do it more persuasively.
First, have stories ready to go, especially stories that address likely objections your
counterpart may raise.
You can actually think, here's a point I want to make.
Maybe there's a story that might lend itself to addressing her concern.
Do I have any?
When you're telling the story, tell it with your whole being.
Tell it with your hands.
Tell it with your eyes.
Tell it expressively.
If possible, try to tell it in a clear, simple narrative direction.
Don't talk like Citizen Kane, don't tell it like Citizen Kane or Pulp Fiction with
lots of flashbacks and flash forwards.
Try to make it as simple to follow as possible with vivid, concrete language and people will
really get engaged with you.
Now let me turn to an approach that's so effective that professors, facilitators, sales
people and attorneys routinely use it.
An approach that can be particularly helpful when you lack authority, when you find yourself
in a position of weakness and even when you don't know very much.
To demonstrate it, I'm going to ask you to imagine that you are part of a group.
I'm also going to ask you for your indulgence because at times I'm going to ask some very
dumb questions.
So here we go.
Who wrote Hamlet?
Who wrote Julius Caesar?
Macbeth?
The Sonnets?
A Midsummer Night's Dream?
Okay, William Shakespeare you say.
Got it.
Now, can you tell me a little bit about him?
Where was he born?
Okay, you say he was born at Stratford on Avon.
Okay, and can you tell me what class he was born into?
That is, was he high born or was he a commoner?
Okay, he was a commoner?
Got it.
All right.
Please jot down on a scale of one to ten how confident you are about that.
So for example, if you're completely confident, give it a ten.
Mixed, give it a five.
Not at all confident, a one.
Okay, now, help me please.
I'm curious to learn how we know William Shakespeare wrote these works.
Can you help me here?
Well, you might say.
His name is on the works, of course, fair enough.
Please help me out here.
If we wanted to make sure that it wasn't just some pen name of some other writer, what assures
us that he was the author?
Okay, you say it's common knowledge.
The history and the literary textbooks say it's, you know, he's the author and experts
confirm it.
Got it.
Got it.
Got it.
Now, to make sure I'm getting this, how do the experts know that he wrote these works?
Well, you first might say, you know, they probably have lots of documentation about
his life.
They have copies of the plays in his handwriting, letters from him about his art, and so on.
Got it.
Got it.
Makes sense.
But, hmm, I'm sorry, I'm a little puzzled because I understand that actually there are
70 verified documents that prove he lived, but that none of them have anything to do
with writing plays or poems.
In fact, they're not even in his own handwriting.
Hmm.
So, so I'm still a little muddled here.
Is there anything else that we can do to help us just nail this down?
Well, you might say, we could look at what contemporary said about him.
Right.
Exactly.
Of course, we'd have to leave out people who'd only, who only knew the works themselves
like people who only knew Mark Twain by his books and find people who clearly knew him
personally.
And there seems to be nothing like that with a couple of cryptic, cryptic debated exceptions.
So is there anything else we could look to?
Well, you might say the plays themselves probably have references to his life and match what
we know about him.
Got it.
Got it.
Got it.
The thing is that there's little of any reference to Stratford and Avon in any of the works,
and here's where I'm really flummoxed.
The play seemed to have been written by someone who was quite familiar with falconry, a rich
man's sport like polo today, who knew law inside out, quoted 200 books when books were
very expensive, who traveled among the rich in Italy, and where 12 of the plays are set,
who wrote intimately about Elizabethan court life, and whose works trashed the most powerful
men in England at a time when playwrights were routinely jailed for offending the government,
yet there's no record of him ever having been jailed.
So I'm still confused.
What am I missing here?
Okay, before we go further, please write down now, on a scale of 1 to 10, how confident
you are that William Shakespeare, commoner from Stratford and Avon, wrote the plays and
sonnets.
And do one thing more, please.
Also write down, on a scale of 1 to 10, how demanding, argumentative and assertive I was.
If you found that I was extremely demanding, argumentative and assertive, put down a 10.
If I was extremely humble and respectful, put a 1.
And so on.
When I do this exercise with my students, we find that their confidence level collectively
goes down about 25 to 50% in 10 minutes.
By comparison, it can take months or years for public opinion to change that much on
major issues.
How assertive was I?
Not much apparently.
Most find that my approach was quite humble and respectful.
They give it a 2 or a 3.
In fact, I never said what if anything, I believed at all about the Shakespeare authorship question
I could still go the other way.
And if we were to go back and review what I said, we'd find that after you first rated
my confidence level, I asked six questions, repeated your likely answers each time, and
only three times shared any information at all.
What's happened here?
I've simply harnessed the persuasive power of question asking and active listening.
In our previous sessions, we've seen their power to reduce conflict and foster learning
and creativity.
Now we're going further and discovering these same skills can be a powerful influencing
strategy.
By simply asking simple, powerful questions and recapping the answers, I shaped and directed
the conversation.
I took a humble approach that allowed me to challenge a seemingly certain fact, and I
did it without offending listeners, without being aggressive or argumentative, without
committing myself to a position, and without losing face.
If the answers I got were strong and compelling, I could simply say, thank you, that's very
helpful.
You've given me a lot to think about.
Let me consider it, and if I have further questions, maybe we could explore it further
later.
In short, I've used an approach that's safe and persuasive, and because it leaves face
saving room for me to genuinely learn things and consider them seriously, it has integrity.
This humble, inquiring approach is at the heart of several different kinds of leadership
and persuasion.
One of the leading approaches to salesmanship rejects fast talking argument and strongly
embraces the power of question asking and listening.
We've seen it before.
Neil Rackham, a social scientist whom we've met earlier, has championed this approach with
a method that salespeople have widely adopted.
He refers to it as spin selling, as you may recall.
In essence, he teaches the salesperson to ask about the customer's situation, her
problems, their implications, and finally the needs they create.
As the customer answers these questions, she in effect starts to see for herself that she
has specific needs, and she also becomes open to letting the salesperson solve them with
this product.
Similarly, skilled professors and teachers spend lots of time developing questions.
Like salespeople, they know that the one who asks the questions shapes and guides the conversation.
If the questions are good, they draw out from the student the lessons the teacher wants
them to learn.
Better because the students told the answers to the teacher, the students feel buy-in and
ownership of these very lessons.
Educators also know how to influence others with questions and listening.
By crafting simple, powerful questions and reflecting back what they hear, they can guide
a group to consensus when most think it's impossible, and win so much buy-in in the process
that the group is willing to carry out and fight for the answers that they've reached.
And every trial lawyer knows that asking good questions during the trial can truly shape
the jury's opinion.
What kind of questions then can help you persuade others in a negotiation or conflict?
One good place to start is to first ask a simple, broad question that gets the other
person talking about the situation as she sees it.
What do you think?
What's going on?
What situation are you facing?
How do things look seem to you on this topic?
In our demonstration, I started with who wrote these plays, that is, who do you think wrote
these plays?
A useful follow-up question is one that probes deeper.
What's the problem?
Or if the other person has given you a strong position, how do you know that this is the
answer?
Notice the power of using softening phrases that signal deference and humility like,
help me here, and just so I'm getting this.
In the demonstration, I asked, help me understand, how do we know?
Notice how that simple probing question reveals premises, presumptions, and possible factual
or logical gaps.
Notice too that when you ask questions, the burden of proof always is on the other person.
That's possible because you're not taking a strong position, you're just asking to
understand hers.
Then, simply by saying back the other's answer and legitimately asking for clarification,
you can test and quietly challenge her per answer and help her see possible problems
with it.
I did that several times, so you're saying this, okay, here's where I'm confused,
I'm a bit puzzled.
And to introduce contrary information in a humble, face-saving way, you can raise it
as a question saying, I'm confused because I've read that X is true, help me reconcile
that with what you're saying.
Given the methods we've considered so far, it's worth returning, lastly, to one of
the most powerful and important of all, the power of genuine, generosity, trustworthiness,
and concern for others.
As we've seen before in his book Give and Take, Wharton Professor Adam Grant observes
that there are three kinds of people, takers, matchers, and givers, and that of the three,
certain givers tend to be the most successful.
They tend to have a much higher level of goodwill or trustworthiness, of reputation for honesty.
The networks they develop also tend to be stronger.
All of this tends to eventually redound to their own success.
They tend to have more persuasive power than others do.
Grant's work suggests that there's a genuine power, a unique power, to something that you've
known since you were a child and may still very well cherish, power of genuine decency
and largeness of spirit.
Grant is observing that the reputation for compassion ultimately may be one of the most
persuasive things we have.
Now, here's a strange paradox.
In some ways, we can't be calculative about this.
We can't resolve to be nice so that we eventually profit, so we need to avoid turning Grant's
insight into slick salesmanship.
That's really the opposite of what we're talking about here.
The idea is simply that genuine humanity may be the most important and powerful power
we have.
So look for ways to genuinely share something of your own doubts, fears, anxieties and experience
in negotiation, not a sign of weakness, but as a way to humanize and connect.
That doesn't mean confessing deep traumas, divulging vital secrets or acting like a wimp.
It means being willing to share a bit more personally than you first think is safe precisely
because negotiation as we've seen is not leisure.
The other side is probably more worried and fearful than you think.
Your vulnerability, matched with preparation, can be disarming and can foster a credibility
that you might not otherwise enjoy.
To sum up what we've seen in this session, use a number of persuasion tools that appeal
to the other person's interests such as your right, if we agree, if we disagree, and
help me serve your interests.
Also use storytelling persuasively.
Instead of directly arguing with someone who holds a strong position, try using simple
questions and active listening as a persuasive strategy.
Practice being more emotionally vulnerable to help you persuade from gut to gut and cultivate
your genuine ability to be truthful, generous, and honest so your reputation for trustworthiness
and decency is growing.
Here are a couple of suggestions.
One thing that you can practice this very day is the phrase, let me tell you a story.
See if introducing a story in the middle of a conversation or disagreement helps you in
your efforts to persuade.
Another is to practice persuasion by question asking.
See what happens if intentionally you avoid direct argument in your next bull session
and instead use some simple questions and active listening to shape the discussion.
But now let me let you in on a secret.
Despite the power of everything we've explored in the course so far, my students often still
feel worried.
All these negotiating ideas and tools sound great they say, but when I'm in the room
I'm afraid I'll just look like a deer in the headlights, my emotions will take over,
I'll forget everything, and I'll just fall back to old ways.
And that's a legitimate concern.
If the emotions and psychological traps of negotiation overwhelm us then we are in trouble.
So in our next session we'll explore ways to turn your fears around, to manage your
anxieties and respond well to the pressure and stress of negotiation.
