You're intuition, let's say, you know, deep inside yourself.
Something maybe some of you can't prove, but why why do you think this is all how
it's laid out? Why do you think we're here?
Basically, the universe is moving towards this.
It's the system moving towards an attractor.
The wave function collapse isn't random.
If you have an isolated quantum system, it's going to look random.
But when everything is interacting, everything, all those wave functions must be collapsed.
If the universe is becoming more complex, that puts constraints on how the wave
function collapses, such that the collapse is much in totality add up towards going
towards this omega point.
There is a multiverse, but it's not like every possibility exists.
There was this evolutionary process where in Lee Smollin's model of cosmological
natural selection, when you have a universe form and then a black hole forms in that
universe, since a big bang is like a singularity event that creates a universe.
The idea is that when a black hole forms in the universe, that's a big bang event
that creates a new universe.
That's how you have this evolutionary process that's creating more and more
universes and the universes that are good at creating black holes and black holes
come from stars, and stars create the chemistry that's needed for life.
Then you'll get more and more universes that create more and more black holes.
So more and more universes that have more and more stars.
And so then this process will lead to more and more universes that are
firmly for life, because stars create the higher elements that are needed for life.
And then so if this evolutionary process is true, you'll have the selection pressure
towards getting more life-friendly universes.
My ultimate understanding was that nature
has this life-generating principle.
It's really hard to determine, you know,
we still have that why something from nothing problem,
but we are making progress.
It's not introducing unnecessary stuff
by going outside this universe
because we have the fine-tuning mystery
that is begging for a solution that we don't have
unless we think about these other things.
Creator, cosmological selection, the multiverse theory,
which I don't think is a good explanation
because it introduces everything
just to explain away a creator.
When we shouldn't necessarily need to explain a creator
with every possible universe exists.
It's just, I don't think it's the right,
I don't think it's superior epistemologically,
Occam's Rage, all the things we mentioned.
So ultimately I'm left with the process itself being God
and that we could be created by an agent,
but it wouldn't be this all-powerful,
fundamental thing that was there forever.
It would be a product of this process,
but that process seems to be eternal.
So even if we have a God, a creator,
I don't think if I learned about him,
I don't think I'd pray to him.
I think if we have a creator,
it might be like us creating things
and then we wouldn't ask our AI, like, is there a God?
Like maybe if we do have a creator,
they're looking for us to answer us.
Maybe we're the AI that's gonna inform them.
But so even if we had a creator,
I'm not necessarily sure
that I don't think that would be the end of all answers.
I think it's more spiritually satisfying
to just recognize there is a process that leads to life,
leads to consciousness and unending consciousness,
reaching higher and higher levels of experience.
So it's a journey for me, but what I am convinced by
is that you do have this trajectory
and once you start asking why it's this way,
you get into all the explanations that I've just said
and I think they're better than the nihilistic multiverse
where just weak anthropic principle version.
Bobby Azarian is a cognitive neuroscientist,
journalist and author of The Romance of Reality,
how the universe organizes itself
to create life, consciousness and cosmic complexity.
If you got this far, please hit that subscribe button.
I hope you enjoy our conversation.
Bobby, thank you for coming up.
Hey, Carlos, thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's such a pleasure.
So excited to speak with you.
We're gonna talk about your book, The Romance of Reality
and for this kicked off before I outline
the three parts that we're gonna cover in today's discussion.
I wanna start off with something that I usually start,
how this is the last question for guests on the podcast
and I'm not gonna ask you this question directly.
It's more of something I was just thinking about.
I usually ask people, if you could go back
and give your 18 year old self one piece of advice,
what would it be?
And I'm thinking about it in terms of this book
because if I could go back and give myself one book
say like the summer before college, it would be this book.
Oh, wow, that's awesome.
Honestly, I mean that wholeheartedly
because it's fantastic, I had no knowledge
of complexity science up until a few years ago
and this book is just an excellent synthesis
of so many big ideas and I give it my highest recommendation.
People watching this right now,
I hope you listen to the whole conversation
but there'll be a link below in the description
if you'd go out and buy this book because it's incredible.
Thank you so much.
I put a lot of time and thought into it
and it's so nice to hear things like that
because yeah, the intention was to kind of give
a big picture view of complexity science
which includes all these other sciences
but like what those sciences are showing us
as far as like the big picture questions
which a lot of the complexity books don't really get into.
They kind of hint at things
but this was just kind of putting all the existential things
out there but to hear that, yeah,
that really makes me feel like the work is worth it
and motivates me for the follow-up book that I'm starting
and so thank you for that.
That's awesome.
I really appreciate that and that's great to know.
Yeah, absolutely and I mean it.
I mean, even a few months ago a commenter
on one of my videos asked me for my top 10 list
and so I have to revise that
because I have to knock somebody off
and put this book in.
Sorry to the person to get snagged off.
No, see Nicholas Taleb, I'm sorry.
He didn't pick that off.
Knock that guy off, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, well let's book it.
I really like his book at Ty for Agile.
I thought it was fantastic.
I haven't read it.
He's a brilliant guy but I've seen some of his tweets
where I was like, huh, I don't know.
He's a troll.
He's a professional troll.
Yeah, he's kind of but maybe that's cool.
Maybe, you know, he mixes it up.
Yeah, I know, yeah, I don't know personally
so I just wanna let the audience know that.
Also as we, for the audience to know,
I'll have links in the description for all of your stuff,
for your blog, Road to Omega,
your Psychology Today articles
and of course the link to buy the book as well.
So I want folks to know,
sort of this is gonna be in three parts.
I hope we have time to allocate across all three
but the first one we're gonna,
I think about in terms of crawl, walk, teleport.
So we're gonna crawl,
we're gonna start ground ourselves in the science,
the major ideas behind the book.
We don't have time to dive into every last detail
because there's so much in here.
It's very densely packed.
We're gonna start there, part two
where I wanna spend a lot of time on.
I know this is something
that you're focusing a lot of time on right now.
Your current projects is how people can use this
in their daily lives, how they can integrate it,
into their habits, their routines.
So I wanna spend a lot of time there.
And then at the end, if we have time,
we'll push the boundaries a little bit,
talk about the more speculative stuff,
allow ourselves to talk about things like,
universal Darwinism, baby universe is spawned
from black holes, things that are a little bit more
out there, time permitting.
So let's get into, let's crawl before we walk.
And if you wouldn't mind,
can you lay the groundwork for the audience?
Can you set the table
and provide us with really high-level description
of the book and some of the core ideas?
Yeah, I realized I didn't answer your question
about if I could go back in time to being 18.
So I don't know if I should address that later
or we should go into it.
Was it if I-
If it's on your mind, yeah.
Yeah, and the structure is great
because Walk, Crawl, Teleport matches the structure
of the book, which is organized into three parts.
Origins, about the origin of life,
evolution, and transcendence.
So yeah, there'll be a logical flow
and I will not go into much detail
about the evolutionary mechanisms in part one.
That's mostly what the book is about.
But I've talked about that in a lot of detail
and other interviews and wanna just give a good,
big picture overview of all the stuff
that you just mentioned.
So if anyone's interested in more details,
you can go to my sub-sacro to Omega.
My book is available on Amazon and other retailers
and yeah, those and other talks online.
But this will be less detailed and more philosophical,
I guess, you know, bigger picture focused on that.
If I was 18, so was it, what book would I read at 18
or what would I tell myself at 18?
So that's funny, I answered what book
because I was thinking so much about your book.
But yeah, you could either one.
Yeah, but the first, the original question was
if I could go back in time
and kind of give myself advice.
Yeah, yeah, that's the original question.
That's what you ask everybody?
Yeah, yeah, I gotta watch all those.
I love the Donald Hoffman interview.
I haven't got to watch the other ones,
but I know you're reading Graham Dempsey and Greg
who are friends and I saw Michael Levin
and some really cool people.
So I gotta go see their answers to that
because that's a good question.
So I don't know if this is how I would normally answer,
but this has been on my mind.
So it's like when you understand the paradigm
presented in the book,
which is not necessarily, not really my paradigm,
I've approached this like a scientist
who definitely, I guess had a hypothesis,
but also as a journalist.
So as a person who's a scientist
and who believes in the importance of evidence
for your beliefs and your arguments,
you know, I couldn't see myself just having some hypothesis
that was never out there and like really like putting it
for like the reason that I feel confident
about the argument in the book is because
it's based on so many people
who have seen the same cosmic narrative,
you could call it this new story of nature.
And it's really interesting because,
you know, you could bring up some of these ideas
to some people and especially like 15 or 20 years ago
and some people like, no, that sounds like new age stuff.
No, they can't be right.
The universe is waking up or becoming conscious
or something like that.
Or it's growing more and more complex always
without limit.
And they're like, no, that's not scientific.
That violates this law and this or this idea
or that was shown to be like,
it's amazing that that was the stance toward this narrative
which we'll get into.
And it was just totally ideological.
And there have been other people
that have been saying this other thing
and somehow for cultural reasons,
most people got convinced that certain things
that people could say about the universe
were just completely wrong and pseudo-scientific.
And we're seeing that's completely not true.
And it's been exciting because I've written certain articles
like challenging the heat death hypothesis
and that life has to come to an end in the universe.
For example, I just wrote one for Noema.
The physicist David Deutch shared it.
Sabina Hossenfelder and Richard Hansen,
big names were like commenting.
She had written something similar in a chapter in her book.
I haven't read it yet.
And Robert Hansen was like, yeah, maybe life can go.
It depends on if entropy has an upper bound.
But my point is with all of the articles that I've published,
I thought we're saying something super radical.
The one that kind of planted the seed for the book
was called Is the Universe Pro-Life for Courts?
And Sean Carroll gave me a quote for that
and retweeted that and said,
controversial topic, opinions may differ,
but he thought that was a good potential argument
that life was inevitable based on thermodynamic arguments.
And I think he'd probably even say that was the case now.
So there were things where I thought
that it was gonna be a real challenge to say this stuff
because of just consensus
and all of that's changing.
It's the most exciting time ever.
So one thing I would tell myself
if I went back is like,
but I kind of followed this advice anyway.
It's not what I was gonna say originally.
I was gonna say, again, it wasn't based off anything.
Looking around me, reading tons of stuff
gave me a strong feeling
that the universe is becoming more complex.
It's not becoming increasingly disordered.
And I need to look into this.
So as long as you feel like you're basing your something,
basing your belief on like evidence
and you have a strong argument,
do not pay attention to like current consensus.
Don't be afraid if like someone's like,
oh, you're a crackpot because of this.
Just put the time into articulating your idea
because if you articulate it well,
it's really interesting.
Like there's things in the book where if I were to,
if the chapters were only a paragraph long
people were reading little summaries,
they might not be convinced all of them.
They're like, this goes against everything we know.
But then you read the book and you see the arguments
and it's specifically the technical arguments
that just went through that skepticism.
For example, Michael Schermer,
I didn't know what he was gonna think of the book.
And he ended up giving a blurb to actually
on the cover talking about like people having a purpose
to your purposes, discover your own purpose.
But so that was thrilling and it's still happening
to see these kind of ideological ideas
that were kind of cemented as like, this is the truth
are starting to be dismantled
because they were never on a firm basis.
And yeah, so basically stick with it.
And stick to your beliefs like, I mean,
yeah, don't get deterred from something
if you feel that is right.
Quickly, because we need to get into all the other stuff.
But this is kind of already getting into those topics.
But I will say that the ideas in the book
made me look at life in a different way
as far as like life does have this intrinsic goal
which is to stay in existence.
And that gives us an intrinsic purpose.
And once you see things in that way
you can kind of start to interpret life as being a game
where there's challenges and goals.
And then you start to think of your moment,
your life on a moment to moment basis
as sort of being this thing
where you're like accumulating points.
I mean, you don't wanna get carried away with this
but overall I think it's a good way to optimize life
where you're just really thinking like,
okay, I'm not wasting time today
because I've had this game kind of framework
where I have these goals
and I'm not doing things right now to get to my goals.
That doesn't mean you don't relax,
you don't have fun
because that's part of getting to your goals.
But if I could go back to when I was 18
or even before high school, like starting high school
I would have imagined my life as being a type of game.
So I wouldn't miss opportunities
and I would take advantage of things
where I just miss certain opportunities of life
because I didn't have this mindset that I have now.
Yeah, so I do think this game lens that we'll get into
is really helpful for sort of like optimizing your life.
And once you realize it, then you're like,
oh man, I kind of wasted time being suboptimal.
Interesting, yeah.
In life, yeah.
Cool, yeah, we'll spend a lot of time
and I'll make sure that our fattest section
is the game of life throw to Omega that we're on
before we get into that a little bit,
just to help an audience.
And I think, well, you just alluded to it a little bit.
This, I think that your book is a response
to the failure of reductionism in science.
So could you tell us a little bit about,
I guess, that changing paradigm
and then also sprinkle in your unified theory of reality
which you have a great flow chart from infinity maps
that I'm sure I'll overlay at some point in this discussion.
But I know there's a lot there
because there's a few different frameworks
that you bring in, but I love to just get,
if you could provide us with a little bit of an overview,
that'd be super helpful.
Yeah, let me, there's so many things
I've been talking about writing about,
like there could be a conversation,
full podcast on each of these topics.
So I'm just trying to be mindful to like say,
be brief and say the most important things
because there's so many cultural factors.
So you can trace this back to like this question
to like understanding the different eras,
basically like pre-modernism, modernism, post-modernism
and whatever we're getting into now.
But like pre-modernism was kind of the time before science
where like religion ruled
and people believed supernatural beliefs.
And there was this strict hierarchy
and modernism was basically a response to that.
And it happened, it's kind of started
with the Enlightenment period in like the 17th century,
18th century and the scientific,
kind of the birth of the scientific method.
And when I started writing the book,
I thought that's kind of when there was like
the onset of reductionism and atheism
and kind of this idea that the universe
was meaningless and purposeless.
But I found out that that's not true at all.
And basically there was this modern movement
that was like very pro-science and pro-reason and logic.
But it wasn't what we have now
or wasn't what the kind of scientific ideology
of the 20th century, which was more nihilistic,
you know, nothing has any meaning, there's no purpose,
there's no design and basically,
oh, and there's no such thing as like continued
complexification because that kind of implies progress.
And so basically modernism started off
like it was still pretty religious
and I'm not advocating for organized religion
by any means.
But what I'm saying is there's a different mindset.
Newton was extremely religious.
A lot of the greatest physicists of our time,
a lot of the founders of thermodynamics,
James Clerk Maxwell, Lord Kelvin,
they were all very religious.
And we're driven by this idea that reality is mysterious
and they're basically trying to understand
what they described as the mind of God.
And you see that language retained
in like Stephen Hawking and stuff.
And you'll find videos of like Richard Dawkins saying,
you know, you can make a good argument for a God
if you basically are a creator,
if you put them behind, you know, at the very, you know,
that they designed the system and then let it evolve
to its own dynamics.
And he says, the God of Paul Davies,
the God of the physicist.
And I was like, the God of the physicist.
And it was again, I was like looking more
into the different physicists.
And you know, a lot of people know Newton as Christian.
Some people know like Goldil,
who's a mathematician, was very Christian.
But like, I didn't know like the founders,
a lot of, you know, the founders
of the second law of thermodynamics
were Christian as well.
And actually the heat death theory,
I believe had Christian motivations
because basically Lord, yeah, it's super fascinating,
but Lord Kelvin, who kind of popularized
the second law of thermodynamics,
which, you know, he and Colossia
has kind of independently put forth.
And just for anyone who doesn't know,
second law of thermodynamics is the law that entropy
always must increase in the universe.
Well, in system, see, that's the thing.
It was supposed to be applied just to like close systems.
And then people immediately started to try
to apply it to the whole universe.
But a lot of the impetus for doing that
was like Lord Kelvin knew that if the universe had an end,
it kind of had to imply there was a beginning.
And at the end of the universe,
the heat death kind of paralleled
sort of judgment, you know, day of judgment type stuff.
So interesting dissertation online,
which talks about the religious motivations
underlying the second law of thermodynamics.
Sir Arthur Eddington, who made the quote,
the second law of thermodynamics is, you know,
if you have a theory that goes up against that,
I can only, you know, whatever, you know,
but it was like, yeah.
And he was very Christian as well
and referred to himself as a rational mystic,
which I thought was a nice, you know,
kind of paradoxical term that kind of,
I felt like a relation to,
because reality is very mysterious.
And I'm not saying we can't understand,
I'm actually saying we can, but we haven't yet.
There's lots of secrets to uncover.
We'll never understand it completely,
but that's what this complexification process,
the world's getting more complex,
that happens when organisms start modeling the world
and when they start modeling the world to survive in it,
they start getting a larger and more detailed map
of the world and that allows them to manipulate
the world around them, which allows life to spread.
So you have this story that is basically, yeah,
it's really different than what we've been taught in science.
So yeah, my point was in modernism,
scientists still were, you know,
driven by this kind of mystical, you know,
desire to understand nature, the mystery of nature.
And really the whole idea was that, you know,
we could use science to achieve unlimited progress,
but this became associated with like capitalism
and colonialism and stuff like that.
So then postmodernism was just kind of this school of thought
that emerged that was a critique of modernism.
So it was a critique of like science thinking
you could find objective truth
that like there's really subjectivity.
That's really important.
There's maybe no objective truth
and that whatever cultural culture believes is relative
in a social construct.
So there's cultural relativism,
which has like no culture is really objectively better
than others, which suggests that science is really not any,
not in any way more fundamentally more solid
than any religions or, you know, kind of folk mythologies.
And so it was idea, postmodernism was good
because there were a lot of things to critique about modernism,
but it should have been a critique that improved, you know,
how we think about these things and, you know,
the limits of science or, you know,
how certain we should be about things.
But like I think it was really bad
that it basically tried to eliminate this idea
that there is this, you know, progress towards, you know,
higher intelligence in the biosphere
because I think it's a law that you can't,
it's something that you see a principle of nature
that is real.
And if we don't understand that we have no idea
how our civilization is evolving and where we're going,
because it's not driven by some mystical force.
It's not something where progress is like,
just keeps happening like perfectly.
It's this air correction process that's similar to AI.
Life is facing challenges.
It's like life is similar to an AI being trained on data
and the data is the chaotic world around us.
And so we keep being faced with problems
and we keep having to overcome those problems
and a lot of organisms die out during that,
but the ones that can solve those problems
get to make copies of themselves.
And so we get all these designs of organisms and AIs
and everything basically, there's a natural selection,
applies not just to living organisms,
but all designs in life and basically the dysfunctional
and inefficient designs get filtered out.
So we have these designs that get more and more robust
and that leads to this process of basically
life-spreading inevitably, but it's not the straight line.
It's always, there's always like two steps back
for one step forward, but you can see the trend clearly
and people like Ray Kurzweil have mapped out these trends
of technological increase, but showing the technological
increase as continuous with the complexity increase of life
because life is really information processing.
And so life is fundamentally different than inanimate matter,
but AI, I wouldn't say is that fundamentally different
from life.
I mean, it's not, AI is not alive,
but it's an extension of life.
It's got designs that would never appear in nature
unless life first emerged.
So you had pre-modernism, which was supernatural.
Then you had the modern movement, which was like science,
but that science could solve everything.
And then maybe some people took that idea too far
and thought, you know, let's do eugenics.
And the Nazis exploited that theory of increasing
complexification and opening the evolution to justify
like superior and inferior races.
So there were all these cultural issues that led people
to not like certain ideas,
whether it was the Nazis using this idea
of like evolutionary progress,
or Tihar Deshardin was a priest, a Catholic priest
that wrote this book that the church actually hated
because they thought it was like against
in Christian teaching, but it was that evolution,
you know, everything's becoming more complex
and that maybe God is in the future.
Maybe there seems to be some sort of design,
but that everything, for example,
the network of humans is approaching
some sort of global mind that will emerge
and this process will continue.
So Tihar Deshardin wrote this book called
The Phenomenon of Man that put out this omega point theory
that my book is largely based on
and all the scientists who have been writing
about this stuff, complexity scientists,
people at the San Jose Institute,
they all know that Tihar kind of put that idea out there
and made it like really salient
that the world's getting more complex.
But people didn't like the religious associations
that he made, but so then people were against it
because they felt like if they acknowledged
that the world was getting more complex
and that it might be going towards some final goal state
that that would just be like saying that God is right
and God is real and there's a design,
there's some sort of trajectory
that's been planned from the beginning
and people thought that was dangerous.
So then there was a backlash against anybody saying
anything that life had a purpose.
They wanted to erase that language from biology.
If you said life does this in any language
that had a purpose, they wanted you to reward it
to be like in this sort of neo-Darwinian language
where you get rid of purpose and you say, oh no,
like people were mad that people were asking little kids
like why does the plant grow towards the sun
and the kids would say because it wants the light
and like there's evolutionary theorists who are,
you know, kind of motivated by atheism.
No, it doesn't want to grow towards the light.
That's teleological language.
That's purposeful language.
You have to get that out of science.
It grows towards the light
because the ones that were worse
that growing towards the light died off
and that one just happened to be better
and it just got out of control.
But now because of AI and emergence
and just engineering, when you talk like an engineer,
you kind of talk about agents, even if they're not living,
you kind of use this purposeful language
so you can't really get rid of this language
when you're talking about the universe
because we do see these things and it's just natural
but also it seems to be the way reality is
at least this emergent phenomenon
does have goals and purposes purposes.
But yeah, so that backlash created this kind of
whole worldview of meaninglessness
and it was perfect for science.
Science was already going in that kind of direction
because it was at this war with religion a lot of times
and so reductionism is just the idea that
there's just a bunch of particles in the universe.
It's a system of particles that are bouncing off each other
and then you can use laws of motion
to understand those interactions
and then if you have those laws of motion,
there's no room for human agency
because everything would be determined
by these fundamental equations
that are specifying these trajectories in advance.
But what my book argues is that that's not right.
It's a simplified version of causality
and dynamics in nature.
And basically when agents emerge,
they're these information processing systems
that exists in a universe that's not completely deterministic.
There's a lot of deterministic processes
but at the very bottom level, there's random,
there's an element of probability and randomness
or stochasticity and so there is room for freedom
and when agents emerge,
they basically, when you're making a conscious decision,
the results of your decision weren't determined
by particle physics at that lower level.
You can basically, you as a physical system,
when you initiate a movement,
it's not something that's violating the laws of physics.
You're metabolizing energy that you ate before
but you're not in an animate system that can't move.
You can make these decisions
and you're truly making these decisions in real time.
So determinism in the classical sense,
that kind of Laplace kind of made applied Newton's paradigm
to the whole world and you have this strict determinism
that's really determinism at the level of particles
as opposed to other people talk about determinism
saying that your actions are a result of your life preferences.
I mean, your experiences and your beliefs and your genetics
and that's a different discussion
and people conflate those two types of determinism,
biological versus physical determinism
and physical determinism is a much stricter thing.
That's saying there's no room for biological anything,
even genes in that view aren't doing anything.
You could reduce genes to particles.
So it got really weird
because you would see evolutionary theorists
being reductionists and I would be like,
if you wanna be a real reductionist,
then like Jerry Coyne, genes don't even matter.
Your whole field would be completely irrelevant.
If you really knew what you were talking about,
like the ideology that you're advocating for,
we could just say genes are epiphenomenal too
and just talk about particles.
Sure.
The book is a pushback on postmodernism and reductionism
and kind of wanting to return to this narrative of science
and not just science, but logic and I mean, arts,
in this view, we see science as something,
we see science as part of the evolutionary process
because testing theories is just like how nature
has been testing organisms.
And in this book, organisms are basically embodied models
or embodied theories about how to survive in the world.
Your genome and your brain has encoded information
that makes predictions about how to survive in the world.
So basically scientific theories are just kind of
extensions of organisms and they're kind of,
it's kind of just an elaboration of this process of life,
creating models that will allow it to survive
in a world that has this tendency to break down.
Otherwise, aside from life,
because that's not the full story when people say,
the world's going towards more disorder.
What I discovered in the book
is that there's this dialectical dynamic
where you have order and disorder
and kind of this tension
and it's because life has to always evade this tendency
towards disorder that life spreads through the universe
and the universe becomes more complex
because you have life spreading.
So if you didn't have that tendency towards disorder,
there would be no evolutionary pressure
towards designs that are more functional
that can survive better in the world.
So you need the tendency towards disorder
described by the second law of thermodynamics
to have this whole complexification process work.
But that's one big insight of the book
that almost no people talk about.
I mean, this dialectical dynamics.
You need the constraint on the system.
Problems create progress.
That's Popper's principle.
It's a big, yeah.
Yeah, so, yep.
And so this whole idea,
everybody was against this idea of teleology,
which was just a word for continual inevitable progress
and complexification towards some higher people.
And I understand why it's
because they thought it was a supernatural idea,
but now I'm saying it's not supernatural.
And people are saying like evolution is blind.
That was wrong too.
So it's just more complicated.
There is this tendency towards progress
and the whole system isn't conscious at this point.
I don't believe it is,
but there is an intelligence distributed
throughout this network that we call the biosphere.
And so you do see this tendency towards that,
but it happens through mistakes
that basically get corrected
if you look at the whole biosphere as a system
and you look at organisms dying
and some living and reproducing.
If you look at natural selection
as basically the biosphere doing its own scientific testing,
you have this new story of life.
And you see that evolution actually does have this tendency
towards more complexity.
Why? Because as that natural selection process proceeds,
knowledge from the successful,
when I say knowledge,
I'm not just talking about human knowledge,
although that's part of it.
But when animals that are less adapted,
more dysfunctional designs die out
and the better designs stay,
the genome, the genomes in the biosphere
are also accumulating knowledge about how to survive.
So when I say the evolutionary process creates knowledge,
I'm talking about the evolutionary process creates knowledge
in genes, in brains, in cultural memory,
and then now digital memory, like the internet.
In cultural memory, I mean like books and stuff.
So when you look at the trajectory of evolution,
it's really this emergence of these
information processing systems and memory systems.
So you have the emergence of life,
you have genes, then you have the emergence of brains,
you have neural memory,
then you have the emergence of societies,
you have cultural memory.
So you get like language
and you get these ideas spreading from brain to brain
through memes basically.
We start telling stories
and then you get the invention of books
and written language and art.
And it's all part of the same process
of basically life exploring the design space
because it's looking for solutions
to this problem of survival.
And at first it's doing it unconscious.
And then when brains emerge,
you have the emergence of consciousness
and then we start to become aware
of our need to survive.
And we start, it's just another layer of our motivation
to do what nature has already programmed us to do.
And what the book argues is,
because I always talk about these details,
but I don't always give the bigger picture.
A lot of it is because when you say this,
the bigger things behind it,
sometimes it turns people off.
So I would save that stuff to the end
or maybe not even talk about it all
if it's a technical talk.
But the main point of the book is that this process
implies that there's some sort of design or logic.
There's some sort of,
the universe isn't an arbitrary system.
You can imagine the universe being full of marbles
like that, the particle story.
If the particle story was true
and they were just little spherical objects bouncing around
because when Boltzmann,
when the second law of thermodynamics was,
and this idea that Laplace had of everything is just particles
at the lowest level.
If you could zoom in on this,
you would see these particles bouncing around.
The periodic table wasn't even invented until like 1920.
So people were, the model of particles were that,
they were these perfect spherical balls
that bounce off each other elastically,
just like real pool balls or marbles would.
And if we had that,
you can have a bag of marbles bouncing around for eternity
and it's not going to form the complexity of life.
You need specific elements with specific properties,
bonding properties like carbon and specific forces.
You need all of these things to be very specific
for all of this to work.
And that's known as the fine tuning problem.
And the fine tuning problem basically says that
if you change any of these parameters,
like the force of gravity,
the force of the stronger weak nuclear force,
even by hair, you wouldn't have life,
but you probably wouldn't have any structure in the universe.
You just would have just like my universe
that expanded forever or contracted into, you know,
singularity again, you wouldn't even have,
it's not that you wouldn't have life,
you wouldn't have structure.
So then the, so, so the book makes the argument though,
first it makes the argument that there is this new cosmic
narrative where the universe is becoming more complex.
And that involves, you know,
the emergence of planets and stars,
because planets, you need planets to have life.
You need stars to provide the energy for life.
You need stars to fuse the simple elements together
to get the elements that are in living organisms and biology.
And so, but then you get the emergence of life
and then you get information processing systems in the world.
And then life begins to slowly spread.
And because of this evolutionary process
being this knowledge accumulation process,
it just keeps learning and modeling the world.
And as it's extracting information
about the world around it, it just keeps expanding.
And that's what we're seeing now with like us
leaving the planet to go into space.
It's something that was part of the trajectory.
It's not the smart idea of a billionaire or something.
It's what would happen on any biosphere
with intelligent creatures who have discovered science
and discovered thermodynamics, for example,
because any advanced intelligence will learn
that their days are numbered unless they get off the planet.
So what I'm saying is that we have to have
a new picture of the universe.
There is some sort of design.
It's almost like life is like AI.
It's almost like life is like the system being trained
and life shouldn't be seen as separate from the universe.
It's part of the universe.
It's actually the universe.
Universe is simplest components organizing themselves
into a functional form that can experience itself.
So life is the universe's conduit or vehicle
for experiencing itself.
And that's a very different story
and it raises all kinds of implications.
And some people would reject it flat out
and be like, yeah, you're talking about God.
You're saying that it has a design
and that implies a designer.
I'm done with your theory.
But what I would say to that is when you look
at this argument and you look at the trends,
it does seem like this story is the true story.
Like we have to accept that or we have,
it has to at least, I think if you do a Bayesian analysis,
which just is analysis of the evidence for each theory
that this theory would come out on top.
And the funny thing is though,
where people were rejecting it,
if you say, oh, but we don't necessarily need a designer.
There are theories of cosmological natural selection
where there is more that you need to explain
about the fine-tuning problem,
but you don't need to introduce a God,
at least not a God from like an organized religion.
I mean, and I say that in that way
because you have the simulation theory,
which argues that we're a creation of an intelligent agent.
So what I realized right in the book
is that the simulation theory
and intelligent creator theory are effectively the same theory.
And that now that we understand
that we can create simulations with agents,
possibly conscious agents we don't know,
then scientifically,
since we've demonstrated that it has happened,
we have to take the possibility,
we have to consider a new scientific theory
that we're such a creation.
And there's epistemological justification for that
because we did it.
But here's the funny thing.
Before we did it,
there wasn't as much justification to say
that we needed to take the creator theory seriously.
But once we have created simulations
and we know that that's possible in this physical world,
we immediately have to write down a new theory
that we are such a thing.
And so basically this says the atheists,
the theory that there's no designer fine-tuning,
there's the appearance of a design.
First of all, there's something that needs to be explained.
And to do that,
we have to understand why these laws and not others.
So we have to think bigger than the universe.
And then so we have these different options.
Is it a creator?
Is it a multiverse explanation
where maybe there's this large ensemble of universes
and we're just in one out of a multiverse
that's mostly lifeless,
which is in the atheist position,
or cosmological natural section,
which we'll talk about later,
or the simulation theory that we're made by an agent,
intelligent agent.
And then maybe there's even another theory from that.
But my point is you can't say that there's no design
and given what we know about the universe,
you can't say this is the only universe
and there's no design.
Because that would be the most improbable thing
that there's one universe.
It's random.
And then it just happens to have the parameters
that would allow for life
when it could have been everything else.
And that's why no one says that.
That's why the multiverse theory
is the rebuttal against this now,
because to destroy the God theory,
you need a multiverse with all of these other options.
Here's the bad thing about it.
Soon as you introduce that,
you get wilder ideas than a creator.
The ideas of every universe existing,
if you're doing every possible thing,
here's the tricky, here's the funny thing too.
If you believe the multiverse,
and we've also demonstrated
that we can create new virtual worlds
that might have a conscious agent,
we can create our own universes.
The multiverse theory then starts to include gods too,
because it includes people who create universes,
just like where we could or we have,
but we haven't created conscious agents.
Let's say we could,
then you, in the infinitude of all possible universes,
you have universes with creators
creating new universes nested in those universes.
If you follow Occam's razor,
the multiverse theory gives you God,
created the universes,
it gives you every universe you could conceive of and more.
So it seems to be worse on Occam's razor grounds.
It introduces all of these things.
It gives us the same thing
that the God creator thing was.
So what I argue in the book is that
we have to explain the design.
You can explain it playing with infinities
with your multiverse theory,
but I don't think that's the best explanation.
I think, and we can get into that more later,
but I just, so yeah,
maybe we should just talk more about the meat,
you know, I know, or the practical stuff.
I actually talked a lot about the tech.
Yeah, you did.
I didn't talk about the technical details,
but I kind of summed it all up, I guess.
Yeah, you like touched and brought in,
I mean, I could talk to you for a long time
about any one of those things you brought up.
Well, before we get into the,
because I do want to segue into the practical in a moment,
but before we do, just perhaps to put a button on it.
And you just mentioned a few minutes ago, Bayesianism.
I spoke with Carl Friston last week.
I interviewed him.
Yeah, that's not out.
Yeah, it will be out in the next couple of days.
So for viewers watching this, that one will be out already.
So if you want to deep dive into,
and Friston is one of the most cited people in the book,
you know, you bring him in quite often.
And actually, I think,
because I first read romance or reality around the holidays,
and I had heard of Friston before,
but how much he's in the book, really.
Really put him on your radar.
Put him up to the top of the list.
Yeah.
So you inspired me to speak with Carl Friston,
you know, so thank you.
That's awesome.
And it was a great conversation, very high level.
Oh my God.
I did not know the term high research load
before talking to Friston.
That means you need all these different pieces of information
from different disciplines coming together
in order to understand what he's talking about.
Because he's a neuroscientist,
he's bringing neuroscience,
he's bringing information theory,
he's bringing stuff from physics.
But one thing that I thought was quite interesting
is that, and he wrote a blurb for your book also,
he said it was, I think a synthesis of his favorite thing,
something that degree, which is amazing.
And I think I was also surprised,
he said that it doesn't get any more fundamental or simpler
than the free energy principle.
Which I thought was really interesting,
because I asked him, that was sort of in response to
when I brought up Jeremy England's dissipative adaptation.
Yeah.
Which he said, I think to a degree,
I hope this is correct,
that that's one subset of the free energy principle.
That would be like something the free energy principle describes,
but that's one of many things
that the free energy principle would have a descriptor for.
Yeah, I'm glad you brought that up.
I'm glad you said that too,
because that's what I argued in the book.
I don't know how much he thought about that before he read my book.
That would be cool if that kind of...
Because, you know,
I mean, he probably knew of Jeremy England's work.
But as far...
Yeah, that's one thing I tried to do in chapter six,
was to show that this dissipative adaptation process
that's been used to explain the origin of life
is a process of Bayesian inference.
That was like the one big novel thing that I put in the book that...
I don't always talk about it.
You know, it's pretty technical,
so it's not something that has been highlighted.
But that it is a process of Bayesian inference,
and we can look at all self-organization processes,
as processes of inference.
Please go on, Zach, if you need me.
Yeah, so, well, and that was very useful for him to clear that up for me,
because, you know, if you'll forgive my ignorance,
I had thought that dissipative adaptation was something that was a sub...
Free engineering principle was something that...
You can look at it that way too.
Yeah, so it's like, which way is this going?
Yeah, it's all...
And he actually, I think, specifically said
that he was a little bit dismissive of the thermodynamic interpretation
as that being the underlying idea.
Yeah.
And that the free engineering principle, I think, has far more applications
than just that.
So, do you have any thoughts about that?
Yeah, yeah, so a colleague also mentioned this about him,
which I think I knew, but it was interesting to hear this kind of emphasized,
but that Carl likes to put, say, you know,
everything in terms of inference,
but doesn't like to reduce everything to evolution, for example.
But you could say the same thing about thermodynamics.
You know, that he doesn't want to reduce everything to thermodynamics.
What my book tried to show is that the thermodynamic story
and the evolutionary story and the inference story are the same story.
And that inference processes are...
And we'll talk about in detail what I mean by that,
but that they are evolutionary processes and they are self-organization processes.
So they're kind of dissipative processes.
So it's pointless to be like, this is a subset of that.
So...
Well, in a way, he's right,
because the origin of life mechanism is one instance of the free energy principle.
But you could...
So if he's talking about dissipative adaptation as an origin of life theory,
it's a subset of a larger inference
because dissipative adaptation is an inference process
and this is one instantiation of that.
It's just the origin of life.
But you could also look at all inference processes
as being dissipative adaptation processes at higher levels.
So you could say the whole biosphere is evolving through dissipative adaptation
because they're just adapting and as they adapt, they extract more energy.
And if they use more energy, they're dissipating more energy.
So you could look at the biosphere as a dissipative process.
And before dissipative adaptation was a theory put forth by England,
tons of people were saying this.
Eric Cheyesson, Eric Smith, and here more with Santa Fe Institute,
this whole thermodynamic narrative,
it had been told much in detail way before Jeremy England.
Jeremy England just came up with this specific equation
about self-organizing molecules
and demonstrated that you could simulate this
and show that this is the case,
that basically if you have a lump of particles driven by a force of energy
and those particles have the right profile such that they interact
like with life, you need carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrene.
You need those molecules.
For example, carbon makes bonds to four other elements or molecules.
And if you don't have something that can bond to a lot of things,
you can't get complex structures.
So if you simulate the properties of those molecules,
you can show that just a system being pushed by a flow of energy
with the right properties will begin to organize.
And as they organize, so that's really what we need to focus on
is that that's the mechanism of self-organization.
As a result of this process, because it takes physical work,
I mean, stuff is happening when it's organizing itself,
it has an energetic cost.
So for that process to happen, to go against this tendency toward disorder,
an organism or the system, maybe it's something that hasn't emerged,
life hasn't emerged yet, but it's you're seeing like a proto organism,
some sort of chemical, you know, autocatalytic network,
some sort of chemical system that is self-sustaining.
It has to get energy from the environment.
So living systems have to extract energy from the environment to survive.
And when they are extracting it to build that order to organize themselves,
so that cost energy, that's the thing to understand.
And when you're using that energy, it's always getting dissipated.
It's always getting used up in the system's releasing heat.
And that heat is entropy.
So there's, I didn't get into it here, I'm kind of on purpose,
but there's multiple definitions of entropy.
There's entropy, which is dissipated energy.
It's like heat entropy.
And then there's entropy with the statistical definition,
which just talks about disorder things and their different concepts.
They really shouldn't even have the same name.
Well, but, but, but the energy concept is kind of a subset of this disorder thing,
but it just, it order form and that system release heat.
So you can have the whole universe, if life's spreading,
becoming more and more organized at the, at the whole global scale.
While more heat is being generated.
So whether entropy goes up or down, it depends on your definition of entropy.
Heat entropy goes up because energy is always being used and spread out
and you can't use that energy again.
So if entropy is defined as the energy unavailable for work,
that entropy is going up, entropy defined as organization, as disorder,
that entropy is going down.
So you have Boltzmann entropy going down as the world gets more complex
and you have energy just being used up.
And then that is called entropy.
That's, that's a classical version of entropy.
So my point is, and Jeremy England makes his point in his book,
all of the evolutionary processes that happen in the biosphere
are also using up energy from the sun.
And as the biosphere becomes more complex, it uses more, it needs more energy.
So it uses it.
I think when you talk about dissipation too much, it gets the focus off.
It makes it sound like life is trying to create entropy when it's not.
It's trying to survive and it needs energy to survive.
And entropy is the byproduct.
So it's just like, art needs gas.
It's not the goal to buy product.
It's just exhaust.
Yeah. So if you want to say the origin of life is an example of inference,
that's right, and you have this dissipated adaptation mechanism,
but you could also turn it around and be like, well,
the inference process that Carl's describing in brains,
which we'll quickly sum up in a second,
is something that allows brains to better model the world
so it can extract more energy.
And then it is always extracting that energy and it's using that energy.
So really, you have dissipated adaptation,
which I believe is just another word for self-organization.
It's thermodynamic self-organization.
You have that on every level and that inference is also self-organization.
So I think that there's things that are equivalent,
learning and evolution
and self-organization.
Yeah. And so I think it's Bayesian inference.
Evolution is, you know, variation and selection.
And then self-organization is this dissipated adaptation.
They're all the same things.
So it doesn't really you don't you don't need to like put one
having priority over the other.
And that was a mistake a lot of people made
because when Jeremy England's working that stuff,
they're like, oh, it's well, it's all thermodynamics.
The world just wants to create instruments.
No, the world is organizing itself
and it does it through this process and this mechanism.
You can look at one aspect where you go to the systems learning.
You can look at another aspect or say the system's using energy
and creating entry and you can use another aspect and say it's adapting.
It's evolving. Yeah. All. Yeah.
You have a great time.
It's not even an equation.
It's just much equivalences in the book.
It's adaptation equals statistical correlation,
equals mutual information, equals model optimization, equals creation.
I mean, that's I mean, but you're that gets to the crux
of what we're talking about here is that.
And I actually find this
not specifically with with the gentleman we're talking about now,
but if you may like zoom out a little bit,
the word games that get played a lot.
And I mean, it's just because that you need different
terminal, different terms for different concepts, right?
But a lot of times you start
when you think about it a little bit more deeply,
you realize, oh, that's pretty much the same thing.
You know, we're just we're using languages is fungible
and we're kind of getting around it.
But I do and I mean, we could talk so much more about this stuff.
I have a lot of questions in this area that I'm going to have to speak
because I do want to focus while we have some remaining time.
It looks like part three might not happen today.
But what should we do with this information?
If we might go from crawling, you know, we have
organized some information and people should get the book to get all these details
for themselves and also read your read your blog posts on Road to Omega,
the Substack and Psychology Today as well.
What do we do?
Like, how do we make this practical?
How do we bring this information into our day to day lives?
Yes, so you can talk about that while I explain
first sense theory in the context of that, because it's really.
Yeah, first sense work and so he has the Bayesian brain
hypothesis and the free energy principle, which is just the same
Bayesian brain hypothesis, but apply the things without brains.
And I realized there's so much here combined with the other work that I was,
you know, looking at, you know, self organization and thermodynamics.
There's so much here to inform practical living.
And it's just crazy that, you know, no one has kind of
used that information to not many people.
I won't say no one, but not many people have used that information
to inform people on how to live life.
And the reason is because of the free energy principle.
It's funny, Carl says it's simple and I agree with him.
It is the simplest thing.
But if you read the papers, it's the most complicated.
thing in the world. Yeah, I disagree.
I mean, it might be the most fundamental, but I explain why.
So it's like both things are true at the same time.
And it's like it is insanely complicated if you want to make it.
But the general principle can is super simple.
But I don't think people have applied it because they don't understand it.
And I didn't understand it.
I wasn't even sure if it was like legitimate science.
That when I first looked at it, because it kept using these
thermodynamic terms like free energy, which were defined not thermodynamically.
It's like information theoretic free energy and comes from machine learning.
It's based on thermodynamic free energy.
But so I was like, what's this guy talking about?
Like minimizing free energy in this way, but that's not free energy.
So yeah, you just have to accept that new language will emerge
because you need new words to explain new ideas.
And it often comes from other fields.
So there's going to be that confusion.
And you just have to embrace all that and read the read the literature.
And once you read it, you start understanding there's a lot of value.
But basically, here's the story.
You have this tendency towards disorder in the world.
And it was great because I was already, you know, finished with part one
all the thermodynamics.
If I had already said all this stuff and talked about cybernetics
and systems have them having to model the world.
And then I found the free energy principle.
And it was like everything that I was like the path I was down.
It was like completed by that.
So I'd already saw this picture before that.
But basically, but it's cool because that's how Friston frames it.
And for people who don't know, he's the most cited neuroscientist in the world.
He developed these statistical techniques for analyzing FMI data
that all FMI studies use pretty much.
And so you have this tendency towards decay.
So how do you explain life?
He wants to explain the organization in the world.
He says, OK, specifically organisms, which are the most interesting to us.
They evade this tendency towards decay because they model the world
and they because they have to survive.
And if they don't have a map of the world, you can't survive in the world.
So the the the brain has to create a map.
And the free energy principle basically extend that and said,
even organisms without brains, how encode some sort of map of the environment
in their dynamics, in their genome, maybe in their metabolic processes
and general functional dynamics at the system level.
But so basically, it's the story of how do we, you know,
how does life emerge and survive?
It emerges.
Well, OK, so yeah, how does life survive?
Let's start there.
Life survived because that's the model of the world.
And if its model isn't accurate, if its map of the world isn't accurate,
the thing is probably going to die.
If you you have a wrong map of the world and something comes out
and kills you because you didn't know about that variable, you're dead.
And then that design of you is gone unless you've made copies of yourself.
But that's a bit of a different design.
And the people who do have good maps are successful.
So those good maps keep getting encoded into the biosphere
and to the network of organisms.
And we keep updating our maps through natural selection.
People die out.
But when you have brains, you don't.
Things don't have to die to get better maps in the biosphere.
You can learn during your life.
Things without brains, they can't learn.
So if they're born in a certain way, they just have those characteristics.
But so we can learn.
But so what is simple about it is Carl Friston is basically saying this.
All organisms minimize what's called free energy.
Don't get hung up on you for the audience.
Don't get hung up on the word free energy.
He's saying in this context, free energy is defined as the model's prediction error.
So the amount of mismatch between your model and reality is getting minimized.
So forget free energy minimization.
Just let's say that Carl Friston, Sirius says your model error needs to be minimized
or else you'll die.
And that we're always trying to do that.
And if we don't pay attention to the evidence, like if we don't.
OK, so for example, someone who has a belief that is contradicted by tons of evidence
and tons of stuff they're seeing in the real world where it's just completely like,
let's say you believe in purple fairy god and that's just your belief.
Oh, that's hard one to disprove.
Let's say you let's just do something a little more grounded.
Let's say you think that gravity doesn't exist in Antarctica or something.
You go to Antarctica and you you throw a ball from like a roof and it exists.
If you if you don't update your model, if you don't go, oh, yeah,
gravities exist because I came here and I did that test.
And if you're denying the evidence that reality is giving you,
then you're not minimizing your model's prediction error.
You're you're you're choosing to stick with a model
that has uncertainty or air or ignorance.
And if you're living that way, you don't have an optimal map of the world.
And if you don't have an optimal map of the world, you're not living optimally.
So the book, you know, this is really what the second book's about
and what I write about on Substack.
But because I didn't have enough time with the deadline
to really incorporate all this, you know, practical living stuff.
But basically what this whole story tells you is that for or, you know,
ordered things for for sentient, any sentient system to exist in the world,
to continue existing, it has to be updating its map of the world to be more accurate.
And that's just called minimizing free energy.
Free energy is an information theoretic term between the difference
between your model and reality.
So we always want to be being our ignorance and we don't live that way a lot.
We're not always updating based on our knowledge.
We sometimes ignore it.
We have confirmation bias.
We want to keep that out.
And if we do that, we're living suboptimally.
So basically, there's different principles that you can follow.
Be curious. That's one thing.
There's a great paper by a friend of mine
who wrote a paper with Carl Friston on active inferencing curiosity.
So you got to be curious because your model is always going to be limited.
None of us have infinite computational storage space.
So we can't know everything about the world.
The world's super complex.
There's no way to know everything.
So we're all living in ignorance.
The best we can do is try to make our model as accurate as possible while living life.
You know, you can't spend all of your time learning everything.
So you have to decide how much information you want to acquire.
But we should always be living in that way.
We shouldn't get too stuck to our beliefs.
We should always be open to new ideas because our model is limited.
It's going to have ignorance.
And once you accept that, then, for example,
let's say people are asking questions about the origin of the coronavirus.
It became un-PC to talk about a lab leak theory.
That's very bad, according to this approach,
because it could possibly be the theory.
And maybe it's not, but you got to look into it.
And if you notice, oh, there's no chance that it was a lab leak thing,
then you can go, OK, you know, based on this stuff, there's very little reason,
almost no reason to think that was the case.
But that wasn't true when people analyzed it, what came out.
And then seeing in everybody had it.
And they didn't even like really say, oh, well, we did a terrible thing
by telling everybody, do not think this like it is wrong.
Think to think this way.
And then everybody started talking about, well, it could be a lab leak.
And there are tons of reasons why, you know, there's I'm, you know,
I won't get into the political stuff, but the point is.
A lot of people like Flat Earthers make this problem
where they're not living in reality.
They're not updating their model of the world.
They're just denying what's out there.
But you also have other situations where scientists
maybe have this reductionist ideology.
They're just over certain about life is transient.
It's going to come and go.
There's no such thing as free will because it goes against our Newtonian
understanding of the world.
That's a failure of being a good Bayesian to you because they are too certain.
And if you look at history, every paradigm, every model,
every theory has proven to have some inaccuracies.
Thanks from, you know, Newton's laws, relativity,
quantum mechanics hasn't been unified with relativity.
So there's all these things.
And in the nineties, we didn't even know.
We thought we were at there.
John Horgan wrote a book.
It's the biggest mistake that you could do writing a book called.
But, you know, it was worth it to help this, but it was called the end of science.
And the idea was that we had we're almost done with understanding everything.
And we thought we understood everything about physics
is before we knew about dark matter, dark energy,
which we only understood dark energy in the late nineties.
And people thought we understood everything.
And then they just try to explain to a consciousness as being an illusion.
So they can back up science understands everything.
Nothing, no mystery, definitely no supernatural, definitely no creator.
But then she hit the fan and we realized we barely understand anything
like most of the universe is stuff that we don't even know what it is.
It's incredible. So.
Basically, yeah, if you go on the road to omega
subsec, I have these posts called the teleological stance.
This post called that.
I said first, yeah, actually, there are multiple posts on the teleological stance.
But basically it's saying all living systems have an intrinsic goal
and that's to survive against this tendency towards decay.
So life does have a goal and a goal gives us a purpose.
And the purpose is to see that life continues to exist
because we're part of this larger system that's becoming more complex.
And what I didn't mention is that it seems to be going towards
a fully integrated self-aware state of the universe.
And I'm definitely not arguing for panpsychism that everything's conscious.
I'm saying that consciousness emerges because of some plan
that we don't fully understand and that.
And that consciousness, because it might be a scale invariant
or substrate independent thing, that you're conscious
because you have this collection of neurons that are exchanging information.
And somehow consciousness emerges from that.
In the book, I try to explain why that's probably happening.
But if consciousness can emerge from a collection of cells,
who's to say that consciousness can emerge from an interacting system
of humans exchanging information?
So that idea has been called the global brain.
Maybe you could have some people think there's already a consciousness.
This level, I don't think there is.
I think there's a collective intelligence
because you don't need intelligence to have consciousness.
So as fear is intelligent, it's a self-regulating system.
But I don't think it's conscious.
But I think consciousness can emerge at these higher levels
and that if life continues to spread through the universe and to do so,
it has to keep extracting energy and it will keep molding the universe.
It'll basically keep it will start incorporating the inanimate matter
of the world into its computational substrate until the entire universe gets subsumed.
And but it's not as if life is just taking over the universe.
This was the story of the universe self-organizing
into this completely functional, conscious, computational state mind.
God, whatever you want to call it, doesn't really matter.
It's just this unified state that will be this computational state
of unimaginable power that that everything is moving towards.
So it was really just a self-organizing system that has this dynamic
and like part of it's being trained and accumulating knowledge
until the whole system is an integrated system, the way an organism is the integrated system.
So I think that's where it's headed.
I'm about to come out with an article on Big Think
analyzing new papers that have emerged from the small one in Jerellania
and Microsoft Physicists saying that the universe is a learning machine.
That was kind of influenced by another paper from 2020 by Vitaliy Vanshurne,
who says the world's a neural network and these got articles, you know,
popular mechanics articles, you can read these a couple of years ago.
And what I'm arguing is that life is basically the universe is something
like a neural network or an organism or a complex adaptive system.
It's all just an information processing network that's emerging.
And that life is part of this process and that's where it's headed.
You can call it a God, you know, there's lots of crazy answers about like what that is.
But that's what Ray Kurzweil believes.
That's what the neural network guy that I mentioned.
He also believes that that's inevitable that it's going towards that state.
I talked to him a couple of days ago in person and he confirmed that.
So it's a radical new story saying that the universe is waking up through life.
But that gives us a purpose.
We're part of this larger grand process and we need to do what we can to continue
intelligence and consciousness and experience and all those things that
come from sentience.
We need to do what we can to ensure that spreads throughout the universe.
And that involves a collective mindset change where we realize to solve
our existential problems, we have to come together because we to solve
these problems are so big that the whole system needs to be using all of its
computational power.
So any civilization that emerges anywhere will have to go through
the same sort of trajectory where they come together.
And we've always been coming together.
We've been coming together into societies.
But the thing is when we come together into a society, we come together
under a belief system and then a society emerges on this part of the world.
And it's a different belief system.
So there's those are two super organisms that are going to be in conflict
because they basically have different genomes.
They're different belief systems.
So it's a genome at a higher level.
It's a knowledge system.
So they're going to compete until they learn that cooperation is easier
and that makes every task easier.
It makes extracting any, any, any, it makes extracting energy easier in any task.
Really.
So it's part of a process.
It's inevitable.
This is a trajectory that civilizations will go through on any biosphere
where you have an intelligent civilization like this, but it's leading
to that larger story and that gives us that frames life in a way that's never
been framed by science before.
It says we have a cosmic purpose and we can carry out this cosmic
purpose by trying to facilitate a mindset of coming together, but it's also
at the individual level where you try to live optimally.
You don't do what's bad for the environment because it's going to hurt you.
You don't live with an ignorant or an accurate model of the world because
it's going to hurt you.
And if it hurts you, it's not good for the collective.
So we need to align our interests and we need to figure out how people can
act in their own selfish interest, but at the same time, do good for humanity.
So we just need to align the interests of the individual and the group
to where we're getting synergy and
without consciously adopting this mindset.
And I think for people to adopt this, because without all the science behind it,
it just kind of sounds like positive psychology or like self help, self
help guru stuff or new age stuff.
But I think with the science, you know, if people go, OK, the universe
does seem to be self organized and there is this trend, there is a meaning.
We don't know what it is.
We don't know if there was a designer.
We don't know.
And we'll talk about that next time.
But we don't know if it was a cosmological natural selection process.
But all we know is that reality seems our reality seems to have this trajectory
and we're part of this process.
And that process is good because it leads to more experiences.
If life ends, that's the end of experience.
That's the end of love.
That's the end of feeling, at least in our universe, that's the end of all that.
So it's a good thing for life to exist.
And out of this story, we get like a self help system.
We get a way to optimize your life based on, you know, just
acquiring information and behaving in a way that is compatible with your future goals.
So is there is there like an exercise or is there prescribed activities
or things, methods?
I mean, yeah.
So so this basically says it's basically an umbrella that goes, hey,
that meditation stuff, you're improving executive control, you know,
networks in your brain, like you're you're improving your ability to not act impulsively.
So you're optimizing your behavior.
It's an optimization process because if you behave,
let's say someone makes you mad and you punch them or you stab them,
you're in jail, you're done.
That's like your goals are gone.
So part of living optimally in like a base optimal way is making decisions
and being aware of all of the possibilities and the consequences of those decisions.
So the space of counterfactuals and choosing the decision that is in line
with your goals and the idea is that your specific goals,
if everyone is working towards those optimal goals,
then that kind of harmonizes society overall, moving in the right direction.
So meditation,
any sort of like new age practice, spiritual practice, religious practice,
even like praying, for example, makes you like aware, you know,
people get mad at people, Christians are saying,
pray for these people in the Middle East, like when they should really be doing
something, your prayers aren't going to do anything.
I don't think that's right because, yeah, they're not doing anything,
but they could not be praying.
And what praying is doing, at least they're making an exercise.
They're going, there's people on the other side of the world that don't have my culture.
And I'm going to imagine these people suffering and I'm going to ask them for help.
They're building out a theory of mind when they're doing that.
They're caring about those people because of that praying action more than they would
if they never did that act.
If they don't do that act, they're basically like an inanimate object.
It's kind of like how we, you know, we don't really treat people from other cultures.
Like the more we find in common with them, the more we start to treat them like ourselves.
But so what I'm saying is the act of prayer is do all kinds of good stuff.
Like also, like when you pray at night, you know, like, I'm thankful for this and this,
that stuff that emerged through evolution because it's adaptive.
So for us to throw that away, and that's what atheists have been doing.
They're like, oh, we hate new age stuff.
We hate religion.
It's just going back to dark ages in some way, because all of those things are adaptive.
So we need a new paradigm that merges science with spirituality and says all those practices
aren't bad, believing bullshit is bad.
You can die because you think homeopathy is going to cure your cancer.
So that's not amazing.
But what, but so I'm not, you know, saying everything is good about religion.
But I'm saying these practices, most of them, the reason people,
religion's not dying is because people find value in them.
And for scientists and atheists to be like, we're just going to do
whatever's the opposite of religion, which is what has happened.
They're putting scientists, you know, these people had a big disadvantage
or giving them an eye and actually religion, organized religion is sticking around
because science is having that mindset.
They're not realizing the power of that.
And then the regular person is like, I don't give a shit about your multiverse theory.
I want a belief system that's going to help me in life and give me a community
and make me wake up in the morning feeling good about life.
So they're actually hurting science by being like, oh, the spiritual practices are stupid.
Oh, meditation is bullshit.
Thinking that there's something higher is bullshit.
So very unproductive.
And I'm very passionate about this because these people are supposed to be
like our thought leaders and tell us like what's right or wrong are saying things
that are causing people mental harm.
I mean, really.
And Sabine Hassanfelders talked about this in her book.
She even wrote like a disclaimer at the beginning.
Like I've read an article saying free will isn't real.
And I'm worried because people have contacted me saying that they've been very
disturbed by this and people contact me too.
And odd people say I got out of this nihilistic trap by reading your book
and the free will arguments.
So those people are not being good Bayseans either.
They're way too certain where they're like free will is ridiculous.
It's like, well, you don't understand high level causality
because integrated information theory and Julio Tononi has two hour talk
on the mechanisms of free will.
And he says absolutely free will is a mechanistic thing.
It's not supernatural and it's real.
David Deutsch, one leading physicist who Sabine argues, you know, interviews
in her book for a chapter on interviewed by John Horgan, the guy I mentioned earlier.
He says, I'm sure we have free will.
So it depends on how you define free will.
And I've defined it in a certain way.
But the idea is that there really is freedom.
And if we're not using that freedom because we don't think we have it,
we're living in a way where we're we're not going to exercise our agency.
I think everything's determined and you're like, I want to help the world.
And I have an idea like you might not put that idea out there.
But if you realize I'm an agent and there it's everything is not determined
like I can actually make a difference on the world, you're much more likely
to to actually go through with what you're doing.
Oh, sure. Yeah, I've said it for a long time.
I'm not sure if I came up with this or I've read it somewhere else.
But I believe in free will because when I don't, I make terrible decisions.
You know, that's great.
I can, yeah, I can rationalize, geez, anything.
But I know you do have to.
Yeah, it really does optimize your decisions believing in it,
which suggests that it's real because if you didn't give anything.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, there's a great that's a that's a huge conversation
that can have to. Yeah.
But one thing I do want to if you do have to run to wrap up a little bit
and maybe give it like sort of a teaser for next time, this idea of cosmic
complexity, you know, this heading towards this omega point.
Can you give us and feel free to speculate?
Feel I know you're the book is grounded in the great science and well researched.
But your intuition, let's say, you know, deep inside yourself,
something maybe some of you can't prove.
But why why do you think this is all how it's laid out?
Why do you think we're here?
Like the ultimate question of like, why this big story?
This, you know what I mean? Like, yeah, what's the purpose?
Like, what's going on?
Yeah, so I won't be able to answer that today.
I'll give the short answer.
But mechanistically, I think what's go like what explains it is basically
the universe is moving towards this.
It's the system moving towards an attractor.
And so when you ask like, and I think this theory can inform quantum mechanics
because it's like, oh, there's this wave function.
There's all these different possibilities.
And that's what kind of overthrew determinism is that we understand
that there's this probabilistic nature due to quantum mechanics.
But what I'm saying is actually the wave function collapse isn't random.
If you have an isolated quantum system, it's going to look random.
But when everything is interacting, everything, all those wave functions
must be collapsed.
And I know some people, you know, I haven't defined these terms, but yeah,
just for like a high level thing, we'll talk about it more next time.
But that that the collapse is if the universe is becoming more complex,
that puts constraints on how the wave function collapses such that the collapse
is much in totality add up towards going towards this omega point.
So I think it is a new motivates a new theory of quantum mechanics.
I mean, there are interpretations like quantum Darwinism,
which are consistent with what I'm saying.
But I think the universe is moving towards an attractor.
And it's this this functional state of like the universe,
being the self aware computational conscious state with the power of a God,
basically, and a God would be nothing more than a mind that has freeman Dyson said,
a God is just a mind that has achieved power beyond our comprehension.
So why do I think there's this design that's leading to that?
Well, one explanation is cosmological natural selection is that the universe basically.
Our universe, there is a multiverse, but it's not like every possibility exists.
There was this evolutionary process where in Lee Smallman's model of cosmological
natural selection, when you have a universe form and then a black hole forms in that universe,
since a big bang is like a singularity event that creates a universe.
The idea is that when a bit of black hole forms in the universe,
that's a big bang event that creates a new universe.
And that's how you have these ever this evolutionary process
that's creating more and more universes and the universes that are good at creating black holes
and black holes come from stars and stars create the chemistry that's needed for life.
Then you'll get more and more universes that create more and more black holes.
So more and more universes that have more and more stars.
And so this process will lead to more and more universes that are firmly for life
because stars create the higher elements that are needed for life.
And then so if this evolutionary process is true,
you'll have the selection pressure towards getting more life-friendly universes.
And then if the intelligence in that universe can engineer new universes by engineering black holes,
and Alan Gooth, the creative cosmic inflation theory, says we should be able.
He doesn't necessarily believe this theory, even though people do consider it.
I mean, Leonard Susskin, string theory guy, said he's surprised at least more.
And this theory hasn't gotten as much attention, like more attention.
But even now, in Gooth's model, he still thinks we can create a universe
by creating some sort of singularity event,
even if he doesn't think that black holes are always creating these universes,
which cosmic inflation kind of has a similar model where universes are created.
But I'm not sure. I don't think it's the mechanism is to black holes.
There's just these, yeah, I guess a little more complicated into inflation.
But so the whole point of that and what small one isn't saying is
if you look at the structure of this cosmological natural structure universe,
it still inevitably leads to life and then it leads to life dominating and taking over.
And that would lead to universes that become more and more complex and more and more intelligent.
And ultimately, that would lead to an evolutionary process towards universes
that lead to fully integrated omega point states,
just because it's the pinnacle of this process and doesn't have to end there.
Maybe our universe, once it reaches this fully integrated state,
maybe there's some interaction with these other universes and that these omega points
at this higher level will merge and form a larger super organism.
If this story of nature's particles coming together and forming these aggregates
at these higher levels keeps going on, maybe it's larger than this universe.
So maybe it continues, I don't know.
But the point I'm emphasizing here, which I haven't really emphasized before,
is that it's still a teleological story.
It's the one that we were trying to get rid of.
Like, why is this universe designed?
Oh, cosmological natural selection.
But if you look at the multiverse of the cosmological natural selection world,
it still starts off empty, I mean, lifeless and inevitably gets dominated by life.
So it's the same teleological story.
So even with the cosmological natural selection theory, we cannot get away
from the teleological nature of the cosmos.
There still seems to be a life generating principle, not just where it produces life
in one universe of this vastly sterile multiverse, but that life spreads
and the multiverse becomes fully biophilic.
So whatever the answer is, there's still this life giving principle
that I see as equivalent to God.
And here's the thing, if you have this process, it's going to lead to intelligent
beings like us who, because the laws of physics don't disallow this,
create virtual worlds that then might have their own agents.
So if we're creating that, then the process leads to creators too.
And so in my view, it's kind of arbitrary to say, was our universe
created or is it cosmological natural selection?
I'm like, well, we don't know it could be cosmological natural selection
or maybe that's not the right answer.
Maybe our universe really is nested in another reality and we're a simulated world
with a physical substrate, you know, just like we create computers
with a physical substrate, but then there's a simulated world of virtual agents.
There's no reason to to say that that's not a possibility.
But here's my point, even if we were created by a creator, you have to explain them
and then you could explain them as a as a result of this evolutionary process.
But it's not the atheist one that leads to mostly still it's still a biophilic one.
So my ultimate understanding was that nature has this life generating principle.
It's really hard to determine.
You know, we still have that why something from nothing problem.
But we are making progress.
It's not introducing unnecessary stuff by going outside this universe
because we have the fine tuning mystery that is begging for a solution
that we don't have unless we think about these other things.
Creator cosmological selection and the multiverse theory,
which I don't think is a good explanation because it introduces everything
just to explain away a creator when we shouldn't necessarily need to explain
a creator with every possible universe exists.
It's just I don't think it's the right.
I don't think it's superior epistemologically.
Occam's are all the things we mentioned.
So ultimately, I'm left with the process itself being God
and that we could be created by an agent,
but it wouldn't be this all powerful, fundamental thing that was there forever.
It would be a product of this process, but that process seems to be eternal.
So even if we have a God, a creator, I don't think if I learn about him,
I don't think I'd pray to him.
I think if we have a creator, it might be like us creating things.
And then we want to ask our AI, like, is there a God?
Like, maybe if we do have a creator, they're looking for us to answer.
Maybe we're the AI that's going to inform them.
But so even if we had a creator, I'm not necessarily sure
that I don't think that would be the end of all answers.
I think it's more spiritually satisfying to be like to just recognize
there is a process that leads to life, leads to consciousness
and unending consciousness reaching higher and higher levels of experience.
And to me, that's kind of a Spinoza type
pantheism thing. It's but it's beyond that because pantheism is
oh, this world could be inanimate and sterile, but it's God.
But like, this is really giving more of a reason to say
the universe is God because it's not this arbitrary random thing anymore.
It's this life generating thing.
And so to me, that has all of the same qualities of a God.
And I do think we could be somewhere far along in the process
where we could be the product of an intelligent agent.
And that agent could have created a moral moral art to this trajectory
where our universe, they want to create something that improves and gets better.
And that's what you're seeing.
We're getting away from our original roots, kind of like
kind of compatible with like this theory of original sin.
But like we evolve from this animalistic thing.
And as this trajectory happens, we get more moral.
We develop a theory of mind.
We start to understand that there are other conscious things.
We start to treat them better.
We start to understand we're part of the biosphere and the universe.
We start to care more about the environment.
So I think our evolutionary trajectory has a moral arc
that is further evidence for some sort of purpose or design.
And that part of me says, OK, there is something maybe to it.
And maybe we're farther along the process.
Maybe there is a creator.
Maybe they do care about what happens the way we create programs
and we're interested in what happens.
But it's a personal journey for me, too.
I don't know. I mean, if is it why is there evil in the world?
Why isn't it more perfect?
I have questions for that. I'm like, trying.
I think, you know, there can't be good without evil.
It's all spectrum.
There's no way to even define good unless you have something opposite.
So maybe it starts off of good and evil because that's the only way it can go.
But it evolves towards a more moral existence
towards as you get closer to the omega point.
So it's a journey for me.
But what I am convinced by is that you do have this trajectory.
And once you start asking what that should why it's this way,
you get into all the explanations that I've just said.
And I think they're better than the nihilistic multiverse.
We're just weak anthropic principle version.
And I think that's super exciting because I really think a Bayesian analysis.
Anybody, I think Sean Carroll, if we have long enough talk,
if you brought me and five leading physicists who are open minded,
Sean Carroll, Lee Smollon, maybe have some neuroscientists,
Christoph Carl Friston, I think if you lay all these things on the table,
we would quickly come to the consensus that at least what I'm putting forth
is a good theory. Some people might say, oh, it's not as likely.
They might say the multiverse thing in there, according to all of their stuff,
is a little bit more likely than this.
But there's no way that you can say that this isn't a legitimate scientific theory,
whether it's our universe was created by an intelligent agent
or cosmological natural selection.
Like, and that's what I've been happy about.
You know, the book could have come out and people could have said crackpot.
Like, and it just could have got killed by like, you know, reviews and stuff like that.
And no one might have given a blog who is not like a Christian person.
But all the people that gave it blurbs and stuff were were scientists,
people called themselves atheists or agnostics.
I mean, there's not one Christian out of like the dozen blurbs I got.
There's not one religious person.
So I know the argument is compelling,
but the argument makes all these other wonderful spiritual weird implications.
And since people were willing to accept the first book, I'm like, OK,
now it's time to open up the bag of worms.
If you're going to put this on the table, which really, you know,
it's not this opening up the bag of worms.
The fact that you had all these unsolved mysteries that this starts to solve.
But it's exciting because I think with what's going on in AI
and these papers coming out arguing that the universe is a complex adaptive system,
a learning system, a neural network or stuff.
It's the it's the right time that this is about to like become, you know,
there's going to be a cafes transition.
There's going to be a shift in perspective that changes everyone's ideology.
And that ideology will lead to greater harmony around the world.
So I want to be part of that happening.
And it's really exciting, but it just has to be done with care
because it's very easy to scare people off when you talk about like the religious stuff
and religious people are scared of evolution and stuff.
So it would be wonderful if people go, OK, we don't know shit really.
And we can.
But there's stuff that we don't we that we know is not true.
And there's stuff that we don't know.
Like we can start to come together and be like, you know, religious and,
you know, scientific people can be like, there does seem to be this purpose.
And we do need to cooperate.
We do need to come together.
We do like all those things.
So I'm excited to see where this goes.
And I'll just make a prediction that in 10 years, if we have a conversation again,
that this paradigm will be considered and I may not even be mentioned.
I may not even be on like the wiki page for it.
But I do believe that in 10 years,
the idea that the universe is a self organizing system going
towards this kind of a mega point computational, fully integrated state
will be if not the leading theory, it will do basically
with the many worlds theory of quantum mechanics that go from complete obscurity
to like start being like kind of like at one of the competing main interpretations.
Yeah, that's so cool.
And I hope it doesn't take 10 years for us to talk again.
But one question before you go, I have to know, how did you choose
that is a hop vibration on the cover, right?
Yeah. So I don't know.
I've heard I'm pretty sure it is. Yeah. Yeah.
So I there was an interview for Eric Weinstein.
I know he has a geometric unity theory and there was a similar structure on his.
And I wonder if it was is that from like gauge theory?
I bring it up. Well, partly it has.
Oh, I bring it's really speaking to me now because I was very fortunate.
About a month ago, I have a video on the hop vibration on that on that object.
You got to watch it. Yeah. Well, I was so fortunate.
It blew up a few weeks ago, and now it's like 800,000 views and counting,
which is awesome. So congrats.
Yeah, it's great. Thank you.
And I don't know why it just kind of took off on its own.
Yeah, that's what people shared it, too.
Yeah, maybe.
And I think Eric Weinstein was on some podcasts recently,
so that might have just picked it up.
But people are really drawn to this this geometric object for some reason.
A lot of a lot of the comments have been people seeing this while,
say, meditating or an altered state of consciousness.
Very cool. I mean, a lot of people.
And I mean, that's probably not so uncommon for.
And a geometric object that's kind of interesting and has,
you know, an undulate and stuff like that.
But but I want to know if there was any like deeper significance behind.
Yeah, so I'll cover because it's not in the story.
Yeah, I could tell you the story.
And I think I don't think she would mind me saying this.
So the artist's name, Francesca Lorenzini,
and on Instagram, she's Francesca Acacia.
But she had all this art that was kind of she has a background
in psychology and philosophy.
So it's very scientific and database.
And so I'll link to I'll link to our stuff, too.
Yeah, yeah, that'd be awesome.
So I was looking through all of that art to like find
the right thing, because I knew that had a certain stick.
I have a few artist friends, too.
I had in mind and the original one fell through.
They just didn't have time.
And it was going to be very similar to Anika Harris,
this conscious cover where it's like all the sprawling organically,
like kind of cosmic stuff.
And that's where we were going to go with.
But since she kind of stole the I mean, she didn't know about it.
But I mean, I got scooped on that idea.
So I was looking for this picture and I saw that and I asked her
where she got it from.
And she was like, I did acid like I saw that.
I bring that up because you said people see that.
So she had a psychedelic experience where she saw something like this.
But then she went out looking for it and she found that.
And it was like a MATLAB data visualization that someone had made.
Yeah. But she tweaked it.
She tweaked it.
And then we put the person in it and we put it on the background.
It's beautiful.
But I didn't I didn't know what the structure was called even.
And I had heard about those structures and I knew it was something like that.
But I don't know if it's exactly the same thing.
Oh, it is. I'm 99 percent sure it is.
It shows loops and levels.
It shows like the theme of the book, sort of like this recursive nature.
And that's kind of mine.
I think it's an important structure.
It's technically a it's a mapping from a four
hypersphere onto a traditional what we would call traditional sphere.
So it's the fiber bundled and you can visualize it in many different ways.
You just cut away most of the fibers.
And those are sort of that's the visualization that she has there.
And there are perhaps I don't quite know.
I can't quite tell how important it is in physics.
Apparently, there are seven, seven or eight different
applications of it in fundamental physics situations.
I've been trying to reach out to the physicist who wrote a paper about it
like 20 years ago, but I can't get in touch with him.
So maybe I'll talk to Eric Weinstein about it
because he thinks it's the most important object in the universe.
But I can't tell, honestly, I don't want to.
I can't tell either.
I have an audience that I'm just not sure how important it is.
It could be very important.
It could be, you know, I don't know enough.
I don't know enough Eric Weinstein's interesting
because he's a person where I feel like I know a lot about science.
I do not know enough about math that you to understand
whether he's got some substantial ideas or not.
So that's something I want to deep dive into
because anytime anyone's like I figured it out,
I think it's worth looking into.
But like I have no idea if it's important as he says to.
It's interesting. I definitely want to learn more about it.
But I do I do think it is.
I mean, some in some way, like that's why I used it.
I think it captures everything.
And I think we're like an early stage in mathematics
where we haven't started to understand.
I've been talking to people about this, like recursive sets and stuff.
There's these structures.
I do think he's on to something and we need to to learn more about it.
But yeah, I think if anything,
it kind of supports this idea that reality is structured
through loops and levels, which we didn't really talk about.
But there's there's hierarchical organization
and there's all these feedback loops.
And so I think it probably is like
some kind of key to unlocking the secrets of reality.
Yes, possibly.
And it's funny because we didn't talk about it.
And I think you do mention in the book,
but Douglas Hofstadter's girl, Esher Bach,
which is all about loops and levels.
And I read that like two summers ago for the first time
and blew my mind. Yeah.
But I will say since that book, my favorite book is yours.
The romance of reality.
Please go out and read it, people. It's fantastic.
So thanks so much, Colin.
This has been a lot of fun.
Yes, I can't wait for round two.
I have a bunch of questions I'll say for next time.
And I just really appreciate your time.
Thank you, Bobby. Let's do it.
All right. Yeah, it's a lot of fun.
