The holographic principle is basically,
and a hologram at any point is the information
for the whole object, the whole scene,
the whole cup, the whole ball, the whole plate.
Berkson was far more famous than Einstein
in the first two decades of the 20th century,
which is kind of mind-boggling just to think of now.
Berkson and Einstein had a history in 1922, I believe.
The story is the myth perhaps is that that debate
prevented Einstein from winning the Nobel Prize that year.
Is that true?
Yes, right.
There was only one problem, and that was that
there was a war going on, and I had been drafted
as soon as I got out of the seminary
because my draft status was no longer 4D, which was exempt.
So I ended up going into the Marine Corps,
and I was actually in a long-range reconnaissance group
plowing through the jungle triumph,
with six guys in the middle of nowhere in the jungle
being dropped up in helicopters, et cetera, et cetera.
One of Gibson's big ideas was affordance theory, right?
He was that we see...
Affordance is a big thing, yes.
We see what is the usefulness of the objects,
and we see that kind of space.
It reminds me quite a bit of Donald Hoffman's theories
around we see the world in terms of
one of the most fit for us as organisms
rather than what's actually there.
But I know you've done a video on Hoffman.
Right.
We're gonna blow Hoffman away here, but let me go back.
Just for one...
Could you tell us about that mystical experience,
what that was like?
Shall we say all of a sudden just kind of
laying on the deck, kind of like, wow, what's going on?
And what one felt was that suddenly
that there was this other being that you actually were.
And this being was infinite.
You and this being had been the same being forever.
I guess I'm reminded of a statement by Thomas Merton,
the great contemplative monk that a Catholic contemplative
monk in a statement was in true contemplative state,
or actually he meant a mystical state.
All concept of sin dissolves because this being
that you are is obviously a divine being and cannot sin.
And so when you brought up in the Catholic framework,
sin is very much a doctrine and a dogma,
and you're worried about mortal sins and venial sins
and confessing sins and so on and so forth.
The whole thing just dissolved because it's felt to be ridiculous.
It's felt to be no longer applicable.
And the whole world was just one gigantic sea of love, you know?
I mean, the ecstasy was so intense,
I almost had to have it turned off.
And there was another interesting concept
that must have come from deep in my being
because I got this, all is just.
There was another was justice, everything.
I must have been worried about injustice.
I still am, but at that time it was like,
well, everything is just.
So it was very intense ecstatic experience.
Rather, each instant penetrates,
permeates the next, like the notes of a melody,
each note penetrates, permeates the next.
Some melodic transformation, organic continuity.
How is these bits, how are they suddenly becoming
concrete coffee cups with liquid in them?
Stirring, rotating, right?
Come on, when you look at the conception, it's ludicrous.
It is not Berkson's conception of holographic feel.
It's a 2D bit hologram.
Sorry, but not the same thing.
Not even worth looking.
See, you got me mad.
No, that's okay.
I mean, you're passionate about it, I get it.
How is this theory, Berkson in general,
how does this influence your day-to-day life
for your moment's moment existence, if it does at all?
I, for one, think that science, physics, psychology,
cognitive science, given Berkson's framework,
absolutely backs the spiritual vision of man,
the Zen vision, if nothing more,
but probably also the Hindu vision
of what our actual capabilities are.
I think that there's no conflict between science
and this whole notion that's permeating people's minds
right now that neuroscience says we're just human robot forms
with no spiritual component whatsoever
is utterly destroyed by Berkson
and gives us a very solid grounding in science
and our own mystical experience that supports it.
So I guess bottom line from that perspective,
Berkson is a great comfort.
And if people wanna shed the transhumanist vision
of the idea where we're gonna all get a nice bunch of chips
because it's just all we really are anyhow
and just become enhanced robots.
And also there is no God, there's no karmic laws
and et cetera, et cetera that they'll get into Berkson
and you'll see quickly how just shallow and superficial
and understanding they actually are.
I don't include people like Sam Harris or Daniel Dennett,
et cetera, these people are in my mind
are extremely badly misled
because they extremely do not understand
the problem of consciousness and time.
So that's one thing, after that, it's been a giant pain
because I never thought that after 50,
what are we, 50 years that this particular conception
would be so buried yet.
It's buried in cognitive science
that no one wants to look at.
It's buried in memory theory,
it's buried in perception theory.
It's buried by the Getzonians for great sake.
They won't even look at it.
It's buried by the Berksonians for that matter.
Even Berksonian philosophers can't deal with it.
I can just feel it, they don't want to deal with it.
Oh, it's too much, can't deal with that.
So it's become a frustrating pain
and I feel like my life's mission has been a bust.
So I feel right now, let me tell you the truth,
it's been a good, it was a good try.
Maybe someone later will come along
and take it up because right now, to me,
it's completely being ignored.
Steve Robbins has a PhD in educational psych and psychology
from the University of Minnesota
with a focus on cognitive science.
His thesis covered turn of the 20th century
French philosopher Henri Berkson
and his alternative model of mind.
In the decades since,
he's published academic journal articles
and three books on Berkson slash consciousness.
Before his doctoral work,
he served as a Marine Infantry Officer in Vietnam.
After 33 years in the software industry,
he's now retired on a mini farm in Wisconsin
and runs a YouTube channel with over 80 videos
dedicated to Berkson and his holographic theory.
Steve, thanks for coming on.
Oh, thank you.
It's a pleasure.
Yeah, it's so great to see you and get to chat with you.
I've discovered your channel many weeks ago
and have been digesting each video, they're dense,
but I highly recommend people check them out.
After this conversation, I'll link all of your,
link to your YouTube channel and your website
in the description of my video.
Right, right.
It's a tiny point, either in space,
somewhere in the channel.
Yes, yes.
Which takes a voyage to discover it currently.
Yeah, absolutely.
A lot of competition, you have to,
it's a tough market.
I know, I'm a similar size channel, so I get it.
So Steve, it'd be great if we could kick us off.
I know you have some prepared slides.
If you want, you can pull those up.
I'd love to, I know you have some at the beginning
that goes through your background a little bit
in even more detail, because I love to learn.
I know our audience will have some context on you
to get your story and to figure out what's intrigued you
so much about Berkson.
I consider you one of the world's experts on Berkson.
So if you wouldn't mind, yeah, pulling that up,
we can get into individuals of your story are great too.
I think seeing the trajectory of your career.
We're gonna have to go visual as you noted,
because there's a lot here to comprehend
that two talking heads make it very slow to get across.
So some pictures work well.
Yes, for the viewers, if you like visuals,
Steve provides a lot of visuals on his YouTube channel
and extensive quotes that help elucidate
the concepts you're trying to get across.
We were thinking about beginning where,
how it began with, well, where I come from, I guess is the...
Yeah, let's get your background.
Where'd you grow up?
So I'm basically a Minnesota native.
I'm sitting in Wisconsin right now,
a little bit north of Milwaukee.
I spent a good chunk of my life, like seven years
as a Franciscan seminarian,
down in Chicago and ultimately in Illinois.
In fact, there was a good picture of,
there's my seminary in Illinois and West by Illinois.
And that's not me, but that's some Franciscan.
Just to give a context of what I'm talking about.
Because I spent the last year in 1966 in the vichit
where you're actually dressed up in a habit
and walking around with your cord and your rosary
and et cetera, et cetera.
But I decided to...
Can you tell us what you're up against?
Do you mind giving us some context as to why you
were temporarily, you joined the Franciscan order?
Yeah, I would say this.
My folks were very Catholic, very dedicated, very devout.
And I had some sort of, shall I say, affinity toward this.
I remember reading The Life of St. Francis,
Perfect Joy St. Francis when I was seven years old.
And that already started me off right there.
I was going to be a Franciscan.
Wow, at seven.
Yeah, that division experience was quite the deal.
I was, you know, you got up at midnight
and chanted office, the divine office for an hour
and then meditated and then went back to bed
and got back up at six and did more chanting
of the divine office, you know, tourism logs
or whatever in Latin and then go through the whole day.
There was no talking, et cetera.
But I left in the spring of 1966
because I decided ultimately after seven years
and lots of Latin and Greek and German
the interesting education that was available at the time
in that environment that it wasn't quite the fit for me.
And so I ended up going to the University of Minnesota.
I had to finish off my undergrad.
I crammed two years into one year at Minnesota
and I was in psychology and political science.
I was actually political science was my thing.
But I liked psychology in the mind.
And, but that, that little place there was the absolute
haunt of skin air and behaviorism and his rats.
And the very last course I had in the spring of 66
was by a professor from Michigan
who was teaching Piaget and cognitive development
and the whole theory that actually there's something
in the brain that skinner denied.
For skinner you weren't even supposed to,
the brain was off limits.
You didn't look in the brain, but here you have Piaget
talking about cognitive development.
And that somehow turned me back on to psychology
and there was only one problem and that was this,
that there was a war going on.
And I had been drafted as soon as I got out of the seminary
because my draft status was no longer 4D,
which was exempt.
And so I ended up going into the Marine Corps
for reasons I won't go into.
And I was actually in a long range reconnaissance group
plowing through the jungle, trying,
with six guys in the middle of nowhere in the jungle
being dropped up in helicopters, et cetera, et cetera.
So I spent 68, 69 doing that.
And-
Wow.
Steve, thank you for your service.
These are always interesting experiences.
And I came back to the States and I guess that's a piece
I didn't, it's hard to picture here, but I was very,
I call it, involuted because I was,
when you go through an experience like that,
you're wanting to find what's the meaning of life
and what the heck is this all about?
And so you sort of go into an intense inward state
and in that state, toward the end,
I was in North Carolina on the sea coast,
in the inland waterway.
I was living with three other ex-officers
and they were still officers in the Marines,
but on top of a yacht basin, yacht club,
but I had what one would call a mystical experience
and which again had an impact on me
because I'm used from the seminary from a course
I took an epistemology, which I didn't have a clue
what was going on, but there's something problematic
with the relationship of subject to an object.
And we'll come back to that in this discussion,
but that mystical experience sort of enhanced
that whole perception that, oh, this is quite interesting.
And you see Piaget, back to him,
he was sort of describing how the child starts out
and actually kind of a mystical state
where he's one with the world
and only gradually does he learn
that he's a self among other selves,
an object among other objects,
a force among other forces
and that he has an identity himself
with respect to this other matrix of beings,
forces and objects.
And so in essence, it's the description
of how one goes from a, should we say,
infatmistic to, excuse me,
needing to zen koan to break through
back to this original state
or where you are one with the universe, shall we say.
So that all struck me.
In fact, that kind of became my thought in that,
well, this is what I really should maybe look at
if I go back to the University of Minnesota,
which my next arrow says back to Minnesota in 1971.
Steve, do you mind, Steve?
Sorry, I hate to interrupt you
because you're in a great flow here,
but if you care to share,
and I know it might be a very personal experience,
so please, if you don't want it, if you don't care to you,
but could you tell us about that mystical experience,
what that was like?
It's a little hard to describe,
but it was, I kind of found myself,
shall we say, all of a sudden,
just kind of laying on the deck,
kind of like, wow, what's going on?
And this, what one felt was that suddenly
that there was this other being that you actually were.
And this being was infinite.
You and this being had been the same being forever.
And I guess I'm reminded of a statement by Thomas Merton,
the great contemplative monk,
the Catholic contemplative monk,
in his statement was in a true contemplative state,
or actually he meant a mystical state.
All concept of sin dissolves
because this being that you are is obviously a divine being
and cannot sin.
And so when you're brought up in the Catholic framework,
sin is very much a doctrine and a dogma,
and you're worried about mortal sins and venial sins
and confessing sins, et cetera, et cetera.
And this whole thing just dissolved
because it's felt to be ridiculous.
It's felt to be, no longer can be,
it's no longer applicable.
And the whole world was just one gigantic sea of love.
I mean, the ecstasy was so intense,
I almost had to have it turned off.
And there was another interesting concept
that must have come from deep in my being
because I got this all as just.
There was another was justice, everything.
I must have been worried about injustice.
In fact, I still am, but at that time it was like,
well, everything is just.
And so it was very intense ecstatic experience.
And with the awareness that there really wasn't no death,
you had been this being, this whole notion of sin fell away
because, well, there's lots of implications in that.
So, yeah, that's pretty much the content thereof.
Okay, and it wasn't long thereafter.
I mean, that, well, it's kind of funny
because I lived with another one of the tenants
that lived with us, his nickname was Duke.
He had been over in Vietnam for, well, 18 months.
The normal 12 month tour and then his troops,
his platoon turned them on to marijuana
because they thought he was a cool guy.
And he re-extended for six months just to do the marijuana.
Wow.
And then he'd be walking around.
He was in LSD and he could be on an LSD trip.
You never knew it, you know?
Wow, interesting guy.
And because I had gotten out of the ring
or about a week after that mystical experience,
he took me on an LSD trip, which was quite interesting,
which also helped in the ultimate breakthrough
one needs to understand Berkson.
Because Berkson, as we're going to point out,
is very zen, very mystical.
And people that are not zen and not mystical
and don't have this intuition,
I think have a very hard time understanding Berkson.
So, yeah, so like I said,
the arrow, I ended up back at the University of Minnesota
end of fall of 1970, starting 71.
I'm back in graduate school in educational psychology.
It was really called the Cognitive Foundations of Education.
It's really a cognitive psychology thing.
Philosophy was, and ultimately,
computer science is going to come along.
Right, yeah.
Because that was the, 72 was the big year
that computer science swept into academics
into cognitive psychology.
And the interesting thing you and I talked about before
was how I hit Berkson.
And the reason was I found a course right away
with a Dr. Bart, who was into Berkson, was into Piaget.
And it was a discussion about,
or devoted to Piaget's group theory,
the use of mathematical groups,
which I think he got from Ernst Kassier,
and initially, the great French phenomenon,
or German phenomenologist philosopher.
And my thing was, I was going to write something
about the epistemology of gene Piaget.
This came from my one course in the seminary
on epistemology and my association
with discovery of Piaget at the end.
And I had no idea what I was going to do,
but I thought it was cool.
And Dr. Bart says, well, why don't you write
a comparison of Berkson to Piaget?
And I thought, oh, okay.
I'm thinking, who's Berkson?
I have no clue who Berkson, but I can do that.
Sure, I can do that.
Oh my God, do that.
So I discovered, you know, you go to the library
and you find books on Berkson,
because you're never going to,
or you wouldn't want to read Berkson right off the bat.
But you find it's going to distill it for you, hope.
And by will and car, I found a book on Berkson.
And this is what I ran across right off the bat
in about three or four pages in the car.
This statement by Berkson,
questions related to subject to an object,
do the distinction in the union,
what's it put in terms of time rather than a space?
And I thought, whoa, that's cool, subject to an object.
I have no clue what that thing meant.
I mean, what is that?
That's why I have the Zen picture there.
It's a column.
Yeah.
It's like, what is the sound of one hand flapping?
Who is it that sees?
Okay.
It's a coin that you have to contemplate.
Well, I didn't know what that meant,
but that was enough to tell me
that something cool is going on.
Do you mind, Steve,
if we quickly just give folks a context
as to when Berkson lived, what is-
Oh, yeah.
I mean, I know, but you're the expert, so.
Well, of course, I forgot when he was born right after that.
Yeah.
I mean, yeah, mid-1800s, late-1800s.
Yeah.
Well, he's writing his thesis in 1889, okay?
His thesis was time and free will.
That was the title of it, 1889.
So he's probably about 20,
we can probably go back to about 1879
or something like that when he was roughly born.
So all seems so much for my Berkson expertise
right off the bat, down the drain.
But he was obviously French.
He was quite brilliant.
I mean, he was extremely diplomatic.
His classmates said he could destroy your theory
in a matter of a few sentences,
but he did it very diplomatic and nicely.
He won at 18 a very prestigious French prize in mathematics.
And he greatly then disappointed his mathematics professor
because he decided he was gonna go into philosophy.
And that professor said, well, you could have been a politician.
I just can be a philosopher.
And I'm pointing this out because there's a great mythology
about Berkson ultimate
because he ultimately gets in a big argument
with Einstein over relativity.
And I think he beat the heck out of Einstein
in terms of proper interpretation of relativity.
That's another story we may not even get into.
But the myth is that he did really understand mathematics.
And even Einstein ultimately admitted,
well, yes, Berkson totally understands the theory of relativity,
but believe me, when you look at Berkson's book on relativity,
he just dismantles, disdisex,
and reconstructs the whole theory mathematically.
And obviously, effortlessly.
Their famous debate, Berkson and Einstein
had a famous debate in 1922, I believe.
And as a true, I mean, the story is the myth, perhaps,
is that that debate prevented Einstein
from winning the Nobel Prize that year.
Is that true?
Yes, right.
And there's a whole book on it,
and I'm gonna join a canalist
called The Philosopher and the Physicist,
which is the great title,
going through the debate.
Unfortunately, she completely misses the actual essence
of the debate, which is a problem.
And Berkson, one of my pieces of research,
this person claimed that Berkson
was far more famous than Einstein
in the first two decades of the 20th century,
which is kind of mind-boggling to think of now.
Right, because what happened is,
he published his time in free will,
which was taking the problem of free will
in the context of the nature of time,
which still is ignored today completely.
You can read Dennett, and A, you don't see Berkson mentioned,
B, you don't see time mentioned,
you know, Dennett on free will, then Dennett.
And in fact, almost all of the current discussions
on free will, he follows it up.
He spends five years studying memory difficulties,
aphasias, amnesias, and lesions to the brain,
and comes out with this book,
I got a picture of their matter in memory of 1896,
because his whole problem was,
does the brain actually store experience?
Does it store that coffee cup out there in front of my guy there
with the stirring spoon, that experience of the coffee stir?
Is that stored in the brain?
And his point was, the whole theory of consciousness
rests on this question,
is experience stored in the brain?
And again, you won't find that question ever mentioned anywhere,
not by charmers, not by straws,
and not by any of the people that are the supposed great theorists
of consciousness nowadays,
just simply not understood.
The bottom line, his analysis of the subject of all the phenomena
of memory research at the time,
was that it couldn't be stored in the brain,
that you did not have to have that hypothesis,
which is now a dogma, that memory is stored in the brain.
In fact, all that could be happening is that the brain,
when it's damaged, simply doesn't,
let's say, form the proper neural patterns
or modulating wave patterns, I'll call it,
that allow the memory to be re-instantiated,
the original experience, but not from within the brain itself.
So that's another whole question we ultimately,
probably actually quite won't get into,
but we'll see part of it.
And then, in 1907,
he followed up with a book called Creative Evolution,
which was a tour de force on the problem of evolution,
the problem of Darwinian evolution.
He was not a fan of Darwinian evolution.
And really, the whole nature of the evolution of the universe.
I mean, Tegard Deschardin,
who actually, I was reading at the time,
my mystical experience, I should say,
was the great Catholic Jesuit,
kind of a mystic theorist,
was inspired by Berks' work, Creative Evolution.
And he was launched it by that point into quite a bit of fame,
and famed them, to the point where the ladies of Paris
wanted to attend his lectures,
and there was discussions of whether you'd hold the lectures
in the Paris Opera Hall,
because the attendance was so great.
Yeah, he was a local celebrity in Paris, right?
This, of course, also generated its own self-resistance,
because now you had other academics that were like Bruch and Russell
that were extremely upset.
Should we say, we won't use the word jealous,
but they didn't like this, too much popularity.
And Bruchton took a lot of shots.
The bottom line to not make us too long is that his popularity,
well, again, he really emerged back in 1922, like you noted,
because he had, being a great theorist of time that he was,
his ears pricked up when he discovered that Paul Langevan
had announced what's called a twin paradox,
do you remember where the twin leaves the earth and the rocket
comes back and he's ageless in his brother?
And Bruchton thought that was a complete misuse of relativity.
It destroyed the logical consistency of relativity.
Hence, he began his arguments and got, ultimately,
Scott Einstein wrote the book Duration and Simultaneity.
And that sort of began this period.
He was actually working with Einstein,
the League of Nations at the time, too.
So he was somewhat prominent in politics at the time,
but that was beginning of his gradual descent into obscurity
and wading into wings, as I like to know,
was behaviorism, skin area and behaviorism,
the analytical philosophy,
which is very antithetical to Bruchton's continental philosophy.
And he ended up dying of pneumonia after standing in the line
for a long time in Paris, 1941,
occupied by the Germans, by the Nazis.
He had caught pneumonia.
He was going to declare himself a Jew publicly as the Nazis were demanding.
So he died of pneumonia and that was the end of Mr. Bruchton.
And as I said, he sort of then went into obscurity.
And so that's him.
So meanwhile, someone like me comes along and discovers this quote.
We were sitting right here.
Yeah, this quote, back to the quote.
Yeah, thank you for the context.
It's helpful.
Okay.
So that began my reading of that book Matter of Memory.
I mean, I must have read it a dozen times.
In backwards, forwards, from the middle, outwards, every direction,
because when you hit Matter of Memory,
you really don't know what's going on.
And the book was considered, especially its first chapter,
obscure even by his adherents,
by Bruchton's adherents, and we'll see why.
So I'm in Minnesota.
And what's about to happen in Minnesota is the computer model of
mine is going to sweep in in 1972.
The whole whole notion of the brain is a computer.
This, my advisor in the education psychology side was very enamored
of a book by Newell and Simon called General Problem Solving,
Human Problem Solving, which went through their book with their model
of a computer model, the general problem solver,
which tried to simulate solving problems the way humans do,
like cryptorhythmic problems, like Donald plus Gerald equal Robert,
you know, which we have to sign numbers to each letter,
like Donald and Gerald, Robert, or chess.
There's another one of the things in their books.
And so that swept in.
And the other side of the story I was in related to was
on a pure psychology side was
what eventually became my thesis advisor, Dr. Bob Shaw.
And let me, I think that's where we're having subject to an object here.
I forgot to put that.
Oh, I have to remember my source of my thing.
So let's, let's, before I go to Shaw, let's go to this point in Berkson.
Here's another of the colons.
This is in chapter one of that book.
So, but isn't that up?
Berkson is talking about how do we see the coffee cup out there?
And in space extended out there on the table.
How do we see that coffee cup?
Is there a photograph of the coffee cup in the brain?
And he says, well, obviously, is it obvious the photograph?
He said, I got to keep my things in order here.
But neuroscience at the time was developed enough to know that there was no coffee image in the brain.
You couldn't, you weren't going to find an image of the coffee cup in the brain,
which is why I have the little red circle there with the line through it.
So he says, excuse me, but isn't that obvious?
The photograph, if the photograph there be is already taken already developed in the very heart of things.
And at all points in space.
No metaphysics, no physics can escape this conclusion.
Build up the universe with atoms.
Each is subject to the action, variable and quantity and quality according to the distance.
Exerted and done by all material atoms.
Exerted on it by all material atoms.
Bring in Faraday, centers of force.
The lines of force submitted in every direction from every center.
Bring to bear upon each the influence of the whole material world.
Call up the Laditsian monads.
Each is the mirror of the universe.
So that is key to his answer to how we see the coffee cup.
But you can see it's yet another koan.
It's koan number two along with subject to an object in terms of time.
So I have no idea what that meant when I read it.
He went on, he was actually before this, he was talking about the nature of the universe.
Take any object, for example, like the coffee cup there.
Any object is obliged to transmit the whole of what it receives,
to oppose every action with an equal and contrary reaction.
To be in short, really the road by which pass in every direction and modifications
or what can be termed real actions.
It's visualized waves,
propagated throughout the immensity of the entire universe.
Okay.
So he says, so only if we consider any other place in the universe,
we can regard the action of all matter is passing through it without resistance and without loss.
And the photograph of the whole is translucent.
Here is wanting behind the plate the black screen on which the image could be shown.
Our zones of indetermination, there is talk about organisms,
centers of free action that can act upon the world,
play in some sort the part of that screen.
They add nothing to what is there, the effect merely this.
The real action, those waves passing through the coffee cup that
the coffee cup is reflecting and sending back to all the other points in the universe.
They affect merely this, the real action passes through those waves,
and the virtual action remains.
Okay.
So if anyone here listening knows what this means already, let me know.
Unless you've picked up what I've said, but you can see that this is pretty much co-on like,
very difficult to understand what's going on.
And he's talking about the problem of receiving the coffee cup,
seeing that coffee cup out there on the kitchen table,
which is really the hard problem.
And we'll go back to that.
That's the hard problem.
Always see the coffee cup out there with this qualia.
Okay.
Well, this is where I was going.
My other advisor, who eventually my thesis advisor was Bob Shaw, the bottom there,
Robert E. Shaw.
Now, he was a student of Gibson at Cornell for a couple of years.
Gibson topped the picture, J.J. Gibson.
There we have his dates, 1940, 1974, 1979.
To me, he was the greatest theorist of perception that walked the planet.
Maybe next to Bergson, but actually pure theorist of perception on philosopher.
But he was very philosophical too.
He founded the subject of, what we call the subject of ecological psychology,
which is, there's now a journal today, the Journal of Ecological Psychology.
It's a whole field or subfield in the study of perception.
And Shaw, my advisor there, was the founder of that journal, the Journal of Ecological Psychology.
He obviously knew Gibson.
He studied with Gibson at Cornell for a couple of years.
Why he was studying abstract automata theory at Cornell.
Abstract automata theory is, shall we say, another level of abstraction above computer science.
It's the abstract logical description of finite state machines.
And Bob was a brilliant guy, as we'll see.
I think it'll become through really evident.
Gibson, if I may, had just such quick, one of Gibson's big ideas was Affordance theory, right?
Affordance is a big thing, yes.
We see what is the usefulness of the objects.
We see that kind of space.
It reminds me quite a bit of, seems analogous to, although I'm sure there's differences,
between Donald Hoffman's theories around sort of our fitness.
We see the world in terms of one of the most fit for us as organisms, rather than what's actually there.
But I know you've done a video on Hoffman.
We're going to blow Hoffman away here, but let me go back just for one thick thing here.
Sure, sure.
But we won't do it here.
No, I just thought it looked quick to answer.
Just say, let's go back to, look at the very bottom line, okay?
Virtual action.
That's affordances, as we'll see.
Just a little preview.
Yeah, I was going to ask you, I know virtual action, there's a few terms that you use that,
when we get to them, I am going to stop and say, let's really define this and get this down.
So virtual action is essentially affordances.
Okay.
Well, yes, but it's worse than that, so we're going to see.
We have to take it in a holographic context, so back to where I was.
Okay, so, let's see what my next slide is.
Okay, so we're going to get there.
So, in 1972, like I said, this computer model swept in.
I attended a seminar with Shaw, and he went through Feigenbaum's book on computers and thought.
And Shaw simply destroyed the whole notion that the computer model of mine had anything to do with reality back then, already in 1972.
Around that time, also, Prebum, Carl Prebum, I don't have a picture of here,
published his book called Languages in the Brain, where he argued that the brain was a hologram.
And that accounted for how the brain stored memory.
I was trying to buttress the findings of Carl Lashley, where Lashley had tried to destroy memories in the brain and couldn't do it, and decided that, which basically,
what Lashley was doing, he was also destroying anything that would be considered neural nets today, but that's another question.
And Lashley decided that memories won't be somehow very distributed, and holography, as we'll see, is the essence of distribution.
And Carl was trying to argue that, and he had a very minor theory of perception at the time, in Languages in the Brain, how we see that coffee cup out there,
that maybe the whole holography had something to do with that, but it was a real coherent theory.
But Shaw had invited Prebum to come to a conference, and talk at a conference at the University of Minnesota, and pretty obviously the two had discussions.
And that, shall we say the next day that Prebum was there, Shaw was giving his seminar, and he started talking about holography.
And so we're going to quickly talk about holography, the construction of a hologram.
And so in the construction of a hologram, we've got the hologram plate there, and we've got a form of laser light to the left.
That would be a laser, a coherent frequency laser.
And so the waves from that laser are hitting the hologram plate, and then, I don't have a picture there, but normally some of those waves are bounced off of half-mirror to the object or the scene,
the pyramid or the ball there.
So you would have some waves bouncing off the ball in the pyramid and bouncing back toward the plate.
So that's called the object wave, as I've got labeled there.
So the hologram is the interference pattern of these two waves, the reference wave and the object wave.
And I was going to put a nice picture of an interference pattern there, and I forgot, but it looks, it's just a jumble of lines that look nothing like the pyramid and the ball.
But that's our hologram.
It's a jumble of lines, the interference, the recording of the interference pattern of those two waves.
And now, the reconstruction process is interesting.
If I beam a wave of light, a coherent wave of the same frequency as the original wave, of the original reference wave, that's now called the reconstructive wave, the reconstructing waves that are just labeled at frequency one.
We're beaming that back through the hologram plate.
And what is specified is the source of this original object wave front, namely the pyramid and the ball.
So notice, that's called the virtual image, virtual action, but now virtual image.
That's the virtual image, and you can move your head around.
Notice the viewer up there.
He can sort of, he's seeing the behind the plate as it were out in space, the image of the pyramid and ball, and he can move his head around and sort of see the side of the pyramid and the side of the balls.
It's a 3D image, so to speak.
So that's the reconstruction process.
Let me see what my next slide is.
Now, one can store multiple wave fronts on a hologram.
So on the left there, I've got the frequency one case, a reference wave of frequency one being used to store the pyramid and the ball interference pattern.
And I can change my reference wave frequency, and therefore my reconstructive wave frequency, frequency two, store an image of the of a cop.
And, and that that way from also interference wave interference patterns also on a plate.
And so if I modulate the reconstructive way from frequency frequency one, where I'm specifying the pyramid ball to frequency two, I'm specifying now the cop.
I can modulate it back to frequency one and see the ball again.
So I can modulate the reconstructive wave.
Okay, so far so good.
I'm in the footsteps of Shaw here.
So then what Shaw says is, well, rather than looking at the brain as being the hologram, what if we look at the universe as being the hologram, the universe is the holographic field.
In other words, as he said, the hologram is not in the head, the head is in the hologram.
And the brain is acting or is creating the reconstructive wave, passing through the holographic field and specifying a source within the field, the coffee cup stirring spoon the table.
Okay.
So he's flipping pre Brahms thesis around completely.
And that's when I realized what Berkson's talking about.
But isn't that obvious that the photograph, I got to move your picture.
That's okay.
This is that obvious that the photograph of the photograph there be is already taken already developed in the very heart of things.
And at all points in space.
What Berkson was describing in that obscure chapter one was that the universal field of matter field of matter is a holographic field.
Each point and that that's a little slide I forgot to do.
Because each point in that field is is the reflection of has the information for all other points in the field.
If I go back to a slide here, for example, if you look at the cup.
Okay.
Visualize it as a set of points.
Okay.
Where each point is giving rise to a a spherical wave.
Okay.
This is in the.
Let me go back one more.
I mean, it's related to what you say.
There's clearly a relation to quantum mechanics here where, you know, waves and particles, etc.
I'm sure.
I wouldn't.
I wouldn't go into the quantum mechanics of black hole and that's it.
Okay.
Okay.
But here.
So the cup go back to the ball each.
This is we're constructing a hologram.
Okay.
Each point on the ball can be considered as giving rise to a little spherical wave that goes out toward that plate.
All right.
And covers the entire plate.
Okay.
So, so the information for any one point in that ball covers the entire plate plate.
But conversely, then at when you realize a whole set of points of that ball covering that plate, then that at any point in the plate is the information for the entire ball.
Okay.
So one one point, the spherical wave from one point covers the entire plate.
But now when you see there's a whole set of spherical waves covering the entire plate realize that any point the plate is the information for the whole ball and the pyramid.
So, so the whole of graphic principles basically that in a hologram at any point is the information for the whole object.
The whole, the whole scene, the whole cup, the whole ball, the whole plate.
So that's back to this.
We were the photograph is already taken already developed a very hard of things in all points and all points in space at every point in space is the information for the whole.
So we don't need a photograph and then you've got this next quote.
Our zones of indetermination in organisms play in some sort the part of that screen they had nothing that what is there.
The effect merely this the real action passes through the virtual action remains.
So, remember in the previous picture, you know, you're seeing the virtual image, the virtual image of the cup, or the.
So that's the virtual action remaining.
So, what would be the real action?
Well, the real actions going back to the other quote is every all those.
The remember Berks and talk about the whole this is massive set of real actions were that if you look at the my little picture there of all the all of the lines and waves in my my little symbol symbol of the universe as a holographic field.
We're only picking out that set of real actions.
Those waves that are interesting to us that is that actually relate to the body's capability for action.
Okay, so hence why why it's virtual action you're seeing how you can act.
You're seeing the possibility of action.
I can act on that cup I can act on that on that table.
I see this one again, or it's enough.
In other words, the cup presents affordances.
Sure, the virtual action and the real action would be everything else that we don't perceive.
Yes.
Yes, we're embedded in the field of real actions.
What we're seeing is the virtual is the virtual action that subset of the real actions.
That the brain is in the body of picking out is interesting to it that relate to its capability of action.
When you upgrade Berks into remember the holographic model.
The notion of a hologram wasn't discovered until 1947 by Gabor.
Matter of memory is 1896.
That's why no one understood it.
It didn't have this physical model there to get it.
Even when I tell people about it now they still get it.
That's another question.
But when you upgrade Berks and then into the holographic language, you'd be taking these quotes.
You'd be saying, well, the universe is a holographic field and the brain is a reconstructive way specific to a virtual image within that field, the coffee cup and stirring spoon.
As we'll see, it's a modulated reconstructive way because coffee stirring itself is very dynamic.
All these events are dynamic.
The brain is constantly being modulated, dynamically transforming as we'll see.
Can you define what modulation is?
Well, that was back to the picture where we simply were changing from frequency 1 to frequency 2 to frequency 3.
We're modulating a wave to a different frequency.
But as I understand...
Like frequency modulation.
Sure, so forgive my ignorance, but I think when I think of modulation and let's try to be on the same page,
I understand it as a signal that's sent to help the transmission of information or help...
See, this is where the limits of my understanding kind of go, but does that make sense?
It's like sending another signal through a signal.
Right, but you simply...
Even on that framework, I think you're trying to get to, you're basically modulating the wave into a certain pattern or form.
So that it carries my...
You modulate that wave, so it carries my voice pattern, my voice frequency.
So that it's reflective of my voice up and down.
It's a more complex modulation.
In fact, this is going to be, and ultimately this is going to be a very complex form of modulation that we're talking about here.
But the simplest form is you're simply changing from frequency 1 to frequency 2 to frequency 3 and back to frequency 2.
Simply modulating that wave to the different frequencies.
That's the simplest form of it.
So, well, I got to see where I'm going here.
So, as I was saying, so the brain is in this framework is a modulated reconstructive wave.
Put the brain here, and it's specific to specifying the cup.
Now that cup is right where it says it is.
Now here's another, I have in the picture, modulation here, modulated reconstructive wave.
Let me move from frequency 2 to the cup, frequency 3, the wine glass, frequency 1.
Again, changing that.
What would be the purpose of changing the frequencies?
Well, if you remember, each of those objects was stored with a specific reference wave of the same frequency.
That cup, that cube was stored with a reference wave of frequency 1.
So the interference pattern is kind of related to frequency 1.
It's a function of frequency 1.
The cup was frequency 2.
And the interference pattern, the way the waves all meshes a function of that frequency 2 and the object wave from...
Sure.
So, if you could, in our moment to moment existence, how many frequency waves are we talking about in terms of what we can perceive?
Are we talking like an astronomically large number?
Well, what we're going to see here is that this is a...
Talking in terms of a simple frequency like this is a way to get the mind going into how this process works, how the holographic specification process works.
But when you're talking the brain and the event that's driving the brain, the name of this coffee stirring,
you're going to have an extremely complex pattern, modulation pattern, we'll call it,
where the notion that it's a simple frequency kind of fades into...
And you're looking at something far more complex.
Sure.
So, hang on, you'll see that in a second when we get there with a little more in Gibson, what has to be brought in.
So, as I'm saying, it's specific to a specifying this wave.
The brain is now specifying the cup right where it says it is in the external field.
It's not right where it says it is.
Common sense says to us when I'm looking at my coffee cup out here in the desk, that's where it is.
It's not constructing an image.
No, it's not an image inside the brain or in some mental space or perceptual space somewhere.
Like you'll get theorists talking about like Yoshabak will say, well, it's in a perceptual space.
Well, what's the perceptual space?
So, this is what's called direct perception.
That is, indirect perception would be the picture up there where the image of the cup is in the cloud.
Shall we say in the mental space or in the brain somehow.
And somehow that corresponds to the world out there in some magical way.
Direct perception says, no, you're directly perceived.
Seeing the cup right where it says it is external in the field.
We're not constructing an image in the brain.
Now, I'm saying, you know, when driving, here we're going to do your question.
What's really driving the modulations?
What I termed the invariant structure of the event.
We'll talk about that where this event is extremely complex.
It's got the velocity flow fields and the swirling of the liquid, the abodic ratios, which are when you're stirring it,
energy of oscillation, the frequency of oscillation ratio to that,
inertial tensors, which have the momentum of the spoon, the various forced momentum of the spoon,
acoustical invariance, like the clinking of the spoon, which is always coordinate with the motion of the spoon, et cetera.
So we're going to go into that because that's going to take us into Gibson.
But every such event has such a structure and that's driving the brain.
We'll get into that.
And it's all being specified at a scale of time because that brain has chemical velocities.
And this is a neural dynamics there, underlying which are chemical velocities,
which can be expressed in the Arrhenius eclage, and it can be modulated too.
It can be changed.
You can drop a catalyst, which lets the reactions occur more quickly with not as much energy,
raise the whole chemical velocities.
So the brain is, we're seeing the world specified at a normal scale.
Normally the buzzing fly, 200 wing beats per second.
If you raise the energy state of the brain, increase the chemical velocities,
it could be specified as a heroin-like fly, barely flapping its wings,
or even raising it still higher, just a cloud of electrons.
So we have to break what I like to call the scale policy, that the world just exists at this scale.
It does not.
There's multiple scales, and the brain is specifying a specific scale.
So this wave is supporting, it's a reconstructive wave, and specific to a scale of time.
So with a fair way to, I'm just trying to perhaps simplify it for the audience,
there's waves, there's a holographic field made up of waves out in the world.
There's waves in my brain, and the waves in my brain are connecting with the waves out in the world.
One could look at it that way.
Okay, simplify.
I mean, that's a really...
But, you know, because there's levels of description, you can see it as waves,
but now, notice I just described, okay, the copycups is set of waves,
but also at another level, and it shows you a scale, it's all these invariance logs.
Okay, the swirling flow field, the adiabatic ratio of energy or oscillation of frequency as I stir.
So, what I had pictured there...
Do you mind just defining invariance for the audience?
We're going to see it in a second.
Oh, great.
Awesome.
Thank you.
We're going there, because this is why I have the picture of Gibson there,
and the fact that Shaw was a student of Gibson.
Because Gibson was the pioneer in describing the importance of invariance laws in the world.
And he saw this information as being part and parcel of the direct specification of the coffee cup out there.
So, here's an example.
Here's an example.
You have what's called a texture gradient.
And the texture gradient is a whole pile of texture units,
my little circles of the texture units, and they recede in the distance.
The horizontal, there's a little mathematical law.
The horizontal distance between each little unit is inversely proportional to the distance from the observer.
S is proportional to 1 over D.
And then the vertical separation going back, notice they get completely, completely compressed.
That separation is special about the law, 1 over D squared.
S, the separation is proportional to 1 over the distance squared from the observer.
So, that's an interesting little thing.
Does that have to do with our field of vision?
Or is this just how...
Sorry, if you could go back a step.
Yeah, because I find this very interesting that there's different laws for horizontal versus vertical.
The point I forgot to mention, these fields are ubiquitous.
These are gravel, this is your gravel driveway, your field of grass, your beach sands, etc.
If I turn it upside down, it becomes the cloud ceiling stretching off in the distance to the back.
If I turn it on angles like this, it becomes the walls receding.
What's being said here is this is an inherent intrinsic mathematical law within these fields, these texture gradients.
And it becomes useful because if I move across this gradient, there's an invariance law relative to those texture rows that specify that the cup stays the constant size.
Notice there's including roughly four texture rows.
If I move it forward, it's now including two texture rows, but its height is doubling.
So as the height doubles, the number of texture rows is halved.
And again, you've got this invariance law where n is the number of rows, s is the height of the cup, or s times n equal k is always a constant.
And so this would be an example of an invariance law where there's this invariant ratio of size to the number of texture rows included as I move the cup back and forth across this gradient,
which is helping specify the role as stable when I move my cup back and forth.
The size of the cup does not change, even though the size is growing under wet retina as I move the cup back and forth toward me.
This ratio is constant, and so I don't perceive the cup as changing size.
I forgot to say two texture rows included with height is doubling.
Here's another one.
This is an optical flow field. So we're putting this whole gradient in motion.
Now it's a gradient of velocity vectors where, again, the value of each vector is proportional to one over the distance squared, again, the distance from the observer.
So the fastest moving vectors are closest to you if I'm standing far away at the border versus optical flow field.
The slowest moving vectors are furthest away near the mountains.
There's a good example as I'm driving along, velocity flow fields.
There's all kinds of interesting little things defined over these flow fields, like the tau ratio, which I've got specified there.
Don't ask me to translate what it means.
You can see it involves the velocity over time.
But this ratio has been shown to be useful for things like coming in for landing because it specifies the severity of impact.
If the tau value is too great that I'm coming up too fast on that flow field is too fast, I'm going to crash.
As a bird coming into land, I'm using this tau value to modulate my wings so that I land nice and softly.
Or as a pilot, I land nice and softly on the runway.
So here we're starting to get a picture of the information in the light and dynamically transforming optical field that the brain is modulating.
The brain is getting into the action systems.
Those ratios are being used to specify virtual action, how I can act on the world.
Here's an example of what's called grasping tau.
As I'm moving the cup back and forth for modulating how I grasp the cup.
Again, optical information is getting into the action systems to modulate and specify how I can act.
Or affordances.
If we get more dynamic, I like to do what I call the Gibsonian cube.
If you were rotating a cube, you'd have a partition set of these flow fields.
The top would be a radial flow field.
As the right side moves toward you, the cube is rotating the opposite direction up there in the corner.
If the side is rotating toward you, it's an expanding flow field.
Directly presented to you, it's just a non-expanding or contracting flow field.
As it rotates away from you, it's a contracting flow field.
The edges and the static features of the cube are really simply sharp discontinuities at the junctures of these flows.
If you think they're not, well, here's an interesting little experiment or demonstration that Shaw discussed.
I've got a rotating cube, a wire edged, and it's got a symmetry period of four.
It carries itself into a symmetry period.
It carries itself onto itself every 90 degrees.
The cube maps right back onto itself every 90 degree turn.
It looks like the same thing again.
It's got a symmetry period of four.
You'll do that four times.
If I strobe the cube at an interval multiple of that symmetry period, four, eight, twelve times per revolution,
I'll get a rigid cube rotating.
I've got a strobe there.
It'll still look like a rigid cube.
Here's my little picture here.
I've got a symmetry period of four, sort of saying the same thing.
In phase, four, eight, twelve.
Out of phase, this would be out of phase strobe, five, nine, thirteen.
It's no longer an integral multiple.
Well, if I do the non-intergal multiple, out of phase strobe,
it becomes a wobbly, non-rigid, plastically deforming, not a cube.
Okay.
Now, one could argue there's a constraint being violated
that normally spatial symmetry that our nice cube carries itself into itself four times per revolution
is no longer being specified.
You expect spatial symmetry should equal a temple symmetry,
but it's not when you add that out of phase cube.
I didn't put another picture here of a rotating ellipse
that if, again, you can decompose the edge of the ellipse
into a whole pile of velocity vectors going around the ellipse,
and if the ellipse rotates too quickly,
it becomes a rigid, a non-rigid, wobbly object again.
So the point being that these forms in the image,
the coffee cup, the table, are very dynamic.
They're dynamic forms.
They're actually qualia themselves.
That's why I said that the whole image is the problem.
I think I mentioned where Chalmers kind of misled us,
that the whole image is qualia.
We're trying to explain the image of the external world.
It's all qualia.
Hence why we need the brain as a reconstructive wave
specifying a portion of the holographic field.
As we'll see, that holographic field is qualitative of itself.
The cube, the coffee cup, is a qualitative portion
of a qualitative field.
So all of these are examples now, I think, of invariance laws.
I think the velocity vectors in the distance,
the height of the cup, the rows occluded, the total ratio,
it's all information that is specifying or useful
part of the specification of the environment,
the external world.
It's not Shannon's definition of information,
nor can it be brought under Shannon's umbrella.
This is Gibson's information.
It's resolutely and adamantly ignored
in the neural net and computer model mind.
As you can see, it can't be.
Why can't it be?
It's obviously important.
It's too important to ignore.
So get put in all together, back to my coffee.
It's got all these invariance laws
defined over that coffee cup.
The radial flow field, an adiabatic invariance,
there's the ratio of energy of oscillation,
the frequency of oscillation.
I moved that spoon.
And inertial tens are defined in various momentum.
These are all defined over time.
You don't find the value of the energy of oscillation
and frequency oscillation as a static, instant, static point.
We'll come back to that.
Acoustical invariance, you've got the spoon
clinking against the cup as the spoon moves and sound.
You've got ratios relative to the extra gradients and flows.
I can move that cup back and forth on the extra gradient,
remember.
Constancy remains the same.
If I had a cubocal cup, I could be rotating my cup.
And now I have that Gibsonian cube with all the flow fields
defining the quote edges and vertices of the cup, et cetera.
Grasping tau, as we noted, for grasping the cup, et cetera.
So back to my picture.
Our little coffee cup, our innocent little coffee cup,
is this invariant structure.
And the invariant structure is, that's what I say,
is driving the modulation of the brain as a reconstructive way.
But I think now, back to your question,
well, can we really talk about quote frequency one
or frequency two, really?
Only in a metaphoric sense that it helps us
understand the holographic reconstructive process.
This is obviously very complex wave form at this point.
If you visualize the brain dynamically changing over time,
being driven by this structure, it's obviously
a very complex structure that's being unfolded into the brain.
And yet, ultimately, the vision is
that it's all comprising this reconstructive way.
And as I noted before, all models of the brain
have to address this dynamic structure.
Because it's obvious to the information that's specifying,
it's obvious to the information that's defining the event,
defining coffee stir.
But neural nets do not and cannot, partly
because they're in this completely different model
in a different model of time.
The neural net is simply an instantiation of a Turing machine.
And the Turing machine is a discrete state model of time,
or removing state 0 to state 1, et cetera, et cetera,
removing state to state as we move that tape.
So you've got an intrinsically different model of time
in the computer model as opposed to what we're going to need
to support this holographic field, reconstructive wave,
invariant structure model.
And we're going to get to that.
We're going to break it out in terms of the computer model
being a discrete view of time.
Yes.
And we're going to, we're about to launch right into that
because that's another piece.
Continuous, OK.
Yeah.
I had one more thing to say about invariance laws.
It's kind of interesting.
Over here, another invariance law.
Here we have the aging of the facial profile.
And the law specifying that aging is such.
If we take a cardioid, which is like a heart shape figure there,
and place it over a skull, and place the skull
on a nice coordinate system or matrix there,
then if we apply what's called a strain transformation, which
expands that coordinate grid in all directions simultaneously,
like stretching a rubber sheet, what you do
is start generating an aging of that profile.
I have a picture there.
If you start with a child, as you do the strain transformation,
you'll get the second picture there,
and then the third.
There's a whole series, obviously.
I just picked out three.
And you can see that we're getting an aging of that profile.
So interesting, because this aging is normally a very slow event.
It takes us, we perceive, we recognize that Joe aged after we,
when we meet him 30 years later, or watch him as he grows.
But the interesting thing is here is that the same law is going to hold
in different space-time partitions of our relativity.
For example, the burden, the essence of relativity,
the real point of it, in Einstein's relativity,
was that the same law holds in either space-time partition,
in the moving, in the stationary system on the bottom right there,
the law is D equal VT.
In the moving system, it's D prime equal VT prime.
It's the same form of law.
It's just I've changed the distance units and the time units
in that moving system, or what I call the moving system.
So the same law holds in each partition D equal VT
or D prime equal to VT prime.
Invariance laws are critical in special relativity.
That's probably the most important piece of special relativity.
It's the importance of invariance laws.
And I got to see what I say here.
Now, if I go back and notice, I said you could raise the energy state
of the body, increase the chemical velocity.
So I could take that buzzing.
And if I raise the chemical velocities, I drop in frankly LSD
at the right proportion.
There's a little paper on that.
You're going to increase the chemical velocities,
but you're going to slow down the specification of the event.
That fly is going to go from 200 wing beats per second
to looking like it's barely flapping its wing.
And I got to keep moving you around.
The slow moving wing of that heron-like fly,
maybe it's a seagull, but we won't argue here.
What does that mean?
Well, it means it's got a relationship to action,
the possibility of action.
I can reach out slowly and grab the wing.
I mean, more startlingly, let's say I raise the energy state enough
so that the fly was stuck still.
I mean, the wing stopped.
Now clearly, I could reach out slowly and grab it.
But this is the exemplar of perception being virtual action.
We're seeing the possibility of action, of how we can act.
This must be so for perception to be ecologically valid
in all partitions.
Because I can change the velocity of processes just by changing
the temperature.
I can get a fever and I can slow down time.
Nature has to have allowed for this.
That is, you have to have invariance laws specifying these events.
That is, the information has to be invariance laws
as invariant to the spacetime partition,
or the energy state of the body.
And the energy state is a range of energy states,
and the time scale that can be specified
is a massive range of time scales.
Again, this is affordances.
It's just an aspect of affordances that the Gibsonians
never seen.
Well, you can see it's too much of a stretch for them.
And I'm going to see why ultimately.
But obviously, if the fly is affording a certain action,
so is the gall affording a certain action.
But it's at a different scale of time.
Change the scale of time, I'm going to change the form of affordance.
So, as I noted, back to where we started,
aging is a rapid event.
If I take it as a rapid event,
let's say that little Joe there is growing right in front of my eyes.
So the same law is employed to guide the modulation of the hand
if I wanted to grasp a transforming head,
the strain on the cardioid.
That's the information that would be getting into the action systems
to guide my grabbing that head as it transforms
at a very rapid rate.
Just a little aspect of the nature,
just the criticality of invariance laws.
So, I noted Gibson was for direct perception.
To him, the environment is directly specified
via all this information.
The brain is resonating to this time extended information.
Another way to put it here in my little box,
the brain is resonating to the invariance in the external event.
And it's directly specifying the image out there.
There's no image in the brain.
That's Gibson.
No one can understand it.
Purvis and Lotto, great perception theorist recently.
There's our little book.
Well, Gibson is now perceived as mystical.
Stephen Leihar, who's the only perception theorist, goes through Gibson.
I've looked at Gibson.
I have no clue how direct perception can possibly be true.
Because for all these people, somehow the image is in the brain
or in that perceptual space, that cloud I had up there.
Again, to make sense, Gibson's direct perception
must be placed within Berkson's holographic
brain as a reconstructive wave framework.
And as we're going to see, it's a notion of time.
And into this, because notion of time.
Another aspect of what implicit aspect, we're specifying the past.
Okay?
The specification is to the past,
to the past extent of the transformation of the holographic field.
The wing beats of that fly.
By the time they get into the brain, they're processed a long gone.
Just 200 wing beats per second.
They're long gone.
So how are we seeing the past?
How is this past specification possible?
Well, what's the barrier to that?
The barrier is this conception of space and time that we have.
I call it the classic metaphysical space and time.
And we're going to compare that to ultimately the temporal metaphysics
of Berkson, which allows the specification of the past.
So the classic metaphysics, in essence, is an abstract space.
It's a three-dimensional continuum of points positions.
I'm showing a two-dimensional continuum of points and positions there.
My little points and positions.
Ultimately, it's a three-dimensional.
We're moving the cup through a three-dimensional continuum of points and positions.
Because it's a space, it's instantly divisible.
In fact, as Berkson calls it, it's a principle of infinite divisibility.
He called it, in essence, a mental diagram, the meshes of which we can contract at will,
that we place beneath the extensity, the true concrete extensity of the concrete world.
We'll talk about extensity a little bit later.
But just imagine it's the concrete world and we place this abstract mental diagram of meshes
that we can make smaller and smaller.
So when we look at motion in this framework, it's taken, as I move that cup from nearer to far
across the continuum, it's taken as a series of, that motion is taken as a series of points
on a line, which, again, is a space.
In that line, the inner space is infinitely divisible.
I can divide it into this little point after point after point.
But between each pair of points, I can imagine there's another line of points.
Again, infinitely divisible.
And so what we end up with is this is an infinite regress.
I can keep dividing.
Between each pair of points, I can do another line.
It's an absurdity because motion is now being reduced to a series of immobilities.
How do you get motion out of a series of immobile points?
And I should add, it's precisely the source of Zeno's paradoxes where I'm taking that line
and I'm having it successively into smaller and smaller hands.
But Achilles never reaches the tortoise because it's infinitely divisible.
I can never quit the process of infinite division.
I can do it with a mathematical convention, but that's a magical mathematical convention
like taking a limit.
But that's a mythology that mathematical convention has actually solved the problem.
Whitehead tried that solution, but it's just a mythology because infinity is infinity.
And the mathematical convention is simply conveniently stopping the infinite division.
Now time is interesting because now it's simply the fourth dimension of this abstract space.
So we really have a four-dimensional abstract space.
It's this series of instants.
So each point along that moving cup is taken as an instant, shall we say.
And so each instant corresponds to a position of the moving cup.
And each instant can be taken as across the whole universe, as though the whole universe
at that point, at instant in time, is a cube of space.
For each cube, the time extent of each cube is a mathematical point equivalent to the mathematical
point on the line.
But as such, each of those blocks is frozen, is static.
You can't move from one block to another.
I jumped ahead of myself here.
But each block, then, is completely homogeneous.
There's zero qualities, especially emotion, because you can't get a block or a series of such blocks
because remember, each block disappears as the next one arrives.
So all you ever have is one block, then the next, and the next, and the next.
So you're not going to get the quality of motion like Valerie Hardcastle's list in the context of a symphony.
The patrons shift in their seats.
The musicians concentrate.
The curtains ever so gently waving.
Those are qualities of motion, which I've never talked about, by the way, the problem of quality.
But these qualities of motion.
So the car, looking at this, in order to reintroduce motion in this metaphysics, actually thought that you had to have,
this is where you needed God because God would have to create each block, then the next block, then the next block,
and the next block.
That's the only way you could get the universe to evolve.
So once you've frozen it, it's a static block.
You're not going to get the next block.
Again, this is precisely the metaphysics underlying the turbine machine and all of computation.
It's why intrinsically, inherently intrinsically, the computer metaphor is not going to be able to deal with what we need for Berkson's framework,
shall we say, and mind.
So let's go to that.
The temporal metaphysics of Berkson.
Berkson, that transformation of the universal field, or motion itself, is indivisible.
It is not a series of discrete states.
Rather, each instant penetrates, permeates the next, like the notes of a melody.
Each note penetrates, permeates the next.
It's a melodic transformation, an organic continuity.
Also, the matter field, and this is characterized by extensity, as I noted.
There's a nice lake there.
That's the concrete material field.
The abstract space placed over it at continual points in positions is not the same thing.
It's the ideal limit of this extensity, but it has never reached it.
It cannot be reached.
It's simply an ideal mathematical limit.
This is why you can't exalt the abstract space into a reality
and make it your starting point for building a model of mind, as does AI.
The brain simply does not dwell in the world of the classic metaphysics.
It deals with the classic metaphysics, that abstract space.
It's created or derived by the brain in its development.
Piaget spends a great deal of time explaining, all the way from 8.0 to 8.7,
it takes to truly construct that abstract space.
Okay.
How's that all?
One point, Steve.
The top two points here.
I'm sure people disagree, but the current consensus in modern physics
is that space and time is discreet.
Yes.
They would break it down in terms of the plank.
Of course, we don't experience it this way because it's so miniscule,
but you have the plank length, plank time.
If you had to discreetize space and time, you could possibly do it that way,
but this model is different.
Is that accurate?
Yes.
The problem is all of mathematics is based in the classic metaphysics.
And even the wave equation is based in this classic metaphysics
and ultimately involves this process of taking limits,
such that I can arbitrarily stop in infinity.
Okay.
The basis of the wave equation is Euler's identity.
Or Euler's identity is Euler's description of the wave,
but in order to make that identity work,
eventually you take a limit to stop the basically Euler's identity.
You've got sort of a rotating cosine wave,
but it always comes back to zero.
In order to make it come back to zero, that's Euler's identity,
E to the i pi equals zero,
you have to take a limit of that relation, E to the i pi,
our arbitrary mathematical limit,
but that sits at the heart of the wave equation.
And you're exalting that abstraction into the reality from which you're trying to start all theory.
Everything's inverted in our current theoretical world.
That's the problem.
So, yeah, I did a, speaking of quantum, I mean, I did a YouTube on Schroediger.
I think it's number 60 on quantum jumps.
Schroediger did a paper in 1952 where he utterly destroyed the whole notion of quantum jumps.
He destroyed it, logically destroyed it.
People don't realize this.
And so, you know, that's, but again, that comes back to the fundamental nature of the mathematics underneath it.
So, let's see.
As I said, this is important.
The brain dwells or is embedded in dynamically transforming,
indivisibly transforming a holographic field or the world of temporal metaphysics.
It derives the spatial metaphysics, the classic metaphysics, the abstract space.
This is just completely foundational if you're going to follow Bergson.
Okay.
So, let's find the past to bring it back.
The indivisible transformation of the field where there are no incidents falling into the past.
You don't have this model of instant after instant falling into the past,
which is the symbol of non-existence.
Rather, you've got this indivisible flow, each instant permeating the next organic continuity.
Well, that in effect forms a primary memory, still in the term from William James.
The field is already, in essence, got its own memory.
It's not falling into the past, into non-existence.
So, then when you're specifying the holographic field,
the specifications to a past extent of this holographic field.
Now, this is interesting aspects of things that I haven't totally worked out,
because you're going to have to have the resonance field represented by that brain,
the wave there is only lasting for a certain period of time,
relative to an extent of the past of the field, of the buzzing fly.
Again, as in, the wing beats are long gone.
So, this allows a past extent of the transformation to be specified.
You don't need short-term storage areas in the brain,
which is a concept filled with logical problems.
Because right now, if you think about when I said, for Berkson,
the essence of the problem of consciousness was his memory stored in the brain.
Well, when your perception is already the problem,
you're looking at that spoon stirring and the fly buzzing.
Well, are you storing each instant of that in the brain,
sliced by, like, snapshot by snapshot by snapshot,
then trying to reconstruct the motion?
How are you doing that?
Who reconstructs the motion, some internal scanner?
We'll talk about that in a second,
but you can see that the very fundamentals of perception itself,
of seeing that coffee cup already involves the problem is,
well, his memory actually being stored in the brain,
his experience being stored in the brain.
And the answer is, no, it can't be.
And something else we can see there, but I lost it.
So, but if I go back to Gibson for a second,
you'll see what he's saying the same thing.
Notice this.
This is back to the classic metaphysics.
He says, the idea that space is perceived,
and time, as you remember, looks at the back of our thinking.
But these abstractions, space and time, the classic metaphysics,
borrowed from physics are not appropriate to psychology.
And this is adjacent to order and successive order,
but are abstractions, and these are not found separate.
Oops, I can spell our other.
This is physical events that conform with relation before and after,
and not to the contrast of past and future.
Well, again, you've got to visualize that line of points,
where one point is the present,
points before that are all past,
which have fallen away,
and the points coming later are future.
That's what he's saying is that's the classic metaphysics.
When you take the classic metaphysics down to its logical conclusion,
and the brain itself only exists for one of those infinitely small points,
a point of mathematical extent and time.
That's just not applicable.
Unfortunately, the Gibsonians are not paying attention to that quote.
I mean, even my brilliant advisor, Bob Schaage,
the paper's trying to model the whole of the Gibsonian ecological theory
on the wave equation with its inherent problem.
So, just an aside.
Here's another thing that Gibson notes,
the traveling moment of present time,
that infinitely tiny point that's called the present
between the past and the future,
the dispacious present,
that mathematical point that would be the dispacious present.
Again, Berks and Gibson notes,
well, no one can say where perception leaves off when memory begins.
In fact, I failed to put the quote there,
but when we're looking at the past,
the specification of the past,
it's really an essence of Berkson said is the case.
Perception is already a memory.
All of perception is memory already.
So, no one can say where perception leaves off,
memory begins, it's difficult, it's an old one,
and notice he says in the blue,
there are animals of man perceived motions,
events, episodes, and whole sequences.
They don't see point after point,
it's an after incident on a line
for the classic metaphysics.
And he says the doctrine of sensation-based perception
requires the assumption that the succession of items can be grasped,
only if the earlier ones are held over,
so as to be combined with later ones in a single composite.
He says this can be pushed into absurdity.
Well, notice I've got up there,
Barcelona's theory of how you would store a biting transformation.
I'd store it there, I'm inviting a carrot,
there's three schematic states,
mouth closed, mouth open, mouth closed back on the carrot.
And so we store that in the brain, three schematic states.
Equivalent to storing, putting three snapshots
on photographs on a table.
Okay, the question is, well, how do I restore the motion?
How do I reconstruct the motion by some sort of internal scanner?
Okay, but then I've got an infinite regress,
I've now got to explain how the scanner, internal scanner,
registers the motion.
See, I'm doing there exactly in that picture what Gibson's saying,
a succession of items can be grasped,
only if the earlier ones are held over,
like on the table, successively one after the other,
to be combined with later ones into a single composite.
It can be pushed into absurdity.
Yes, it can.
Biting is actually a facial flow field.
There's Homer there, biting, or, you know,
look at the facial flow fields on these biting.
There we go.
Here's an actual, you know, biting a carrot.
Okay.
It's hard to store.
Well, I screwed up.
We got to go back.
Sorry about that.
It's hard to store as the coffee stirrer into the rotating queue.
See, again, notice.
Do you see anyone in memory theory,
I'm just rhetorical questions as far as your concern,
addressing how you would store that coffee stirrer
with all those invariance laws that define it,
which define only over time.
The invariant radio flow field, the inertial tensors,
how do you store that?
And, you know, as a series of three-dimensional snapshots
in the brain, good luck.
And then how do you restore it as reconstructed as motion?
Hence, you know, again, Gibson is relying on Berks.
Which brings us to the last thing I got here.
That good old original question, the problem of subject and object.
What is going on there?
Because we need to remove the viewer.
Somebody looking, see, remember the hologram plate is the brain.
And we have to review who's looking at that image out there.
Or, equivalently, we need to remove the homunculus,
looking at the image, whether it's in the perceptual space
or out there, or somehow.
So we're back to our coin.
Questions related to subject and object.
The distinction in the union is you put in terms of time
rather than space.
My original coin.
So, here's the deal.
Defined over the dynamically transforming holographic field,
we've got an elementary awareness at the null scale of time.
When I say null scale, I mean the most infinitely small scale
of time you can imagine.
Things are still always changing,
but think of that change in the tiniest interval you can imagine.
Again, each point or event in that field reflects
the state of all of the points.
So, in essence, you've got elementary awareness there.
At every point, every point is sort of elementary for,
not truly elementary, of all the other points,
taken at this infinitely small scale of time.
And you've got elementary memory
because of the indivisible transformation,
where there are no instants falling into the past,
that primary memory.
So, as I've noted, if you take our fly
and take it at that null scale,
at a very tiny scale of time,
where it's almost a cloud of electrons,
it's not going to have the distinct outlines
of the rest of the field, the rest of the whole erratic field,
to include any distinct outlines from our body.
Our body is going to be the same thing.
In other words, the objects that we think are nice and separate,
like the cup and the spoon and the body,
don't actually have the distinct outlines.
They're all meshed into the field, ultimately.
It's a big spatial unity.
So, if I start lowering the energy state of that brain,
I'm going to lower it now,
because I'm going to go from this very small scale to a bigger scale.
I'll get my hair in like fly.
And if I lower it still more,
I'll get my normal scale, a buzzing like fly.
So, we're starting to have subject differentiating from object,
not in terms of space, but of time.
The unity of the two,
the body and the fly there, is not broken.
Spatial unity.
Remember, there's no distinct outlines
or borders between these objects.
But as I impose the scale of time,
I start getting this nice separate object,
the buzzing fly and the coffee cup from my body.
And, you know, in terms of time,
and then I think we have to add a bit more with the Piagetian development,
where ultimately, he describes this whole evolution
of the child's conception of object,
where he starts to realize that he's a separate object
from the coffee cup and the fly.
Can I tell you a quick anecdote that this reminds me of?
Do you mind?
Say what?
I just have a quick anecdote on that.
You just mentioned child.
And this is reminding me.
I have a niece and two nephews.
And this is just recalling something my nephew said to me years ago
when he was a little younger.
I think he was five or six years old.
And we were just playing, hanging out.
And he said something to me that we were separated.
He was standing on the, he was standing, you know,
I was standing separate from him.
And he goes, I'm touching you right now.
I was like, what do you mean?
He's like, well, I'm standing on the floor
and the floor is touching you.
You're touching the floor.
And I was like, huh?
And he said, yeah, it even,
I'm touching the house across the street.
I'm touching that.
And his conception, I think it has something to do with,
I think about this a lot with kids.
Like, what are they perceiving?
What are they seeing?
What is their kind, like the difference in terms of,
and obviously as they grow up,
they reach some critical period where they come into agreement
with society, the people around them as to the nature of things
and what's actually happening, right?
Or as we perceive it.
Yeah, they start to need to be one.
Yeah.
But the interesting thing is like,
if you look at it in terms of a slice of time, let's say,
and I hope this is, it follows with what you're saying.
If you were able to just take a slice of time, one plank time,
let's say, you know, just one snapshot,
everything would be the same object.
Is that accurate?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Once you, because it's all, it's one big field.
And yeah, almost, yeah.
I'd say yes.
I'd go for that.
Something like that.
Obviously language is tough because we're trying to put
to words these very complex things and it might not even be
possible in our vocabulary to get there,
but we can kind of analyze and get around it sort of.
True.
Okay.
I think I may be one more thing.
So this is where it's kind of interesting because really there is,
the essence is there's no one seeing.
This is where it gets Zen.
The specification is to a time scale form of that elementary
awareness that we're talking about elementary memory to find
over the transforming holographic field.
And so, I mean, this is the kind of the essence of the Zen
Satori where all of a sudden you've been concentrated on your
Koan.
Who is it that sees?
All right.
And all of a sudden there's this Satori or Ken show where you,
you are the field.
You know, there's a famous book by Douglas E. Harding that I having
on having no head where all of a sudden you realize there's just
this, there's no, there's, there's no, you're, you're that,
that you're, you know, there's no separate being.
You're, you're his context.
He became the Himalayas, you know, after time, but this,
this is the essence of the Zen Satori.
I spent some time on YouTube discussing, I know you said you
watched the Zen experience.
I think those are my favorites.
Right.
This is why Berkson is so Zen.
I'm not sure what I got left here now.
Well, like I said, so, well, I have a lot of questions even when
you're, I have a lot of questions even when we complete the slide
share, but
so notice this is Berkson's unique panpsychism over on the
left.
It's, it's a panpsychic model because that field is conscious in
essence.
It's got elementary awareness and elementary memory, but it's not
the consciousness of stirring spoons on that experience of the
coffee cup and stirring spoon or if you're a frog, the fly buzzing
or anything like that.
It's, it's not yet the consciousness of frogs or humans or ants or
anything, but it's panpsychic, but there is no aggregation
problem.
We're not trying to, this is Chalmers famous problem.
We're not trying to aggregate or combine the consciousness of all
the little tiny particles into the field and explain how we end up
with the experience of coffee stirring.
You know, how do you get coffee stirring on a bunch of little
conscious particles?
Well, or to make it even worse for Chalmers, how would you explain
how you now get the time scale of the buzzing fly as opposed to the
hearing like fly as opposed to the electron cloud fly out of your
conscious particles too, right?
Of course, time scale is never a problem for any quality of
consciousness there's ever seen in my life yet.
So they just don't comprehend that one.
So the deal is the reconstructive wave specification dynamics
takes care of this.
I'm specifying this field as a coffee cup and a buzzing fly.
I don't know, in other words, I now have a dynamics.
I have a mechanism to explain the conscious experience of the
external world in this panpsychic field that panpsychism in and
of itself does not have.
It has no such thing.
It fails miserably and drops dead on that.
So that's my panpsychic.
The only other thing I had that was, I just, I think it's worth
mentioning is this.
In this model, experience is not in solely within the brain.
Therefore, it cannot be stored solely in the brain.
Yes, the brain, the brain also as a reconstructive wave can resonate
in the same invariance law pattern as the coffee cup we saw,
as the coffee stirring.
And we can reconstruct or reintegrate in the old terminology
that experience.
So if you wreck the brain as a modulating device, it's going to
look like the memory is gone.
A memory stored in the brain is destroyed, but all you've done is
wreck the brain's ability to assume the complex modulation pattern
that is involved in perception of that coffee cup as we've been
discussing.
Now, obviously then, in other words, what we really are,
and if you took Berkson's theory of the temporal metaphysics,
we're four dimensional beings.
And we're elongated being of four dimensions in which all of that
experience, all the coffee stirrings you've ever seen,
are stored in detail.
Not in that image form necessarily, but it's all there.
And I can reconstruct it by re-assuming the right modulation
or resonance pattern.
And so obviously you've got a whole different theory of memory
implied.
I've done a lot of talking about, but also a whole different
theory of cognition, because we're using our experience,
our experience of coffee cups, our experience of cubes,
of rotating cubes, et cetera, to do cognition, to think.
And this is where Penrose went when he was talking about why
computers can't deal with consciousness.
And he started up, obviously, with the Gettle's proof as being
an indication or the problem basically showing this.
But along the way, in the shadows of the mind,
he started talking about what he saw as non-computational
thought.
And here's a little example I've got here of his non-computational
thought.
This would be a proof, a visual proof that he tried out of a
computation that does not stop.
It's called the halting problem.
How can I show that a computation does not stop?
It goes on infinitely and always ends up with the next logical
result?
Well, in this case, what he's doing is showing that a hexagonal
number and added to a previous hexagonal number always makes a
circle number.
And that never stops.
And so what he does is an example there.
You've got the number 19, which is a hexagonal number,
and he folds that into a three-sided cube.
And then he stacks that three-sided cube over the previous
cube, which was an 8, 2 by 2 by 2, a 2 by 2 by 2 cube.
And now he's got a 3 by 3 by 3 cube of 27.
He's going to go on and take another cubicle number, which is
37, fold it in three sides, stack it over the 3 by 3 by 3
cube, 4 by 4 by 4 cube, and now he's 64.
And obviously this can go on and on and on.
So notice what he's doing.
It's very visual.
He's folding each hexagonal number into a three-sided cube.
He's stacking the cube always over the next to make an ever,
ever larger cube.
So this is a dynamic transformation.
Hope I don't lose my slide.
Yeah, over time.
It requires a mind that's in indivisible flow, not state after
state after state, where each previous state disappears as the
next one comes, which is the essence of the computer model.
You have to have this invisible flow or continuity else the
globality of this transformation of continuous folding and
stacking cannot be perceived.
And the invariance across this transformation, namely always a
three-sided cube, always ultimately a stacked cube,
the variance can't be registered.
So Penrose was really pointing to the essence of invariance laws
as being the essence of proofs.
And I need this continuous, indivisible transformation.
Him being a complete mathematician and totally stuck in the
classic metaphysics didn't realize what he's saying.
He never has grasped the implications of non-competitional
thought.
And of course he was trashed heavily in behavioral and brain
sciences journal when he did a process of this book.
They couldn't stand it.
But this is what he was pointing to.
This is the essence of true cognition.
This is what you have to have.
And this is why a computer and AI is never going to equal human
thought.
Because again, the intrinsic model of time is the classic
metaphysics.
The discrete instant state of time.
No matter how concrete you look at the computer itself with all
of its electrical flows and wires, et cetera, the essence of the
machine is an abstraction.
It's a logical model.
It can be carried out on an abacus or a registered machine with
beans and shoeboxes as long as you're carrying out the abstract
operations.
And the abstract operations are state after state after state
in discrete time.
So inherently, intrinsically, it cannot do this type of thought.
And you're never going to get AI.
And if you notice, this is actually already simply a special
case of the problem of common sense of knowledge, which AI
can't deal with either.
It's his bet noir, common sense.
Yes, there's working on Lacrune trying heavily to solve it in
terms of neural net architecture.
But neural nets are, again, simply instantiations of
Turing machines.
So they're faced with this problem.
This is just another common sense of knowledge problem.
I mean, you can imagine myself, I'm going to build a mousetrap or
even a lawn mower, and I got to stack a whole bunch of stuff on
top of each other and make a big cube.
So I think that's the main thing I wanted to say.
Yeah, notice I have a little note here.
Penrose identified this thought as demanding consciousness.
But again, in other words, he's stuck in a classic metaphysics
and doesn't understand that consciousness and pleasantness
will flow as time at primary memory.
This is just an example of the same thing.
Piaget is just replete with this.
I mean, if Penrose actually understood the literature of
developmental psychology and cognitive psychology that Piaget
represents, he would probably be ashamed to do what he had said.
But here's another simple example.
Piaget is taking children age three to seven.
He's got a tunnel there.
He moves those little colored beads into the tunnel,
and then he rotates the tunnel.
There's a halter, and then he asks the child,
well, what order will it come out now?
And you can see if I do a semi-rotation, 180 degrees,
the order is going to be reversed.
I'm going to go in as ABC, but I'm going to come out as CBA.
If I do a full rotation, I'm going to keep the order the same, right?
I'm going to come out again as ABC.
But three times, three half turns, I'm going to invert the order.
And if I ask seven times, what's the order going to be?
Well, if I know the rule by this time that the order changes,
odd number of turns, the order reverses.
Even number of turns, the order is going to be the same as it went in.
I can always tell you, 19.
Okay, well, it's going to be, the order is going to reverse, right?
It takes the children three to seven years to figure this out,
this odd even rule.
And in the course of it, what they do is they visualize,
just like Penrose and his cubes,
they visualize one half rotation, one semi-rotation.
What will happen then?
What if I do it again?
What if I do it three times?
Okay, it's going to reverse.
And they'll get to a point where they can maybe visualize four semi-rotations,
but ask, well, what will happen on number five?
They can't.
They flake out.
They can't visualize it.
They can't keep the train of visualization going anymore.
So ultimately they come to a point where they can say,
what's body seven?
Oh, yeah.
Odd number of turns, it's going to reverse.
And this all comes down to what he describes as concrete operations,
which develop over three to seven years.
And here's this interesting quote.
He says, well, operations, one might say,
are nothing more than articulated intuitions,
when they're adaptable and completely reversible,
since they are emptied of their visual content
and survive as pure intention.
In other words, operations come into being in their pure state
when there's skimethization.
So notice that.
In essence, the imagery, the dynamic transformation of imagery
is absolutely essential in the course of development,
exactly like Penrose was pointing to.
It's just that as you do it enough,
the images almost disappear in terms of very schematized form.
And so he says, instead of demanding an actual representation,
each inversion will be conceived as a potential representation,
like the outline for an experiment to be performed,
which is not useful to follow to the letter,
even in the form of performing it mentally.
So this is really the essence of Piaget's concrete operations
or non-computational thought to put it in Penrose's term,
which he didn't under the novel Piaget.
In other words, you need Berkson's device
to support this kind of thought.
Again, this is just a common sense knowledge problem.
I mean, this is a specific problem,
but is this an example of the kind of, I mean,
called a thought process, the kind of problem solving
that a computer would find difficult to do at this point?
Yeah.
Common sense knowledge is the essence of the problem.
I mean, they've tried to simulate this stuff with neural nets,
the developmental series, but people have looked at it
and says, well, what's going on in the neural net weight,
how the weight changes, nothing to do with how children
actually develop.
But when I say common sense knowledge problems,
my metaphor, my example I like is creating a mousetrap
out of arbitrary components.
Where I should have put my picture in here.
But you imagine you have a little cardboard box
and you have a pencil and rubber bands and paper clips
and a piece of cheese and some strings and some toothpicks.
And I actually ran across this when I was in my teens,
it was in Reader's Digest.
It was a creativity test for engineers.
Well, here's this pile of stuff, can you make a mousetrap?
OK.
And you can visualize making a mousetrap with a,
imagine a box with, you got the pencil drawn back.
You've got rubber band outside the box
and you have a little hole.
The pencil goes through and you can draw the pencil back
and maybe you put the toothpick lodged in a little groove
in the pencil so that the pencil sticks there.
The pencil would be in the inside of the box,
holding the pencil and there's a string to the cheese
and the mouse pulls the string, pulls the pencil out
and sticks himself with the pencil.
OK.
The pencil flies and hits the mouse.
In other words, it's a crossbow trap.
It's analogous to a crossbow.
OK.
Get the picture.
I could make, if I got a razor blade,
I stick the razor blade into the pencil
and I prop the razor blade up in a corner
and prop it up with a pencil and maybe rubber bands
pulling it down.
Give myself some staples to work with.
So there's force on the pencil.
The mouse has got to be a fairly strong mouse
with that trap to pull the razor.
It all depends.
People whip up these traps all the time.
Gotcha.
So if you're, yeah.
Maybe you have the stapler falling on the mouse.
I don't know.
This is the common.
OK.
The problem is that there's no finite set of features
that you could put in the database that a machine could use
because the features are emerging with the transformation.
The rigidity of the pencil and the sharpness and the fact
or the fact that I could lodge it in the box corner.
The box corner is a nice place to lodge a pencil for the axe.
All these things are all these features of the pencil
or the functions emerge with the transformation
that you're the analogy transformation.
You're sort of visualizing.
I can make it into a crossbow or I could make it
into a giant boulder trap like that destroys Wiley Coyote
or something like that.
OK.
So it becomes a massive problem of representation,
excuse me, of the features of objects
because there's no finite list, excuse me,
all the transformations that are necessary, et cetera.
That's the common sense knowledge problem.
And you can see why I'm saying, well, just
tunnel rotation or stacking cubes of one another
is just part of the same kind of problem, the same thought
process.
Cool.
And yes.
This is your last slide, right?
Yeah.
I do believe.
If you have time, I have one more.
Oh, one more.
Yeah.
But I thought that would be the one we, part two,
if we ever do one, we'll go into relativity
because that's another piece of the story of, excuse me,
getting hit in the horse.
This is another piece of the story that was interesting
because I remember Berkson's argument
with Einstein and relativity.
And in that time I had with Shaw,
I was trying to reconcile Berkson to relativity
because Berkson believes in becoming,
the dynamic transformation of the universe
is always evolving and coming.
But you have that static block model of space time
where everything's laid out in one big block
because supposedly there's no simultaneity.
Therefore, there's no plane that you can take through that block
that represents a universal present across the entire block,
a present instance that then grows as the block grows.
Because I've destroyed simultaneity, supposedly.
And I was trying to reconcile that
and I found this article by Millik Kapek
where he tries to show that the Minkowski formula
for the space time manifold or matrix,
the Minkowski space time, actually preserves becoming.
And I thought that was cool and I wrote this paper up
because then it seemed like, okay, Berkson's got to be coming
and this interpretation says there's at least some becoming
in the static block universe, there's got to be some becoming.
And that seems to be the point of reconciliation.
Shaw thought that was cool and he gave it to Gibson
who was there at the time.
And Gibson read the article and said,
well, yeah, scribbled on the top half.
Yeah, it's good to take big thoughts, big questions,
but you should look at other things.
He said, okay, he doesn't like that resolution.
And the next day he was giving his talk at the University of Minnesota
and he comes up with a statement out of the blue,
to anyone there other than someone who happened
to have written that particular paper, namely me.
So I'm sitting there and I'm probably the only one who knew what he was saying,
but this is the quote, he says,
physicists must lead us when they say there is no simultaneity.
When the camera pans to the hero and tied to the rails
and then to the hero rushing to the rescue on his horse,
these events are simultaneous.
I guess we should add the train in to speed into the hero.
So, and I recognized right away another one of those,
I know this is, he's siding with Berkson.
He's siding with Berkson against Berkson's argument against Einstein,
because these are multiple, what's called multiple,
I call multiple simultaneous flows that cannot be relativized.
And that's another whole topic.
I don't know if you want to share that.
I think it would be interesting to go into, you know,
where this absolutely destroys Einstein
and very concretely and very easily.
And why relativity in its current interpreted form,
interpreted interpretational form,
that is where the twin paradox is held to be true,
it's got to be ditched.
And so, but that's another.
Okay, yeah.
That's another topic.
Already a lot we've covered so far.
Can you, this is, this one's your last one, right?
I hope so.
I have a number of questions.
I'd love if, if you still have time,
I'd love to just cover up on a couple of things.
I guess the first thing,
I'm going to tackle this from different perspectives,
but taking a step back and thinking about Berkson a little bit.
One of the things I think is interesting is,
and I'm trying to make a comparison here with,
I think a lot about ancient symbols and semiotics generally,
but are you familiar with the Yin Yang symbol, the Tai Chi two?
Are you familiar with that symbol?
It's like two, a white half and a black half.
Oh yeah.
And the pace, the pace is in between.
Well, one thing I think is very interesting about Berkson is,
he's spoken about as like a poetic philosopher oftentimes.
And of course the debate we just talked at the beginning about
between him and Einstein seems to be if there are two halves
of the same coin, let's say,
Berkson would be the intuitive Einstein representing rationality.
Would you say that's a fair kind of,
that's a very broad kind of statement, but that is where they kind of...
Well, the other way, equivalently the classic metaphysics,
classic spatial metaphysical space and time versus the temporal metaphysics.
Sure, yeah, you can split it both ways.
Which incorporates the latter incorporating intuition,
which is another whole topic.
Yeah, intuition was a big,
intuition was a huge part of Berkson's framework
and ideology.
But so I bring up the Yang-Yang symbol because the way I perceive it's quite interesting
because Berkson's usually portrayed as this poet.
And that's part of the reason why he spoke, you know,
he spoke and wrote in sort of beautiful language, flowery language.
It was kind of tough sometimes, I think, to sort of provide boundaries
or like specify exactly where he stood on certain issues perhaps.
For other people, for other people that read Berkson.
I bring up the Yang-Yang symbol because it's funny,
because like within Berkson, that intuitive sense,
what you've brought here is a very technical framework.
And it's almost like you're bringing in the rationality within Berkson's poetry.
Does that make any sense?
Does that congeal it all to your, the way you see it?
I could see it in a certain way, but I tend to look at it as,
I'm just getting even more visual and more concrete than Berkson did.
No, I mean, I agree.
I think you are getting more concrete because Berkson was, you know, it's funny.
He didn't have the language.
He didn't have any particular stuff earlier.
I'm doing this in a PowerPoint medium with all kinds of stuff.
I mean, he, I mean, one of the, one of the reasons it kind of,
I ended up doing this, whatever number I'm at, 75 or whatever of these things is,
I mean, I published a lot in academic world,
but you can't express all the stuff there is,
and as dynamically and as neatly in articles as you can in this medium.
It's, I mean, I think this was incredibly freeing up powerful medium.
I mean, obviously, I'm, you know, I'm sure people look at me and think I'm,
I'm in a stone age on it, but because, you know, even,
I know even compared to you, I'm in a stone age, but, but, but it's,
so some of that, some of it is this medium.
When, when you, I guess if you looked at my academic articles,
I would appear a little, I probably wouldn't be quite as,
obviously you're going only put so many pictures in an academic article,
and you have to, well, and I tend to get a little more concrete than Brugton
and those things, but there sure seems to be a whole lot of people
that you don't understand me.
So I don't, I don't, like I said, it's very, it's very Zen.
It's very, you have to have a certain intuition of soul in my mind to resonate to this stuff.
Yeah.
And I agree.
I mean, the, and it actually speaks to perhaps a sub point of what Berkson was getting at
in terms of duration with, and this is something I do.
If you're, if we're going to talk about both creators of content on, on YouTube
and another, you're another place, of course, you're, you're written work.
I've always found showing things in motion to be, to have things,
to explain things better than static imagery.
So it's funny when you're showing your off your GIFs or GIFs on these slides
and you show the stirring coffee cup.
And you can kind of, I think, understand where Berkson was coming from,
because would it be fair to say he'd argue most of science, the cutting edge physics,
let's say, focuses a lot on the spatial component and doesn't give the temporal dimension,
it's fair to do or it's fair emphasis.
And actually, as far as the limited physics, I know it's funny.
Many, most, not probably not all equations can be are agnostic to the direction of time
can be done backwards and forwards.
That's the bare minimum.
I know.
I think, I think that's the case.
But of course, the temporal component is probably underappreciated or not.
Oh, it's just absolutely, yeah.
There's so many, like, there's so many subject matters where the temporal,
the problem of time is just simply just not grass.
I mean, like I said, when you look at the whole literature on the hard problem,
you just don't see any understanding of the problem of time, period.
You know, like just as I noted, all the examples of qualia are probably like the redness of the sunset,
the taste of the qualifier.
So it's all fairly stacked, you know, qualities of motion,
like the gently waving curtains of ballet hardcasts or the patients shifting slowly.
And there seems to look, okay, that's just not even grasped or understood.
And notice that it's all,
if I made the field make this point,
there's all dynamically changing qualities of form that say, hey, the whole image is form.
And so your problem is how do you see the external image,
the world, the image of the world out there externally,
the coffee cup and changing with this in front of this gently waving curtains.
That's the problem.
See, it's because of that failure of the grasp of the time and all of all these dynamic forms and change
that when you say, oh, I've got a, I've got a model of how you see the image of the world out there.
They don't even know that that's a solution to the hard problem.
They don't even, it doesn't even dawn on them that that's a solution.
But physics, same problem.
The fact that they think that they can get away with
a completely discreet state model of time and capture what's actually going on
in this, in the dynamically transforming matter of field is endemic to them.
And on nice examples of it aren't coming to mind at this point.
That's fine.
Yeah.
But they're, how do you think this model?
Sure.
How do you think, how do you think this model?
Oh, sorry.
Yeah.
The, and also just to be clear for the audience, I don't believe Berkson, he didn't, he didn't
create the term holographic theory of mind, right?
You are.
No.
Yeah.
Like I said, he was interpreting Berkson.
It wasn't until 1947.
So yeah, I guess it was after his death.
I represent this.
Let's take Berkson and, and upgrade him into the, how, how he probably would have talked
that he knew about photography.
Yeah.
Can you intuit how, how does this model help explain qualia?
Well, as I said, the transformation of the field is indivisible.
Each instant permeates the next.
It's already a qualitative transformation.
So when you're specifying the brain is specifying the gently waving curtains, it's specifying
the qualitative transformation of that field at a certain scale of time.
Color itself is, is, is a time phenomenon.
It's a, it's a, it's a certain vibration, vibration of a magnet electromagnetic field
over time.
That again, you're putting this, like Berkson noted, you know, if you take one second of
red light and spread it out wave by wave by wave, such just that you could count in the
normal amount of time people can distinguish events, you know, you've got 25,000 years
that would require to count each wave of one second of red light for 400 billions of vibrations.
But in essence, we're compressing the, you know, now notice when you spread it all out,
it's almost, almost back to my, my cubes of space.
It's almost one giant big pile of cubes homogeneous, you know, no quality.
But now when you're specifying that color, it's compressed into a, you know, one second
of red light is now, you know, that's what we see.
We don't see 25,000 waves.
You see this, you know, glob of color of pulsating red.
Okay.
It's, it's, it's this, it's this huge amount of time being compressed by our perception
and by the brain processes.
So it's not, now it's becoming more, it's, it's now obviously more qualitative, you know,
perceptually than that huge spread out field as it would look at virtually what I call
the null scale of time.
But it's, but that, but again, the null scale of time is, it's an abstract limit.
It never becomes the homogeneous space instant after instant of the classic metaphysics.
So all quality, all qualia is a function of time and motion.
And at a scale where there's buzzing flies, Aaron flies, brown flies versus red flies
versus white flies versus gently waving curtains versus violently waving curtains.
Sure.
And I'm going to jump around a lot here, but if we're thinking about the, say the double
slit experiment, does this, well, I mean, this is a theory of every sort of a theory
of everything or theory, at least our state, our perception of things.
Does this relate to the double slit experiment in some way?
And if so, how?
I'm sure it does, but I, you know, I don't, I don't, I don't even know how to answer
that question.
I know it's a very broad question, but I make, I make connections here between,
obviously the double slit is, you know, particles.
Oh, sorry.
There seems to be a connection between at least the wave particle duality, the observation
of that.
So our measurement of that.
And then it's, it's a resultant effect on, you know, the pattern that's found on the
screen, right?
So this seemingly, you know, so this theory would have to at least incorporate that, or
at least I don't have to explain it per se, but it has to be at least perhaps consistent
with that observation.
Yeah, I'm drawing.
It's like, it's a giant disc loaded to my head that I can't do it right now.
Yeah, we just, this is a long conversation.
But I think that there is probably a connection here if you were trying to make the case.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I, you know, and I don't think, I mean, I've looked a lot at the quantum theory of them.
I've done stuff at it, you know, videos on it, like I noted, you know, about, but I,
you know, I would say that making that final link that you're asked actually asking for
that resolution, that's kind of a physics problem, more so than my problem.
I can't, I can't, I can't do it.
But yeah, sure.
It's a good question, but yeah, don't don't get the answer for me.
No, absolutely.
I understand that's something to consider for the future.
The other thing I'd say or question I have is it's sort of coming back full circle to
well, sort of the top of our conversation.
And some of my favorite videos of yours on your channel actually were the Zen related
Zen Buddhism and how it relates to this theory.
I think you have two, maybe more related.
I did one on Zen number 24 and I did one on Zen and the art of mule cycle maintenance.
Yes, I think those are, those are my, those are some of my favorite videos of yours.
So I wonder if, and this is, you know, speculative or let's say thinking out loud kind of territory.
Do you think there's any relationship between the mind and meditation and perhaps the process
of quieting those potential say waves or that modulated reconstructive wave as you put it.
Is there some perhaps relationship between that and the, the sense of say oneness, say
with the world or the outside, what's outside the brain?
Yeah, when you go, I think, I think I kind of get the Zen Satori experience.
When you go to the, in the context of Berkson framework, but when you go to meditation.
Yeah, that's just another whole subject matter what's actually going on there.
Obviously the, the Berkson framework, which that says we're a four dimensional being to be were embedded in this
holographic field in which we have no actual difference distinction from lays a framework for lots of things that can happen in meditation.
You know, but I just haven't really gone into that whole subject of how meditation or the brain waves and how it's operating.
And I don't, I just haven't gotten into it.
Actually, I don't think there's all that much understood really to go into it.
I mean, I know you have people like, you know, the biology of beef and these kinds of books that are written, but no, I'm, I'm just not.
I'm just not, it's just, it's just a bridge too far for me to walk over.
Yep.
I'll say also, I'm jumping around a lot here, but one of the, one of the interesting videos on your channel as well deals with the holographic theory of mind and how it relates to a holographic principle more broadly.
And what I was surprised by was how those two things are actually, in your opinion, not compatible.
Right.
Yeah. Can you, can you talk about that a little bit?
Hmm.
I can.
Probably wouldn't, wouldn't.
Pictures would have been good, but.
What's up?
See, Susskin, I mean, I looked at Susskin's stuff on it and, you know, they're, they're trying to
describe the hologram as being on a two-dimensional surface, some, somewhere, basically digital, like bits.
Okay.
So volume, you know, and they're expressing, we can express all the information of the, in the universe, volume wise, in terms of bits on a two-dimensional surface.
Right.
First of all, I have major problem with their bits because, as I noted to you before, bits are a massive abstraction that don't exist except over some sort of concrete embodiment.
It's like, you know, to represent a bit, it takes tons of transistors on a breadboard.
It takes magnetic cores and more stone age philosophy.
Something is very concretely, you know, doing voltage changes or whatever to represent those.
And we're looking at it and say, ah, that's a bit.
Well, what is that on a surface of a black hole for God's sakes?
What is, what is, what is your bit other than highly imaginary piece of information stuck mentally on your black hole?
I mean, you know, it's, it's not a breadboard.
It's not a, it's, it's not a, oh, we can see even worse if you look at Cubis.
It's even worse.
You know, now you have LC circuits that are, you know, with resistors and capacitors that are representing the qubit.
I mean, like with Joseph, Joseph, Josephus and junctions.
I mean, come on, you know, that's your bit.
That's your qubit.
It's on a black hole.
What, you know, not that there's all kinds of instantiations of Cubis, but they're all worse.
But that's number one.
Number two, what, what the heck is the reconstructive wave?
What is the source of the reconstructive wave that's beaming through your two-dimensional surface to project the three-dimensional world?
Okay.
Four, and then problem C, where, how do you introduce time into this thing when you have a whole series of flashes of your reconstructive wave?
Do you have projection after projection after projection to create the coffee stirring?
Oh, how is these bits, how are they suddenly becoming concrete coffee cups with liquid in them?
Stirring, rotating.
Come on.
I mean, you know, when you, when you look at the conception, it's ludicrous.
So it does, it is not Bergson's conception of a holographic field.
Suskins 2D hologram.
Sorry, but not the same thing.
Not even, and not even worth looking at.
See, you got me in my head.
No, that's okay.
I mean, you're passionate about it.
I get it.
It's something that I have to do a lot more research on and try to understand better myself.
So the idea that they're going to use the holographic principle is somehow, somehow it's got something to do with mind and consciousness and holographic theory is just, just insane.
Gotcha.
I just lost my, my light.
So we're coming up on time.
The question, like what question I would say, one of the last questions I want to ask you is, how is this, this theory Bergson in general?
I mean, you've been a fan of Bergson's for decades now.
How is this conception?
How does this influence your day to day life or your moment to moment existence, if it does at all?
Well, if I were to say spiritually, it would, it would, it would say, hey, I for one think that science, physics, psychology, cognitive science, given Bergson's framework absolutely backs the spiritual vision of man.
The Zen vision, if nothing more, but probably also the Hindu vision of what our actual capabilities are.
I mean, when I say Hindu vision, I'm thinking of people like saints like Ananda Maima, you know, or Yogananda that could read anyone's thoughts or, or could.
You know, Ananda Maima supposedly stopped the train engine with a wheel spinning on a train platform.
But that's another, in other words, I think that there's no conflict between science and this whole notion that's permeating people's minds right now that neuroscience says we're just human robot forms with no spiritual component whatsoever.
It is utterly destroyed by Bergson and gives us a very solid grounding in science and our own mystical experience that supports it.
So I guess bottom line from, from that perspective, Bergson is a great comfort.
And if people want to shed the transhumanist vision of where they were, where they were, the idea where we're all getting nice bunch of chips, because it's just all we really are anyhow, and just become enhanced robots.
And also there is no, there's no God, there's no karmic laws and etc. etc. that they'll get into Bergson and you can, and you'll see quickly how just shallow and superficial and ununderstanding they, you know, they actually are.
They don't include people like Sam Harris or Daniel Dennett, etc. These are, these people are in my mind are extremely badly misled because they extremely do not understand the problem of consciousness and time.
That's one thing. After that, it's been a giant pain because, because I never thought that after 50, what are we 50 years that this particular conception would be so buried yet.
It's, it's buried in cognitive science that no one wants to look at. It's, it's buried in memory theories, buried in perception theory. It's buried by the Gessonians for Christ's sakes. They won't even look at it.
It's buried by the Bergsonians for that matter. Even, even Bergsonian philosophers, who can't deal with it. I guess, feel it. They don't want to deal with it. Oh, it's too, too much. Can't deal with that.
Well, it's become, it's become a frustrating pain. And I feel like my life's mission has been a bust. So I feel right now, I'm just telling you that's true. It's been a good, it was a good try.
Maybe someone later will come along and take it. Because right now, to me, it's, it's, it's completely being ignored.
Yeah. Well, I'm glad I, you know, it's your life's passion or part of your life's passion. And you've, you've picked up the torch. It sounds, it seems like from Bergson on this, and try to keep his ideas alive. So
Yeah, well, you know, I'm a little different from Bergson in that respect. I mean, he, he watched himself be buried, you know. Along came Skinner and his, and his rats.
Sure.
And after that, the computer model of mine, I mean, the complete antithesis, the absolute computer being the absolute embodiment of the classic metaphysics, the realization almost the wet dream realization of how we can instantiate the classic metaphysics as quote mind.
I mean, he, he, he watched that. He didn't see the computer thing coming, I'm sure, but I got to live through that one. Yeah, it's still there.
All right, Steve, is there anything else? Anything you want to leave us on? Tie this thing up in a bow? Where can our viewers, how can people learn more about you and your work in Bergson?
Well, yeah.
My I have a little website. It's Steven E Robbins.com STPHN.
I'll put it below. Yeah.
That's all it's got all my articles on it. It's got a link to the, the videos, the videos I think is the same channel, I think, Steven, Steven, Steven, Steven E Robbins, I'd have to flip out and look at it, but
Yeah, so yeah, I'm, I have stuff there that people can look at.
Yes, you do. You have your website.
It's probably like 20, it's probably like 20 academic articles, you know, yeah, academic journals.
They're all it's all linkable. I'll link in the description below your website, your YouTube channel. And I, I think I might parse out a couple of my favorite of your favorite videos of yours to share with with my audience.
So Steve, I want to say thank you so much for your time.
It's been great energy. This has been fun is so much to think about and kind of let's steal in my brain to try to make this all congeal. But thanks again, and this has been a wonderful time, wonderful conversation.
Oh, it was great fun, Carl, isn't it? I do hope people get something out of it. Enjoy it.
I'm sure they will.
All right.
Thanks, Steve. See you.
See you later.
