This lecture is about the brains of musicians.
By musicians, I don't just mean professionals, people who earn a living by making music.
I mean anyone who regularly engages in making music.
This would include children who've only been studying an instrument for a year or two,
or people who play an instrument or sing with a group regularly.
When we think of musicians in this way, we can see that it includes a lot of people.
The Boston Symphony Orchestra has about a hundred professional musicians.
The city of Boston has tens of thousands of musicians using the definition of people who
make music regularly.
It also has tens of thousands of non-musicians.
There are lots of people who love music but who don't make music regularly.
Many of these people had music lessons early in life when they were in school, but at some
point they stopped playing or singing with a group.
Others have never studied or made music regularly.
Using these definitions of musician and non-musician, imagine walking down a street in your city
and trying to guess which of the people you pass are musicians and which aren't.
It would be impossible.
It's not like trying to guess who is an athlete and who isn't, because the differences between
musicians and non-musicians aren't obvious outward physical differences.
The great pianist Leon Fleischer once called musicians the athletes of the small muscles.
Any physical differences between musicians and non-musicians is going to be subtle.
But what about mental differences?
If we could measure the brains of healthy living musicians and non-musicians, would we find
significant differences?
Much over 20 years ago in the early 1990s, we didn't have a firm answer to this question.
People had been interested in the question for a long time.
About 200 years ago, in the early 1800s, Franz Josef Gaul had considered this idea.
Gaul is known in neuroscience for his theory of phrenology, the theory that the mind was
composed of several distinct mental faculties, each with a specific location in the brain.
He thought that if a particular faculty, like the faculty of music, was particularly strong
in a person, that brain area devoted to that faculty would be enlarged.
This would lead to a detectable enlargement in the skull just above that brain area.
Phrenology had critics from the start, and today no neuroscientist believes that entire
mental faculties like language or music are located in single areas of the brain.
Also, no neuroscientist believes that bumps in the skull reflect the size of brain areas
beneath those bumps.
Gaul was ahead of his time in thinking that there were measurable differences in the brains
of musicians versus non-musicians.
With the rise of modern brain imaging in the mid-1990s, it became possible to compare
brain structure in musicians and non-musicians.
Over the past 20 years, a small stream of research papers has done just that, and now
we know enough to begin to discuss these differences based on real data.
Musicians and non-musicians, like all healthy humans, have similar patterns of gross neuroanatomy.
Musicians don't have any brain areas that non-musicians don't have, but there are subtle
differences in brain structure that are detectable using modern neuroimaging methods.
We should keep in mind, though, that this is a young area of research, and many major
discoveries lie ahead of us.
Before we discuss the research findings, I want to address a larger issue that comes
up whenever you talk about brain differences between musicians and non-musicians.
This is the ancient nature-nurture debate.
If brain imaging shows that there are subtle differences in the brains of musicians and
non-musicians, are those differences inborn?
Are they the reason why some people became musicians and others didn't?
Or are the differences a product of experience?
Do they reflect experience-driven neural plasticity, which is the capacity of the brain to change
the details of its structure and processing as a result of experience?
We know that some aspects of our biology are inborn.
Eye color is a good example.
Your eye color is an inherited trait.
More than a dozen genes appear to be involved in determining eye color, and the color of
your eyes doesn't change depending on what hobbies you take up or how you spend your
days.
We also know that some aspects of our biology are strongly influenced by experience.
Let's say a person chooses to become an athlete early in life and devotes thousands of hours
to playing a sport from childhood into adulthood.
As an adult, the structure of his or her muscles and bones will end up being quite different
than if they had spent those same hours parked in front of a television watching sports.
Their eye color wouldn't be different, but their muscle structure would be.
What about the brain?
Well in one sense, it's uncontroversial that the brain changes with experience.
We all learn things, and we all remember many experiences that we have.
At the neural level, learning and memory involve changes in the strength of synapses
between neurons.
But what about larger scale aspects of brain structure?
Are those modifiable by experience?
It used to be thought that the details of an individual's brain structure were largely
determined by birth, and after that, all a person could do was lose neurons.
It is true that most of the neurons that you will ever have are already present at birth.
In fact, neurogenesis in the brain, or the creation of new neurons, is largely complete
by about midway between conception and birth.
By that point, all of the major brain structures have been formed.
But a great deal of brain development does happen after birth.
This includes growth in the connections between neurons, including growth in axons and dendrites,
which are the branches of a neuron that send and receive signals from other neurons.
Also, as neurons connect up in more intricate ways after birth, there is a lot of synaptogenesis,
the formation of synapses or points of communication between neurons.
In other words, a lot of the brain's microarchitecture is constructed after birth.
And importantly, the way this microarchitecture unfolds is not entirely determined by intrinsic
biological factors, but also depends on experience.
For example, most axons in the brain are covered by a fatty sheath called myelin, which is
made up using a special type of cell called a glial cell.
Myelin greatly increases the speed and efficiency with which neural signals are transmitted from
one neuron to another.
While the timing of myelination during development may largely be under genetic control, the
degree of myelination, which influences how strongly neurons are connected, is thought
to be more subject to experience.
Let me give you a metaphor which tries to capture the idea that the macro structure
of our brain is largely biologically determined, but the micro structure is much more influenced
by experience.
This is the metaphor of the brain as a garden.
In this metaphor, individual plants represent individual neurons in the brain.
Nature determines the types and number of plants that will be planted and where they're located.
The large-scale layout of each garden is the same.
It has the same macro structure.
All the gardens have trees planted here, shrubs planted there, and flowers planted over there.
But within those zones, the details of the layout are slightly different.
These differences represent inborn genetic differences that will influence how the mature
garden will look in terms of its micro structure.
Nature starts the garden off as ceilings.
As the garden grows, nature adds very few new plants.
The main growth in the garden is not in the number of plants, but in the architecture
of the plants.
With rain, which you can think of as a metaphor for the food we eat as we grow, the plants
grow taller and send out branches.
You can think of the increasing height of the plants as representing the development
of axons in the brain and the increasing branching of plants as the development of dendrites.
In the brain, axon length and dendrite branching both influence how strongly neurons communicate
with each other.
Now nature has determined which plants are in the garden, the types of plants, how many
there are, and where they are.
The rain, or food, ensures that the plants will grow.
A lot of the structure of the garden comes from nature, but not all of it.
You can think of experience as a gardener that has the ability to shape some of the
micro structure of the garden as it grows.
It can apply some fertilizer here and do some trimming there, and as a result, experience
influences how tall certain plants grow and how densely they branch out or overlap with
the branches of other plants.
As a result of experience, even if two gardens started out with the same plants in the same
detailed layout and had the same amount of rain, the gardens would end up with a different
micro structure.
In this metaphor, the gardener is your life experience.
It's the activities you engage in, like education, or playing music, or sports.
This metaphor isn't perfect.
Brain development is very complex, so naturally the metaphor leaves out many aspects of how
brains develop.
But at least it gives us a metaphor that captures the fact that nature and nurture interact
in shaping the brain's micro structure.
We're used to thinking of the brain as a computer.
We do what many previous generations have done, which is to think of the brain in terms
of the most complex machine around at the time.
Previous generations thought of the brain using metaphors of hydraulic systems, or clocks,
or telegraphs.
Today, the metaphor that dominates is the computer.
As the neuroscientist and Nobel laureate Gerald Edelman often pointed out, the computer metaphor
can be misleading.
For example, computers of the same make and model are physically identical.
Due to the role of experience in shaping the brain, no two brains are physically identical,
not even the brains of identical twins who share a hundred percent of their genes.
Edelman's theory of neuronal group selection, which he discussed in books like Neural Darwinism
and Bright Air, Brilliant Fire, included a major role for experience in shaping brain
circuits and in creating human individuality.
Going back to the study of the brains of musicians, we can now see that any microstructural brain
differences we observe between musicians and non-musicians could be due to either nature
or nurture.
Today, with modern brain imaging, finding differences between the brains of non-musicians
and musicians is relatively easy.
Finding those differences is the hard part, and it's harder than simply deciding if a
difference is due to nature or nurture.
There's growing interest in the idea that some of the differences between the brains
of musicians and non-musicians emerge through an interaction of nature and nurture.
This idea is that some people's brains may be more shapeable by experience than others.
Going back to our garden metaphor, imagine that gardens are different not only in the
details of their initial layout, but also in how they respond to fertilizer and trimming.
For genetic reasons, in one garden the plants are more responsive, a little fertilizer makes
them grow a lot, and they also have supple branches that are easy to trim.
But in the other garden, for genetic reasons, the plants are less responsive to fertilizer
and their branches are more resistant to trimming.
In these two gardens, the same amount of fertilizer and trimming, the same experience, would produce
different results, even if the gardens had started off with an identical detailed layout.
Going back to the brains of musicians and non-musicians, this implies that some of the
differences we see reflect a mixture of inborn predispositions and the effect of experience.
In current research on music and the brain, some researchers favor the view that many
of the differences between the brains of musicians and non-musicians are due to nature.
Other researchers favor the view that many of the differences are due to nurture.
Researchers favor an interactional view.
This is a young field and we need more data to resolve these debates.
As we'll see in the next lecture, there are ways of doing experiments to determine if
musical experience can play a significant role in changing brain microstructure and
processing.
This is worth knowing because of its implications for how musical training might impact other
brain functions.
For the rest of this lecture, though, I want to focus on some of the specific differences
that have been found between the brains of musicians and non-musicians.
I'll start with a study that used a technique called magnetoencephalography, or MEG.
MEG measures the magnetic fields produced by electrical activity in groups of neurons.
This method can't measure brain activity at the level of single neurons, but it can
detect activity produced by large groups of neurons in the same region if those neurons
have synchronized patterns of activity.
MEG was involved in one of the first studies to examine brain differences between musicians
and non-musicians, published in 1995 by Thomas Elbert, Christo Pontev, and colleagues.
In this study, researchers lightly stimulated the little finger or the thumb of violin players
or non-musicians on their left or right hands while measuring the size of the neural response
in sensory motor regions of the brain.
When the right hand was stimulated, they saw no difference between musicians and non-musicians.
But when the left hand was stimulated, musicians showed a stronger response.
The left hand is the hand that does the fingering on a violin.
One thing that made this work so interesting was that it came in the wake of earlier work
with animals, suggesting that if a particular digit of the hand was used extensively, more
neurons in a given brain area became involved in representing that digit's activity.
This was one line of evidence for a phenomenon that has become a major theme in brain science,
namely experience-dependent neural plasticity, the capacity of the brain to modify its structure
and function as a result of experience.
Today, neural plasticity is a major research topic in brain science with profound implications
for our understanding of the brain and for practical issues ranging from education to
neural rehabilitation.
We have long known that the brain generates behavior, but neural plasticity means that
behavior can modify the brain.
Going back to our study of the violinists, the greater response of musicians when their
left hand digits were stimulated suggested a role for neural plasticity.
After all, if musicians just had bigger brain representations for their fingers than non-musicians,
one would expect stronger brain responses to stimulation of either the left or the right hand.
Another clue that plasticity might be involved was that the difference in response between
musicians and non-musicians was larger for the little finger than for the thumb, consistent
with the more important and active role of the little finger in playing the violin.
Furthermore, for the little finger, the size of the response was largest in violinists
who started their training at a younger age, and thus who had had more practice, again
pointing to a role for experience rather than just genes in shaping this difference.
Let's look now at another study published in 1995.
This was the first study to use MRI to show structural differences between the brains
of musicians and non-musicians.
This study by Gottfried Schlaug and colleagues focused on the corpus callosum, which connects
the two sides of the human brain.
It's a large bundle of neural fibers beneath the cerebral cortex that is critical for communication
between the two hemispheres.
The corpus callosum is the largest white matter connection in the brain and consists
of over 200 million axons projecting between one hemisphere and the other.
White matter refers to axonal connections between neurons.
It gets its name from the whitish myelin that coats the axons.
Some early and fascinating work in cognitive neuroscience concerned unusual patients in
which the corpus callosum had been cut as a treatment for epilepsy.
Research on these split-brain patients by Roger Sperry, Michael Ghazanaga and others
provided important information about how the two hemispheres of the brain differed in terms
of their neural and cognitive specializations.
For example, this work supported the idea that the left hemisphere is particularly important
for linguistic skills like speaking, reading, and writing, while the right hemisphere is
particularly important for processing spatial relationships.
Coming back to Schlag and colleague study, they compared the size of the corpus callosum
in professional classical musicians and non-musicians who were matched for age, sex, and handedness.
The musicians played keyboards or strings, or both, they found that the anterior half
of the corpus callosum was significantly larger in the musicians.
This could reflect more axons crossing between the hemispheres or thicker axons or better
myelinated axons.
We don't know the precise micro-anatomy behind this structural difference, but whatever
it is, the difference made some intuitive sense, since keyboard and string players have
to coordinate complex movements in the two hands.
Thus, the greater size of the anterior half of the corpus callosum could reflect greater
interhemispheric communication between the motor areas of the two hemispheres.
Another aspect of this study's findings was particularly interesting.
When the researchers looked closely at their data, they found that the difference in corpus
callosum size was largely driven by the musicians who had started their training before the
age of seven.
This raised the possibility that musical experience had a particularly strong impact
on brain development during an early period in life.
In research in animal neuroscience, it's well known that there are times during maturation
when experience can have a particularly long-lasting effect on the brain and on behavior.
These times are called sensitive periods.
In humans, sensitive periods are thought to be important in the development of language,
including our ability to discriminate and produce the speech sounds of our own native
language.
For the development of musicians' brains, also be subject to sensitive periods.
In a 2013 study, Virginia Penhune and colleagues provided evidence for this idea.
They once again looked at the corpus callosum of musicians using MRI, but they used a newer
method to look in more detail at the structure of the neural fibers in the corpus callosum.
This technique is called diffusion tensor imaging, or DTI.
DTI measures how water diffuses in local regions of the brain.
How would that help us study brain structure?
Well, water naturally tends to diffuse equally in all directions or isotropically.
In the brain, the direction of diffusion is influenced by brain structures.
For example, if water hits the fatty mile in sheath of an axon, it tends to diffuse
along that axon rather than across the axon.
This means that water diffusion is no longer isotropic, it's anisotropic, or biased, in
certain directions.
DTI measures the degree of anisotropic motion in water molecules in the brain, which is
influenced by the presence of neural fibers connecting brain regions.
Axon density, axon diameter, degree of milanation, and directional fiber coherence among axons
can all influence the direction of water diffusion in the brain.
DTI has provided a new way to study connections between different regions of the brain, and
as a result, many studies have begun to use it.
It's not infallible.
Many assumptions have to be made to take measurements of water molecule diffusion and turn them
into pictures of fiber tracks connecting brain areas.
In animal studies, the pictures we get using DTI don't always match up with no neuroanatomy
based on older, more laborious, and more accurate chemical methods for tracing neural connections
in the brain.
DTI is a young method, and it's continually being improved.
If it's used cautiously, it can teach us important things about the brain.
Going back to the study of the corpus callosum, penhunon colleagues used DTI to measure the
corpus callosum in highly trained musicians and compare them to people with minimal musical
training.
The researchers were interested in the idea of a sensitive period, so they recruited two
groups of musicians, those who had started training before age seven and those who had
started after age seven.
These early trained and late trained groups were matched for a number of years of training
and for the amount that they practiced.
The researchers found differences between musicians and non-musicians in the degree
of connectivity between the two hemispheres in the middle part of the corpus callosum.
Supporting the finding of schlaugen colleagues, these differences were due to the early trained
musicians, those that started before age seven.
The connectivity in the late trained group didn't differ from that seen in non-musicians.
Thus even though the late trained group had learned complex bimanual movements as part
of music training and had played as long and practiced as much as the early trained group,
this didn't result in differences in the corpus callosum structure.
In other words, it was the timing of the onset of training, not just the amount of practice
that drove the structural changes seen in the brain.
So far the studies I've told you about have focused on highly trained musicians, which
might lead you to think that only they show brain structure differences from non-musicians.
The study I want to tell you about next proved that this isn't the case.
This study, published in 2009 by Christa Hyde, Gottfried Schlaugen colleagues, was important
because it looked at the impact of musical training on brain structure in children.
They focused on six-year-old children and measured the structure of their brains using
MRI before and after 15 months of weekly keyboard music lessons.
Now the brain microstructure of six-year-old children is still developing.
So to see if musical training is impacting this brain development, you need to compare
brain changes in a musically trained group to brain changes in another group of children
that don't have musical training.
Both groups will show changes due to normal development.
So the question is, is the amount of change different?
This is what the researchers studied.
The other group also consisted of six-year-old children who were matched to the musician
group for socioeconomic status, but who didn't have weekly private music lessons.
Like the musically trained children, they had ordinary weekly group musical activities
at school.
This study used a method called deformation-based morphometry to measure local differences in
the size and shape of brain regions in the two groups.
Such differences could be due to an increased density of connections in a region, more axons
and dendrites, for example.
Remember in most regions of the brain, new neurons are not added during development or
as a result of experience.
It's the micro-architecture of connections between existing neurons that changes over
time.
The researchers found that at the start of the study, there were no significant differences
in the sizes and shapes of brain regions in the two groups of children.
But after 15 months, there were measurable differences in a number of brain regions.
One of those regions was located in the middle part of the corpus callosum.
Multiple studies using different methods have all found a relationship between musical
training and the corpus callosum.
This gives us confidence as scientists that the results are reliable.
It also makes me think about the idea that musical training doesn't make you a more
right-brain person, it makes you a more whole-brain person, because it improves communication
between the hemispheres.
Going back to the study of children and musical training, other brain areas show differences
too.
These included regions in the primary motor and primary auditory cortex.
This makes sense since keyboard training is demanding both in terms of motor skills
and auditory skills.
One of the strengths of this study is that the amount of change seen in the corpus callosum
and in the motor and auditory areas correlated with performance on simple motor and auditory
perceptual tasks that the children did in the lab.
This suggests that these brain differences had functional correlates relevant to music.
One intriguing aspect of this study was the finding that there were also differences in
regions of the brain that weren't directly involved in motor and auditory processing.
Some of these regions were in the left frontal areas of the brain, in areas known to be involved
in cognitive processing.
This shows that music is not just a right-brain phenomenon and raises interesting questions
about the cognitive impact of musical training, which is something we'll consider in our
next lecture.
So far we've focused on studies that have compared musicians and non-musicians in terms
of connection between the hemispheres or in terms of the relative sizes of brain areas.
In the last part of this lecture, I want to turn to a new line of research that compares
musicians and non-musicians in terms of connections within the hemispheres.
The past few years have seen a surge of interest in human neuroscience in the pattern of long-distance
connections between different brain areas.
Most of us share the same overall pattern of long-distance connectivity, but the strength
of connections between regions can vary between individuals, and these differences can have
consequences for cognition and behavior.
By strength of connections, I mean the number, size, and structural organization of axons
that project from one brain region to another.
For example, when many well-myelinated axons project in a coherently organized fiber bundle
from one region of the brain to another, that represents a strong connection.
If the brain areas are connected by axons that are fewer in number, smaller, less well-myelinated,
or less well-spatially organized, that represents a weaker connection.
There are numerous long-distance fiber tracks within each hemisphere of the brain, and they
are very important to higher cognitive functions.
In 2011, a study by Halwani Schlag and colleagues looked at one particular long-distance fiber
track in the brains of musicians and non-musicians.
This is the arcuate fasciculus, which connects regions in the temporal lobes with regions
in the frontal lobes.
Both hemispheres have an arcuate fasciculus, although in humans it's better developed
on the left.
It's been known since the 19th century that the left arcuate is important for language
processing.
This is the fiber track that helps connect two left hemisphere regions involved in language
processing, Wernicke's area in the posterior temporal lobe and Broca's area in the inferior
frontal lobe.
The arcuate on both sides of the brain is also important for auditory motor integration
more generally.
Thus, it's plausible that this fiber bundle might differ in strength in musicians and
non-musicians.
Musical training involves learning to precisely coordinate sound and movement.
When you play an instrument or sing, small differences in how you move your muscles can
cause slight differences in the sounds you make, and these differences matter to listeners.
Alwanian colleagues used DTI to compare the volume of the arcuate fasciculus in highly
trained singers, highly trained instrumentalists, and non-musicians.
They found that this fiber track was larger in the musicians than in the non-musicians
on both the right and left sides of the brain.
Between the two groups of musicians, the singers had even larger arcuate volumes on the left
hemisphere.
Once again, we see that music is not just a right brain phenomenon.
For me, this study raises questions about the possible impact of music training on language
processing, which is a topic we'll take up in the next lecture.
The last study I want to describe also examined connections between brain regions within each
hemisphere.
It focused on a remarkable musical ability known as absolute pitch.
I'll use the abbreviation AP to refer to this ability.
Musicians with AP can name the pitch class of a musical tone without any reference.
Pitch class refers to a note's letter name.
All the notes named C on a piano, for example, are the same pitch class.
To people without AP, it seems like an almost magical ability.
An AP person can hear a single note without a context and immediately name the pitch class,
such as C, or G, or F-sharp.
For them, recognition of pitch class seems totally effortless.
It comes as easily to them as naming a familiar color would come to you or me.
AP only happens in about 1 in 10,000 people, so it's not a big part of normal music cognition.
Sometimes great musicians have it, like Mozart, but other times great musicians don't have
it, like Haydn.
AP does appear to have an association with early musical training.
It's very rare to find AP and musicians who did not start their training as young children.
But early training is no guarantee of AP.
AP may reflect the interplay of biological predispositions with early musical experience.
For years, people have wondered what it is about the brains of AP musicians that underlies this special ability.
In 2010, Psyche Louis and colleagues published a study that compared the brains of AP musicians
and non-AP musicians, focusing on connectivity patterns within each hemisphere.
The two groups of musicians were matched in terms of age, sex, IQ, native language,
age of onset of musical training, and amount of musical training.
Using diffusion tensor imaging, or DTI, the researchers found that the AP musicians had
significantly stronger connections between two regions of the temporal lobe,
the posterior superior temporal gyrus and the posterior middle temporal gyrus.
This was found on both sides of the brain, but the connections on the left side seem particularly important for AP.
On the left side, but not on the right side, the size of the connection actually correlated
with how well the musicians did on tests of AP.
The authors argued that the strong connections they found represent a link between brain areas
involved in pitch perception and brain areas involved in categorizing sounds.
Research by other scientists has shown temporal lobe regions play an important role in sound categorization and speech.
Our ability to take a continuously varying speech signal and map it onto perceptually discreet categories,
like the vowels and consonants of our language.
So again, music and language seem to have a deep relationship in the brain.
In this lecture, we've looked at several different ways in which the brains of musicians differ from the brains of non-musicians.
We've come a long way since Franz Josef Gauls' speculations over 200 years ago.
Today, we can confidently say that there are measurable differences,
and we can even pinpoint some of those differences to specific brain areas or brain connections.
But to what extent does music training cause the differences we see,
and how might changes in the brain caused by musical training impact other aspects of cognition?
These are hot questions in the cognitive neuroscience of music, and we'll focus on them in our next lecture.
