Armchair debates about the origins of music have been going on for over a century and
they'll probably be with us for a long time to come.
But in the past decade or so, something new has happened.
There's been growing interest in using empirical research to address evolutionary questions about music.
You might think that studying the evolution of music empirically means studying archaeology.
And archaeology certainly has important things to contribute.
The 40,000-year-old bone flute I mentioned earlier is just one of many archaeological discoveries about music,
which are explored in Ian Morley's 2013 book, The Prehistory of Music.
The research I'll discuss in this lecture concerns evolutionary history,
but it examines living animals, and in particular, primates.
Species like monkeys, apes, and humans.
Studies of music perception in non-human primates can address evolutionary questions like
how ancient are the brain mechanisms that underlie our capacity for music?
I'll start with studies of music perception in non-human primates.
Then, I'll turn to research on human behavior, inspired by an adaptationist theory about the origins of music.
This is the social bonding theory, which claims that musical behavior had survival value for our ancestors because it enhanced social bonds between group members.
As we'll see, research on non-human primates and humans, inspired by evolutionary questions, has led to some surprising and interesting results.
Let's start with research on non-human primates.
Underlying these studies is a fundamental idea from evolutionary biology, the idea of biological continuity between species.
One of Darwin's main points in his book, The Descent of Man, was that humans had a lot in common with other animals.
He discussed similarities in body structure between humans and other primates, as well as similarities in behavior, such as facial expressions of emotion.
Darwin was trying to overturn the long-held idea that we were fundamentally different from other animals, a product of special creation.
He wanted to replace that idea with the idea that humans, just like every other species, arose by gradual evolutionary modification from more primitive animals.
This idea implies that non-human primates are our close cousins, we are all descended from a common ancestor.
Genetic research strongly supports this idea.
It suggests that all living primates are descended from a common ancestor that lived about 90 million years ago.
Humans are especially close genetically to chimpanzees.
We share over 98% of our genes and had a common ancestor about 6 million years ago.
Of course, we are also different from other primates in some obvious ways.
Our three-pound brain is weirdly large for a primate of our size.
Humans and chimps are roughly the same body size, but our brains are about three times the size of theirs.
And humans communicate using a rich vocabulary of words and complex syntax, something no other animal does.
But even so, many of our basic brain structures and functions, especially those not having to do with language, are very similar to other primates.
For example, like other primates, we have good 3D vision and depth perception, and we are capable of very complex limb and hand movements.
This makes sense, since our ancestors lived in the three-dimensional world of trees and used their arms for moving around in the world.
The neurobiology of reaching and grasping is very similar in a human and in a rhesus monkey.
And neural research on how monkey brains control reaching has provided a lot of information that can be directly applied to humans.
For example, in designing brain-controlled robotic limbs for people who can't move their own arms.
The basic point is that ancient aspects of brain structure and function are shared by humans and other primates.
But what does this have to do with music?
Well, if musicality is based on ancient brain mechanisms, then those same mechanisms should be present in other living primates because of our shared ancestry with them.
It was Darwin himself who first used this logic to test music perception in another primate.
In March of 1838, when Darwin was 29 years old, he visited a young orangutan named Jenny in the London Zoo.
This was 21 years before he published the Origin of Species.
Darwin was already well known as a naturalist and was allowed to enter Jenny's cage.
Jenny was a sensation in London.
She was one of the first apes who had been on public display and people were fascinated and sometimes a little disturbed by how human like she was.
Of course, this is exactly what interested Darwin.
He was looking for links between humans and other primates as part of his thinking about evolution.
On his visit to Jenny, he took along a few things that he knew humans liked to see if Jenny liked them too.
He took some peppermint candy, a twig of verbena, and a harmonica to see if she liked music.
In his notebook, he tells us that Jenny liked the candy and the smell of the verbena
and that she listened with great attention to the harmonica and even put it in her own mouth to try.
This made a real impression on Darwin.
It fit with his idea that our love of music, along with many other of our traits, had ancient roots that we shared with other apes.
After his visit to Jenny, he began keeping notes on reactions of his infant son Willie to music.
He kept notes for months and concluded that the love of music was present early in human life, consistent with the idea of musicality having ancient roots.
Even though 1838 is over 175 years ago, research on music perception in other animals has only really recently begun to pick up steam.
Scientists have just begun to appreciate that cross species research is a powerful way to study the evolution of human musicality.
I think it's also a powerful way to compare human and animal cognition more generally.
Music perception involves complex mental processing that doesn't rely on words.
Since other animals don't use words, research on music perception provides a great way to study how our mental processes compare to theirs, when language is taken out of the equation.
Sometimes the results of this comparative research can be surprising.
We already saw one example of this in a previous lecture.
Multiple studies have shown that songbirds who do complex auditory processing don't recognize a melody if it's transposed up or down in pitch.
This is very unlike humans and suggests that we have brain specializations for relative pitch processing.
What have we learned since Darwin's visit to Jenny the orangutan in 1838?
Darwin's informal experiment with Jenny was about musical preference. Humans get pleasure out of music.
Jenny's interest in music suggested to Darwin that she might like it too, which would suggest music taps into something ancient in primate brains.
But as Darwin was no doubt aware, informal experiments have their drawbacks.
Perhaps Jenny was just interested in the novelty of Darwin's harmonica and its sound.
Controlled experiments are needed to test if other primates really do like music.
In 2007, Josh McDermott and Mark Hauser did a well-controlled study of music perception in primates.
They tested two species of monkeys that normally live in the jungles of South America,
cotton-top tamarinds and common marmosets, and built a clever device to test musical preferences in animals.
This device is made out of two long boxes that join together to make the arms of a V shape.
A monkey is released into the base of the V where the two arms come together.
The walls of the boxes are made of mesh, so the monkey has air and light on both sides.
Each arm of the maze is a little food treat, so the monkey is encouraged to explore both arms.
But the maze isn't about food, it's about sound.
At the end of each arm of the maze is an audio speaker.
When the monkey enters one of the arms, sound from that arm's speaker begins to play,
and it stays on as long as the monkey stays in that arm.
When the monkey moves to the other arm, the first sound stops, and the sound from the other speaker begins to play.
The monkey can choose what side of the maze it sits on, and the sounds it hears depend on the side it's on.
The experiment lasts about five minutes, during which the monkey is alone in the room with no experimenter to influence its behavior.
The experimenter later analyzes the amount of time the monkey spends in each arm of the maze.
I think Darwin would love this setup.
It's an elegant way to examine auditory preferences in animals, because the animal is in control of which sound it hears.
The assumption is that it will listen to the sound it likes better.
In an earlier study, McDermott and Hauser had shown that monkeys can demonstrate an acoustic preference in this V maze.
For example, if one speaker plays chirps that monkeys make when they find food,
and the other speaker plays calls that monkeys make when they are distressed,
they spend more time on the side of the maze that plays the food calls.
It makes sense that they would prefer these sounds to distress calls.
In the 2007 study, the researchers used the maze to test if monkeys like music.
One speaker in the maze produced music that sounded pleasant to western listeners.
A lullaby played on a flute that sounded something like this.
The other speaker produced silence.
The study asked if monkeys would prefer music or silence, given the choice.
One thing that made the study elegant is that the researchers used the same design to test humans.
They tested collagen, which is a very simple method.
The other speaker produced silence.
The study asked if monkeys would prefer music or silence, given the choice.
The study also used the same design to test humans.
They tested college undergraduates.
They couldn't squeeze them into the little V maze,
so they put one person at a time in a normal room, which they divided in half with a piece of tape.
Each person was just told they had to spend five minutes in the room with no other instructions.
The person quickly learned that if they were on one side of the room, the flute lullaby would play.
If they were on the other side, the music would stop and they would get silence.
The study produced clear results.
The undergraduate students preferred music to silence, but the monkeys preferred silence to music.
They actively spent more time on the side of the maze that turned the music off.
McDermott and Hauser tried a couple of other kinds of music.
A sung version of a lullaby and a string quartet by Mozart.
Music
The results were the same.
The humans moved to the side of the room that turned the music on.
The monkeys moved to the side of the maze that turned the music off.
I think Darwin would be disappointed because these results suggest that the love of music is not something ancient that we share with all other primates.
But just recently, a study came out that would probably make Darwin happy.
In 2014, a group of researchers at Emory University, led by Franz DeVall,
published a study on musical preferences in chimpanzees.
We are much more closely related to chimpanzees and other great apes than to monkeys.
If some of the core components of musicality are only seen in great apes,
then we might share more with chimpanzees in terms of musicality than with monkeys.
DeVall's group studied chimpanzees in their normal, large living enclosure.
To test their musical preferences, the researchers put a speaker at one end of the enclosure
and played either music or silence through the speaker.
They tried different types of music, and unlike the monkey study, they chose non-western music.
They pointed out that if monkeys don't like western music, that doesn't mean they don't like music in general,
because western music is not the only kind of music.
They tried three kinds of music, West African Akane music, North Indian Raga music, and Japanese taiko music.
For each kind of music, they measured how much time the chimps spent in four different zones.
Zone one was the zone near the speaker, where music was clearly audible.
Zone four was furthest from the speaker, where the music was barely audible.
The idea was that if the chimps liked the music, they'd spend more time in zone one, where they could hear it clearly.
If they didn't like it, they would move away from zone one.
The researchers measured where the chimps sat when the different kinds of music played,
and compared these positions to where they sat when the speaker produced silence.
Did the music draw them in or push them away, or make no difference?
The researchers found that when African or Indian music was played, the chimps moved toward the speakers,
compared to when they sat, where they sat during silence.
This is the opposite result from the monkey study, where the monkeys preferred silence to music.
Two things suggest that this response by the chimps wasn't just an interest in the music's novelty.
First, they showed this behavior consistently over several days for the African and Indian music,
and second, they didn't move toward the speaker when it played Japanese taiko music,
so they weren't just interested in any sound that the speaker produced.
Maybe the human love of music really is tapping into something ancient in primate brains,
but in a study like this, we don't really know why the animals showed the preferences they did.
Why did they like the African and Indian music, but act indifferent about the Japanese music?
The researchers suggested that maybe the chimps perceived the strong, predictable drumming sounds
in the Japanese taiko music as threatening, since chimps sometimes drum on trees as part of territorial displays.
Well, that's interesting, but without doing experiments that manipulate the sound of the music,
we don't really know what aspect of the sound is driving the animal's preferences.
So the next logical step for studies of music processing by other primates is to manipulate the structure of the music we play them,
to try and understand what it is about musical sounds that leads them to either like or dislike music.
This is exactly what some researchers have recently begun to do.
This line of work is related to a particular theory about music's origin.
This theory predates Darwin's idea in The Descent of Man about music having emerged as a courtship signal like birdsong.
It comes from Darwin's contemporary Herbert Spencer, who published an essay on the origins and functions of music in 1857.
Spencer's theory wasn't about music's survival value.
His essay was two years before Darwin's ideas about natural selection were published in the origin of species.
Spencer's theory was about the psychological roots of musical behavior.
Spencer thought that music got much of its emotional power from the way musical sounds resemble the sounds of human emotional vocalizations.
He thought that as a voice got more and more impassioned, it became more and more music-like in its characteristics.
He wrote that the distinctive traits of song are simply the traits of emotional speech, intensified and systematized.
Spencer thought music first arose as a stylization of emotional speech that language came before music.
This was the opposite of Darwin's idea.
Today, in 2015, there's a lot of interest in the idea that music's ability to express emotion comes partly from the way it reflects the acoustic qualities of emotional vocalizations.
Unlike Spencer, modern researchers who believe in this idea don't necessarily think that language came before music.
After all, an animal can make emotional vocalizations without knowing how to speak.
Think of the way a dog growling or whining or yapping can convey basic dog emotions without using words.
The idea that music has its origin in the sounds of emotional vocalizations led to a primate study which was published in 2010.
It's an unusual study that came out of a collaboration between an expert on primate behavior, Charles Snowden,
and a cellist and composer, David Tai, who plays with the National Symphony Orchestra in Washington, D.C.
They reason that if music grew out of emotional vocalizations, then other animals should respond to music that reflects their own emotional vocalizations,
not necessarily human emotional vocalizations.
Snowden knew a lot about the emotional vocalizations of cotton-topped emeralds,
and he and Tai worked together to make the key acoustic features of these vocalizations and turn them into patterns of musical notes that could be played on the cello.
For example, a tamarin vocalization that expresses calm and affiliation sounds like this.
If you slow it down, you can actually hear a descending tonal pattern that's not evident to our ears if we hear it at normal speed.
Let's listen to a slowed-down version of that call.
Based on the sound of this call, Tai composed a piece of monkey music for the cello that was meant to sound calming to the tamarins.
It sounded like this.
Similarly, they made a piece of monkey music that was meant to sound arousing to the tamarins based on the tamarin threat call.
The threat call sounds like this.
Tai used the threat call to compose a piece for cello in human voice, which sounds like this.
口音
Snowden and Tai predicted that if they played this monkey music to tamarin monkeys, the monkeys would demonstrate different emotional responses to the music based on affiliation calls and music based on threat calls.
Because now the music would mean something to them.
of the idea with cotton-top tamarinds. Remember, this was a species that chose silence over
human music in the earlier study I described. This time, though, the question wasn't about
preference for music versus silence. The study was about emotional response.
One pair of monkeys was tested at a time, and the researchers counted the frequency of behaviors
that indicated a calm, relaxed state, like foraging or grooming, versus behaviors that
indicated arousal, such as moving quickly from one perch to another, or head shaking.
They found that when music based on threat calls was played, the tamarinds showed increased
signs of anxious behavior, and when music based on affiliation calls was played, they showed
increased signs of calm behavior. It seemed that monkeys did respond to music composed
on the basis of monkey-emotional vocalizations.
Snowden and Tai saw this result as supporting the idea that the early roots of music lay
in an ancient emotion signaling system that used the voice. Using the voice to express
emotion is something that many animals do, not just humans, so this would be a case of
music building on ancient brain circuitry. Their idea was that tapping into this circuitry
with music requires making music based on the particular emotional sounds a species makes.
This is a neat idea, and leads immediately to a question. Can music based on animals'
emotional sounds actually have stronger emotional effects on an animal than just playing the
emotional sounds themselves? Classic research in animal behavior has shown that artificial
stimuli can be stronger than natural stimuli in the reactions they elicit. Nico Tinbergen
coined the term super stimulus to refer to a stimulus that exaggerates the features of
a naturally occurring stimulus and leads to a stronger response than the original stimulus.
Baby seagulls peck at a little red dot on the bills of their parents to elicit food.
If you show a baby gull an artificial adult gull head with an artificially large red dot
on its bill, it will peck even harder. Could music for animals take the acoustic features
of animal emotional sounds and make them even more salient, leading to stronger emotional
responses than to the species' own emotional sounds?
Snowden and Tai have pointed out that their work on species-specific music could have
practical implications. Music is often used in animal shelters, but it's human music.
We don't really know if the animals actually like human music or if they find it irritating.
If species-specific music can help calm animals, then it may provide a way to reduce animal
stress in shelters. This idea shows how research on the origins of music can have real world
implications.
We've seen how studies of non-human primates can be used to address evolutionary questions
about music. But what about studies of human primates? There's been growing interest in
recent years in testing the social bonding theory of music's origins by studying the
impact of group music making on the social behavior of people. Remember that this was
one of the adaptationist theories about music, which proposes that musicality is part of
our biology because musical behavior had some survival value in our species' past.
The social bonding theory focuses on how making music with others could have been a mechanism
for helping bond together the members of early human groups.
One thing that distinguishes humans from other long-lived group living mammals like chimpanzees,
elephants and lions is how cooperative or pro-social we are towards other group members
that aren't closely related to us. In human social groups, the average degree of relatedness
is relatively low compared to other social mammals, and this is true even in small hunter-gatherer
societies where group size is small, like it was for most of human evolution.
How did humans become able to bond socially with relatively unrelated group members? One
idea is that we develop behavioral mechanisms to bond us together.
The social bonding theory argues that musical behavior was one of the mechanisms for making
group members feel more psychologically connected to each other. This would then translate into
more cooperative and pro-social behavior between group members outside of musical contexts.
If groups with better cooperation out-competed other groups, then behaviors that promote
in-group cooperation should be selected for.
How would this work? One idea is that when humans make or listen to music in groups,
they often synchronize their movements to a common beat. This allows them to coordinate
a complex pattern of simultaneous action. In neuroscience, there is some evidence that
the brain circuits responsible for controlling one's own actions are also involved in perceiving
the actions of others. Thus, if you perform movements that are simultaneously with someone
else, this could lead to a certain amount of blurring between self and other from the
brain's perspective. Of course, when you are dancing or moving to a musical beat with
others, you consciously know that you are different from the other person. But neuroscience
suggests that at some level, your brain begins to think of you and the others as part of
a larger self, and this may promote a sense of emotional and psychological connection.
In a 2014 paper, the evolutionary biologist Robin Dunbar and colleagues have suggested
that this self-other blurring could work in tandem with neurochemical effects of repeated
rhythmic movement. This type of movement can lead to the release of endorphins in the
brain. Endorphins can lead to elevated emotional states. They are involved in the euphoria
some people feel after exercise called the runner's high. Endorphins are also part of
the brain's opioid system, and this system is known to be involved in social bonding
in humans and other animals. So, rhythmic synchronization to a common beat, which is
a key part of a lot of music, could promote social bonding through self-other blurring
and through neurochemicals like endorphins. But how can you test if moving to a common
beat with someone really promotes a sense of social connectedness outside of musical
contexts? In 2010, a study was published which tested
this idea in a very clever way. The study was conducted at the Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology in Germany by Sebastian Kirschner and Michael Tomasello. They focused
on four-year-old children and tested them in pairs. Each pair was invited to do an activity
with the experimenter in which they woke up wooden frogs living around an imaginary pond.
The pond was an oval blue carpet on the floor. In one condition, the experimenter sang a
song with the children that helped them wake up the frogs as they marched around the pond
and drummed in synchrony on the wooden frogs. In the other condition, the experimenter and
children woke up the frogs by making them jump up and down while saying, weee, another
excited sounds but without any joint singing or synchrony. This non-musical activity was
designed to be as fun and engaging as the musical activity but without synchrony in
singing or drumming. After the activity was over, the really clever
part of the study took place. The experimenter left the room and told the children they could
play with the toys in the room while he did something else. This ensured that no adult
was around to bias the children's behavior. But unbeknownst to the children, the toys
had been specially constructed to be a test of helpfulness because one of the toys was
designed to break. The toys were tubes with marbles in them. Each child got one tube and
needed to carry the tube across the room in order to play a game with the marbles. This
was a solo game which each child could play alone. One of the tubes was booby trapped.
Soon after a child picked it up, one end would fall off the tube and all the marbles would
hit the floor. The question was, what would the other child
do? They could just ignore the first child's problem and continue across the room and play
the game or they could stop and help pick up the marbles even though that would delay
their own game. The results were clear. In the pairs where
children did the musical activity, one child was much more likely to help the other than
in pairs where the children did the fun but non-musical activity. The synchronized singing
and drumming was thought to have promoted pro-social behavior consistent with evolutionary theories
about music and social bonding. The researchers also found that the musical
activity seemed to promote cooperation between children. This was done by using another toy
that tested cooperation instead of helpfulness. This toy also used marbles but it was more
like a pinball game with two sides. The game was designed so that it could either be played
independently with each child keeping to one side of the table with his own marbles or
her own marbles or played cooperatively with both children sharing the marbles and the
whole game board. After the musical activity, children were much more likely to play cooperatively
than individually. This pioneering study is now one of several
studies that have found links between joint synchronization to a beat and subsequent helpfulness
or cooperation between group members. These studies have used different methods and tested
different ages from toddlers to adults. The fact that effects are seen with different
methods and different ages suggests that there really is something to this link between simultaneous
synchronized rhythmic movement and pro-social behavior. This supports the social bonding
theory of music's origins though we need research on the brain mechanisms behind these effects.
Are the effects really due to self-other blurring and endorphin release?
This line of work has some interesting practical implications. When we think about reasons to
keep music in the schools, maybe one reason should be that group music making promotes
cooperation and helpfulness in children. These are skills that are essential in real life
but which we don't teach explicitly, unlike math or writing.
A recent study by Ian Cross and colleagues at Cambridge University suggests that long-term
musical training in children promotes empathy, which supports the idea of a link between
music training and pro-social behavior. So now we've seen two examples of how research
on the origins of music can have practical implications. One example came from research
on other animals looking at their response to species-specific music, and one example
came from research on humans looking at how musical activities impact social behavior.
There's an important lesson here about science. Studying a topic that would seem to have no
possible practical application like the origins of music can lead to ideas and results that
do have significance for real world issues.
