This lecture will focus on an aspect of musical rhythm that seems simple, the beat.
But as we'll see, the processing of beat is mentally complex and is based on sophisticated
brain processing.
Let's start by illustrating what a musical beat is.
Let's listen to a short excerpt of music that conveys a clear sense of a beat.
You'll first hear the music alone, and then a woodblock sound will enter to mark the beat.
From an acoustic standpoint, the music you just heard was complex, many different frequencies
being sounded in a complex temporal pattern.
Yet as you could see, there was a steady underlying pulse marked by the woodblock.
That was the beat, a perceived periodic pulse that listeners use to guide their movements
and performers use to coordinate their actions.
Of course, we can perceive a beat without moving, but we very often express our perception
of the beat with rhythmic movements that are synchronized to the beat, like bobbing
our head or tapping our foot.
In other words, beat perception involves an intimate link between perception and action.
This is one thing that distinguishes rhythm in music and language.
As we saw in the last lecture, languages have rhythmic structure, but language rhythms aren't
based on periodicity.
We don't tap our feet and dance to ordinary speech.
We can easily add periodicity to speech.
Rap is an example of language with a beat, but an underlying beat is not part of normal
conversational speech.
A beat is part of a lot of the world's music.
Ethnomusicologists tell us that every culture has some form of music with a beat.
This suggests that beat perception is a fundamental aspect of music cognition.
Now, it's important to note that not all music has a regular beat.
In Western culture, Gregorian chant is an example of music without a beat.
In North Indian classical music, pieces often start with a rhythmically fluid introductory
section called the alap, which also has no regular beat.
These traditions show that music does not have to be beat-based, but a great deal of
music is beat-based, including most Western popular music.
As I said at the opening of this lecture, beat perception seems simple.
The beat is usually an effortless percept.
It doesn't seem to require any mental energy to perceive.
Young children usually develop the ability to move and clap to a beat without any special
training.
When you connect these observations together with the fact that all cultures have some
sort of music with a beat, it leads to the idea that beat processing is a very ancient
and primal aspect of music.
It might even seem that beat perception is something that we share with most other animals,
reflecting ancient aspects of animal biology.
However, recent research suggests that this intuitive view might be wrong.
In the first part of the lecture, I'll tell you about research with humans, which shows
how mentally complex musical beat processing is.
In the second part of the lecture, I'll talk about research with other species, which suggests
that the way we process beat may be unique among primates.
Let's begin with research on humans and start by discussing some basic aspects of beat perception.
We feel a beat most strongly when the rate of beats is between about 50 and 150 beats
per minute.
In that range, there seems to be a preference for a tempo of about 100 beats per minute.
This range is not radically different from the range of the human heartbeat, so one can
see how intuitive it is to think that the musical beat has its origins in basic physiological
rhythms like the heartbeat.
But if all you needed for beat perception was a brain and a heart, then beat perception
should be the same in us and in other primates.
As we'll see later, that may not be the case.
Another basic aspect of beat perception is that it involves periodicity, a pattern that
repeats regularly in time.
In most western music, the beat itself is periodic.
When I snap my fingers to the beat, my snaps are evenly spaced in time, like a metronome.
There are other musical traditions where the periodic pattern is at the level of groups
of beats, because the time intervals between individual beats are not all the same.
For example, in certain types of Balkan music, the time intervals between beats can take
on a short or long duration, with the long duration being one and a half times the duration
of the short.
Let's listen to a melody that has this kind of pattern, based on a repeating sequence
of short, short, short, long intervals between beats.
First you'll hear just the melody, and then you'll hear the melody with the beats marked
by percussive sounds.
The pattern you heard had periodicity, but it wasn't at the beat level, since beats
weren't evenly spaced in time.
It was at the level of groups of beats.
It might seem that this would make the beat hard to follow, but in fact, a lot of Balkan
music with asymmetric beats is dance music.
People who grew up in this musical tradition can follow the beats quite well.
Another musical tradition that uses more complex beat patterns is West African Ghanaian drumming.
In this tradition, the rhythmic reference is a repeating pattern played on a handbell,
and this pattern isn't just a sequence of equally spaced beats in time like a metronome.
Let's listen to three cycles of this pattern.
The bell pattern repeats periodically, and members of a drum ensemble keep their rhythmic
orientation by hearing their parts in relation to this bell.
As different drums enter, each with their own characteristic repeating pattern, a polyrhythmic
texture is created that allows for many different ways of hearing the rhythmic pattern.
The ethnomusicologist David Locke, who studies Ghanaian drumming, has used the term simultaneous
multi-dimensionality to describe the idea of rhythms that present listeners with many
different perceptual possibilities, depending upon the rhythmic layers and relationships
they attend to.
In a 2009 paper, he suggested musical cubism as a more intuitive term for this concept
of being able to hear a complex rhythm in different ways.
This was based on an analogy to the way visual artists in the cubist school rendered a subject
from different visual perspectives simultaneously.
When you consider musical traditions as rhythmically rich as Ghanaian drumming, it might seem as
though a simple periodic beat, like we're used to in most western popular music, is
not that complicated.
But I want to show you how mentally complex even simple beat perception is.
I'll use six key features of human beat perception to illustrate this.
Human beat perception is predictive, highly tempo flexible, modality biased, constructive,
hierarchical, and strongly engages the brain's motor system.
Let's go through these one by one.
First beat perception is predictive.
Beat perception isn't just about perceiving the timing of events, it's also about predicting
the timing of events, with a high degree of precision.
One way we know this is by examining how people move to a beat.
A simple way to study this in the lab is to ask people to tap along with a metronome,
which is the simplest form of a beat.
Most people find this very easy, and they spontaneously tap very close in time to each
metronome event.
This figure illustrates this phenomenon.
The upper gray bars show the timing of short tones, which happen every 600 milliseconds.
The lower black bars show the timing of a person's taps in relation to the tones.
As you can see, the taps are very close in time to the tones.
This shows that people are anticipating the onset of each tone, not reacting to it.
If people produce taps in reaction to tones, each tap would be at least 100 milliseconds
after each tone, like this.
In humans, this ability to accurately predict the timing of beats is highly tempo-flexible.
The kind of accurate synchronization we just saw can occur over a broad tempo range.
For example, instead of having a tone every 600 milliseconds, if the metronome had a tone
every 800 milliseconds, or every 400 milliseconds, people could still predict and synchronize
accurately.
Those rates I just mentioned were more than 30% slower or faster than one tone every 600
milliseconds.
This kind of broad tempo flexibility is a hallmark of human beat perception.
There are other species that can synchronize rhythmic behaviors to a simple beat, but they
don't show this broad flexibility.
For example, in Southeast Asia, there are some species of fireflies where individuals
pulse in synchrony with each other like visual metronomes aligned in time.
In the lab, they will synchronize with a flashing LED, with the kind of accuracy I showed you
in that picture of human tapping a moment ago.
But research shows that there is very little flexibility in this behavior.
If you change the tempo of the LED by more than plus or minus 5% from the firefly's
native flash rate, they can't maintain temporal alignment the way humans can.
The broad tempo flexibility of our beat perception suggests that our mechanisms of beat processing
are more complex than beat processing mechanisms seen in other animals.
Another thing that distinguishes our beat processing is modality bias.
We seem to get a much stronger sense of a beat out of rhythms that we hear than rhythms
that we see.
This has been shown in the lab for over a century by having people tap to a visual metronome
that is identical in timing to an auditory metronome.
People can synchronize to a visual metronome, but they don't seem to predict the timing
of beats nearly as accurately as they do if the metronome is auditory.
This diagram shows an example of how someone tapped to a visual metronome that was identical
in timing to the auditory metronome I showed you before.
This time, the metronome has a short flash every 600 milliseconds instead of a short
tone.
You can see that the timing is not as accurate as when the metronome was auditory.
This has been shown many times now.
In a study I recently published with John Everson, Karen Emory, and Brenda Nicodemus,
we found this asymmetry seems to reflect something fundamental about the human brain.
We found that congenitally deaf individuals who use sign language as their primary means
of communicating are much better than hearing individuals in synchronizing with a flashing
metronome, but they're still not as accurate as hearing people with auditory metronomes.
This means that experience alone can't explain the auditory advantage for beat perception.
It seems to reflect something about the basic wiring of the human brain.
Let's turn to the constructive nature of beat perception.
By constructive, I mean that the beat is a mental periodicity, constructed in the brain
in response to a rhythmic pattern.
The easiest way to demonstrate this is with syncopated patterns.
In syncopated patterns, not all accents are on beats, and not all beats are marked by
accents.
In syncopation, one can even have a beat where there is no sound at all.
Feeling a beat at a point with no sound, a point of silence, is strong evidence that
the beat is a mental construct.
The only events that occur at silent points are mental events.
In 2010, Escaffier and Schermer published a study which provided evidence for these
silent mental events using a syncopated rhythm.
Let's look at a picture of the rhythm they used, when it's shown as a sound waveform.
You see five events, and it sounds like this if you play the pattern once.
There are two bass drum hits, a louder snare drum hit, and then two softer snare drum hits.
If you loop this pattern and ask people to tap the beat that they hear, many people will
tap at the places marked by these arrows.
They tap four beats to this pattern, and the fourth beat is in the middle of a long
silence.
Let's listen to several cycles of this pattern.
Starting on the fourth cycle, a woodblock sound will be added to indicate where most
people tap to the beat.
Notice how the fourth beat of each cycle of the rhythm happens in the long silent interval.
The fourth woodblock sound in each cycle happened at a point where there was no sound in the
original rhythm.
In the original rhythm, that point marks a beat without a sound, a purely mental event.
How do we know that a mental event happened at that point?
Escaffier and Schermer showed that if a picture was flashed right at that point, it was processed
faster than if it was presented at another point in the silent interval that was off
the beat.
It was as if the time point of the beat was a peak in a cycle of attention that had become
entrained by the rhythm.
This is exactly what the psychologist Mari Rice-Jones had proposed in her dynamic attending
theory of rhythm perception, which was first published in 1976.
Let's now move to a fifth key feature of beat perception, which also shows the mental complexity
of beat.
Beat perception is hierarchical.
We often talk about the beat, but beats in a sequence can differ in their perceived strength.
Some beats can be perceived as stronger than others, and this contributes to the perception
of musical meter, or the higher level organization of beats in time.
For example, a march has a strong beat every two beats, while a waltz has a strong beat
every three beats.
We would count a march one, two, one, two, one, two, but a waltz one, two, three, one,
two, three, one, two, three, these have a very different feel.
Let's listen to a march.
And now to a waltz.
The sixth and final key feature of musical beat perception I'll discuss is something
that neuroscience discovered relatively recently.
This is the fact that beat perception strongly engages motor regions of the brain.
This happens in the absence of any avert movement or any intention to move.
For example, in 2009, Jessica Grann and James Rowe published a paper in which they used
fMRI to measure which brain regions were more active when people heard beat-based rhythms
versus rhythms without a clear beat.
People just listened without moving, but one of the key areas to show stronger activations
for beat-based rhythms was the putamen in the basal ganglia, which is a critical part
of the brain's motor system.
Grann and Rowe also found that when people perceived a beat, the basal ganglia seemed
to be strongly communicating with certain other brain regions.
These included auditory regions, which wasn't surprising, but they also included regions
of the cortex known to be involved in motor planning, such as the premotor cortex and
the supplementary motor area.
In Grann and Rowe's study, the putamen, the auditory cortex, and the motor planning regions
of the cortex seemed to form a network of regions involved in beat perception.
The fact that pure beat perception strongly engages motor planning areas is very interesting.
The philosopher Nietzsche once wrote that we listen to music with our muscles.
That's a poetic way of describing the way that listening to music can give us a powerful
inner sense of movement.
The fact that feeling a beat strongly activates motor planning areas of the brain confirms
this idea and also raises the question of why this should be.
Several researchers have suggested that the auditory motor links observed in brain studies
of beat perception play a role in our ability to predict the timing of beats.
We've now discussed six key features of beat perception, which show that the simple phenomenon
of the musical beat is anything but simple.
Now that we have an idea of how complex beat processing is, we can ask, how old are the
brain mechanisms of beat perception?
One intuitive idea is that beat perception taps into very ancient aspects of animal
biology.
As we discussed in our last lecture, the body is full of rhythms, including the heartbeat
and rhythmic oscillations of electrical potentials in the brain.
In his book, The Descent of Man, Darwin himself wrote that the perception of musical rhythm
is probably common to all animals and no doubt reflects the common physiological nature
of their nervous systems.
If this is right, then other primates should perceive a musical beat in a way similar to
us.
What do we know about beat perception in other primates?
Research on this topic is just beginning, but what evidence we have so far is very surprising.
This evidence suggests that other primates may not perceive a beat in the same way we
do.
This evidence comes from a line of research started in 2009 by Hugo Marchant and colleagues
working with rhesus monkeys.
They were the first researchers to train an animal to tap along with a metronome.
They were interested in the neural mechanisms of timing in sequences with multiple periodic
time intervals.
They knew that previous research had shown that other animals like rabbits and rats were
good at learning the timing of a single interval.
In the 2009 study, they showed that rhesus monkeys were also good at timing single intervals.
Marchant and his colleagues trained monkeys to listen to two tones separated by a single
time interval, like a half second, and then tap on a key twice to reproduce that single
time interval.
The monkeys could do this accurately.
The surprise came when they trained the monkey to tap along with a short metronomic sequence
of multiple time intervals.
This turned out to be very hard for the monkeys, and took over a year of training.
The monkeys finally did learn the task, but when they performed the task, the way they
tapped was very different from the way humans do it.
Their taps were always 200 milliseconds or more after each metronome tone.
Remember that when humans tap with a metronome, our taps are very closely aligned in time
with the metronome tones, which shows that we accurately predict the timing of those
tones.
But the monkeys, it seemed that they were not predicting the beat in the same way that
we do.
Marchant and his colleagues got this same result when they tried metronomes at different
ranges ranging from two tones per second down to about one tone per second.
They also got the same result when the metronome used a visual flash instead of an auditory
tone.
Remember how humans tap more accurately to an auditory metronome than to a flashing
visual metronome?
Well, monkeys didn't show that pattern either.
Their tapping accuracy was the same with both types of metronomes.
For Shanton, his colleagues have replicated this finding several times in their own lab.
These differences between monkeys and humans on such a simple sensory motor task has come
as a real surprise to neuroscientists.
In fact, some of my colleagues who study perception and motor control in monkeys are
convinced that if you train monkeys in the right way, they will tap to a metronome just
like humans do.
But until someone shows that to be true, we have to consider the possibility that beat-based
processing doesn't come naturally to non-human primates.
This difference in beat-based processing may not just be about the ability to synchronize
movements to a beat.
It may also be about the ability to perceive a beat at all.
In a subsequent 2012 study that Marchant and colleagues did with the music psychologist
Hank Yan Honing, they used EEG to look for a brain signature of beat perception when
monkeys heard rhythms without moving.
Honing and his colleagues had used this technique before to show brain signatures of beat perception
in humans.
But when they tried it with the monkeys, they didn't see that signature of beat perception.
Now this is a very young line of research and it's quite possible that future studies
will show that monkeys are very similar to humans in their ability to perceive a beat
and move to a beat.
But if the differences found by Marchant, Honing and their colleagues hold up, their
findings will be some of the most important in the history of research on beat-based processing.
Such findings strongly contradict a deep intuition that goes back to Darwin.
This is the intuition that beat processing reflects primal aspects of brain function
widely shared by many animals.
In future research on beat processing and other primates, it would be especially interesting
to look at chimpanzees and bonobos because they are much more closely related to humans
than monkeys are.
Chimps are especially interesting because drumming is part of their natural behavior.
In the wild, chimps will drum on trees with their hands and feet.
A 2015 paper by Babazueka and colleagues suggests that male chimps may use drumming when they
are traveling through the forest to signal their location and identity to other chimps.
The biologist Tecumseh Fitch has pointed out that drumming in primates seems to be restricted
to us and the African Great Apes.
So it seems logical that if any other primate is capable of perceiving and synchronizing
to a beat the way we do, it would be a chimpanzee or bonobo.
Can a chimpanzee synchronize its movements to an auditory beat?
One lab in Japan has begun to investigate this question.
This is the lab of Professor Tetsuro Matsuzawa at the Primate Research Institute of Kyoto
University.
In 2013, Matsuzawa published a paper with his colleagues Hattori and Tomonaga, in which
they tested three adult chimpanzees in a metronome synchronization task.
The chimpanzees learned to tap two keys of a piano keyboard in alternation.
These keys were separated by one octave, so they tapped like this.
Then the researchers turned on a metronome in the background to see if the animals would
spontaneously synchronize their taps with the metronome.
One of the chimps did show some synchronization.
This chimp wasn't nearly as accurate as a human, but on average her taps were close
to the tones in time, and not 200 milliseconds after the tones like the monkey's taps.
When the researchers changed the tempo of the metronome, this chimp didn't adjust the
timing of her taps to stay in sync.
So there wasn't any evidence of tempo flexibility, which is a hallmark of human beat-based processing.
We need more research to see if chimps really do process beat the way we do.
Before the modern studies of beat processing and other primates, I had begun to wonder
if only certain types of brains were capable of perceiving a beat and synchronizing to
it the way we do, predictively and with a lot of tempo flexibility.
In 2006, I published a theoretical paper proposing that only certain types of brains might have
this capacity.
These were brains that connected complex auditory processing and complex motor processing.
Humans connect complex auditory and motor processing because of something we do called complex
vocal learning.
This is the ability to reproduce complex sounds that we hear.
We all do this as part of learning to speak our native language.
Complex vocal learning is unique to humans among primates.
All other primates are born with an instinctive set of calls that they can modify in rather
modest ways based on their auditory experience.
I suggested that the evolution of vocal learning created the strong auditory motor pathways
needed for beat perception and synchronization.
One thing that made the hypothesis interesting was that it made a strong, provocative prediction.
The prediction was that animals that weren't vocal learners couldn't synchronize their
movements to a steady auditory beat the way we do, predictively and with a high degree
of tempo flexibility.
Most animals are not vocal learners.
For example, dogs and cats are not vocal learners.
This vocal learning hypothesis predicts that they could never learn to move in synchrony
to a beat in a predictive and flexible way, no matter how hard you try to train them.
They just don't have the right kind of brain structure.
Now I should point out that there is a sport where people train their dogs to dance with
them.
It's called canine freestyling and you can see videos of canine freestyling competitions
on the internet.
The dogs can learn a complex series of moves as part of these dance routines.
However, they never seem to pick up the beat.
But again, just as with the monkeys that don't synchronize like we do, maybe it's just a
matter of doing the right kind of training.
In 2008, I got an unexpected chance to test the vocal learning hypothesis when a colleague
sent me an internet video of a cockatoo dancing to music.
A cockatoo is a kind of parrot and parrots are famous vocal learners.
This sulfur-crusted cockatoo was named Snowball and he had been dropped off at the Bird Lovers-Only
Bird Shelter in Indiana.
On the video, Snowball seemed to be dancing to the beat in a way that looked really synchronized
and predictive, like a human.
I emailed the owner of the shelter, Irina Schultz, and asked if we could collaborate
on a scientific study of Snowball's dancing.
Irina had a background in biology and to my great luck, she was willing to devote time
to this study.
We tested Snowball with different versions of the same song adjusted with a computer
to span a broad range of tempi without changing the pitch.
We found that Snowball could synchronize a different tempi and published a paper with
our colleagues in 2009 describing this finding.
Fortunately, a group at Harvard University, led by Adina Schachner, was also interested
in testing my vocal learning hypothesis and they published a paper right alongside ours.
They looked at thousands of YouTube videos of animals dancing to music and found that
the only ones that really appeared to be synchronized were videos of vocal learners.
And most of the animals were parrots.
So Snowball is not unique.
He and other parrots seemed to have the capacity for predictive and flexible beat perception
and synchronization.
As far as we know, they don't do this behavior in the wild.
This suggests that the capacity for predictive and flexible beat processing may have originated
as a byproduct of brain circuitry that they have for other reasons, such as for complex
vocal learning.
The vocal learning hypothesis continues to be tested in modern research.
In 2013, Peter Cook led a study at UC Santa Cruz showing that a sea lion could synchronize
its movements to a musical beat in a predictive and tempo-flexible way.
This finding was more in line with Darwin's view that beat processing should be widespread
because sea lions are not known to be vocal learners.
However, sea lions are related to seals and wallorses who are vocal learners.
We don't really know yet if sea lions have the brain mechanisms for vocal learning.
It's a topic of current research.
I think the best animal to study and to really test the vocal learning hypothesis is the
domestic horse.
There are anecdotal reports of horses spontaneously trotting to the beat of music and doing it
at several different tempi without a rider on board to give them cues.
If this can be shown in a scientific study, this would seriously challenge the vocal learning
hypothesis because horses aren't vocal learners and aren't closely related to any vocal learners.
In 2012, my colleagues and I published a paper with a new method for testing if horses spontaneously
trot to the beat of music and I hope someone will use it to do research with horses.
Stepping back from the specific studies of monkeys, chimps, parrots, and horses, let's
remember the larger issues.
Beat-based processing seems simple to us and even Charles Darwin thought it tapped into
basic aspects of brain function that were widely shared among animals.
Modern research, including brain imaging studies of humans and behavioral studies of other
animals, is challenging this view and is teaching us how complex and interesting beat-based
processing really is.
