The title of this lecture is Are We The Only Musical Species?
This seems like a very easy question to answer.
We may be the only animal that speaks, but we're not the only animal that sings.
Everyone is familiar with bird song, and as we'll see in this lecture, birds are not
the only singers in nature, apart from us.
So in one sense, the answer to our question, are we the only musical species, is clearly
no.
In other words, music seems like something that connects us to the rest of the animal
world, whereas language seems to separate us from other species.
When we use language, we communicate with each other, using a large vocabulary of words
in a complex syntax.
As far as we know, no other species does that, or has ever done that, in the history
of life on Earth.
However, when we sing songs, we do something that seems a lot closer to what some other
animals do when they communicate.
As we discussed earlier in the course, Charles Darwin felt that there was a deep connection
between our singing and the songs of other animals.
He theorized that our ancestors sang wordless songs before they spoke to help them attract
mates, the way that many birds use song today.
So we sing, and other animals sing.
In that sense, we're not the only musical animals.
But what exactly are the similarities and differences between our singing and the singing
of other species?
Well, when we sing, we usually use words, and other animals don't.
But let's put that aside and focus on the sound structure of song, that is, how pitch
and rhythm are patterned, and how the songs are physically produced.
Once we take words out of the equation, putting our singing in a comparative perspective with
sounds made by other species can help us appreciate what's distinct about human musicality.
In this lecture, I'll discuss the songs and vocalizations of several different types
of animals to put human music in a broader biological context and give us a broader perspective.
Let's start small.
I mentioned that birds are not the only singers in nature.
Some of nature's tiniest singers would be snacks for birds.
They're fruit flies.
Fruit flies?
You might think that fruit flies primarily communicate with vision or with odor.
After all, they're attracted to the smell of fruit.
But research has shown that male fruit flies use songs to attract females.
They don't produce vocal sounds.
They make their songs by extending a wing and beating it to create a series of sound
pulses.
Different species have different patterns of pulses.
Experts in fruit fly courtship song can listen to a recording and identify which species
of fruit fly sang it.
When you record these pulses and listen to them carefully, they sound like more than
just a buzzing sound we're familiar with when we hear house flies inside a room.
Our course composer, Jason Rosenberg, has listened carefully to fruit fly love songs
and has created an emulation for us to listen to.
This is what it sounds like.
It's surprisingly rich for an animal whose brain could fit on the head of a pin.
If even fruit flies can sing, doesn't this suggest that music and singing are ancient
behaviors that link together animals as different as insects and people?
There is something very important that distinguishes fruit fly song from human song and it's not
just the degree of acoustic complexity.
It's how the song is acquired.
Fruit fly songs are instinctive.
In fact, the timing patterns in fruit fly songs are under genetic control and some of
the genes are even known.
One of them is the period gene, which is also involved in regulating circadian rhythms in
the fly.
It might seem odd that a gene involved in regulating circadian rhythms at the time scale
of entire days is also involved in regulating timing on the order of seconds in a song.
But in biology, there's rarely a one-to-one relationship between a gene and a behavior.
Genes form networks so that the effect of a gene on a behavior usually depends on other
genes involved in that behavior.
So fruit fly songs are instinctive.
Their details are under strong genetic control.
That's very different from human songs.
The structure of the songs we produce as children and adults depends to a large degree on the
cultural and historical context in which we grew up, not on the genes we inherited from
our parents.
In fact, if anything, kids tend to like songs that are different from their parents.
Many of us have lived on both sides of this equation.
We thought our parents' music was old-fashioned, and now our kids think our music is old-fashioned.
It's an endless cycle.
Well, we might be able to dismiss fruit fly songs as having little in common with human
songs, but once you get to vertebrates like us, you might think animal songs and our songs
would start to have a lot more in common.
There are many vertebrates that sing, especially birds.
But from a biological perspective, some bird songs are more like fruit fly songs than human
songs in the sense that they too are instinctive.
Instinctive doesn't have to mean structurally simple.
The song of the common loon is a beautiful, haunting song that's familiar to many people.
It's often used in films to evoke feelings of wilderness, even in landscapes where no
loon has ever set foot.
The naturalist John Muir described it as one of the wildest and most striking of all the
wilderness sounds, a strange, sad, mournful, unearthly cry, half laughing, half wailing.
Let's listen to the song of a loon.
That was much more complex than a fruit fly song, but also instinctive.
It turns out that the only other primates besides us that sing complex songs also have
instinctive songs.
Gibbons are lesser apes that live in tropical and subtropical rainforests in parts of Asia.
They sing complex songs often at a particular time of day.
These songs are used to mark territories and help reinforce pair bonds.
Even a male-female pair will sing together in a gibbon duet.
Like the loon song, the gibbon song is acoustically complex, so once again innate doesn't have
to mean simple.
Let's listen to a short clip of a gibbon song.
This is just one gibbon.
Unlike gibbons, humans learn their songs.
Singing one song through experience is a hallmark of human music, and it sets us apart
from many singing animals.
Our songs are the product of complex vocal learning, learning to produce complex sounds
based on auditory experience.
Complex vocal learning sets us apart from many other singing animals.
But not from all singing animals.
Among birds, there are three groups that have independently evolved the capacity for complex
vocal learning.
The songbirds, the hummingbirds, and the parrots.
Among the mammals, we are the only primate with complex vocal learning, but not the
only mammals with this trait.
Dolphins are vocal learners.
Bottom-nose dolphins communicate using little pitch glides called signature whistles.
They can imitate each other, or artificial whistle patterns produced by a human.
Harbor seals are vocal learners too.
The most famous vocal learning seal was a seal named Hoover, who lived for many years
at the New England Aquarium.
He had been found as a pup and raised by a fisherman from Maine, and he imitated human
speech.
You can hear recordings of Hoover on the Internet, imitating English phrases, complete
with a Maine accent.
Other mammalian vocal learners include certain whales.
One of them, the humpback whale, is a famous singer, and I'll spend some time describing
humpback song in a few minutes, including how it compares to human song.
But first I want to tell you about my favorite whale vocalist.
It's the beluga whale, a white whale found in arctic waters.
It's sometimes been called the canary of the sea because of the complex tonal sounds
it makes, but that's not why it's my favorite whale vocalist.
It's my favorite because of its remarkable vocal flexibility.
This flexibility was discovered in the 1980s by the marine mammal researcher Sam Ridgway.
In the 1980s, Ridgway was training belugas for the Navy in San Diego.
The belugas were often around divers who would talk underwater in their modified face masks
because those masks had a special diver-to-surface communication radio built into them.
One day, out of the blue, the diver started hearing speech-like sounds that weren't coming
from another diver.
They were coming from a young beluga whale.
Because Ridgway was a research biologist, he was able to study this behavior and even
determine how the whale was making these sounds.
It wasn't using its larynx the way we do when we make sound.
It was pushing pressurized air past a set of vibrating membranes in its nasal cavity.
This is a known sound-producing mechanism in toothed whales, but in this case it was
being used to mimic speech.
The resulting sounds are nothing like the whale's own natural communication sounds.
They're not intelligible speech, but they capture some of the prosody of speech, its
rhythmic and melodic patterns.
Let's listen to a recording of this whale.
At the end of that recording, you heard the whale expelling air out of its blowhole.
In 2012, Ridgway and colleagues published a scientific paper describing these sounds,
which proved beyond a doubt that beluga whales were capable of complex vocal learning.
I can't resist telling you a little anecdote about this particular whale sound.
When Sam Ridgway first shared this recording with me, I wondered if the sounds the whale
was making were the closest it could come to human speech due to the physical limitations
of its sound-producing mechanisms, or if this was actually a very faithful replica of what
the whale was hearing.
The whale was around divers who were talking into modified face masks.
The whale was hearing speech filtered through an air pocket and a rubber mask.
The resulting sound may have actually been much closer to what the whale is producing.
I got obsessed with this idea, and I asked a friend of mine who does underwater acoustics
to help me record what a person sounds like underwater talking through a rubber mask.
We used the pool at his house, got a rubber mask that fit over the mouth, and recorded
each other using a hydrophone and underwater microphone.
The resulting sound was a lot closer to what the beluga whale sounded like.
In other words, I think the recording you just heard may underestimate the vocal flexibility
of beluga whales.
They may be able to copy speech with even better fidelity than that if they could hear
clear speech underwater.
But let's get back to whale songs.
As I mentioned earlier, humpback whales are vocal learners who are famous for their songs.
In their songs, we begin to see some structural patterns that are reminiscent of how humans
organize songs.
Male humpbacks sing in warm waters during the mating season.
Early research on the structure of these songs by Roger and Katie Payne revealed that one
could identify notes, phrases, and themes in these songs.
From year to year, some old themes would disappear and new ones would appear.
A new theme could spread within a population of whales as if they were listening to each
other and sharing a musical tradition.
Katie Payne noticed that sometimes phrases within a theme would end on the same sound,
which she called a rhyme, reminiscent of how human song phrases will sometimes rhyme as
part of the structure of a song.
Apart from these structural resemblances between humpback song and human song, humpback songs
are often eerie and beautiful to human ears.
The sound of these songs actually played a significant role in the movement against
whaling in the U.S. some decades ago.
The songs helped convince people of the intelligence of these creatures, suggesting a real link
between us and them, and providing a basis for people to identify with them and want
to protect them.
Let's listen to a portion of a humpback whale song.
A full song can last for half an hour or more, so we'll just be hearing a short portion,
less than a minute.
As you'll hear, time moves slowly in humpback whale songs.
Humpback song may be the closest that another mammal comes to human song.
In humpback song, we see familiar characteristics, a complex structure with multiple levels
of organization, notes, phrases, and themes that can change over time and be passed between
members of a community.
Before I leave humpback whale song, I do want to mention something unusual about it that's
quite unlike human song.
This has to do with a special adaptation whales have for singing underwater.
In land animals that sing like gibbons, birds, and us, the primary source of sound is our
mouths.
We sing as we exhale air into the environment.
Whales don't do this.
Underwater films of whales singing show that there are often no bubbles escaping their
bodies.
It makes sense that they wouldn't want to lose air since air is precious underwater,
but how do they sing long songs without releasing any air?
If you try to sing and you close your mouth, you can still make some sound because sound
can radiate out through your nose.
When you hum with your mouth closed, the sound is coming out of your nose.
You can prove that to yourself by trying to hum your way through a song like Happy Birthday
while pinching your nose.
Pretty soon, your vocal tract and nasal cavities will fill up with air and the back pressure
will stop your singing.
The whale's blowhole is its nose.
When it sings, the blowhole is closed like the mouth.
The humpback songs that we hear are probably radiated from the whale's throat as it moves
air over its vocal folds and into other parts of its vocal tract where it can be stored
and recycled.
It's a great example of nature finding a novel solution to a challenging problem.
How to sing underwater when you're an animal that can't afford to exhale underwater.
So far in this lecture, I've focused mostly on mammals to compare human song to the songs
of other species.
Clearly the best biological analog to human song comes not from other mammals but from
birds.
In particular, it comes from vocal learning birds who learn their songs just as we do.
As I mentioned earlier, there are three groups of vocal learning birds.
Among the many living groups of birds, they're not particularly closely related, so they
seem to have evolved their complex vocal learning capacities independently.
These are songbirds, hummingbirds and parrots.
Of these, parrots are perhaps the most famous vocal learners.
Some species have incredible vocal powers.
They can imitate human speech or singing with amazing fidelity.
Again, I have a favorite example of this flexibility.
In this case, the parrot is a pet that belongs to the composer Bruce Adolph, who some of
you may know from his piano puzzlers on NPR.
Bruce's parrot is a male Panama Amazon parrot named Polly Rhythm.
Bruce got Polly when the bird was three months old and this year, 2015, Polly will be 50
and he's going strong.
Big parrots like Amazon live a long time.
Polly has learned some opera arias from listening to recordings of Mozart, including parts of
the Queen of the Night aria from the Magic Flute.
Listen to the short clip of Polly.
Now, to give you an even better sense of Polly's human-like vocal flexibility, let's hear a
short clip that Bruce Adolph recorded of his wife, Maria, and Polly interacting musically.
The clip starts with the human voice.
You'll hear Maria making meowing sounds, which Polly imitates, and then the back and
forth musical interaction starts.
See if you can tell who is the human and who is the parrot.
If you get confused, that just shows how good a mimic Polly is.
Polly.
From the standpoint of the comparative biology of music, parrots are clearly fascinating
creatures to study.
They are the only animals that rival us in terms of vocal flexibility.
And as we saw in an earlier lecture, some parrot species can also synchronize their
movements to the beat of music in a flexible way, like we do.
This suggests there may be some important underlying similarities in the neurobiology
of their auditory motor circuitry and our own.
In the field of avian neurobiology, there has been much more work on the neurobiology
of songbirds than of parrots.
Songbirds are much easier to study in the lab than parrots, and there are now many studies
of the neurobiology of birdsong.
It's a very active and exciting subfield of biology.
Songbirds have a specialized set of brain regions and connections that seem to be absent
in birds that don't learn their songs, like chickens and pigeons.
These regions and connections have been studied in great detail, and in the future it may be
possible to make direct comparisons between the neurobiology of birdsong and humansong.
These comparisons are challenging because of the differences in brain organization in
birds and humans, but comparative neuroanatomists like Eric Jarvis and Harvey Carton are making
progress in comparing bird and mammal brains.
For the rest of this lecture, I want to focus on comparative research on the acoustic structure
of avian and humansong.
There's a long history of interest in the idea that birdsong and humansong might have
some deep similarities in how they're organized.
If you listen closely to many birdsongs, you sometimes hear things that are reminiscent
of human musical structures.
This was a favorite idea of the late, great birdsong biologist Luis Baptista, author of
the 2005 paper Why Birdsong is Sometimes Like Music.
This is an intuitively appealing idea.
Let's listen to a sample of Purple Martin singing to see if we hear anything that sounds
musical.
First, we'll play it at normal speed, and then at half speed.
Slowing things down may help you hear some of the patterns that go by very quickly at
normal speed.
Here it is at normal speed.
Now listen again at half speed.
You've probably heard some tone sequences in there that sounded pretty musical to a
human ear.
In recent years, one person who has explored the idea of parallels between birdsong and
human music in detail is the musician and philosopher David Rothenberg.
He analyzes birdsong from a musical point of view in his 2006 book Why Birdsing, a journey
into the mystery of birdsong.
While interest in the similarities between birdsong and humansong is quite old, empirical
research comparing the structure of birdsong and humansong is still relatively rare.
One persistent question that has intrigued researchers is whether there is any evidence
that birds gravitate towards certain pitch intervals between the notes of their song.
In this course, we've seen how human musical scales around the world have certain intervals
that are universal or near-universal, such as the octave and perfect fifth.
We've also seen how important the structure of complex harmonic tones is to human music.
A complex harmonic tone is one with a fundamental frequency and upper frequencies or harmonics
which are integer multiples of this fundamental.
Is there any evidence that certain pitch intervals or the structure of complex harmonic tones
is also important to birds?
If so, this could point to some deep connections between human and non-human music.
In 2014, Emily Doolittle, Tecumseh Fitch and colleagues published a paper that examined
this issue using the song of the hermit thrush.
The hermit thrush is a North American thrush with a beautiful, evocative song.
Walt Whitman mentions the song of this bird in his poem When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard
Bloomed.
Let's listen to a short clip of this bird song first at full speed and then slow down.
Here it is at full speed.
And here it is, slowed down.
Doolittle Fitch and colleagues were interested in the frequencies of the notes of the hermit
thrush song.
They wanted to know if there was any evidence that the song notes might have certain interesting
frequency relationships.
They analyzed a large sample of songs from 14 different hermit thrushes and focused on
notes that sounded like they had a stable pitch when the songs were heard slowed down.
They looked at songs where there were at least 10 notes with stable pitches.
In this group of songs with stable pitches in a minimum of 10 notes, they found that
in most of them, the frequencies of the notes seemed to fall in a harmonic series, as if
they were all upper harmonics of a fundamental frequency.
It was as if the frequencies were outlining part of a complex harmonic tone.
Now, not all songs had this property, but it was common enough that it seemed like the
birds might be gravitating towards it.
This supported the idea that complex harmonic tones may play a special role in influencing
the creation of musical patterns.
An idea proposed by the biologist Dale Purves among others.
There are other ways to compare birdsong and human music besides looking at frequency
relationships between tones.
In 2011, I published a paper with Adam Tierney and Frank Russo in which we looked at the
shapes of pitch contours in human songs and bird songs.
We wanted to know if the simple fact that we sing while exhaling could lead to certain
widespread features in human song contours.
What do I mean by that?
When we sing, we force air out of our lungs and past our vocal folds.
This creates the air pressure that makes the vocal folds vibrate.
As we exhale, there is a tendency for air pressure to rise quickly at the beginning
of a phrase and then decline slowly over the rest of the phrase.
All other things being equal, higher air pressure makes the vocal folds vibrate faster, leading
to higher pitches, and lower pressure makes the vocal folds vibrate more slowly, leading
to lower pitches.
This means that pitch contours that rise and then fall or start high and then fall should
be easier to produce than pitch contours that have the opposite shape, such as falling
rising or starting low and then rising.
Sure enough, when we looked at a large set of songs from a range of different cultures
and measured the pitch patterns of their phrases, we found many more phrases with rising falling
contours or high falling contours than phrases with falling rising contours or low rising
contours.
This seemed to be a basic statistical property of human song pitch contours.
To see if this really was due to the biomechanics of exhaling and its relationship to pitch,
we decided to look at birdsong.
Birds also sing while exhaling, but with one big difference from humans.
Many birds take breaths between each note of their song.
These little mini breaths allow them to sing long songs with their tiny lungs without running
out of air.
If our idea was right, then we should see a bias toward rising falling and high falling
pitch contours in the pitch shapes of individual birdsong notes.
And that's exactly what we did find.
The statistical properties of birdsong pitch contours at the level of single notes reflected
the statistical properties of human pitch contours at the level of song phrases.
Both seemed to result from a basic biomechanical commonality in how birds and humans sing.
There is much more work that could be done comparing the acoustic structure of birdsong
and human song using empirical methods.
This kind of research can help address the larger question of how the music of our species
is related to the music of other species that evolved alongside us.
