Music is such a fundamental aspect of human culture that it's hard to imagine life without
it.
To appreciate the evolutionary mystery of music, it helps to imagine yourself as a visitor
from another planet.
How would you react to humanity's strange obsession with music?
The neurologist Oliver Sacks, in his preface to his book Musicophilia, reminds us about
a passage from Arthur C. Clark's book, Childhood's End, in which aliens, called overlords, are
puzzled by music because they themselves have nothing like it.
Sacks imagines the overlords back on their spaceship, ruminating about music.
Sacks writes that the overlords would have to concede that music was in some way central
to human life, yet it has no concepts, makes no propositions, it has no necessary relationship
to the world.
This quote from Sacks helps us step outside our normal perspective for a minute and asks,
why is music a universal, ancient, and powerful aspect of human life?
Why do we spend so much of our time and resources on it?
What are the evolutionary origins of musicality?
The origins of human music have been debated for almost 150 years.
In 1871, Darwin published his famous book on evolution, The Descent of Man.
In this book, he argued that humans were not a product of special creation, but had descended
from earlier ape-like ancestors via the same mechanism of evolutionary change that applied
to all living species, natural selection.
Many people know The Descent of Man because of its huge significance to biological science
and to intellectual history.
What many people don't know or remember is that in this book, Darwin devoted ten pages
to music, the greatest evolutionary biologist of all time in the foundational book about
human evolution spent ten pages thinking and writing about music.
Why?
Darwin believed that music was ancient, universal, and powerful, and that its origins must lie
in some biological function that musical behavior had for our ancestors.
He also felt that discovering this function was going to be difficult.
He wrote, as neither the enjoyment nor the capacity of producing musical notes are faculties
of the least direct use to man in reference to his ordinary habits of life, they must be
ranked amongst the most mysterious with which he is endowed.
In this quote, Darwin is basically saying, look at this behavior that pervades human
culture.
It doesn't have any obvious survival value.
It's not like language where it's easy to imagine the advantages it would have granted
our ancestors in the struggle for existence.
The original survival value of music is a mystery.
Darwin's point still rings true today.
There is no consensus about the original survival value of music.
In fact, there's no consensus about whether it had survival value at all.
Today there's still debate about whether musical behavior originated in humans because of
its survival value, and thus was a direct target of evolutionary forces, or whether it was
purely a cultural invention that built on mental capacities that evolved for other reasons.
One example of an invention that builds on other brain functions but which is deeply important
for human life today is literacy, the ability to read and write.
We know that writing is about 5,000 years old dating back to ancient Mesopotamia, and
thus there is no chance that literacy has been a direct target of natural selection.
Literacy is a human invention that builds on brain circuits that evolve to serve other
functions like language processing, detailed visual shape recognition, and fine motor control.
When someone learns to read and write, there are subtle changes in their brain that reflect
the acquisition of those skills, but evolution didn't specifically structure our brains
to learn those skills.
As the cognitive neuroscientist, Stanislaus DeHaine puts it, literacy is an example of
how human culture neuraly recycles brain circuits that have evolved for other reasons.
Literacy shows that a very important aspect of human cognitive ability, one that many
of us depend on every day, can have its origins as a human invention, not as a biological
adaptation.
Well, theoretically, one could explain music in the same way, an invention that builds
on brain skills that evolve for other reasons.
And as we'll see, this is actually one of the current arguments for music's origins.
But while no one objects to this argument when it comes to literacy, many people disagree
with it when it comes to music.
Why is that?
Well, first, literacy is very young in terms of human history, just a few thousand years
old.
Music is much older.
Bone flutes date back to 40,000 years ago, and musical behavior probably predates that.
Our early ancestors were hunter-gatherers, and much of the music of living hunter-gatherers
is vocal, which of course doesn't fossilize.
In other words, 40,000 years ago is very unlikely to be the beginning of musical behavior in
our species.
Second, literacy, despite its great value in human life, is far from universal.
It's estimated that about 25% of the world's population is illiterate today.
Music in contrast is a part of life for most people.
Third, basic musical behaviors develop early and without any special instruction.
Humans begin responding to music as babies, and children develop basic musical abilities
like singing, clapping, and dancing without having to study these things in any formal
way.
This is very different from literacy, which is usually explicitly taught and requires
conscious effort and supervision.
In this lecture, I want to give you an overview of the ongoing debate between those who view
musical behavior as having adaptive biological origins, and those who view it as an entirely
cultural invention.
After that, I want to briefly describe a third perspective which may be able to reconcile
these opposing positions.
Okay, let's start with theories of musical behavior as adaptive in origin.
The first and most famous adaptationist theory of music comes from Darwin.
Darwin's theory comes from synthesizing an observation about the effect of music on
humans with an observation about the use of music, music like sounds, by animals.
Concerning the effects of music, he noted that in humans, music arouses great emotions,
especially emotions of tenderness, love, triumph, and ardor for war, as he put it.
He said that music can mix these emotions together, and that we can concentrate greater
intensity of feeling in a single musical note than in pages of writing.
When I read these words, I have a vision of Darwin, sitting in his parlor chair, listening
to his wife, Emma, play the piano, as she often did.
Emma had studied briefly with Chopin, and Darwin was clearly emotionally moved by the
music he heard.
But being Darwin, he wanted to know why he had those responses.
So he connected his observations of music's emotional effect on us to his observations
about how music-like sounds are used by other animals, especially birds.
Birds are nature's most musical creatures.
Why do they sing?
In birds, singing is an acoustic display used to attract a mate or to defend a territory.
Singing in birds is thought to have arisen via a process that Darwin called sexual selection,
the selection of traits that promote the ability to compete for mates.
Much of the descent of man is devoted to developing the theory of sexual selection, which applies
to many animals.
Male birds use songs as displays to attract females or defend territories, even though
singing takes up time that can be used for finding food and reveals a bird's position
to predators.
Darwin connected his observations about the emotional impact of music on humans with
his idea about singing as a product of sexual selection.
Remember that he said music arouses feelings of tenderness, love, triumph, and ardor for
war, as well as rich mixtures of these.
He wrote,
Nearly the same emotions, but much weaker and less complex, are probably felt by the
birds when the male pours his full volume of song in rivalry with other males for the
sake of captivating the female.
Darwin is saying that music evokes such strong and complex emotions in us because it once
served as a function in human life similar to its function for birds, namely a function
in finding a mate.
He writes that our strong responses to music today become intelligible if we may assume
that musical tones and rhythm were first used by the half-human progenitors of man during
the season of courtship when animals of all kinds are excited by the strongest passions.
In this case, from the deeply-laid principle of inherited associations, musical tones would
be likely to excite in us in a vague and indefinite manner the strong emotions of a long past age.
In other words, music activates ancient, primal emotions in us because of its ancient, primal
role in the emotionally-charged business of attracting and defending a mate.
Darwin felt that music had this role in human life before we had articulate language.
Just as birds sing but don't have the power of speech, he felt that the progenitors of
man, either the males or females, or both sexes, before they had acquired the power of
articulate language, endeavored to charm each other with musical notes and rhythm.
One wonders what Darwin imagined early-human song to sound like.
Here's what our course composer, Jason Rosenberg, imagines.
Darwin's ideas about the evolution of music are still being discussed today.
His idea that song came before speech in human evolution has been elaborated upon
by the cognitive archaeologist Stephen Mithin in his book The Singing Neanderthals,
and by the cognitive biologist Tecumseh Fitch in his book The Evolution of Language.
Both of these researchers see merit in Darwin's idea of a musical proto-language,
a song-like communication system that is simpler than music as we know it today,
but which came before the evolution of full-blown speech.
These researchers are less committed to Darwin's idea that the primary function of this language
was in mate attraction. One problem with the idea that human song originated to attract mates
via sexual selection is that most sexually selected traits in nature involve strong male-female
differences in structure or function, what biologists call sexual dimorphism.
In song words, it's often the male who sings and the female who chooses her mate based on these
songs. This difference in behavior is accompanied by sex differences in brain structure and function
in regions involved in singing. We have no evidence that human males and females differ
in any major way in terms of musical abilities or in terms of brain structures supporting musical
abilities. Another problem with the theory of sexual selection of human music is that if human
music had its origins in mating behavior, one would expect the behavior to emerge when humans
become sexually mature. But we know that musical behavior and responsiveness to music start early
in life. So if human music didn't originate to attract mates, what other functions might
have had in human evolution? Two of the other most prominent ideas about adaptive origins for music
concern mother-infant communication and social bonding between members of early human groups.
The ideas about mother-infant communication are rooted in some of the unusual features of human
infants compared to the infants of other primates. Because of our bipedal locomotion, which is unique
among primates, the human female pelvis has a narrow birth canal, meaning that human infants
have to come out of the womb relatively early in their biological development. As a result,
human babies have an unusually long period of total dependence on their mother and other caregivers.
Mothers and infants need to communicate long before babies can speak, even though babies
don't understand words. Also, human mothers, unlike all other primate mothers, don't have
fur that a baby can cling onto. So if a mother needs both hands for something, she may need to
put the baby down and then needs a way to stay connected to the baby, to soothe it without
physically touching it. One important channel that human mothers use to communicate and stay
connected to their infants is sound, which is, again, unlike other primates. Think about how
mothers and caregivers in general talk to babies. They often use a special speech register,
which researchers call motherese or parentese, which is slower and more rhythmic and repetitive,
and with pitch patterns, they're somewhere between speech and singing. Babies, in turn,
will gurgle or coo or cry. They make non-linguistic sounds that indicate their emotional state.
Researchers like Ellen DeSaniaca and Dean Fock have argued that mother-infant vocal
interactions early in human evolution, possibly even before language evolved,
could have laid the foundation for the emergence of musical behavior. Thus, another possible
adaptive function for a musical proto-language lies in human mother-infant communication.
The final adaptationist idea about music that I want to discuss shifts the focus away from
two-way communication, such as between potential mates or between a mother-infant pair,
to communication between members of a group. Across cultures, music is often a group activity,
not just an exchange between potential mates or between a mother and her child.
It's very common for groups of people to come together to make or listen to music
at the same time. And when people do this, there's a tendency to share a similar emotional state,
to sense a real connection to the people around you and to the identity or message that the music
projects. In our own culture, think of church hymns or gospel music or national anthems or
concerts where people gather to make or hear music that they love. Let's listen to a section
of a choral piece by Jason Rosenberg to remind us of how music so often binds together people
into larger social units.
According to the social bonding theory of music's origins, which has been proposed by several
researchers, including the physicist Juan Roderer, the neurobiologist Walter Freeman,
the psychologist Stephen Brown, and the evolutionary biologist Robin Dunbar,
a key function of music in early human groups was to strengthen bonds between group members
via shared emotional experience. The idea is that these bonds led to more cooperative or pro-social
behavior between group members outside of musical contexts, which then enhanced the ability of the
group to function as a successful and cohesive social unit. There's always conflict within
human groups, and this conflict can reduce a group's ability to deal with challenges from the
environment or from other groups. If groups in which members cooperate out-compete groups where
individuals behave more selfishly, then there is a selective pressure favoring behaviors that promote
in-group cooperation. In his 2012 book The Social Conquest of Earth, Edward O. Wilson explores this
idea of multi-level selection theory, in which natural selection can operate simultaneously at
the individual and group levels. The social bonding theory of music's origin is focused on the group
level. Now note that this theory isn't wedded to the idea that music came before language,
though theorists who favor the musical proto-language idea point out that this
bonding function could have happened before language evolved.
In recent years, the social bonding theory has been rising in popularity, replacing the sexual
selection theory as the most prominent adaptationist theory of music's origins. One thing that makes
the theory so interesting is that it fits with some of the widespread features of human music.
For example, relative pitch perception allows voices to blend together across different pitch
ranges. Men and women can sing the same melody in unison, even though they sing in different
pitch registers with men much lower than women. Also, music often has a steady beat,
which creates a shared mental framework for coordinating singing, playing instruments,
or dancing. Music typically also has a lot of repetition built into its structure,
a point recently explored by the music theorist Elizabeth Margolis in her 2013 book On Repeat,
How Music Plays the Mind. This is very different from language, where we're always told not to
repeat ourselves. In music, repetition is celebrated. Think of the Beatles songs I want to hold
your hand, where they sing the phrase three times in a row near the beginning of a song.
That repetition, which would be pointless or even irritating in language, is great in music.
It invites the listener not just to listen passively, but to join in, sing along, and share
in the feelings and message of the song. As we'll see in the next lecture, the social bonding theory
has led to some very interesting experiments. We've discussed the three most prominent adaptationist
theories of music's origins. Made attraction, mother-infant communication, and social bonding.
In today's world, music has no obvious survival value. You can live, reproduce, and be very
successful in human society today without engaging with music in any serious way.
But perhaps this wasn't always the case. All adaptationist theories share the idea that
music had some survival value for our ancestors, and that as a result, our brains have been
specifically shaped by evolution to support musical behavior. Our capacity and desire for
music today exist because of this evolutionary shaping, even though the music we make today
may be very different in form and function from the music of our early ancestors.
There's a very different view of music's origins, which I want to turn to now.
This view regards music as a purely cultural invention, like reading or writing. One prominent
thinker who held this view is the great psychologist William James, the father of American psychology.
In sharp contrast to Darwin, he clearly says that music has no biological function
and compares its origins to a surreptitious birth, something unplanned and hidden, a byproduct of
having a complex hearing system. I wish James had written more about music. He was a brilliant man,
and I wonder how he came to these opinions. In light of what we know today, James' idea
doesn't hold up. If it were true, then birds and other animals that have complex auditory
systems should perceive music in the same way we do. But as we saw in the previous lecture,
that's not the case. But even if James was wrong about human musicality as a byproduct of complex
auditory processing, he made a broader point that we still need to think about. Maybe musicality arose
not because it had some survival value, but as an unintended byproduct of other mental abilities.
The psychologist who has developed this idea the furthest is Stephen Pinker,
in his 1997 book How the Mind Works. This book comes about 100 years after James' book, and
unlike James, Pinker deals with music head on. Much of the book is actually about how many human
mental faculties have been direct targets of natural selection. Pinker sees music as a counter
example, a prominent aspect of mental life that has not been shaped by biological evolution.
Pinker sees music as an invention that became universal in human culture because of the strong
links between music and pleasure. He writes that music appears to be a pure pleasure technology,
a cocktail of recreational drugs that we ingest through the ear to stimulate a mass
of pleasure circuits at once. In this view, music is a technology, something humans invented,
like literacy. Earlier we noted that music is much more universal and ancient than literacy,
and that unlike literacy, basic musical abilities develop without any special instruction.
So how can something that's ancient, universal, and spontaneously developing be a human invention?
Pinker has an answer to this challenge. He suggests that music taps into other brain functions,
which are ancient, universal, and spontaneously developing. In fact, he suggests that music is
an invention that taps into five distinct types of mental functions, each of which
did have an adaptive role in human evolution, but a role that had nothing to do with music.
The key idea is that since these non-musical mental functions are adaptive,
the brain gives us pleasure when we activate them. By co-activating multiple adaptive brain
functions, music triggers a concentrated dose of pleasure without itself being adaptive.
So what are these five non-musical brain functions? The first concerns language. When we speak,
our voice pitch moves up and down, creating speech melody, and our syllables have systematic
patterns of timing, accents, and phrasing, creating speech rhythm. Pinker argues that
the processing of musical melody and rhythm taps into some of the same brain mechanisms that
process linguistic melody and rhythm. The second mental function is auditory scene analysis,
the ability to mentally separate the different sounds that reach the ear, like separating the
words that someone is speaking from the sound of a lawnmower in the background, even though the
sounds arrive as a mixture. When we listen to music, we use these mechanisms of sound separation,
for example, to mentally separate the guitar and bass in a rock song. The third mental function
is the processing of emotional vocalizations. Music can have pitch and rhythm patterns that
resemble the emotional sounds that we make, like growls or screams or sighs. The fourth mental
function is habitat selection. Music can have sound patterns that resemble environmental sounds
that help us decide if a habitat is safe, like thunder or wind. The fifth mental function is
motor control. Music often makes us want to move and dance, using brain circuits shared with things
like walking or running. The idea is that when you hear music, even though you consciously know
it's music, your brain analyzes it using sound processing mechanisms that evolve for other
reasons, such as language or emotional vocalization processing. The pleasure we feel arises because
those mechanisms have all have adaptive functions, but those functions did not originate because of
music, we just feel the pleasure and attribute it to music. Picker points out that just because
something is an invention doesn't mean it's not valuable. Literacy is a human invention,
and we can all agree it's very valuable in our world today. His theory isn't about the cultural
worth of music, it's about the biological history of music. His argument is that musical behavior,
like reading and writing, is a purely cultural invention, not something that arose because it
promoted survival among our ancestors. Picker is one of several non-adaptationist theories
that now exist about the origins of music. A well-known evolutionist who is in this category is
the late Stephen Jay Gould. Gould loved music deeply, but in a 1991 essay he implied that
musicality and many other core mental traits of humans were capacities that originated as
byproducts of a brain that had grown very large and complex for other reasons.
He felt that music was an example of an acceptation, a term he coined in 1982 with his colleague
Elizabeth Verba to describe a trait whose current function is distinct from the reasons for its
historical origin. Gould felt that the arts were acceptations, capacities that we have because of
the human brain's size and complexity, not because those capacities were directly selected for.
The debate between music as having an adaptive origin versus being a purely cultural invention
or acceptation is probably going to be with us for a long time to come. I want to suggest a
third perspective, one that might provide a way to integrate these views. This perspective is based
on the idea of a feedback loop between human cultural inventions and biological evolution.
The technical term is gene culture co-evolution. The idea is that a cultural invention can gradually
change the biology of a species in lasting ways. We're talking now about genetic changes,
changes that can be inherited biologically from one generation to the next.
The best example of gene culture co-evolution in humans comes from the invention of dairying
or herding animals for drinking their milk. For most of human evolution milk was just for babies
and young children and only they had the enzyme lactase that could break down lactose or milk sugar.
Normally the gene that produces this enzyme is switched off when children mature but around
11,000 years ago people began herding cattle and making food like cheese out of their milk.
A few thousand years later a genetic mutation spread throughout Europe that gave adults the
ability to produce lactase. A cultural practice had led to a lasting genetic change and this opened
up a new food resource to the early Europeans which in turn affected their ability to grow
and spread. Behavior influenced genes which influenced behavior. It's a loop rather than
a one-way arrow from genes to behavior. How might gene culture co-evolution relate to music?
In an essay about music and evolution in 2010 I suggested that music may have originated as an
invention among human ancestors based on mental capacities that evolve for other reasons.
I had a non-adaptationist view of music's origins. I compared the invention of music
to the ability to control fire, a product of human ingenuity not of biological evolution.
The control of fire started as an invention but became universal because it provided things
that humans value deeply. It allowed us to cook and to fend off predators and to stay warm.
I suggested that music may have become universal because like fire music also provides us with
things that humans value though these things are mental rather than physical. These things
were its emotional power, its usefulness in rituals and its usefulness in helping us remember
long sequences of information. All cultures recognize the emotional power of music and all
cultures use music and rituals large and small. As for memory before writing music was the primary
way to remember long culturally important stories. Australian aborigines have song lines which they
use to remember paths across the land and navigate long distances. Could the invention of musical
behavior have led to genetic changes in humans? I began to wonder about this more recently.
I've been inspired by the biological anthropologist Richard Rangham's ideas about how the control
of fire led to biological changes in humans. Rangham in his 2009 book Catching Fire How Cooking
Made Us Human argues that cooking opened up a new range of food resources in human evolution
and made existing foods like starchy vegetables and raw meat much more digestible. He suggests that
this allowed humans the human body to spend less energy on digestion and free up more resources
for other energy hungry organs. The brain is a very energy hungry organ. In modern humans it consumes
20% of our energy budget even though it's about 2% of our body weight.
Rangham suggests that the energy freed up by cooking eventually allowed a substantial increase in
brain size in human ancestors which would again be a case of gene culture co-evolution.
These ideas are controversial in anthropology but I think most anthropologists would agree
that as a result of cooking which is at least 250,000 years old certain aspects of human anatomy
having to do with chewing and digesting food were permanently changed. Returning to music,
could the invention of musical behavior have led to permanent changes in our biology? Do we
have to think of music as invention versus adaptation or can we use the concept of gene
culture co-evolution to think about how cultural invention and biological evolution might be
intertwined in the case of music? A number of researchers have recently raised this idea
including the musicologist Gary Tomlinson in his 2015 book A Million Years of Music.
I think it deserves serious consideration. If we want to pursue this idea we have to ask
how might regular musical behavior have led to biological changes the way for example that
daring behavior led to changes in the regulation of the lactase gene? One place to look might be
brain specializations for synchronized simultaneous rhythmic action. This is a very
distinctive feature of music compared to other behaviors such as language. In language people
exchange information by taking turns. One person speaks then another person speaks. In music people
often do things in synchrony. They sing, play or dance at the same time. If this coordination
did promote social bonding in early human groups then perhaps our brains have become specialized
for tightly synchronized rhythmic actions with others. I've given you a taste of three different
kinds of theories about music's relationship to biological evolution. Adaptationist theories,
invention theories and gene culture co-evolution theories. In recent years evolutionary research
on music has taken an exciting new direction out of the armchair and into the lab.
