In this lecture, we'll step back and think about one of the basic issues we considered
at the start of this course, the biological significance of music.
In the early lectures, that discussion focused on the evolutionary significance of music
and debates about that topic.
I want to look at that issue again, through the lens of cognitive neuroscience.
I'll end up concluding that at this point, we need to keep an open mind about whether
musicality is something we've been shaped for by evolution or not.
I'll also conclude that we need to get beyond framing the debate about our musical capacities
as the product of biological evolution or the product of human invention.
Then I'll go on to think about the biological significance of music more broadly, based
on what we've learned about the relationship between music and neural plasticity.
That is, I'll shift from thinking about music and biology on evolutionary timescales to
thinking about it on the timescale of individual lifetimes, informed by the perspective of cognitive
neuroscience.
But let's start with evolution.
How can cognitive neuroscience help us think about debates over the evolutionary status
of music?
In 1871, when Darwin wrote his ten pages about music in The Descent of Man, he was thinking
about the biological significance of music.
He felt that human music with its universality, its power, and its antiquity in human life
must have had a biological function for our ancestors.
His argument was that music's biological significance lay in its survival value as
a courtship signal which helped our ancestors find mates.
Darwin began a debate that is still going today.
Even for those who don't subscribe to Darwin's particular theory of the evolutionary function
of music, the larger issue of whether our brains have been specifically shaped by evolution
to support musical behavior is still an active topic of debate.
The idea of specifically shaped is important.
We have the capacity for all kinds of behaviors that our brains aren't specialized for in
an evolutionary sense.
Every normal human being has the capacity to learn to ride a bicycle, or to learn to
read and write, but we can be quite sure that evolution didn't specialize our brains for
these behaviors.
They are too recently invented to have been the targets of evolutionary forces.
On the other hand, every normal human being also has the capacity to learn language, and
many cognitive neuroscientists believe that our brains have been specifically shaped by
evolution to support linguistic processing.
Why do cognitive neuroscientists believe this?
What is the evidence that convinces them that we have been biologically specialized for language?
It's not armchair arguments about how useful language might have been for our ancestors.
It's facts about how language develops in human children, as well as facts about the
genetic and biological foundations of language abilities.
If we can think through what the compelling evidence is that we've been shaped for language,
this can help us think about whether music also meets these criteria.
I want to go through five aspects of language that point to biological specialization for
this in humans.
For each aspect, we'll think about whether it could also be used to suggest that we are
biologically specialized for music.
The first aspect of language that points to biological specialization is babbling.
Around the age of seven months, human babies begin to produce nonsense syllables, such
as bah and dah, in repetitive sequences.
No other primate does this.
Babbling helps babies learn the relationship between their vocal tract movements and the
sounds that they make.
In other words, it kick-starts and begins to tune the auditory motor interactions that
babies will use in acquiring our species' unique communication system.
Apart from the fact that we are the only primates that babble, there is one other thing that
suggests that babbling is a biological specialization for language.
Its emergence is spontaneous.
It's not just an imitation of adult speech.
We know this because even deaf babies produce vocal babbling, even though they don't hear
their parents.
Babbling is often taken as evidence of a specialization for language, but since humans
normally sing using words, it could just as easily be seen as a specialization for musical
behavior.
A second aspect of language that points to biological specialization is complex vocal
learning.
Complex vocal learning is learning to produce vocal signals based on auditory experience
and sensory feedback.
We talked about this in our previous lecture.
This ability seems simple to us.
Every child learns to produce a complex set of sounds as part of learning to speak.
They're not born knowing the vowels and consonants of their language.
Some languages, like Hawaiian, only have around a dozen distinct speech sounds.
Others, like some of the Saan languages of South Africa, have over a hundred speech sounds,
including click sounds that don't appear in most of the languages.
Humans also learn the characteristic prosody of their language, its melodies and rhythms.
All of this seems totally ordinary to us, but a comparative perspective shows that complex
vocal learning is an uncommon trait in animals.
It has only evolved in a few groups of animals.
Among primates, humans are unique in having complex vocal learning.
In early studies of how much human language could be learned by chimpanzees, researchers
quickly learned that having the chimps imitate the vocal sounds of speech was not going to
work.
Years of trying to get them to imitate and articulate human words didn't lead anywhere.
The chimps had to use a signed-based language to express the words that they had learned.
Visual symbols instead of spoken sounds.
Vocal learning appears to be part of an ensemble of traits that we have acquired through revolution
to help us learn our complex acoustic communication system.
We see it as evidence for specialization for language, but just as with battling, vocal
learning could just as easily be a specialization for musical behavior since it's a core part
of musicality.
A third aspect of language that points to biological specialization is how quickly we
learn the sound structure of our language.
Babies usually don't begin to speak in coherent words and phrases until after the first year
of life.
But before they are doing that, they do a great deal of rapid and complex perceptual
learning of the sounds of their native language.
By six months of age, they start to show evidence of learning the particular vowel sounds of
their language.
Soon thereafter, they lose sensitivity to certain phonetic contrasts that do not occur
in their language and gain sensitivity for other difficult phonetic contrasts in their
native tongue.
That is, infants come into the world with open ears suited to the sound of any human
language, but they soon begin to hear with an accent in ways that favor their native
language.
Complimenting these perceptual skills are skills at sound production.
Speaking involves regulating the airstream while producing rapid, complex gestures with
multiple parts of the vocal tract, such as the tongue, teeth, and the soft palate.
Children largely master these complex motor skills by the age of three or four.
By that young age, they can produce speech that is not only fluent and highly intelligible,
but which also has many of the subtleties of their native language in terms of their accent.
These abilities stand in sharp contrast to other motor skills of three to four-year-olds,
such as their ability to throw and catch a ball with accuracy.
How does music stack up in terms of rapid learning of sound structure early in life?
A few lectures ago, we saw how between six and twelve months of age, infants tune into
the rhythmic structure of their native music.
Six-month-old Western infants are as good at detecting changes in the rhythmic patterns
of Western music as of Balkan music, which has beat patterns that Western adults have
difficulty following.
By twelve months, Western infants start to show difficulty detecting rhythmic changes
in Balkan music.
They are rapidly learning about their native musical rhythmic system and losing sensitivity
to rhythmic patterns that don't occur in their culture.
This is very reminiscent of the classic work on language about how babies learn speech
sounds.
In terms of production, by three to four years of age, children aren't just speaking, they're
also singing.
Many young children love to sing if they're put in a musical environment or to play with
musical toys if they're given the chance.
And quite apart from enjoying producing music, infants from a very young age enjoy listening
to music.
In a previous lecture, we talked about an experiment that measured how long infants
sustained interest in song versus two forms of speech, infant-directed speech, which has
exaggerated pitch contours and a regular rhythm, and adult-directed speech.
Song was much more powerful at sustaining interest.
Song was also more powerful in physiologically soothing distressed infants than speech was.
A fourth aspect of language that points to biological specialization is the fact that
we have critical periods for language acquisition.
A critical period or sensitive period is a time window when developmental processes are
especially sensitive to environmental input.
But, or lack of it, during this time can have a profound effect on the ultimate level
of adult ability in specific skills.
Vocal development in songbirds is a well-studied case in biology.
If birds who learn their songs, such as baby swamp sparrows, are not permitted to hear the
song of an adult before a certain age, they will never acquire full proficiency in their
species' song, even if given unlimited exposure later in life.
In an influential 1967 book called The Biological Foundations of Language, Lenberg proposed
that humans have a critical period for a language acquisition that ends at puberty.
Thankfully, one can't test this idea with the kind of deprivation experiments done
with songbirds.
Right now, the best evidence for a critical period for language comes from studies on
sign language.
Rachel Mayberry and colleagues have shown that when sign language input is delayed in deaf
individuals with no other language, there is a significant impact on adult communication
skills.
What about music?
Is there any evidence for critical periods?
As we saw in an earlier lecture, evidence from structural brain imaging by Virginia
Penhune and colleagues has provided evidence that early musical training impacts brain
structure in a way that is different from later musical training, even when the amount
of training is matched.
So there may be evidence for sensitive periods in music acquisition.
This is a young research area and will probably be learning a lot more about it in the coming
years.
A fifth aspect of language that points to biological specialization is the discovery
of a universal language-relevant gene in humans.
In research on the biology of language, there's been a lot of excitement about the discovery
of a single gene mutation in humans that has a strong influence on speech and language.
This gene is called FoxP2.
When one copy of this gene is damaged, individuals show a range of problems with speech and language,
including deficits in oral movements, difficulty in manipulating phonemes, and problems with
grammar and lexical judgments.
I want to spend some time on this line of evidence because we haven't talked much about
the relationship between genes and behavior in this course, and this gives me a chance
to get into that subject.
The discovery of FoxP2 came about because of a British family, the KE family, that provided
the first clear link between a single gene and a developmental disorder of speech and
language.
About half of the members of this family have a mutation in a gene on chromosome 7, a gene
called FoxP2.
FoxP2 is subject to simple inheritance.
It is an autosomal dominant, which means that one damaged copy leads to the disorder.
An early description of the disorder focused on problems that affected family members had
with grammar, triggering a great deal of media attention and speculation about a grammar gene.
It is now clear, though, that the affected members of the KE family have a broad spectrum
of speech and language deficits, and problems that extend beyond language.
These include orophacial dyspraxia.
This is a problem controlling coordinated face and mouth movements.
But it's important to note that affected family members don't simply suffer from an
overall intellectual deficit.
Their verbal abilities are more significantly impaired than their nonverbal abilities, and
some affected individuals have nonverbal IQs in the normal range.
FoxP2 is not unique to humans.
It occurs in many other species, including chimpanzees, birds, and crocodiles.
However, the exact DNA sequence of human FoxP2 differs from other species, and shows almost
no variation within our species.
Monetative analysis of this variability suggests that this gene has been a target of selection
in human evolution, and it was fixed.
It became universal in its current form within the past 200,000 years.
What exactly does FoxP2 do?
FoxP2 codes for a DNA binding protein, and is therefore a gene that regulates other genes.
Studies of the gene in other species help provide some clues about what FoxP2 does.
In particular, studies of FoxP2 expression in birds that do versus do not learn their
song suggest that FoxP2 expression in specific brain regions is related to learning of song
sequences.
Molecular biology research has shown that the basal ganglia are an important site for
FoxP2 expression.
Basal ganglia are subcortical structures involved in motor control and sequencing, and as we've
seen in this course, they are also important for the processing of musical rhythm.
A study by Katie Alcock and colleagues in 2000 showed that affected members of the KE
family have trouble on tests of musical rhythm.
They also showed that this isn't just a general problem with any kinds of musical patterns,
because they are as good as unaffected family members on tests of musical pitch.
This means that affected family members have deficits in temporal sequencing in both oral
movements and in nonverbal musical rhythmic patterns.
So FoxP2 isn't just a language gene, it's a gene that seems to influence fine sequencing
and timing in ways that impact speech and musical abilities.
It may be that FoxP2 is involved in building circuits that do complex sequencing operations
for speech, language and musical rhythm.
We need a lot more research on how FoxP2 might be related to both linguistic and musical
abilities.
For now, we can say that this language gene can just as easily be seen as a music gene.
We've now been through five aspects of language, which provide evidence that we've been biologically
specialized for language, babbling, complex vocal learning, the rapidity with which we
learn the sound structure of language, critical periods for language acquisition, and the
discovery of a universal language-relevant gene whose sequence is different in humans
than in other animals.
In each case, we've seen how the same evidence could be used to argue that we have been biologically
shaped for music.
Of course, these aren't all the aspects of language that suggest specialization for
this ability in our species.
Different researchers would doubtless add other things to this list.
For example, as very young children, humans learn words at an astonishing rate.
Our brains seem prepared to soak up and handle a large vocabulary of words.
But children can also learn an amazingly large number of musical patterns at a young age.
Young children can recognize many different songs and can often sing along to them in
a way that shows that they are storing a tremendous amount of detail about the song's melodic
and rhythmic structure.
The larger point is that if you want to argue that we're biologically specialized for language,
you should consider the aspects of language that make you believe that, and ask whether
you could make similar arguments for music.
As of now, I think you can make similar arguments for many of these aspects.
This means we should keep an open mind about whether we have been biologically specialized
for music or not.
Also, I think we need to change the way we talk about the options for the evolutionary
status of music.
For a long time now, there's been a debate between those who see musical behavior as
having emerged because it had some survival value for our ancestors and those who see
it as a purely cultural product.
It's framed as a choice between two totally different options.
I think we need to start talking seriously about a third option, based on the idea of
gene culture co-evolution.
We talked about this early in the course.
This is the idea that human inventions can end up impacting our biology in lasting ways.
We talked about the evolution of dairying as an example.
At some point in our history, certain human populations started herding animals and drinking
their milk.
This resulted in genetic changes in certain human populations which made them more lactose-tolerant.
A cultural invention led to a biological change that was inherited from generation to generation,
a genetic change.
We also talked about the control of fire, which probably arose as a human invention,
how that completely changed the game for humans in terms of diet and the food resources they
had access to.
We mentioned the ideas of the biological anthropologist Richard Rangham, who has argued in his writings
that cooking had large implications for human biological evolution, including implications
for the brain.
In discussions about music and evolution, more and more thinkers are beginning to think
about gene culture co-evolution.
I think this could be a very productive line of theorizing if it can lead us to ideas for
specific things to look for or test in terms of behavior or brain function.
This way of thinking about music and evolution is still in its infancy, but I predict it's
going to become a major theme of future research and writing about music and biological evolution.
Now I want to step away from issues of biological evolution and consider the biological significance
of music at the time scale of individual human lifetimes.
In this course we've seen many examples of how regular engagement with music can have
a biological impact on the brain.
We've seen it in studies of children who learn to play a musical instrument where there
are measurable impacts on aspects of their brain structure.
We've seen it in studies of children who take music lessons and whose brains begin to
process language differently.
We've seen it with adults who listen to music regularly after stroke and show changes in
cognition and brain structure that aren't seen in adults who listen to stories or who
don't do any special listening at all.
We've seen it in patients with aphasia who undergo music-based therapies that impact their
brain structure and enhance their verbal fluency.
These are just a few of the examples of the biological impacts of music we've discussed
in this course.
In my 2008 book, Music, Language, and the Brain, in the chapter on evolution, I argue
that we are unique among all living creatures in our ability to invent things that transform
our own existence.
Written language is a good example.
This technology makes it possible to share complex thoughts across space and time and
to accumulate knowledge in a way that transcends the limits of any single human mind.
The invention of aircraft is another example.
These machines have fundamentally changed the way ordinary humans experience their world,
allowing large-scale movement between cultures.
A final example is the Internet, a technology that has profoundly changed the way people
communicate, learn, and make communities.
These are all examples of the technologies invented by humans that have become intimately
integrated into the fabric of our life, transforming the lives of individuals and groups.
As the philosopher Andy Clark has argued in his 2003 book, Natural Born Cyborgs, this
never-ending cycle of invention, integration, and transformation is uniquely human and has
ancient roots.
I think we can think about music in this framework as something that we invented that transforms
human life.
Just as with other transformative technologies, once invented and experienced, it becomes
virtually impossible to give up.
This notion of music as a transformative technology helps explain why music is universal
in human culture.
Music is universal because what it does for humans is universally valued.
Music is like the making and control of fire in that respect.
The control of fire is universal in human culture because it transforms our lives in
ways that we value deeply, for example allowing us to cook food and keep warm and see in dark
places.
Once a culture learns fire making, there is no going back, even though we might be able
to live without that ability.
Similarly, music is universal because it transforms our lives in ways that we value deeply, for
example in terms of emotional and aesthetic experience and the way we form social bonds.
As we discussed early in this course, current archaeological evidence suggests that music
has had this transformative power for a very long time.
The oldest known musical instrument is a bone flute from Germany that dates to about
40,000 years ago.
It seems likely that even earlier instruments will be found one day because human art is
now known to have at least 100,000 year old history.
This is the age of shell beads that were found at some ancient human sites.
It will be particularly interesting to see if future research will uncover ancient musical
instruments in Africa because modern humans evolved on that continent before we emigrated
out from there and spread around the world.
Let's return to that idea that music is a transformative technology.
Because of music's ability to significantly impact brain structure and function within
human lifetimes, I have argued that music is a transformative technology of the mind.
It's a trait that can shape the biological systems from which it arose, within individual
lifetimes.
It's a human invention that can substantially influence the microarchitecture and function
of the human brain.
And I think it was doing this long before any other technology that we know about.
Music may have started as a human invention.
Even if there has been no gene culture co-evolution, no biological specialization for music, music
still has profound biological significance for our lives because of what it can do to
individual brains within individual lifetimes.
Even if music wasn't a direct target of natural selection, musicality and its different components
still have biological roots, and we can study the evolutionary history of those roots using
the methods of cognitive neuroscience and the methods of comparative psychology, which
compare our mental abilities to other animals.
There is growing interest in using music as a way to probe how our cognition is related
to or different from the cognition of other species.
Music gives us a way to study complex cognitive processes that don't depend on words, and
it thus levels the playing field for comparing our abilities to other species because they
don't use words.
This is an area where I think there will be a lot of growth in the coming years.
An entire issue of the journal Philosophical Transactions B of the Royal Society was recently
devoted to the comparative study of musicality in humans and other species.
As we approach the end of this course, I want to encourage you to keep learning about the
cognitive neuroscience of music.
There are helpful websites, like the website of the Society for Music Perception and Cognition,
that can help you do this.
At that website, you can keep track of upcoming conferences, get links to videos of research
talks on music cognition, find a map of labs that study music cognition in North America,
and much more.
In the first lecture of this course, I mentioned the Voyager spacecraft, which were launched
in the 1970s to explore our solar system.
Each of those two spacecraft had a golden record on it, containing images and sounds
that were emblematic of our existence.
This record is meant to represent who we are and what we've accomplished as a species.
90 minutes of that record is devoted to music.
It's a wonderful testament to how important music is in human life.
The Voyager missions also provided a metaphor for the study of music in the brain.
Many of the first detailed images of the outer planets were thanks to Voyager.
For the first time, scientists could see things that earlier generations could only dream about.
The rise of new methods in neuroscience has given us the ability to measure the structure
and activity of the brain in entirely new ways.
For those interested in music in the brain, we can now see things that previous generations
could only dream about.
Humans have thought and written about the relationship of music and the mind for over
2,000 years.
But most of what we know empirically about music in the brain has been discovered in
the past 20 years.
Probably about 95% of the research findings I've described in this course are things
we just didn't know 20 years ago.
We are at the very beginning of our understanding of music in the brain.
Let's end this course with a piece of music from the Voyager Golden Record.
This is from Beethoven's Cavatina from the string quartet number 13 in B-flat major
Opus 130.
I want you to imagine that you are the alien who first comes across this spacecraft as
it's drifting through space about 40,000 years from now.
As far in the future from us now as we are from the first archaeological evidence for
music in our own species.
To take the record off the spacecraft, find one of the two needles that was included on
the spacecraft for playing the record and put it on.
You hear something you've never heard before.
The sounds aren't language, but they capture some of the deepest thoughts and feelings
of a human species, a species that's transformed its own life through music.
Thanks very much for joining me.
