In this lecture on the next, we consider studies where music has an impact on people
who have a range of medical conditions.
This lecture focuses on studies that involve listening to music.
In the next lecture, we'll turn to studies where people actively engage with music by
playing, singing, or moving to music.
The idea that music can help people with medical conditions has an ancient history.
Today there's an entire discipline devoted to using music to help people with different
physical or mental issues that they're facing.
This is music therapy.
The website of the American Music Therapy Association defines music therapy as the clinical
and evidence-based use of music interventions to accomplish individualized goals within
a therapeutic relationship by a credentialed professional who has a completed and approved
music therapy program.
Music therapy is a worldwide discipline with its own journals, conferences, and academic
training programs.
To do it justice would require an entire set of great courses lectures done by a music
therapist.
I have no training in music therapy and I don't do research in that area, so I can't
speak on behalf of that field.
What I can do is describe research on the biological impact of music on people with
a few different medical conditions.
My perspective is that of a cognitive neuroscientist interested in how music can influence our
brains and our bodies in measurable ways.
Let's start with a study that illustrates a short-term effect of listening to music
on physiological processes.
There's growing interest in the idea that music might provide a useful non-pharmacological
way to influence people's physiological state as they undergo surgical procedures or recover
from surgery.
In 2011, Stefan Kohlschund colleagues published a study that measured the effect of music
on patients undergoing hip surgery.
This study was notable for being a randomized placebo-controlled study designed the way
you would design the study of a medication on a physiological process.
The researchers studied older patients having total hip joint replacement under spinal anesthesia.
This was light sedation.
All the patients were told they would hear relaxing sounds to mask operating theater
noise.
They were given an iPod with closed ear headphones, randomly chosen to either have music or a
placebo sound.
The placebo sound was relaxing ocean sounds.
Half the patients heard music and half heard ocean sounds.
The music was joyful-sounding music from different genres, including classical, pop and jazz.
The researchers used purely instrumental music so that any effects wouldn't be due to words.
Let's listen to part of one of the pieces that the patients heard.
Patients started listening to the music about an hour before their anesthesia was turned
on.
The anesthesiologist then started the anesthesia and adjusted the amount of anesthesia until
the patient's brain reached a certain level of sedation as measured by EEG.
The EEG measure is called the bispectral index.
It's widely used in surgery to measure the depth of anesthesia.
The researchers made sure that none of the medical personnel involved in the surgery
knew what the patient was listening to.
In technical language, the doctors were blinded to the treatment condition the patients were
in, music or ocean sounds.
And the patients themselves had no knowledge about the purpose of the study.
They thought they were just listening to sounds to mask out the noise of the operating room.
The study was well designed and well controlled.
The researchers took biochemical measurements from the patients at multiple time points
in the study, focusing on patient stress hormone levels and immune system function.
These were measured from blood that came from the patient's catheter.
There were two main findings of interest.
First, the patients who listened to music had lower levels of the stress hormone cortisol
in their blood during surgery, about 20% lower than the other group.
And second, patients listening to music also consumed about 15% less anesthesia during
surgery.
Remember that the amount of anesthesia was adjusted so the patients reached a certain
level of sedation as measured by objective brain measurements.
With music, patients required substantially less anesthesia to reach this level.
In trying to understand the mechanisms behind these effects, the researchers suggested there
could be at least three different ways music affected the patients.
The first way was that the dopamine reward system could have been activated by the music.
The second was that perhaps there was a down regulation or decrease in activity in the
central nucleus of the amygdala, a brain structure involved in processing fear and
threat related stimuli.
The third way was the music could have affected these patients was by using their cognitive
and attentional resources and thus distracting them from the surgical procedure.
These all make sense.
We've seen earlier in this course that when people experience pleasure in music there
is activity in the nucleus accumbens and other reward areas of the brain that use the
neurotransmitter dopamine.
Prior research has shown that music can modulate activity in the amygdala, and we know that
music engages multiple brain regions involved in complex cognitive processing.
In this study, all of these mechanisms could have been involved.
They're not mutually exclusive.
The study by Coulson colleagues gives us a nice model for how to study the biological
effects of music in the short term while the music is on.
As a neuroscientist interested in brain plasticity, I am particularly interested in the research
on the lasting effects of musical experience on the brain.
Can just listening to music have lasting effects on brain structure or function in
medical patients?
Let's think about this by considering the relationship between listening to music and
stress hormone levels.
We just saw how listening to music can lower stress hormone levels.
In that case, the stress hormone was cortisol.
Cortisol is produced by the adrenal glands as part of an evolutionarily ancient stress
response that uses the brain's hypothalamic pituitary adrenal system, or HPA axis.
If you've seen the great courses lectures on the biology of stress by Professor Robert
Sapolsky or read his book Why Zebras Don't Get Ulcers, you know that stress hormones are
very adaptive when the HPA axis is activated occasionally.
Stress hormones help the body mobilize energy for muscular action by increasing circulating
glucose and by reducing the energy channeled into long term projects like digestion and
growth.
This is adaptive in the context of mammalian evolution where an animal has to rapidly fight
or flee to survive a sudden threat and can afford to divert energy from long term projects
for the purpose of immediate survival.
However, if the stress response is repeatedly activated, this can be bad for the brain.
Federal research shows that frequent activation of the stress response leads to persistently
elevated levels of stress hormones, such as cortisol.
This is bad for the brain because cortisol can cross the blood-brain barrier and lead
to changes in brain structures that have cortisol receptors.
These include regions in the hippocampus, the frontal cortex, and the amygdala.
Persistently elevated cortisol in the brain can lead to atrophy of dendrites and loss
of synapses in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex.
It can also lead to increases in the number of dendrites and synapses in the amygdala.
In humans, these changes could impair mental processes involving these brain structures,
such as memory, attention, and emotion regulation.
Are there medical conditions that involve frequent activation of the stress response?
If so, and if music could be used to lower stress hormone levels at those times, this
could have lasting benefits for the brain.
One condition that's worth thinking about in this regard is premature birth.
Premature birth is on the rise in the U.S., and it has important neurodevelopmental consequences.
For example, children who are born prematurely are more likely to exhibit cognitive deficits,
including language delays and ADHD, as well as emotional regulation issues.
Some of these problems might be due to the biological factors that led to premature birth,
but it's also worth considering whether neonatal experience contributes to the severity of these
problems.
The environment of most preterm infants is the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, or NICU,
where they stay from days to months before discharge.
The NICU saves the lives of many infants, but it also places them in an environment
very different from that of the uterus.
These differences include frequent sleep interruptions, loud and unpredictable noises
such as alarms, and invasive procedures like injections and blood sampling.
One 1995 study by Barker and Rutter followed 54 infants in the NICU and found that they
underwent a total of more than 3,000 invasive procedures between admission and discharge,
with blood sampling being the most common.
That's a very different experience than the normal newborn experience, where people normally
go out of their way to make infants comfortable and make sure they aren't disturbed.
The early experiences of NICU infants may be relevant to their neurodevelopmental outcomes.
These experiences seem likely to repeatedly trigger the stress response.
It was once thought that the HPA axis of newborns was not very responsive, but current research
supports a different picture.
It's true that the HPA axis of newborns doesn't show the normal circadian rhythm that it exhibits
later in life, but it does respond to stressful events.
A 1992 paper by Gunnar that looked at blood cortisol levels in neonates following stressful
events said that the HPA axis in neonates is highly reactive and sensitive to variations
in stimulation.
Frequent activation of the stress response in the NICU could have long-term consequences
for the brain.
This is because the responses are happening at a time of rapid brain development.
Most of the brain's neurons and major structures are present by midgestation, but a great deal
of brain development occurs during the late prenatal and early postnatal periods.
This includes the formation of connections between neurons, such as the growth in axons
and dendrites, and the formation of synapses between neurons.
Myelination of axons, which is critical for neural communication, also increases quickly
during this period.
Reflecting this growth, the volume of gray matter in the brain between gestational week
30 and birth increases by nearly 400 percent.
Having elevated stress hormone levels at this point in life is probably not good for
the developing brain, especially for structures like the hippocampus, frontal cortex, and
amygdala, which have stress hormone receptors.
If music can lower stress hormone levels for infants in the NICU, this could have lasting
neurodevelopmental benefits.
Fortunately, there is an entire branch of music therapy devoted to NICU infants.
Pioneering work by music therapists like Jane Stanley and Joanne Lowy has shown that music
in the NICU can have effects on behavioral measures of distress in NICU infants.
When I read research papers on NICU music therapy, one finding that I occasionally see,
which really catches my eye, is that NICU infants who get music therapy will sometimes
grow faster than other babies.
This means they're discharged earlier, which is good for them and their parents.
When I first read about this, the finding seemed completely bizarre.
How could hearing music make a baby grow faster?
But in the framework of stress biology, this could make sense.
Lower levels of stress hormones like cortisol mean less energy devoted to short-term fight-or-flight
responses and more energy devoted to long-term projects like growth and digestion.
The effect of music on NICU infants seems like an area where applied research by music
therapists could dovetail with basic research and cognitive neuroscience.
It would be especially interesting to measure aspects of brain structure and function in
babies who do receive this therapy versus those who don't receive this therapy.
These studies could be done years after the children have been through the NICU to see
if early exposure to music had lasting effects on their brain and cognitive development.
Now I want to turn to research on medical patients who are at the other end of the lifespan.
These are older adults who have suffered from strokes.
Once again, this may be a case where lowering stress hormone levels with music could have
lasting benefits.
Music impact on stress hormones could help explain the results of a recent line of research
focusing on recovery from stroke.
The research comes from the work of Teppo Sarcomho and his colleagues in Finland.
In 2008, they published a landmark study that looked at the effect of music on the recovery
of brain function following strokes.
Strokes are brain events in which a poor blood flow to the brain causes cell death.
This can result in serious and sometimes permanent motor and cognitive problems.
The adult brain makes few new neurons, so the biological damage is permanent.
Behavioral and cognitive recovery depends on the remaining undamaged regions of the brain.
Sarcomho and colleagues studied 60 patients with strokes in their left or right hemisphere.
All of them had standard post-stroke therapy.
Every patient was also randomly assigned to one of three groups.
A music group listened to one hour of self-selected music per day, a story group listened to
one hour of self-selected stories per day, and a control group had no additional treatment.
The patients in the two listening groups were given portable audio players and audio materials,
and a researcher kept in touch with them to encourage them to do their listening.
The patients kept diaries, which confirmed that they did listen.
The experiment lasted for two months, beginning soon after stroke onset.
Soon after their strokes, all of the patients were tested on several standard cognitive
tasks and mood measurements.
These tests were repeated again at three months and six months post-stroke.
The cognitive tasks examined seven things.
Problem memory, short-term memory, language, visuospatial cognition, focused attention,
sustained attention, and executive functions.
Executive function includes things like attending to relevant information and ignoring irrelevant
information.
The mood measures examined eight things, tension, depression, irritability, vigor, fatigue,
inertia, confusion, and forgetfulness.
All of these tests were administered by people who were unaware of which group the patients
belonged to.
Like the medical personnel in the first study we discussed, they were blinded to the experimental
condition each patient was in.
This helped ensure that they weren't biased in terms of how they judged the patients in
the two groups.
Soon after their strokes, patients in the three groups showed no significant difference in
any cognitive or mood measures.
But at three and six months, significant differences did emerge between the groups.
These differences were on two cognitive tests and two mood measures.
On the cognitive tests, verbal memory and focused attention were better in the music
group than in the other two groups, either the story group or the control group.
On the mood measures, the music group showed significantly less depression than the group
with no treatment.
For other cognitive and mood measures, all three groups showed comparable performance
at three and six months.
These were striking findings.
Because of the random assignment of the patients to the different conditions, the researchers
could infer that listening to music was enhancing cognitive and emotional recovery from stroke.
In stroke therapy today, there's a lot of interest in the idea of biological interventions,
like inserting neural growth factors into the brain or using electrical stimulation
to enhance neural plasticity in undamaged parts of the brain.
But the patients in the music group weren't having chemicals injected into their brains
or having electric currents pass through their brains.
They were listening to music.
How could this help stroke recovery?
Sarkamo and colleagues suggested that the music acted as a kind of environmental enrichment.
There is work in animal neuroscience showing that animals that live in enriched environments
with toys to play with or structures to explore, show richer patterns of connections in their
brain microstructure than animals that live in impoverished environments like simple,
empty cages.
This could be due to the greater sensory stimulation of enriched environments and to brain chemicals
that are released when animals are more cognitively active.
The researchers suggested that music could be a form of cognitive enrichment for humans
after stroke because music engages so much complex mental processing.
This may be part of the story, but I want to go back to the biology of stress that we
discussed earlier.
There's no doubt that a major stroke is a very stressful event.
Your life changes dramatically overnight.
You might lose control of one or more of your limbs.
Your communication skills might be seriously affected.
You may have to give up your job or change your work life dramatically as well as your
personal life.
After stroke, stress hormone levels can go very high, which would make sense given what
patients have been through.
If those stress hormones enter the brain, they could affect brain structures with stress
hormone receptors.
As we've discussed before, these include the hippocampus, which is involved in learning
and memory, the frontal cortex, which is involved in attention, and the amygdala, which is involved
in emotion regulation.
When I read the study of sarcomone, colleagues, I was struck by the fact that the patients
in the music group did better on tests of verbal memory, focused attention, and depression.
Perhaps the music they listened to lowered their stress hormones to a level where they
didn't do as much damage to some of the brain structures involved in these functions.
At this point, this is just a hypothesis, but it would be interesting to pursue.
In 2014, sarcomone colleagues published another paper about the patients in this study.
This newer study used MRI to examine structural changes in the brains of the patients in the
different groups.
The researchers had obtained structural brain scans of the patients soon after their strokes,
then again at six months after they had been regularly listening to music, listening to
stories, or neither.
The brain study used a method called voxel-based morphometry, or VBM, to examine changes in
gray matter and white matter between the first and second MRI scans.
Increases of gray matter, as measured by VBM, is thought to reflect things like the sprouting
of axons, the branching of dendrites, the formation of new synapses, and an increase
in small blood vessels in a brain region.
These are changes to the micro-architecture of the brain.
As we have seen in previous lectures, brain micro-architecture is shapeable by experience-dependent
neural plasticity.
The striking finding of this study was that there were significant differences between
the three groups in the pattern of gray matter increase between the two MRI scans.
In multiple regions of the brain, the music group showed significantly larger increases
in gray matter than the other groups.
For example, in the patients with left hemisphere strokes, the music group showed more gray
matter increase in the left and right superior frontal gyrus, which are involved in cognitive
processing.
They also showed significant increase in two regions of the limbic system, which are involved
in emotional processing, the left subgenual anterior cingulate, and the right ventral
striatum.
The ventral striatum houses the nucleus accumbens, which we've discussed several times in this
course.
It's an important part of the brain's reward pathway and is involved in the experience
of pleasure in music.
These changes on both sides of the brain once again show that music is not just a right
brain phenomenon.
One thing that made these results so interesting is that the researchers also found relationships
between the amount of gray matter change in specific regions and the amount of recovery
in particular cognitive and emotional measures.
For example, in the left hemisphere patients, the degree of gray matter increase in the
superior frontal regions correlated with the amount of their recovery in verbal memory
and focused attention.
And the degree of gray matter increase in their subgenual anterior cingulate area correlated
with the patient's decrease in depression.
This study showed that regular musical listening during the six-month post-stroke period influenced
the structural reorganization of the recovering adult brain.
According to conventional wisdom, most of the recovery that the brain will have after
a stroke occurs in the first several months.
Thus, just as with the premature infants in the NICU, music for new stroke patients
may come at a critical time period when its influence on biology can have lasting effects.
For me, these results immediately raise questions for future research.
How would the impact of regular music listening after stroke interact with biological therapies,
such as inserting growth factors in the brain or using electrical stimulation to promote
neural plasticity?
Could there be synergies so that the combined effect of music in one of these treatments
is greater than the sum of doing one or the other?
Another question that deserves study is how listening to recorded music compares to interacting
with a live music therapist in terms of biological impact.
In several parts of this course, we've seen that social interactions can play a big role
in music cognition.
Humans are deeply social creatures.
We often react much more strongly to live musical interactions than to recorded music.
Even though we have access to high-quality audio systems today, people still pay to go
to musical events where they can experience the social power of live music.
If just listening to recorded music can have biological impacts on stroke patients, what
could interacting with a live music therapist do for them?
Using a design like the one in sarcomo study, one could add live music therapy as another
condition and study its impact on brain reorganization after stroke.
In the last part of this lecture, I want to turn to a disease that is increasingly touching
many people's lives.
This is Alzheimer's disease.
Alzheimer's is a neurodegenerative disease that leads to dementia with severe problems
in memory, judgment, mood, and language use.
Because it causes cognitive and emotional decline but leaves physical abilities largely
intact, Alzheimer's places a huge burden on caregivers and on society.
As the world population ages, the number of Alzheimer's cases is expected to reach 43
million by 2020.
Research into the causes and treatments of Alzheimer's is over 30 years old but there
is no cure yet.
Medications can treat cognitive and behavioral symptoms such as memory loss and anxiety,
but current drugs have limited impact and they often have side effects.
There is a lot of interest in exploring non-pharmacological methods that can help Alzheimer's patients
and their families.
Some randomized controlled trials show that the structured use of music can have lasting
benefits for Alzheimer's patients.
In 2009, Roglio and colleagues studied Italian dementia patients.
These were mostly Alzheimer's patients with a moderate to severe diagnosis.
They were divided into two groups.
The first group received music therapy for 16 weeks.
These were half hour sessions twice a week where a therapist and a few patients played
instruments together.
The other group had an equal number of sessions involving non-musical activities with a therapist.
These activities were tailored to the patient's interests.
For example, they might have a newspaper read to them or play cards, also in small groups
with a therapist.
All the patients were given a range of standard neuropsychological tests before treatment,
twice during treatment, and one month after treatment.
The tests were given by a researcher who was blinded to what group the patients had
been in.
One notable finding from the study was that the music group, but not the control group,
showed a significant reduction in anxiety scores during the treatment period.
Their anxiety scores were about 50% lower than pre-treatment levels.
Also, this effect was still present at the one month post-treatment test.
On the other hand, scores on the mini-mental state exam did not change with treatment
in either group.
The mini-mental is a standard test to measure cognitive impairment and screen for dementia.
In any research on the effect of music on a neurological condition, it's important
to know if the effects seen in one study will replicate in other studies.
In fact, the findings of Roglio and colleagues have been replicated by another group.
In 2008, Goethe and colleagues studied French patients with mild to moderate Alzheimer's.
They also divided them into a music group and a control group.
Each group received 16 weeks of therapy with one session per week.
In contrast to the previous study, individuals in the music group heard pre-recorded music
from a genre of music that they liked.
They just listened to this music over headphones while resting with their eyes closed.
This music had actually been specially composed by music therapists to gradually relax the
patients and then stimulate them.
Patients in the control group had an equal number of sessions during which they were
given newspapers and art magazines which they could read.
Once again, a blinded researcher did neuropsychological tests of the patients before treatment, during
treatment and two months after treatment.
As in the previous study, the music group, but not the control group, showed a significant
reduction in anxiety scores during treatment.
Again, scores went down to about 50% of pre-treatment levels.
This time, the reduction was still present at the two-month follow-up.
And again, scores on the mini-mental state exam didn't change over the course of the
experiment in either group.
It's encouraging to see such a strong replication of the effects of music on Alzheimer's.
But even more interesting was a comment that some of the patients made in the second study.
They said that for them, the music had triggered salient autobiographical memories.
This reconnection with their past may be one factor behind their reduced anxiety levels.
Memory loss is a hallmark of Alzheimer's.
But an important observation is that not all forms of memory are equally impaired.
Recent research demonstrates that musical memories are often retained in moderate to
severe Alzheimer's patients.
Many can sing along with familiar songs.
A 2010 study by Van Stone and Cuddy showed they could even detect subtle alterations
to such songs, which shows that their musical memories are very detailed.
The mnemonic power of music for many Alzheimer's patients is important because there is a strong
psychological link between familiar music and autobiographical memory.
We know this intuitively.
A piece of music can often carry us back in time to events and feelings that happened
decades ago.
This has been scientifically studied in Healthy People by Peter Genata and colleagues and
provides a potential route by which music could activate memories in Alzheimer's disease
patients.
A 2009 fMRI study by Genata and colleagues with normal subjects showed that the medial
prefrontal cortex is involved in associating music with autobiographical memory.
This region is known to atrophy more slowly than other brain regions such as the temporal
lobes in Alzheimer's.
This means that the brain areas linking music and memory are relatively spared in Alzheimer's
disease.
In 2006, Irish and colleagues showed that music induced stimulation of autobiographical
memory in Alzheimer's is associated with decreased anxiety.
The ability of music to reawaken memories of one's life could help explain the anxiety-reducing
effects of music that were seen in the two studies I described earlier.
Music can help reconnect people with who they once were.
The new documentary film Alive Inside vividly demonstrates the powerful link between music
and memory in Alzheimer's disease.
As we've discussed in this course, neuroimaging of normal individuals shows that music activates
many structures in the brain's limbic system, which are involved in emotional processing.
These include the ventral striatum, amygdala, and orbital frontal cortex.
The orbital frontal cortex is another region that atrophies at a slower rate than temporal
lobe structures in Alzheimer's patients.
Again, music may be able to tap into relatively preserved brain areas in Alzheimer's patients,
in this case to stimulate positive emotions.
Since positive emotions promote positive interactions with other people, musical activities can
help restore emotional connections between Alzheimer's patients and their caregivers
and family members.
In this lecture, we've seen several different ways in which listening to music can have
a biological impact on patients with medical conditions.
In the next lecture, we'll turn to the impact of actively engaging with music.
