predicted the future than George Orwell. In
Jura, Orwell sat down to write one of the
20th century… maybe in fact of any century…
perfectly predicted the dystopian society
Orwellian. And, err, Alexa, she's a bit...
allowed to say BEEP anymore.
Maybe you go and read another book... like,
to me?
video's sponsor Surfshark?
the video?
It is just not my week...
video on Jordan Peterson’s YouTube channel
It was recorded in 2018 whilst Peterson was
book 12 Rules for Life (2018). He’d been
Broadcasting House to be interviewed on several
programmes. And, on arriving at the BBC, Peterson
journalist, broadcaster and activist George
and not without controversy; the BBC had initially
working briefly for the Corporation during
highly critical of the its role in public
imitation of Orwell—an already pretty tall
an initially abandoned, yet later reclaimed,
‘if liberty means anything at all it means
want to hear’.
as an embattled truth-teller—despite, at
York Times Best Sellers list and being barely
fairly unsurprising that he connected with
given that persecuted perception of himself,
Random House, was there to capture Peterson’s
most of the video consists of Peterson relaying
of stability and continuity amid centuries
does offer a few words about the man depicted
Orwell quote about liberty “mean the
to hear”, Peterson declares that
English journalistic tradition is that journalists
they want and think and that keeps everyone—including
we sacrifice that… especially at the feet
by anything anyone else says… we sacrifice
due to his assumption that he and Orwell would
as ‘one of  intellectual heroes from
simply to explore these kinds of uses of George
by the political right. My decision to focus
simply to ensure we had a tangible case study
our discussion around. On diving into Peterson’s
affection for Orwell provided more than just
readings of Nineteen Eighty-Four favoured
telling in terms of the worldview which underlies
want to explore what Peterson and his ilk
then, I also want to interrogate what this
core assumptions which underlie Peterson’s
our contemporary world.
1944 satire Animal Farm and his 1949 novel
around by those on the political right. And,
revolutions gone wrong—the hopes and dreams
rocks of authoritarianism and political repression.
against Farmer Jones do little more than take
Eighty-Four, a similar revolt has led to the
the very fabric of reality, using various
under its rule but, through censorship and
to think.
alluring reference points for the political
Nineteen Eighty-Four is often touted as ‘one
Multiple aspects of its world-building—the
“Big Brother”, “Room 101”, “2+2=5”—have
is not disconnected from its political content.
not only due to it being a compelling read
but also due to its use as, in Isaac Deutscher’s
in the cold war’. On the book’s publication
publisher, Harcourt Brace, was to write to
be interested in helping to call this book
thus, perhaps, helping to halt totalitarianism’.
Nevertheless, it soon became required reading
coming to be interpreted against the context
States and the Soviet Union as, to quote Abbott
the great exposés of the horrors of Stalinism’.
revocation of Stalinism and of the authoritarianism
of the mid-century Soviet state. As we’ll
perception that this is all it is and the
vs them” lens encourages many people to,
of the institutions and cultural norms of
Union during those years. In summary, Nineteen
in which the Cold War both defined how it
reading it helped to shape that generation’s
War itself.
As we’ve seen already, Orwell holds a special
Peterson offers ‘a list of influential books
are included on the list: Nineteen Eighty-Four
called The Road to Wigan Pier. But, to properly
it’s necessary to highlight the extent to
more broadly. In 12 Rules for Life, he writes
by the fact of the Cold War. It obsessed me.
desert, into the long night of the human soul’.
What’s interesting about Peterson is that
Regardless of the depth that many have attributed
for Life is a mass-market self-help book based
and train stations. Yet, even here, Peterson
discussing the horrors of Soviet slave labour
Micheal Gorbachev, who inadvertently contributed
sense on reading Peterson’s work that no
He is somewhat reminiscent of Hiroo Onoda,
on the Philippine island of Lubang, still
World War 30 years after it ended. It’s
prose, his unshakable belief in the individual
in which he continues to see “reds under
with as not only a “postmodern neo-marxist”
destroy his beloved “Western culture”.
became a means to make sense of the Cold War
capitalism and communism, and another, Peterson,
adopted through reading Orwell—indelibly
to view Nineteen Eighty-Four as only critical
Western capitalism is to ignore considerable
any further, then, I think it’s useful to
understanding of what Orwell was trying to
more broadly.
is that he wasn’t exactly someone who went
to a series of life choices and partly due
whom resisting some degree of political engagement
Why I Write (1946), published towards the
a peaceful age I might have written ornate
remained almost unaware of my political loyalties’.
else), the age in which Orwell lived was not
by economic crises, revolutions and war.
there are a handful of key experiences which
was his time serving as an Imperial Police
then part of the British Empire. Despite being,
police officer’ who once ended an argument
Orwell grew to see imperialism as ‘an evil
spiritually corrupting the colonisers. The
various “tramping” expeditions in which,
those outside his privileged bubble, he went
London and, later, amongst coal miners in
would be used as the bases for books by Orwell.
to develop an interest in matters of class
and power.
however, came in 1936, when accompanied by
enlist as a soldier in the Spanish Civil War.
had elected a government consisting of a coalition
meaning anti-monarchy) parties. In response,
and supported by Nazi Germany and Fascist
civil war followed. Whilst most neighbouring
government in fighting the Fascist insurrection,
to Spain independently to fight.
to Spain were committed socialists, communists
sceptical of these movements. In The Road
attack, if not on socialism itself, then certainly
driven as much by envy and dogma as by a sense
likes to pick out some of these passages in
on socialists and on Stalinist Russia led
Communist-run International Brigades, and
POUM party.
his memoir Homage to Catalonia (1938), Orwell
England the aspect of Barcelona was something
time that I had ever been in a town where
hope and humanity that Orwell found in the
the early years of the Civil War would push
and turn him into a deeply-committed socialist.
to a friend that ‘I have seen wonderful
which I never did before’.
in Spain would confirm his suspicions about
For, Soviet support for the Spanish government’s
with strings attached. This eventually led
had previously been considered allies being
Orwell and his wife narrowly escaped these
was shot in the neck by a Fascist sniper.
a committed socialist and a defiant critic
but a disdain for the corruption of that ideal
would bring to both Animal Farm and Nineteen
gone wrong, corrupted by opportunists seeking
what could have been. As Orwell would later
work that I have written since 1936 has been
and for democratic socialism’.
video, however, are the deep critiques of
use of the notion, “Western”) society
For, the novel was not only inspired by Orwell’s
but also by his experiences of surveillance,
to England. And, once we apply some of that
of a statue of Orwell outside the BBC claiming
society begins to seem very peculiar indeed.
of the premise of Nineteen Eighty-Four here.
a man living in what, at Orwell’s time of
of London. In the world of the novel, the
society of Oceania; a one-party authoritarian
Big Brother, the party, IngSoc, keeps a close
of cameras and microphones in both homes and
are also said to be lurking around every corner.
lies in the propagation of endless amounts
which might damage people’s devotion to
plays a key role in this. As a party functionary,
historical documents. If the party’s official
the quantity of chocolate rationed to each
Oceania is currently at war with—Smith’s
like so that anyone who dared to look into
ever been different.
Eighty-Four is based heavily on Orwell’s
Soviet Union: Big Brother is a clear stand-in
Oceania is “English Socialism” and people
killed or sent to far-off labour camps. But
one, Orwell jumps at the chance to include
of seemingly random personal bugbears such
of beer in litres rather than pints, urbanisation
importantly, the book is also laden with critiques
of the British state around the time of the
heavily surveilled by the Soviet secret service
efforts only emerged after his death. It was
British government, that he had his most visceral
Orwell often had to edit his work to stay
anti-obscenity laws. And, his political views
months after returning to England from Spain
police officers with orders to confiscate
which he had been sent from France. The authorities
his post. Following this event, Orwell wrote
of letters to persons connected with left-wing
remark’.
keeping a close watch on him since 1936, when
whilst researching The Road to Wigan Pier
however, have several further experiences
to publication was beset by roadblocks placed
the whims of the British establishment. Orwell’s
it to be too pointedly anti-Soviet; it was
who thought it too anti-capitalist; and it
then rejected after the firm received a letter
(although, to add another twist to this tale,
sent that letter later turned out to be a
on Nineteen Eighty-Four to take account of,
this video with, is the time Orwell spent
War. Partly as a result of his experiences
produce and write radio programmes to be broadcast
cultural programmes such as poetry readings
Sanders write, however, ‘all the programmes
part or which were scripted by him were contributions
was more than aware of this. Although he wrote
‘kept our propaganda slightly less disgusting
be relied upon to circulate what he felt to
effort. He wrote in his diary in 1942 that
that the Japanese are plotting to attack Russia.
wrote several scripts praising Stalin as having
of Russia—despite evidently being convinced
propagandist, writing that ‘as to the ethics
be used by the British governing class. It’s
chiefly a question of whether one considers
Yet, both this feeling of complicity and of
informs Nineteen Eighty-Four. In fact, Winston
of Truth can be much more easily compared
Eileen’s, wartime employment in the Censorship
than it can be to anything specific that happened
never once set foot in.
upon Orwell for rhetorical ammunition) and
of the Soviet Union. Yet, as Peterson’s
take this to mean that his work sought to
of the capitalist West. As we’ve seen, this
prone to Peterson-esque attacks on ‘intellectuals’,
‘in England the immediate enemies of truthfulness,
lords, the film magnates, and the bureaucrats’.
declaring that ‘one of the things that’s
is that journalists in particular have the
ludicrous. Orwell’s journalistic career
publish certain articles because editors and
at the BBC, having to outright lie. In that
“plague on both your houses” novel, with
and authoritarianism in “the West” as
changeable and contrarian writer, and it’s
work without finding some things they agree
It’s probably no huge revelation to say
his ilk is to pick out ideas which support
which might challenge it. That being said,
our focus. For, whilst Peterson might (by
of Orwell, I think Orwell (and Nineteen Eighty-Four
through which to understand Peterson.
an eclectic thinker. Whether in his books,
of topics and draws (with varying degrees
I want to focus on here is his frequent warnings
culture”. For, it is this warning that “Western
the framing for much of Peterson’s work.
the West, we have been withdrawing from our
cultures, partly to decrease the danger of
prey to the desperation of meaninglessness,
political project (if not as an academic one),
as intended to halt this slide towards chaos.
is certainly thrown around a lot, and most
referring to when they use it. But what we
it with any real degree of specificity, it
the emergence of the idea of “the West”
like to see a video on that topic, do let
that the idea that there exists a things called
that that culture is currently in crisis)
that the “culture” that one applies that
secondly, that there has been a degree of
to this moment of supposed “crisis”; and,
unique or distinct from other cultures.
doesn’t seem to have ever offered a clear
culture” to consist of. He’s never explained
it includes and who it doesn’t. Yet, he
of the lectures in his Maps of Meaning series,
Western culture is that there’s a transcendent
To Peterson, then, “Western culture” appears
influenced by christianity.
here in taking this as a definition, this
definitions of “Western culture” which
with the Ancient Greeks, weaving through the
contemporary United States—‘from Plato
book on the topic. Yet, even this focus on
presuppositions. On the point of homogeneity,
chunks out of each other as sharing in the
text, differing denominations extract wildly
the Bible. On the point of historical continuity,
taken wildly different forms through history;
empire, fascism and various forms of capitalism.
and continuity would require sanding off the
at the cost of our third presupposition: distinctiveness.
from the other abrahamic religions, or any
has always been one without substance, defined
Appiah writes, ‘the very idea of the “west”,
really emerge until the 1890s, during a heated
this point, was a way of distinguishing between
countries it was colonising. When those empires
20th century, the term came, instead, to be
nations and those in the Soviet sphere of
of “the West” has increasingly failed
plugged the gap in providing something to
moment, too, seems to have all but passed.
is in crisis in the present day, then, I would
to define itself against. The US’ occasional
seeks to rekindle some kind of “us vs them”
it certainly hasn’t reached the cultural
difficult to come to terms with. Not only
work is built on a series of binary oppositions:
and nature. To some extent these, too, only
to their “other”. Faced with an object
substance, Peterson thus has to continually
a point of contrast for what “the West”
a different view of what our world could and/or
he’s so fond of—as external aggressors.
lens on this. A key part of the novel’s
at war with one of two other superpowers:
ever leads to minor gains or losses in terms
purpose at home. For, the presence of an enemy
discourages people from asking too many questions
of the revolution having long since faded,
and defines this society. The idea of “Western
Despite his best efforts to convince us otherwise,
culture” is in crisis, then, perhaps it’s
distant nations that makes up Oceania in Nineteen
existed in the first place.
I hope it's been worthy of your time. If you've
then I would be very, very grateful if you
friends) either online or off who you think
you as ever to J Fraser Cartwright, Richard,
De Los, Allan Gann, Luke Meyer, Gary, Dylan
Al Sweigart, Z.C. Reese, Brent Cottle, Shab
for being signed up to the top tier of my
Early Access to videos, copies of the scripts
to do so at patreon.com/tomnicholas. Thanks
