Okay, so welcome everyone to the ICTS colloquium.
It's a great pleasure to introduce Professor Tadashi Takenagi.
Professor Takenagi is a professor at the Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics at Kyoto.
He did his PhD from the University of Tokyo and was later a postdoc at Harvard University.
In fact, when I was a beginning graduate student, he was a postdoc there, so I've known him for a long time from there.
And Professor Takenagi is very well known for his work on the Entanglement Entropy, which is what he's going to tell us on.
And in particular, for his insight, which is you, which led to a generalization of the Beckenstein Hawking Entropy formula to black holes to a very wide class of entanglement entropies and has really led to a very large amount of progress in the past 15 years on the understanding of entanglement entropy in holography.
And for this, in part for this work, Professor Takenagi was awarded the 2015 New Horizons Prize and the 2016 Nishinama Memorial Prize.
And so we're very happy to have him here today to tell us about a new generalization of the entanglement entropy.
So over to you, Tadashi.
Thank you very much for the kind introduction. So it's a great, it's really great pleasure to give a talk and colloquium in this art.
I see tears and then today I'd like to talk about some new generalization of entanglement entropy, which are also nice interpretation using areas safety or holography and this is we name this is to shoot entropy is kind of generalization of entanglement entropy.
So let me begin with the introduction. This is quite a broad minded introduction for as organs are quite broad in my understanding.
So in science, microscopes are basic tool basic important tool to study various properties of materials and universe and so on.
So in biology and chemistry and material physics. So we often use more traditional microscope, maybe X-ray micro optical one or electronic one.
And we see and we magnify the materials or animals and so on.
And to see some cells, DNAs or atoms. And in particle physics and the nuclear physics we often use accelerator as a basic experiment to also this magnify small constituents.
And we see some elementary particles.
And what about string theory or especially quantum gravity. So, in my opinion, one very good microscope is offered by a holography so called ADS safety correspondence.
This is not a real experiment, but a sort of experiment, but it's very, very powerful, and we can magnify some, for example, some region of space time, and which is the main topic of this talk.
And in the end, after we magnify gravitational theory, so we see a tiny bit of quantum information, so named qubits.
Or this is a kind of structure of quantum entanglement. One bit of quantum entanglement is kind of sort of minimum unit of the space time.
It corresponds to Planck lengths in quantum gravity.
And for this simplest target is black hole, which I'll come back just next from next slide. But before that, let me just give some contents of this colloquium.
So we just finished introduction and I'm going to talk about black hole and entropy, and then consider similar phenomena but from completely different viewpoints, namely quantum entanglement in quantum mechanics.
And then we combine these two ideas to reach holographic entanglement and then go to our recent works, namely pursued entropy and their applications.
Okay, so let me talk on this black holes and entropy.
You know, black hole, I think most of you are very familiar with black hole, and the black hole is extremely dense astronomical object, and it is too heavy for particles or radiations to escape from it.
And in our universe, of course, there are many black holes, and black holes can be formed from gravitational collapse of stars.
After stars collapse into a black hole, so this is assumed some binary star and they collapse into black hole.
Then, so originally, the outside observer, originally they could see inside the star, because this is the right from the star, we can see that.
But once they form black hole, so because of the very strong attractive force, attractive gravitational force, even light rays cannot come out of black hole, inside black hole.
So observer, for observer, inside black hole is still, it's not accessible, but it's originally made from some stuff, some collapsing some materials, so that means there are some hidden information.
Some hidden information there, but somehow outside observer cannot see, cannot access to that information.
And this information, this hidden information, and in physics we usually have some quantity which characterizes amount of anything, like including information.
So how to estimate the amount of information? So this is the entropy.
In physics, we measure the amount of inaccessible hidden information by entropy, right?
A typical formula is entropy is log of microstate number, right?
Now, degree of freedom of microstate, double is the number of microstate and take log of that and this entropy.
But more generally, for especially for our purpose, it is more, we have some little bit more advanced formula, but this is very classic formula, known from, argued by this von Neumann entropy.
So using density matrix, this is a kind of probability distribution, and it's a kind of in quantum mechanics, this matrix, Hermitian matrix, and its trace is one, so that this probability, some of all probabilities just normal to be one.
And it's entropy is defined by minus law, minus trace rule of law.
So this is a, this measures the amount of information, hidden, hidden information.
We often use this formula.
And for black holes, there are famous formula is known, as you know, it's a Beckenstein Hawking formula of black or entropy.
This is discovered quite long ago, more than five years ago, but this formula is still gives some auto mystery of how physics related to gravity looks like.
It's also the question of this quantum gravity.
So the calculation, this original classical calculation in general relativity shows that black holes has a following entropy.
This is a famous formula.
And entropy, this entropy of black hole is equal to, so this is a, there are appear some fundamental constant in physics, Boltzmann constant, this of course is entropy.
And H bar is a prime constant.
And the Newton constant is GM.
So this, of course, this mean Newton constant is gravity, gravitational and KB mean also this is related to statistical mechanics because it entropy and H bar means this is related to quantum mechanics.
And finally, it is related to area of black hole.
So black hole is surrounded by event horizon and this area appears.
And this entropy is not just known to satisfy some various property of some.
So this is called black hole.
So it's also temperature Hawking temperature and free energy and so on.
And they, but anyway, this means that we have to understand this formula we have to unify geometry gravity quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics also this also suggests relation to quantum information is to.
Anyway, so to we have to understand this formula by combining all of these different topics of even mathematics and physics, and this is actually theory of quantum should be a theory of quantum graph.
So these, so these different idea origin is in a different textbook but we have to unify and this is actually unification actually given by the idea of quantum information towards physics and also holographic relation area safety corresponds as I come up later.
But anyway, so here black hole entropy is proportional to the area, but not to volume.
This is a very important so usually some in some dynamics entropy is proportional to volume but it's here actually it's not that not true so actually proportional to surface area.
But here before we go further. So this idea eventually goes to reach this idea of photography but before that we temporarily leave from black hole physics, and we would like to consider kind of microscopic analog black hole very tiny analog black hole in the context of quantum mechanics.
So this is a quantum entanglement.
So quantum entanglement means that two parts of which we call subsystem so we have a total system and decomposing to a and b and a and b are subsystem and they this a and b are quantum mechanically correlated.
This phenomenon is called quantum entanglement.
So typical example, if we let's assume everything is pure state, this is always I machine in my talk here.
So typical example is this better state.
This is a kind of if you put minus sign is a kind of singlet state of two cubic system some spins to spin system.
So this is a this are always just up or down the spin spin degree of freedom.
We have a and b there are two here by space h a and h b to have a and b and this there are one spin a and another spin b.
And if it spins up and down, then we have this is the state but the quantum mechanics we can superpose different state we superpose the state with the opposite one a spins down but be spin up.
And this actually gives non trivial quantum a quantum correlation, namely quantum entanglement.
And because if we if we assume the state and if we let's assume we measure first spin a spins up then immediately we know second spin time and opposite also true if the second first spins down then second spin we know it's just always up.
So that way a spin and b spin are highly correlated and this correlation is called entanglement and this gives minimum unit of entanglement this is called one bit of quantum entanglement.
And so in general for pure state we say there are no zero quantum entanglement if this state is not factorized as a direct product state.
And the best measure of quantum entanglement for pure state is known to be entanglement entropy.
And entanglement entropy is, as we also explained later this is basically measures effectively measures number of various between a and b.
So just counting number of this kind of entanglement states.
But so I will give some two different definition of entanglement entropy.
And the first one is very common in high energy physics or condensed matter and just most physical applications.
So for this we divide Hilbert space quantum system into two subsystem H A times H B as I explained, and we define reduced density matrix and this is a quantum state besides a web function of total system and trace out b.
We lose the information b. So this is a coarse grain only coarse grain of information is included a low end.
So this is a reduced density matrix and entanglement entropy is defined by rule of law. This is the same as the one which I just introduced.
And if you imagine some many spin system like quantum which appears in many cases of quantum manual system there are many spins.
And we can just choose some particular pattern spatial pattern a you can choose this is a nine spin but you can choose both in or any or here and here and you can choose any different subsystem a.
But here let's fix a then we this H A times H B is automatically defined from the obvious from this picture.
And this is a then we can define entanglement entropy.
And we can take also continually meet the whole nice quantum manual system then we reach quantum fuselage. This is a high energy physics people usually watch.
And then a and b are separated by some boundary.
So this once we specify this boundary we have this factorization and we can define because definitely speaking this is how I define in this context.
And the simplest example for two spin system like this so we have a direct product system, direct product state.
And then even though these are mixed but it's just a and b completely separated and they are completely independent so they are no entanglement at all from the beginning.
And that's just the way it's defined just pressing B and still if we diagonalize it's just one zero right only one.
So that means entanglement entropy is zero and indeed this is not entanglement.
But on the other hand if you see better state or plus or minus it we don't care.
And then this is just same as previous one that this entanglement example of entanglement entanglement state and then we trace out to be then we have one half one half way.
So this gives a maximum entanglement for this two cubic systems, two spin systems.
And this is called better state or if you're there.
This is a simple example.
And then so this entanglement entropy so defining quantum maneuver system and this is not not only just a kind of mathematical quantity but also this is now a measurable quantity.
So this is the knowledge there are many several measurement of entanglement entropy and condense matter systems.
One example is a rotor approach bosonic atom called atom system in optical lattice.
And this actually simulate this kind of habit.
And when this we are in an insulator phase motor insulator phase is the entropy is very small but for super fluid phase it gets large enhanced.
This is a major.
Another one example is a trapped iron quantum simulator.
And the both of them are the major second range entropy which is kind of version of slightly modification of online entropy but it's also major entanglement.
And so this case they this for some paper nicely simulate this Hamilton X Y Hamiltonian and this this case it's now they measure entanglement entropy for under time evolution.
It's like this is something also called similar to what people call quantum.
It's linear kind of growth.
It's also major.
Okay.
So but I want to give also second definition of entanglement entropy.
This is a more common in quantum information.
So the content in quantum is information series very, very combinations very, very operational in this way.
So this is a definition of L O C C and we have with the compose a and B and we have a given space and L O means local operation.
And this is a project measurement or unitary transformation which act a and B only so it only act a or it only act on B.
Not possible.
This is kind of a very sophisticated measure which we can do in a one level.
So if we India, there's one laboratory in Bangladesh, there are one bubble laboratory in Kyoto, maybe another laboratory and then individually can have some very sophisticated quantum measurement, but only between long distance place.
Then we can only communicate by classical method like just classical communication like just send sending emails or call and song zero classical beats only we can send classical.
This is a CC.
This is something I mean we can do indeed for the separated laboratories and this is called L O C C.
This is a basic idea how we characterize quantum entanglement by kind of this operational idea.
And the basic protocol of L O C C is as you may know so this quantum teleportation to find such example, we can send some information from a and B.
And so this is a so and the basic property of quantum entanglement entanglement entanglement entanglement entanglement entanglement entanglement entanglement is not does not increase.
And the L O C C. L O C C is something we can do physically so it's always reduce or just keep the same value of entanglement entanglement is kind of something important some very important resource like money, and we cannot entanglement entanglement by simple procedure.
This is the best we said we think this way.
And so, but the idea is L O C C is something we can do.
So that means we start with some very complicated entanglement state, which is not like pure better state better state is we can just for better said we can just count number better state.
But in general it's more complicated complicated way entanglement complicated way with non trivial coefficient.
And so that's just how we can define entanglement. And actually we can do L O C C to extract some number with their peers.
And basically we can just count number of their peers and we optimize the results by taking maximum value maximum number of their peers.
But this is not enough we have to also start with infinitely many copies of original system and act L O C C and take maximum number which we can extract from the original system.
Number of their peers which we can extract from original system and take this ratio right we take M copy so we have to divide by M.
We take M copy and you get N at their peers and over M and take M goes to infinity.
This is kind of a sympathy limit and then this defines some nice major of the content of entanglement.
This is the basic idea basic theorem that this precisely coincide with Honnoyment.
Can I ask a question?
How did you I mean I didn't understand this distillation actually can you explain it a little bit.
So after so we this original very complicated system, but we do this distillation means we act this L O C C like projection measurement and do some unit transformation.
And then in the end we get a just a simple bell pairs like bell pairs is like like this.
We can get this kind exactly this with one one coefficient.
So this is a basic idea how we can distill content and just distill bell pairs.
So originally it is a coefficient of very complicated but after this projection measurement we can get keep only good one and just in the end end up with bell pairs.
Okay.
Yeah, and then so this is a basic ferrous theorem that Honnoyment is precisely equivalent to this thing.
Okay, so and then for this entanglement for content manual systems so there are basic theorem which is called area law.
So entanglement also this is also true for quantum field theory in the continuum.
And so I'm talking, I'm going to explain in the language of quantum field theory.
So entanglement entropy in quantum field theory includes uv divergence because it's an infinitely major freedom in the uv and because of that entanglement entropy also gets divergent.
And we need some cut-off which we call ipsion.
ipsion is lattice spacing or just size of a lattice spacing and ipsion goes to zero is a continuum.
And that's because there are basic behavior of this divergence.
It's called area law is given by this formula.
It's always this entanglement entropy and outside is proportional to the boundary area, not the volume, not the insert volume, it's this boundary area.
And because of dimensional reasons it's explained to D minus one.
So I'm talking D plus one dimensional of quantum field theory.
This is my notation.
D is a space direction and one is a time direction.
And it's divergence is given by this.
And there are sub-reading.
Sub-reading time depends on the detailed shape of the system.
But the reading time, it's always looks like area, area of time.
And so introduce meaning of entanglement entropy.
So entanglement entropy is the amount of lost information.
So because we trace out region B, we have region B, but we trace out and we get some coarse-grain density matrix.
And then ambiguity of this coarse-grain procedure is really entanglement entropy.
So this is a kind of SA, the amount of lost information, who, when an observer cannot see inside B.
So if we say so, then maybe one may think this is much looks like very similar to the idea of black hole entropy.
So that's the reason I'm saying this is a kind of microscopic analysis of black hole.
But if we see, if we try to find some direct relation, it's not that so successful.
So anyway, this is the area of entanglement-designed black hole entropy.
However, we cannot identify simply black hole entropy equal to entanglement entropy in this context.
Because entanglement entropy is diverged and also depends on the number of fields.
So if we have a number of scalar fields, then twice, then entanglement entropy also gets twice.
But the black hole entropy is quite universal, only given by area and Newton constant.
It's also finite, but entanglement entropy is diverged, so it looks different.
But can entanglement entropy be related to any entropy in gravity?
This is a basic question, and one direct answer to this question is offered by holography.
This is basically our work, which I will explain later.
But to explain this, let us get back to black holes and a little bit more develop this holographic idea for black holes.
So holography and entanglement.
So black holes from string theory viewpoint.
So black hole, if we think, sorry, I didn't talk about string theory, but only this side of the string theory comes in.
And black hole in string theory is actually, so we have some black hole,
and we can realize black hole in string theory.
And in string theory, so we have some strings, but black hole is very, very heavy.
And heavy object, good heavy object in string theory is D-brain, something called D-brain, some brains, which extend with some space time.
And so we have some very heavy object D-brains, and D-brains for D-brains, strings attach each other.
So this is, I'm writing some particle-like D-brains, which is called D-zero brain, but we can also consider some membrane-like D-brain and wrapped on some compact mind.
Anyway, you get some particle-like D-brains.
And D-brains, idea of this green-wise D-brains, and between D-brains, there are strings.
So these are strings of string theory.
And we can count, this is very heavy.
So this, we know, we can show this, actually, give some particular class of black holes.
And we can, in some sense, we magnify this black hole by using string theory.
So if we magnify this black hole inside, actually, we see some of these strings.
And we can now count number of degree of freedom of strings, and take a log of that, then we get entropy.
And this is really coincide with black hole entropy.
This is a quite classic, well-famous work by Stromminger Buffer.
And microstate of strings actually explain black hole entropy.
But we can go further.
So this is a kind of one particular example of calligraphy.
And we can go further.
And so anyway, this black hole entropy formula, which I explained, is like area over 40 Newton.
And this already says that degree of freedom of gravity is not proportional to volume, but area.
This is a little bit surprising.
But actually, this is a source of idea of calligraphy by Tofuf and Sasuke.
So the idea is to understand this formula is to claim that actually gravity in some manifold actually can be understood as some non-gravitational theory, which lives on the boundary.
So boundary is one dimension lower.
So here, it's maybe entropy is proportional to volume.
But from the viewpoint of gravity, entropy can be proportional to area, because one dimension changes.
This is the idea of calligraphy.
So gravity on some manifolds may be equivalent to some quantum matter without any gravity on some boundary of this original manifold.
And black hole entropy then corresponds to some kind of quantum.
This is the idea of calligraphy.
And the basic example, most of the well-studied example of calligraphy is provided by ADS CFD correspondence in this one of the sentence book.
So ADS CFD is the equivalence between two theory, one is gravitational theory, another one is not gravitational theory, it's a quantum field theory.
So more precisely, gravity on D plus two dimensional anti-dorshita space, the string theory, equal to conform a fuselage gapless theory or gapless scaling balance theory in D plus one dimensional space time.
And the boundary of this anti-dorshita space is this D plus one dimensional space time.
And the one convenient limit is classical limits, because we can approximate the spring theory by just general relativity with negative cosmological constant.
Anti-dorshita space is negative cosmological, has a negative cosmological constant.
And for conformal fuselage, we can take large n and strong coupling.
And this large n and strong coupling precisely correspond to this classical limit, where we can neglect spring collections and quantum gravity collections.
And this is very, but on this field theory side, this is highly non-trivial, a strongly interacting quantum fuselage, very difficult solve, but by using gravity, we can solve very classical.
So there are many works of this application of ADS CFD to QCD and nuclear physics and condensed matter physics by using this idea.
And also, in my talk, I mainly think about this thing.
But here, the basic principle of ADS CFD is very simple, just partial function is equal to each other.
Partial function of free energy of gravity is equal to partial function of free energy of conformal fuselage.
And here is just sketch of ADS CFD.
So we have anti-dorshita space.
This looks like this.
Anti-dorshita metric looks like this.
This is some direction called extra dimension.
And it's wrapped in this way.
And as z goes to large, it shrinks to zero size.
And the boundary, where boundary is metric divergent, and that is exactly correspond to the divergence of UV divergence of quantum fuselage, conformal fuselage.
And there are, and actually this, as in a previous example of black holes, actually this comes from the consideration of D-brains.
And there are many D-brains, which are very, very heavy, and that gives this halved space.
It's given by anti-dorshita space.
And because there are many D-brains, there are open strings between them.
And they, if we have any D-brains, then you get a UN gauge group.
So this gives them young muse gauge theory, but there's a special one, so that we get conformal scaling variance.
This is a conformal fuselage.
And if we compute some dynamics, property of entropy and temperature, this is precisely the same as black hole dynamical quantity, talking temperature, and the black hole entropy, and so on.
So there are these claims, these AD-70 claims, this equivalence between these two series.
Okay, so now I come to more quantum information quantity.
And then, as I explained, so the amount of quantum entanglement for pure state is characterized by quantity called entanglement entropy.
This gives my Honoima entropy of the Houston stream matrix.
And what about in this ADS or a holographic context?
This is a holographic entanglement entropy.
And actually there is a very simple formula, which we find 2006.
So this is the anti-dorshita space.
This is the anti-dorshita space, and this is the boundary of ADS.
And the boundary we have conformal fuselage, non-gravitational theories, and we decompose Hilbert space A and B, and we fix some time, but it's spatially decompose A and B, and define entanglement entropy SA.
And this is actually conveniently computed by using gravity picture that actually we can some naively assume like Beckenstein Hawking's entropy formula that is actually given by ADS.
So this might be related to some area, and indeed that is true.
And this area should end on the boundary way because the entanglement come from this boundary, A and B, and the area that tells us leading divergence come from this area.
And we can, but this is a holography.
Holography means one dimension gets larger.
So we extend the surface towards the bar, and there are also infinitely many different ways to extend the surface, but we pick minimum area.
Fortunately for anti-dorshita space, there are minimum, non-trivial minimum area.
In flat space, it's just coincided with the boundary, but because of what bar factor, so in ADS spacetime, there are non-trivial minimum surface.
And this is, this area of this minimal surface is claimed to be just give entanglement entropy.
So this is a holographic entanglement entropy.
And this formula, or later proved by Rue-Quitain-Manusena, by using this bar-to-bundle relation, this relation.
And also this formula passes many, many different checks of this express-calculation field theory and gravitational calculation.
And the intuitive understanding of this formula is as follows.
This is the original intuition, which we had when we find this formula.
And so observer, so this is a boundary of ADS, and this is inside the ADS here. CFT lives on the boundary.
And this is a region A, and the region B, we press out.
So for observer, only accessible to A, and not accessible to B.
So that case, so maybe this observer sees some kind of event horizon, which surrounds region B, so that observer cannot see inside B.
And then the area of this horizon, like black hole, Vacation-Hogging formula, so gives this entanglement entropy.
And of course, we have to optimize such a surface gamma A, and the minimum of this area should be the most optimized amount of the information.
And now that this is known, this region, which is, so hidden region, so which, so observer A only accessible to this white region, and not accessible to this shaded region.
Observer B can only accessible to this shaded region, and this region is called entanglement range.
So we can reconstruct the information here, and by using only reduced density matrix of B, and here by using low A.
And the relation to, so also it is good to mention the relation to black hole entropy, so this is a black hole, and so we can regard holographic entanglement entropy.
This one is as some generalization of black hole entropy, because this subsystem A is here, and how system B is here, and there are some black holes inside the area.
This happens when we construct a finite temperature case, and then if we take subsystem A to be total system, then really surrounds the black hole horizon.
In this case, in this limit, precisely, we produce black hole entropy, and in general, A and B are, SA and SB are different because there are geometrical obstruction of black hole, and this is true for mixed state, and this is consistency between quantum information and geometrical picture of entanglement.
And we can also derive holographic, so basic inequality for strong server activity, because this is SAB, AB is A union B, this area is SAB, and this SBC is this area, and this just we change the color, but we can recombine it like this way, because obviously this is not minimal surface, this is minimal surface, and then we can prove this inequality and this second one also very severely,
of another recombination, and in this way, algebraic property in quantum information theory correspond to geometrical property in gravity.
And also we can see just some calculation, and this is general behavior of holographic entanglement entropy, so this is the subsystem A is here, and you can assume any shape.
Let's assume some smooth, surrounded by a smooth surface, and this linear size of A is L, then typically it's always take this form, entanglement entropy, and just compute it by area of minimal surface, start from this divergence.
So epsilon is, so epsilon come from the cutoff, which we put as a boundary, sorry, so at z equal to zero, metric divergence, so we put cutoff, z equal to epsilon.
So this is a cutoff, epsilon, that cutoff correspond to ultraviolet divergence, cutoff, in quantum, you say.
So this area of divergence, this is easy to reproduce, and sub-reading divergence, and the final term depends on the dimension.
When total dimension is odd, auto-dimensional, for a fuselage, end up with constant.
This constant is for spherical, when subsystem A is just disc, round disc, this is called f function.
And for even dimensional case, d plus y is even, then we have conformal anomaly, and then there's a logarithmic term, which whose coefficient is related to conformal, central average, conformal anomaly, central average in even dimensional conformal fuselage.
And so far, I'm actually talking about static background here, static, no time dependence, but if we have some time, Lorentzian time dependence, we can have a generalization of this photographic entanglement entropy, it's called covariant photographic entanglement entropy.
It's worked out with Veronica Fugueni and Mukundran Harvani, and this is derived by Don Rucco-Itsun-Marasena by using this bar-kutsu boundary, equivalence of partial function relation, right there.
And so this is just a picture of ADS, but this is some, let's assume some Lorentzian time dependence, maybe some black hole is formed or evaporating or anything like this.
Then we have some, so we have some subsystem A, and the entropy depends on time, right, so this is, they use density matrix also depend on time, quantum state depend on time.
And this is at some particular time, and you can also define subsystem A at later time, and then we calculate some surface area.
But this surface is not minimal surface now, because in Lorentzian geometry, minimum area, of course, maybe you can say this right-right direction is minimum, it's then area is zero, so that doesn't make sense.
So we should use slightly different language, so a different definition, so this is extreme, so we use extreme surface.
So basic idea, this Lorentzian space, we calculate the area functional and extremarize, we take just subtle points, not to minimize it.
Subtle point, we just solve subtle point equation, and then sometimes there are several solutions, disconnected solutions, discrete solutions, then we just minimize over this finite number of such solutions.
So this is a prescription for time dependence case, and called holographic, or covariant holographic entanglement.
And so, but now this, so this time depends, so we can treat some dynamics.
And for example, we can derive some pattern with Einstein equation from quantum entanglement.
So this is actually based on this first law of entanglement entropy.
First law of entanglement entropy basically says that entanglement entropy grows, let's assume some perturbations, very small amount of change of entanglement, for small amount of entanglement entropy grows, actually given by a change of some energy, more precisely this is called modular Hamiltonian,
this is the log of Lorentzian space.
This is much like first law in some dynamics.
And actually this first law, this is also always true for any quantum system, even though for CFT, except CFT this modular Hamiltonian takes very complex form, but for CFT we can have a very simple expression of HA, and then we can derive this equality in terms of differential equation.
Like this, and indeed this one. So this is the entanglement entropy for some subsystem A, which is round, let's assume round sphere, round disk.
And the linear size is L, and the center of mass is T and X. T and X are just time coordinate and space coordinate CFT and L.
So these are extra quantity L, and this basically, this L plays a role of extra dimension in the ADS interpretation.
But anyway, so we get this equation, T and X and N, and this is a differential operator. This is actually same as Laplacian in not digital space, but not anti-Dosita, but this is Laplacian in digital space, as pointed by these people.
But anyway, so we can, once we get this, then by using this relation between area and entropy, and area basically comes from metric.
So we can derive this in terms of the differential equation for metric, and then we end up with this Einstein equation, but there's a perturbative Einstein equation.
So just a kind of weak, weak gravitational wave. We just talk about perturbative perturbation of metric around, for example, pure ADS background, and just require this Einstein equation, then we can have this first law equation.
So anyway, this is not complete history, because we don't recover full Einstein equation, but this already tells us somehow nice suggestion that entanglement dynamics is probably equivalent to gravitational dynamics in the light of holograph.
Okay, so now I just finished my kind of review part, and I'm gonna switch to the, I would like to switch to more recent part, which I'm recently working on.
So this is a, which we call a pursuit entropy.
Okay, so, but let me, so let me first introduce the quantity which we call pursuit entropy and give some holographic interpretation and other applications.
So the definition of pursuit entropy is basically this idea is just to extend entanglement entropy, so that we accommodate two different quantum states, rather than one quantum states.
And so consider two quantum states psi and bar phi.
So these are two, completely two different quantum states, and they find following transition matrix.
So this is an inner product, and this is just a bracket.
And if of course if this psi and bar phi is the same, this is just standard quantum state psi psi state.
And this is just one. So just normal density matrix of pure state. But this is a, now, not to do, we have two different states, this is no longer per mission.
And this is something we call transition matrix. And we decompose, this is the same as previously, as previously, so we decompose hyperspace HA and HB.
And then we introduce reduced transition, this is an analog of reduced density matrix, just press a bit.
And then pursuit entropy, what we call pursuit entropy is defined by minus plus tau log tau, tau log tau, like this.
This is also same for normal, just we, but now tau is not per mission. So a little bit, properties is different because of that.
And so here are basic properties of pursuit entropy. So if psi or bar phi have no entanglement at all, so that if they are direct, one of them is a direct product, we immediately know this pursuit entropy is there.
This suggests some connection to quantum entanglement.
So if we take dagger, then we flip psi and bar phi. And then we have some other ways, say, for example, this is true basic property for entanglement entropy for pure state.
And this is true for also pursuit entropy. And as already mentioned, so if psi is equal to bar phi, then this pursuit entropy just coincides with ordinary entanglement entropy.
And in general, since this is not per mission, so this is more general property that this entropy, we call this, so this is the reason we don't call this entropy, but we call it pursuit entropy.
This quantity is not real value. In general, this can be complex value because this matrix is not per mission.
But nevertheless, in physical interesting case, which I will explain this tend to be also holographic case tend to be real value, real positive value.
And so, okay, so this is a definition. And then, but I didn't explain why we, how we motivate this quantity. So this is the most important motivation come from holographic.
So this is a holographic shooting entropy formula. So here what we, here we'd like to consider time dependent, but the Euclidean time dependent background is a Euclidean time.
In Euclidean time dependent, then, so we start from here and some passing integral Euclidean, then that creates one state bar for that creates one state psi.
So we can do some passing integral plus infinity to some particular time. That gives different state, which is namely bar phi.
And they are coincide here. And basically, if we just do passing integral, then we just get inner product, inner product given by bar phi and psi.
But here, we insert some minimal surface here. We are interested in minimal surface, which are hung out here.
And so we take some problem system A on this time slice, and we define minimal surface, which end on the boundary way.
And this is what we call gamma A. And we can calculate this minimally. This is quite well defined for a simple to kind of space time.
So what is the interpretation? What is the, what this quantity dual to in conformity theory and answer is just given by this, this quantity. This is the shooting.
And so derivation itself is very simple. And then you can just do some sort of, I'm not going to detail because this is a curriculum.
So this is, we can use some something called replicatory, which people often use for to calculate entropy in quantum field theory.
So there are questions. If phi and psi are orthogonal to each other, yes, yes, that is true. So if bar phi, I'm assuming psi and bar phi is not orthogonal to each other.
This is just assumption. If they are orthogonal to each other, of course, this quantity is not very defined. That's exactly true. It's get there, right? Yeah.
And they, yeah, so this is a, yeah, so to derive this formula, this is just guiding principle over the set is just Euclidean passing integral of the boundary dual to bulk Euclidean time defense solution.
And it's a partial function.
And this is, we can do that. We can prove this formula just exactly same way how we derive this.
And look what's my life for holographic entanglement.
So I'm not going to explain details.
Just using replicators.
Okay, so there are several comments that in quantum theory transition matrices arise when we consider post selection.
And the post selection is that we started some psi. This initial state, but eventually project down to bar phi. And we can insert some harmish operator in the middle, but this is not same state to this quantity is not in general not real value.
But this is called also called weak value. And we can actually also experimentally measure real part and imaginary independent.
There are such also protocol.
But our case, this is not always not just such a physical operating, but it's like, actually, our case this is sort of modular Hamiltonian logo.
In other words, for this our holographic student entropy is we can rewrite this way so bar phi and psi and then if the same state we know this is given by area operator but here we have also area operator again but with different state bar phi and psi.
So this is kind of weak value holographic student entropy is equal to weak value of area operator. So we can, we can say also this way.
And so what about some expression calculation. This is just we define this and I will give some most simplest example of which we can do analytically calculate analytically is in ADS 17 is just this general solution.
So general solution and I'm talking about the lowest dimension ADS 3 CF2. So we start with some two dimension confusely do some exact minor perturbation.
But under time this is a Euclidean time these are these are where this 2d CFT is there are also extra space direction which also one of these slides.
And so we have negative time how negative then sources minus five minus, but how positive sources five plus deformation five plus and they are different.
So different exact minor perturbation then this person integral from minus infinity to this point equal to zero.
It gives one state given by this perturbation ground state with this perturbation another person integral plus infinity type of zero gives quantum state with ground state given by this the home.
CFT. So these are two different state and and we can define for sure the entropy. And this is for this general solution. This is called general solution because this interface conformal invariant interface and it's gravity dual.
I'm not going to detail but we have exact solution.
So gamma this is anyway important factor gamma is this difference between five plus and five minus difference between five plus and five minus is parameter gamma gamma is the amount of deformation.
Can I ask a question please.
Yes, yes, yes.
Yeah.
Can you comment on what happens when fire and siren orthogonal vectors.
Yeah, yeah, so I just in that case this quantity is not well defined.
Yeah, that's it.
We don't want to consider this one.
Okay, so.
Yeah.
So minimal so this is minimal says it's still same.
Original one.
But anyway, so the final entropy looks like this. It's not to be a gamma deformation and it gets this coefficient of the usual universal C over three, but this is modified depending on gamma this deformation this how to define how these two states are different.
I call zero if these two states are the same just original.
And you can expand and then we can explain this part of this gamma square term by just safety perturbation into the safety.
So, and then we also would like to mention some pursuit and operational interpretation pursuit entropy using entanglement distillation I explained from in the first part of this clocking we explained some entanglement entropy can be understood amount of their peers which we can this day from
given bipartite system.
And we can do the similar estimation for pursuit entropy, but here we we assume some some special we restrict some special good class of transition matrix.
We can call a and how we are both her mission and the semi positive definite, and then it never the less it's hiding on to be a because sign of a final size of completely different can be completely different.
Under this, under this assumption, we can show this for sure the entropy is actually number of the silver bell pairs in intermediate state between this initial state and the final state, and we also take a simple to be.
So we can for simplest example, we can take this one, this is a two cubic zero lines up and downstream zero is the upstream lines downstream, for example, and there are different coefficient, but science profile different completed different states.
And we define transition matrix.
And this leads to the pursuit entropy, like this, this one is always in some sense obvious.
And so for that, we can take a M copies of this original system upside and we can do the same for about five.
And we can decompose into their peers. This is their peers.
And the project and then we project down to maximum entangled state, and the maximum entangled state has a log this combination factor entropy.
This is each K. So the PK is a maximum entangled state and a is a level of that.
And K is a different kinds of a maximum projection to different kinds of maximum entangled state.
Each K once you fix K, then we have maximum entangled state, but the different K cross into different maximum entangled state, and there are probability distribution for K, right, which maximum entangled state is projected is measured.
This PK is this probability description and take average.
This is a for once we fix K then we get the maximum entanglement state with whose entropy is just local dimension given by this, and with probability distribution and take a
total of K to M and we just take a large and limit a simple degree large and limit and take a subtle point approximation and then precisely we recover this format.
So by taking so as before as in over M is approximate approaches to this for sure.
This is what we can confirm in this example. So this is a basically disclaim.
So in that sense, for sure that we also seem to have some nice operational interpretation, at least for some nice class of states.
And then we go to, I'd like to using my remaining time I want to give some application for sure the entropy.
This is the application to pursue that more some quantum manual system or maybe hopefully useful for condense motor systems.
And but anyway, so we can the whole quantum manual system we can summarize basic property of the shield entropy in quantum theory.
So we have area or this is also true of the shield entropy, and but we are quite interested in this difference of the shield entropy and the average entanglement entropy.
So this is to show the entropy for two different states psi one and psi two.
And so this is to one. I'm my mistake.
This is a two and one.
And this is actually complex conjugated each other. This is quite always real. This is delta s is always real value. So this is take a complex conjugate.
And this is just average of this entanglement for each state.
And so this means that the shield entropy is enhanced or actually adopted.
And we can see for area of state we once we fix some states, once we fix a grand state of quantum theory, and give some concept some excited final temperature state or some slightly excited states, then always this difference turns out to be negative.
This is some example, some example.
Always this is negative.
And so what happens if they belongs to different two different quantum phases.
Can delta s be positive and the answer is actually yes. And this can be seen the very, very basic example of quantum phase transition namely quantum ising spin chain with transverse magnetic fields.
So this is a ising model and with transverse magnetic field x direction.
And the psi one, let's call to take psi one to be vacuum or particular value of J, J one, and the H is always, sorry, H, let's all the set H call one.
And psi two is a vacuum for different value of J, J two.
And the J is less than one paramagnetic phase and J call J greater than one is a fellow magnetic field phase and just J call one the quantum critical point.
And of course, we'll study the text book example, and we studied this in a medical calculation.
So we do this, we did this, we calculated this pursuit entropy.
And then, so this is a blue guy pursuit entropy and averaged lines of this orange guy.
And look, look into this region. So this is a J one is paramagnetic phase but J two is very large fellow magnet phase to different phase.
Then, actually, this delta s turned out to be positive.
And same also true for J, J two, J one is large but J two is negative.
And all the if we look opposite side, right, if J one and J two both are small both are same phase then there are no such positivity.
And the blue is negative. The orange guy is larger than blue guy but it's opposite here.
When these two states are belongs to different phases.
So this suggests that this pursuit entropy might be useful for some to detect some non trivial quantum order, quantum topological order also.
So especially in topological order case we can have give some for following puristic interpretation.
So we have some quantum states, quantum state which gives only this upper half plane, which is which called psi one is a ground state in the upper half plane, psi one and this is a belongs to one quantum phase.
And psi two is a lower half plane belongs to another quantum phase.
And let's assume this is everything this topological order then this two different between two different topological order we get some gap less excitation.
And we are defining pursuit entropy precisely this region. So, because of this gap less mode it's quite natural to believe that this entropy somehow enhances.
And this is a basic reason why we have some enhancement of pursuit entropy over its normal average of entanglement.
We can make this more geometrical by considering holographic calculation, so we can do this express calculation by using simple setup of area safety, but I'm not going to details but here is a picture.
So once, so upper half plane belongs to psi one or half plane psi two, and both are kind of, let's assume both are gap to face.
Then in area safety range, this is called area soliton solution which you cap off geometry.
And another, there are another cap of geometry, but between them there are gap less mode, because they are different phase so that means we, we get some anti-dorshita space.
It's not not cap of geometry, but full ADS geometry appears in the middle.
And we calculate entanglement entropy here and the minimal service leaves on this full ADS region and entanglement entropy for psi one is just this gap region.
So it's, and there are some cap of geometry here.
So entropy is very small because of that.
And so we can actually have an enhanced pursued entropy. This is a really pursued entropy.
And just minimally pursued entropy. So this is a potential piece enhanced assuming some potential that I mean this potential is highly not trivial like this way.
Okay, so this is actually a holographic interpretation of this enhancement of this pursued entropy.
Okay, finally, I'd like to also talk on some, some application to non-equivalent dynamics and cost selection and which might be related to some black hole information problem.
So this is actually highly motivated.
This is our recent work with Ibrahim Akal and Taishi Kawamoto and Shamin Luan and Disha Wei.
And this is highly motivated by an interesting proposal made by Horowitz and Mada Sena about this final state projection.
So this is one idea to resolve black hole information paradox.
And there are many, many ideas, but just one of them, but this is kind of to realize this in a field theory setup we find quite interesting as we explained.
So this idea of final state projection is that this is a penal diagram of evaporating black hole.
And there are singularity, space-like singularity in this evaporating geometry.
So if we are naively following this black hole evaporation by hooking pair production, so entropy is increasing, and so all the hooking argument that utility is lost under this summarization process.
But if we assume there are some final state projection along this black hole singularity, then we just finally project down to some pure state here, and then we can recover utility after this, basically.
And for this final state projection, of course, key element is this, we do some projection measurement in quantum field theory, and we would like to model.
So we forget about gravitation there, we just model quantum field theory properties, and like this one.
So this is a, so we want to create some EPR, sorry, we want to create entangled pairs like hooking radiation.
So simplest model is something which we call quantum quench, but we can just start with some completely disentangled state and do some evolution under CFT Hamiltonian, then entropy is rapidly increasing.
So we start with some disentangled state, this is called just boundary, this is described as boundary state in quantum field theory, we just do some initial projection to trivial stream, direct product state, and do some evolution by CFT Hamiltonian.
This mimics hooking radiation, like some entangled pair production, and we do some final state projection, but only half of space time, because it's only half of that.
So we end up to some, we have some, we end up with some final state and just state, and also keep going, like this region.
And we measure entanglement for this region, region is also like this time slice.
So it's a discoloration outside of graph 4 region.
And then we produce page curve, this is a question.
So page curve is give some unitary to your evolution, radiation entropy.
And so, anyway, so this final state is different from initial state in this setup.
Entanglement entropy does not seem to be useful, as it only depends on initial state.
Just calculate entanglement entropy, we cannot incorporate this final state in the time evolution.
And of course, in that context, if we don't do it, if we really simply mind it, just entanglement entropy is just linearly increasing, this is all the hooking argument.
So we need some, to take into account this final state projection, so we need a quantity which depends both initial state and final state, and then might be get this page curve.
So this is a very simple, we are very simple minded, and we want to do, we want to realize this page curve like behavior by looking at our future then.
And anyway, this gives some example of this behavior of future entropy under non-trivial time evolution with post selection and some non-equivalent dynamics.
And as I explained, so this future entropy is expected to relate some counting number of EPR pairs in an intermediate state between initial state and final state.
So this gives some one measure of quantum entanglement in the intermediate process of final state projection.
So this is a simple example, so this initial state, so this is some boundary state, just putting some boundary and at a later time, this is a low range of time evolution, but again another boundary.
This is actually initial state and final state is different, because final state is boundary state, but here, if we time a volume up to here, then we get this state and they are different.
And this is actually using ADS-BCFT, gravity dual or boundary conformity theory.
So we can, this is a BCFT, but we can make a gravitational picture of this, this is just using end-of-the-world brain.
And this is the subsystem A here, and the entanglement entropy for A, sorry, the future entropy for A is just given by minimal surface, which connects two points.
And there are two possibilities, connected surface and also disconnected surface, which ends on the end of the world brain, which ends on the end of the world brain.
And the connected one is just constant because this is obvious, this is static space, but this connected one is gross and decay.
But already this looks like, a little bit like to pursue the entropy, but this is not directly related to this setup, so I want to give more analogous setup, so namely given by this.
So this is our initial projection, and then we create EPR pairs, and then do some final state projection.
This is a model one, and do some just time evolution, Euclidean time evolution.
So this means that this is projected down to psi, final state, times vacuum state.
And model two, we end up with final state times just time evolution, this is a low range of just time evolution, that means any state is allowed.
That means density matrix is just unique, just any possibilities.
These two are different models.
But nevertheless, final answer to this pursuit entropy, time evolution, they are very similar.
So we start increasing pursuit entropy and getting read some maximum, and so around in the middle, it gets much more and going to zero again for point A is here.
So it's like going up and going, here also true, so the second model is going up and going down in the same way.
Okay, so these are actually, we can call this kind of page curve for pursuit entropy and might be related to some graph for information products, but though we here we don't even take into account gravitational dynamics yet.
Okay, so basically these are all of my presentation, so I'd like to summarize conclusions and give some future problems.
So, holographic entanglement entropy, in the initial part we explained, holographic entanglement entropy shows that the area of the extremar surface, surface is in a shape particularly area space plane, equivalent to equal to the amount of quantum entanglement,
namely, holographic entanglement.
And this implies that the space time can emerge from quantum information, so if we have number of quantum information, if quantum information gets larger, then space time area also gets larger.
And so we talked about this time dependent case, covariant, holographic entanglement entropy, and that gives extremar surface, and for static case we have just minimal surface.
But also there are third case, which you actually we didn't consider until recently, that is the minimum areas in Euclidean time dependent backgrounds.
So Euclidean time dependent background computes inner product basically, two different states, and here obviously two different space appears, and so we need to introduce new quantity other than entanglement entropy, which we call pursuit entropy, which depend on two different states,
initial state and final state.
And more generally, the areas of extremar surface in asymptotically areas, space time, and with future and past geometry fix, that reason, so we have two different states, equal to pursuit entropy.
So if we just talk about, you know, Laurentian time regression, and then initial state, and final state initial is correlated just on the time of that case, we just, if we calculate area, it just gives standard entanglement.
But here point is that we have two arbitrary chosen different boundary conditions in the future, past geometry.
So pursuit entropy, who we give some argument that this actually gives a nice major of quantum entanglement and the post selection so it might be, so it's quite interesting to quantum information application.
This pursuit entropy is actually paper of first written by collaboration with collaboration with Nakata-san, he is actually a quantum information expert, and also together with my student Disha Wei and Yusuke Taki.
So, and moreover, pursuit entropy, so by using also geometry, but also using some quantum many body calculations, this satisfied area as in entanglement entropy.
But more interestingly, so we've focused on this difference between pursuit entropy minus average entanglement entropy, and this can be positive actually, only when this is usually negative, but this can be positive.
Only when two states are in the different quantum phases.
So maybe this gives some application to quantum physics, especially shantopological order and so on.
And finally, so under post selection process, we show that pursuit entropy follows analog of the page curve going up, going down, so this might have some interesting application to black hole information.
Okay, so thank you very much. I think I'll stop here.
Thank you very much Tadashi for that very nice talk. Maybe I can ask the audience if there are questions.
Hi Surat, can I ask a question? This is Shubhav.
Yeah, of course, of course. Yeah, go ahead.
So Tadashi, this is last but one point.
So it, I mean, there was this question that the, because of this normalization between psi and pi, this the pseudo entropy may become ill-defined if there are orthogonal phase.
But across the phase transition in a thermodynamic limit, those two wave functions are always orthogonal.
So, so would you try to?
Yeah, that's a good question, but okay, okay, yeah, that's true.
But anyway, we are doing some numerical calculation.
And so that the total system is finite.
And that gives some nice results. So I think probably we can take limit in the end.
But the thing that you are calculating, isn't it nightly plus infinity in the thermodynamic limit?
But are you suggesting that there would be some finite scaling of these things which carry more information?
Yeah, good question. Yeah, to be honest, we didn't study carefully that.
But I think probably, yeah, because this constant does not depend on so much size.
As far as we probably, if we, I mean, nice, if we carefully define this limit, some directly, we probably we get some finite results.
So I think there's no difference between pursuit entropy and the entanglement.
Because this goes against the UV divergence, but difference is finite.
I see, because this denominator is what is called the fidelity, the overlap between two wave functions.
And that goes to zero across a quantum phase transition.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So maybe this zero cancels out. Yeah, yeah, but yeah, that's a very excellent question.
So we have to do, I mean, careful analysis, but so far we, our analysis has remained to this finite size and numerical spin calculation.
Thanks.
Are there questions?
Yes, I have a question.
Yes, please go on.
So, you mentioned about this first law for entanglement entropy, right.
And see usually in statistical mechanics, the first law, in a sense gives you a definition of temperature.
So that the proportionality constant which you have not put there.
So what would be the significance of that actually for entanglement entropy?
Temperature is normal to be one here because of this definition.
I see.
So if you put the beta, we can actually use beta, then beta appears.
I think, yeah, beta appears here. So, or you can put t here.
I don't have people prefer to absorb this factor in the definition of what you have.
So that's that is that's part of this.
I think the point maybe we don't have an independent definition of the model of Hamiltonian, you know, when we speak of thermodynamics, there's some independent notion of energy.
I mean, entropy is always well defined, but we don't have some independent notion of energy and maybe that's why, you know, so you just define the spectrum of log of row A to be model Hamiltonian and that's why you can absorb this temperature and to call it one or two pi or whatever.
I see. Okay, thanks.
Can I ask a question?
Of course, yeah, go on.
You mentioned earlier on that this pseudo entropy can in general be complex, but in the holographic example, you were finding it to be real.
Is there a significance for that?
Good question. Actually, so we can actually say particular case we always have a real value to show the entropy.
And that is actually given by if we consist of just Euclidean passing integral and define a to show the entropy, then always to show the entropy is real value because as you can imagine some replica trick and calculate to show the entropy.
Okay, yeah, we can we can talk about we can we calculate the range version to show the entropy and then we can take any copy of Euclidean passing integral and just do passing integral and assuming some sources in Euclidean passing integral is real value.
Then, of course, it's partial function, it's also real value and the pseudo entropy is real value. And indeed, I think that's what happens for photographic case.
We assume, I mean, metallic is real value. That means external field also real value and Euclidean passing integral also real value.
So is the fact that it can become complex only for finite size systems?
Actually, even photographic case, we can also take a linear combination of two different geometry with generic coefficients.
Okay.
Then also even holographic calculation should entropy becomes complex.
I see. Thank you.
But for single geometry, it's always real value.
Okay, thank you.
Are there other questions?
Hi, I have one question.
So, yeah, so the transition matrix you have considered is true for only pure state, right? Suppose we have some mixed state in some, then how do you define the transition matrix?
Yeah, that's a good question. And we have some proposal for mixed state. But yeah, because mixed state, we can always purify by assuming some extra field of space.
And assuming one purification, of course, we can define this quantity.
But the problem is that there are many different ways to purify mixed state. And maybe we can choose for the canonical purification or maybe we can assume all possible purification and just take minimum, finally, against all possible purification.
And that way, there are many different definitions for mixed state. So we are not sure which one is most useful so far.
Thanks.
Any more questions?
Comments.
Okay, so if not, let's thank Tadashi again for a very nice talk and discussion.
Thank you very much.
Thank you Tadashi, thank you.
