So, good morning, everybody, and first of all, I would like to thank ACTS for the beautiful
organization and the kind invitation, and of course also the organizers, local and
among them in particular, Professor Singh. It's my very first time in India actually,
and it's a great start, I guess, to be here actually. So, the lectures that I will deliver
will be essentially about the theory of open quantum systems and recent extension in the
direction of Markovian dynamics. This theory of open quantum system provides kind of background
for an improved description of the interaction with the quantum system in some other degrees of
freedom, and the basic root of these facts lie back in the beginning of quantum mechanics when
people tackle the problem of measurement, because measurement meant putting into interaction the
system which you want to observe in some other degrees of freedom, which at some point you
think you can describe in a classical way. So, in a sense, I'm providing kind of background,
sense of mathematical and physical to tackle this problem. So, the idea is to take the pain to
use the blackboard, so maybe you can follow better. I'll try to do that. And of course,
please feel free to interrupt me if you cannot follow or there's some point just to be clarified.
So, this blackboard is so huge that actually I don't know where to start, but let's say here is
enough for the time being. So, the first part of my presentation will be truly about open quantum
systems. So, providing the basics, and this kind of crash course on the subject if you want. So,
in a few hours, I'll try to convey the basic idea. So, I will start about something on the
foundations of this theory with the idea to provide somehow the basics and the motivation. So,
let me start with some basic concepts just also to fix the notation. What do we mean when we
speak about open quantum systems? The idea is that somehow within the overall amount of degrees
of freedom that we have to face, we distinguish some which we call the system, which lives in a
certain space, and as it's own Hamiltonian describe the isolated evolution. But besides
these degrees of freedom, we have the idea that there are some other degrees of freedom,
which you also have to describe according to quantum mechanics. We call these degrees of freedom
typically environment so that we use the notation HE for the Hilbert space in which this kind of
degrees of freedom is described and associate to it a free evolution that might be a certain
element on it, HE. Of course, this is not the only picture that you can have in mind and other
possibility is certainly the following. So, other you have an overall set of degrees of freedom
among which you interpret some of the relevant ones, the one you can measure, the one you are
interested in, or you have to separate systems which at some point start to interact. So,
basic fact of course is that at some point there is some interaction among the two,
so that the overall Hamiltonian has a contribution which comes from the free one
plus an interaction term. So, the point is if both kinds of degrees of freedom are quantum,
is there something interesting which happens and in particular the point is that you are not able
to face and describe all these kinds of degrees of freedom, typically because the environment is too
large or also because you can only measure a subset of degrees of freedom. So, the basic question
will be can we remain at the level of the Hilbert space of the system only to provide the dynamics,
to describe the observations and so on. So, can we say something about the dynamics of the system?
Now, the starting point is of course an overall state for all kinds of freedom
which is a statistical operator leading in a trace plus space of operators over the
tens of product Hilbert space. And this tens of product structure is a typical quantum structure
which will bring with itself some consequences at the level of mathematics. By a statistical
operator I mean the trace plus operator which has to be self-adjoint, in particular it has to be
positive and with the trace equal to 1. This is in principle the basic object which gives us
all the information about the overall amount of degrees of freedom. But as a matter of fact,
as I said we are only interested in a subset of degrees of freedom which we call the system.
So, among all possible observables which we might consider, the relevant ones are those
of the following form. They are characterized by a self-adjoint operator on the side of the system
and on the side of the environment considered the identity. So, the question is do we need all
this information to describe the dynamics of these quantities and the answer actually is no.
In particular, we can see that if we look for the dynamics or for a fixed time the expectation
value of this quantity, even the overall state, this is simply described by the expectation value
taken with respect to the system degrees of freedom only of our observable with another
state which we call rho s, rho s is the reduced system state and this reduced system state
is obtained by taking the partial trace with respect to the environmental degrees of freedom
of the overall degrees of freedom. So, this statement essentially amounts to the fact that
if we can measure our interest in or want to look for the dynamics or possible expectation values
of the system only, all that we need to know is this object, the statistical operator of the system.
So, the crucial issue will be can we remain at this level in the course of the dynamics?
This is not a trivial point. Why? Well, a basic fact is that once you are in a tens of
product Hilbert space, which is the one we are considering here, then the operators which live
there and that you are considering are possibly correlated. And these correlations are of different
kinds and they might imply typical one-two features. What are the correlations which we are,
we will be interested in in this framework? Well, the most simple situation is to consider a state
which is of the following form and such states which you consider tens of product or something on
the side of the system which has to be a statistical operator by itself and something on the side of
the environment which has to be a statistical operator by itself. These states are called
factorized. They are most simple if you want but actually they are very relevant because they provide
the general initial condition which you need in order to obtain a dynamics which you can restrict
your time evolution at the level of the Hilbert space of the system on.
So, these kind of states are in a sense very easy but basic because they provide a sensible
initial condition. Also, in a measurement situation, this is the way to start with. So,
at the beginning, the system you want to measure and the apparatus, one two apparatus that you
want to couple to the system have to be destroyed. So, their statistics have to be uncorrelated.
So, it's simple but quite important. But of course, there are more general states that we might be
interested in. Let me mention so-called separable states which might occur. So, they essentially
are obtained by considering classical mixtures of factorized states. So, you consider some weights
that call an PI and the collection of states on the side of the system, the collection of states
on the side of the environment. These PI are a collection of positive numbers which sum up to one.
So, they set the statistical mixtures. These are called separable states.
Among them, one consider a more special class which is the following.
You consider mixtures of such states where, however, you restrict the state on the side of the
environment to be one dimensional orthogonal projection. So, these are one dimensional
orthogonal projections.
Also, these states do play a special role in the setting of open point two systems
because as I said, if the initial state is factorized, this is the general valid initial
condition to describe reduced dynamics. But also, the states which go under the name of zero discord
state, zero quantum discord state. And actually, the characterization of these states in a sense
quite recent. So, it goes back to the beginning of this century. They have been recently understood
as a possible special initial condition in order to possibly properly speak of a quantum dynamics.
I will possibly say something more in detail about this. But the idea is that in a sense,
this is also a possible initial condition that we can consider still coming to the conclusion
that it is sensible to focus on the time evolution of the system only. In a sense, only effectively
describe the interaction within that. As the last example, most typical for quantum mechanics
and usually essentially considered as one of the resource, especially for quantum information,
is the situation in which your state is entangled. Let me only mention maximally entangled states
which we encounter back in the featuring the dynamics of the system. So, consider states
which are maximally entangled. In this case, we assume for simplicity that both Hilbert's
space of system and environment are finite dimensional with same dimension n. And these
states, as follow, you can write them as a sum k from 1 to n. This psi k, psi k, where this psi k
can be written as the tens of product of a set of states which provide a complete or
normal system on the side of the system and a complete or to normal system on the side of the
environment. As we will see, these kind of states will be relevant in order to introduce the notion
of complete positivity which we will face in a minute when trying to characterize the reduced
dynamics of our system. So, this somehow fixes the basic ingredients and the notation. And let me now,
if only worse, not in formula, point to what are the relevant situation that one can consider
within this setting. So, in a sense, the possible motivation for considering this setting.
So, what are the possible motivation and application?
Well, there is one fundamental viewpoint which is underlying the whole theory. And this is the
fact that actually the complete isolation of the quantum system can only be considered as an
idealization. So, for sure, you can, for all practical purposes, you can consider systems which,
for a certain amount of time, can be considered as isolating. But this is always an idealization.
And there are many situations in which this idealization breaks up in the early time and for
almost all kinds of observables that you can consider. So, first of all, isolation
is an idealization. Of course, you can think you can shield your system, but in principle,
you cannot shield it from everything. Think about, I don't know, the most weak interaction about
neutrinos. It's essentially impossible to shield your system. And depending on the relevant interaction,
it might be more or less important to keep this external environment in account. But beside this
motivation, which is actually fundamental, it's a fundamental viewpoint that tells you that you
cannot avoid addressing the subject. Let people, in a sense, more practical-minded, more specific.
So, I would like to point out the following effects. The one is known as decoherence. And what
do I mean and what is usually meant by decoherence? This is a typical quantum effect, which we
essentially only have in quantum mechanics. And this can be described as a dynamical effect,
which comes about because your quantum degrees of freedom interact with other quantum degrees of
freedom. And as a consequence of this interaction, with elapsing time, your quantum system loses the
capability to put into evidence typical interference effects. So, typical quantum pictures of your
system, which you can put into evidence especially or in the most easy way showing up some interference
pattern or similar quantities involving coherences of your system, they are reduced, removed by
interaction with some external environment. And this fact typically appears if you have
interaction with the environment, which have a kind of measurement character.
So, as it will be for sure clarified in other lectures in this school,
this cannot be considered as a solution to the measurement problem. It's a kind of
step towards this solution in a sense. So, essentially it's only a description of some
phenomenology that you observe in true experiments, which tell you that some coherences in your system
get lost or to be more specific are no more observable as a concept of interaction with
other users. And you will hear about this effect from the experimental viewpoint for sure in later
talks, for example, by Professor Aert and, for example, in this group, they are concerned
with pushing in a sense the limit, the mass of object which show up interference effects
to the highest possible values. So, they typically have to face and counteract this
coherence effect, which would tend to wash out the interference pattern that they use.
But this coherence effect from the viewpoint of the observation are also very similar to what
is described by so-called spontaneous localization modes. And you will hear about that by Professor
Bassi also in connection with experiments, which they have to actually distinguish this effect
from those of the coherence. So, let me mention as a further point related to the coherence,
this spontaneous collapse model. And let me be clear, I'm not meaning that they describe the
very same effect. I'm saying that as far as the observation in experiment is concerned,
they show up in the very same way. So, it's very difficult to distinguish the two effects,
which have two different effects. Then besides the coherence, which is only quantum, if you want,
we can also consider dissipation. And this is both a classical and quantum effect.
However, it is clear that in this setting, we are looking for the typical quantum pictures
in describing dissipation. And in particular, let me mention here the connection with a
recent research field, which is called quantum thermodynamics.
And you will probably hear about this by, for example, by Professor Paternostro in the lectures,
which we follow towards the end of the school. So, this is a recent field in which exploiting
typical quantum tools, and in particular tools of open quantum system theory, one tries to describe
as best as he can, what is the notion of heat, work in quantum setting, how heat and work can
be exchanged between system and environment. And as a last connection, so I'm just, in a sense,
connected to major fields. This is related to the foundation of quantum mechanics, this is
quantum thermodynamics. The last connection that I would like to draw as a motivation
is consider fixed time quantum transformation in this setting.
Despite the fact that the blackboard is huge, it takes time to write, so from time to time,
I will abbreviate something, so Q stands for quantum. Okay, please forgive me, but.
And fixed time quantum transformation, also called channels, one of the basic tools in
quantum information theory, where people do want to better understand and explain the process of
transfer of information, typical quantum effects on this transfer of information,
and there you are faced with effects due to the coherence, you want to see what happens with
entanglement, so it's a typical setting which tools coming from the open quantum system theory
are used in order to describe this kind of transformation. So, another field which is
related to the one I'm presenting here is of quantum information. However, I will speak about
dynamics, while typically in quantum information the time is fixed, so you consider it before and
after, so time seems, in a sense, either. Okay, now I will try to go a bit deeper in the subject,
and actually describe what we can say about the dynamics. First of all, about its very existence,
and then how we can characterize it in general terms.
So, the title of this subsection is
1.2, quantum dynamical maps.
So, the mappings that should describe the dynamics of an open quantum system and complete positivity.
This is a mathematical property. I already mentioned, and now we will really introduce it and see how
it comes about when you continue to see that this framework, which we have two kinds of
in a quantum setting, and we will see that, yes.
Okay, for sure, this will come towards the end of my lectures, but for sure. So, the point is that
if the space you are considering is bipartite, and you have fixed how it is bipartite, that is
also not obvious. For sure, interesting, even if you start in a situation at it, and this, as I said,
is to be the typical starting point in order to actually speak of a dynamical map, I would say
that you start a situation in which the statistics of the two systems is uncorrelated,
so the state is factorized. The interaction will bring with itself correlations among system
and map. It's certainly of interest to study these correlations, and actually what will be done will
be to exploit the existence of these correlations, and their behavior in time points to a possible
notion of memory in the quantum dynamics. Of course, there are other situations in which correlations
are of interest, for sure, but this actually will be the focus of my lecture. But indeed, even
before you consider the dynamics, correlations are of relevance. First, in order to characterize
possible issue of state factorized, but also, as I will possibly say later on, zero discourse
on two states can be a possible initial state, but actually pointing to a dynamics which is in
sense simplified, because, well, it's better to not speak about this at the point, but the
underlies the fact that you allow for a dynamics for a subset of the possible states on the side
of the systems which commute along the sets, so it's a kind of classical reduction of the dynamics
that you want. And as I did, I pointed to the existence of an integral state, in particular,
maximum time of state, and this will turn out to be relevant to speak about the property of
complete positive. So even before going to the dynamics, there are many ways in which correlations
can play a role. I hope, yes? Yes, for sure. This will come about in a minute. So as a result,
the equations providing the dynamics of the initial state will turn out to be equations
which do not consult purity. So even if you assume that the initial state is pure,
this purity will not presale, so you cannot stick to such a description. So even if you are,
in a sense, so smart that you can prepare your system in a pure state, which means that you have
high level of control on the state of the system, as a consequence of the dynamics,
this pure state will turn out in the mixture. Of course, in the general setting, of course,
you can, you might devise very special interactions such that as a general practice in the case.
So, but I guess most of these questions will be better answered when I now go on introducing the
dynamics. So as we said, the setting is that we have two kinds of degrees of freedom,
and we want to see whether it is possible and sensible. In a sense, focus on the degrees
of freedom of the system only, the one you are interested in, the one you can measure,
the one you can access. So is this feasible? In order to obtain this, it might be useful to
consider the following diagram. Suppose you start with a state which is indeed a factorized form,
so it's a tens of product state. Then, since the overall system can be considered to be closed,
and if it is, it's not so, you consider other degrees of freedom so as to come to a closed system,
so you enlarge the environment if you want. The dynamics is given by a unitary evolution
operator fixed by the Hamiltonian, which I wrote. So you can say that you move from the
stated initial time, rho zero, to the state at the later time, or S of t, simply by letting this
unitary evolution act.
But if you're interested in the system only, as I showed before, you consider the partial trace,
this leads you to the state of the system at time zero. But also, once you have the
evolution of the whole state, you consider the partial state at this level and obtain
the reduced state of the system at time t by taking the partial trace with respect to the
environmental degrees of freedom, which roughly speaking can be considered as integrating out
the environmental degrees of freedom, and end up with the final state of the system.
Now the question is, you can remain at the level of the Hilbert space of the system only
if you can make this diagram commutative. So it can also put an arrow here and introduce an object,
which we call phi of t. This is this quantum dynamical map. If this object exists, then
you can obtain the state at the later time, simply by applying this map at the state at the initial time.
And all the information, the relevant information on the side of the environment,
are hidden or written into this map. Now the statement is that if the initial state of this
form, actually this map exists as a well-defined linear map. And indeed we can,
from this diagram, we can also obtain a direct representation of this map because it is simply
the trace of the environmental degrees of freedom of unitary evolution applied to
the initial state in factorized form, evaluated according to this unitary interaction phi of t.
Now one can immediately see that this expression can be rewritten as follows.
It can be written as a sum of two indexes, let me call them alpha and beta.
The origin of these indexes comes from the fact that this operator rho e
being a statistical operator can always be written as follows. You can introduce a set
of positive weights summing up to one and the complete autonormal system on the side of the
environment, which diagonalize this state. So the state can be written as follows. And
then we can now write the action of this map as rho s of zero acted upon to the left by a
certain operator k sub alpha beta, depending on time, and to the right the adjoint. And this
operator k alpha beta of t, you immediately see that can be written as follows. It's obtained by
the square root of lambda alpha and the matrix element of this unitary operator between
chi beta and chi alpha. So these are states of the side of the environment. This is an operator
on the overall Hilbert space. So what you end up with is an operator at the level of the system.
And in particular, these operators sum the adjoint of k alpha beta time t times k alpha beta time t,
summed over alpha and beta, provide you with the identity, which is equivalent to trace
preservation. So what do you have? You start with an initially factorized state,
suppose that the overall system is isolated, so you can introduce a unit revolution,
take the partial trace, and not only you obtain a representation of the dynamical map,
but from its representation, you immediately see that is a well-defined linear transformation.
So chi of t is linear.
It's defined on a whole space of trace class operators. It is positive
so that if t is positive, applying pi of t to the operator t gives you again a positive operator.
It is trace preserving.
But actually, which means again that the trace
of the transformed operator is equal to the trace of the initial operator. These are in a sense
necessary conditions in order to obtain at the latest time actually again a state. But you obtain
something more. This map has the mathematical property of being completely positive. And now I
come to define what completely positive means. So in a sense, you immediately obtain a more
special property, which is this complete positivity, and let me define it. It amounts to the fact that
you have this special representation of the map, but as we will see in a minute, it's called
Krause representation. This property actually has to do with the fact that the composite system
quantum mechanics lives on a tens of product structure of the spaces. So it's something which
is really typical of the quantum mechanical system. This notion has no special meaning,
so there is no distinction between positivity and complete positivity in the classical set.
Now, let me provide the mathematical definition of this property. We say that considering a map pi,
which goes from the space in which statistical operators live, so trace class operators,
trace class operators on the given space, hs, pi is said to be cp, completely positive.
If considered the map pi tens of identity over cn, which now acts on an extended
Hilbert space, which is taxed on the tens of products of hn times cn. So this is a
Hilbert space of dimension n. So you extend your mapping to end to act on the space of trace
class operator on this tens of product structure. It will have as output still operators in the space.
And the idea is that you define them on operators which have the tens of product structure, so a
tens of b, which are sent to a transform according to the map that you know, tens of b.
So the idea simply is that it acts on the first element to the map that we are considering.
It will unchanged the second element. And this is enough to define the map.
And you say that pi is completely positive if this map is positive for all n. So if
the map pi tens of identity on cn defined as follows is positive, so the notion which we
already have, for all n in the natural numbers. Actually, if the Hilbert space hs is finite,
this is up to the dimension. Yes?
Cn, this should be in latex type, blackboard, bold, c. So it sends for complex numbers.
So it's a notation for the Hilbert space of dimension n.
Sorry? Yes, yes. It's a way of writing Hilbert space of dimension n. So it's a custom notation.
No. This is now not related to POVM. So the idea, if you want to see this as system and
this as environment, this is possibly fine. Typically, one might call this an ancilla,
since nothing is happening to this degrees of freedom. So in a sense, there are fictitious
degrees of freedom, but of course, in a physical setting of the environment. But what you're
saying here is that you do not act on the environment. And this is a notion which is relevant for maps,
while positive operator value measure, product value measure, is a notion relevant for observables.
So in a sense, it's a different level of description. So of course, there is a relationship
between completely positive maps and POVMs, but it is not written. So given a certain
transformation which is completely positive trace on increasing and so on, it uniquely identifies a
POVM. So this is another statement. No, no, no. That is, so a POVM would be an assignment
from a measure space to a space of operators. We have no measure space. We are only considering maps
which transform operators into operators. For example, you could apply this phi in the
Heisenberg picture, actually the dual map phi to a POVM to obtain another POVM. This you could do,
but it's another level of description. Maybe we can come back to this in a moment.
We will come back to that for the time being. I just pointed to the fact that, okay, we start with
a physically motivated interaction and we end up with a map which has the structure.
Now, at this point, say a mathematician would recognize that this is a typical structure of a
completely positive map. I have now given the definition of completely positive and now in the
following blackboard, what I would do is to show that a map is completely positive,
if and only if it can be represented in such a way. Then I will come back to another motivation,
but for the time being we can say, okay, we don't know anything. We start with a coupled system,
with a system and environment, couple them, end up with a reduced dynamic of the level of the system.
This reduced dynamic is by vertical structure, which means that if we admit that our time
evolution comes from a proper existing interaction between system and environment,
so we have a microscopic level of description of things, then the time evolution is completely
positive. In a sense, I do not need any other motivation. That's enough if you want, but of
course there can be others and I'll come back to that. In general, a positive map is not completely
positive. A typical example is transposition. Transposition is an example of a map which is
positive but not completely positive. Another fact which I said and which is actually important
is that indeed, if you consider maps acting on spaces, this is a space of operators,
so objects which do not commute among themselves. If you consider a map acting on a space of
objects which do commute among themselves, so instead of a quantum setting, you have a classical
setting, your observables are functions. Positivity and complete positivity are one and the same thing.
That's why it didn't appear in a classical setting. Okay, so here I've given the definition and now
let me state
only state, of course, not give the proof, but a theorem. So
say the following statements are equivalent.
One, phi is cp and by now we know what we mean.
Phi admits a so-called Krauss representation.
That is, phi applied to say an operator t can be written as a sum of a certain index,
say k, of operators a k acting to the left, t a k dagger to the right. So it has this structure.
And for the case we are considering, since we are considering trace per setting max,
I can also add here the condition that sum over k a k dagger a k is equal to the data.
This, of course, is not strictly related to complete positivity. It is now a requirement
that we need for trace preservation. So preservation, but still it's relevant for us.
Third statement, phi can be written
as phi applied to t is equal to the trace over a certain environmental exorphidum. So there
exists a Hilbert space h e and there exists a unitary evolution u such that t tensor rho e
u and u dagger to the right taking the partial trace over this set of degrees of freedom which
have introduced with this possible state for this new set of freedoms that have introduced
lead to the mapping that was considered. So these two statements in two and three
are known as a first and second browser presentation.
This u dagger t tensor rho e, this e stands for environment, t is the operator on which
I'm applying the transformation. So it's, I could have used the letter rho, but to leave
it more general, since this is a map which is well defined on a Julian space,
it's for us, it's typically the density matrix. So for our purposes, I can simply replace
this t with rho s. Yes, maybe it's also easier to pull.
So simply the idea is that these results are of course general. We look at them in our setting
where we look for trace preservation and look about the action on statistical operators,
but in a sense this is a theorem which comes from mathematics. So that was simply the point.
So what we have is that if the map is completely positive then for sure it can be written as
follows so that there exists if you want another set of degrees of freedom, a way to couple those
set of degrees of freedom which the one I'm considering such that the transformation
can be written like this. Also if the map is completely positive it for sure can be written
in such a way with a proper choice of operators. So what we learn from here, in a sense we have
both facts and we learn from this that as a matter of fact the very physics has given us
transformation which is completely positive. So in the sense I do not need any other motivation.
Maybe a viewpoint that you might often find in textbooks and so on is saying, okay now we have
suppose we have a certain transformation phi which has to send a statistical operator in
statistical operators. So states into states. One would say positivity is enough.
But then one could say okay but suppose that my system is now described together with another
system living on a Hilbert space say of dimension n. On the other system nothing happens. So there
is no coupling to the other systems. Simply I'm just trying them together but there is no
dynamic on the side of the other system. So I would expect that states describing the overall
set of degrees of freedom are sent to states. But this does not happen if the map is only positive.
That's because of the existence of correlated states. And I will show this in a minute but
yes this is lower bounded by the dimension of the Hilbert space of the system. But in general
there is a huge variety of possible choices of a coupling state of the environment dimension of
the environment. There's a lower bound but sense no other constraints. And it is there is a of course
I'm not going through all the details. There is a important freedom both in the choice of these
so-called Krause operators and in the choice of these extended which also tells us that different
environment can lead to the same reduced dynamics also in physical terms. So yeah you can
see how. Sorry no they are not they are not you they choice is nothing.
This is it's not a problem it's a in a sense it's a freedom which is written inside the theory if
you want. Essentially they are there if you want you could say that they are unique up to kind of a
unitary transformation if you want so change of faces. But what you see this freedom is actually
important because it reflects at a physical level the freedom which we have here because a way to
explicitly obtain our Krause operators given certain dynamics was to consider their matrix
elements of the interaction. So this freedom also has a physical meaning but of course it's
yes
no no no wait a second they are equivalent in the sense if it is completely positive
you can return like this and the map written like this is completely positive.
Well if you have to state properly a theorem then you should say hypothesis and so on and
so on. The statement is there exists a space hg there exists a state on this space which
by the way can also be taken to be pure such that the partial trace which
is given phi which means if you give phi you are also specified on which space it acts then there
exists a space then you proving this you can find it.
Okay so in as I said there is a huge freedom so you essentially when you prove the theorem
what you really build is actually is an isometry which you show that can be extended to a unit
so you build in the theorem as a constructive demonstration if you want even the elements
you construct an operator on a domain this operator is an isometry and then being an
isometry can be extended to a unit operation but of course it's a mathematical construction it
doesn't give you a dynamics also please notice that there is no time label here there is no time
label which means that for each fixed time there is a unit operator to follow if you have
in mind the dynamics you have in mind that you have a collection of unit operators depending on time
and if this is a group of unit operators then there exists a self-adjointed component such that
so there are two distinct levels of distinction so given a map fixed time if you want fixed time
as you have seen I removed the label time fixed time there is a you but the proof of the theorem
only gives you a possible construction no it's not related to an underlined dynamics
so this will depend on the dimension of hs for in any case it's a set which is at most enumerable
if the dimension of hs is finite say n that is equal to m square so it's at most m square
and even if hs is infinite dimensional so the theorem holds through the general case then
this sum is in any case over over at the numerable set which is our
at most in most of my cases
I have the idea that you are following so I try to to go on and let me connect now complete positivity
to entanglement through this
I will make a further connection now sticking to the case in which the dimension
of hs is finite where we have a simpler construction then if the dimension is finite
we can say that phi is cp if and only if a certain matrix which is known as
shoy matrix is positive so phi acts on a space of dimension n
and this matrix is n square dimension
how do you build this matrix which is called phi shoy
what you do is you take your original mapping consider tens of product with the identity on
cn in this case and let it act on a maximally entangled state
so these states according to the definition I've given before are this form
1 over square root of n sum over i going from 1 to n of ei tens of ei where this ei
provide a complete or to normal system
in our space cn
so a a simple way to write these matrix is as follows it's an n square times n square
you can write it into blocks at the block one one you have a phi applied to p1 p1
so this is the block one one you consider then the generic block say i j
and this block is
obtained by acting with the original map on ei j so
this block structure then we will provide an example
essentially the relevant point is that in order to determine complete positivity
you let your map suitably extend it act on a maximally entangled state that is the
crucial point so there's a connection between complete positivity than entangled that it was
and in particular the structure of the matrix that you have to introduce
whose positivity in the standard setting so it's a n square times n square matrix
whose positivity is equivalent to the positivity of the eigenvalues
is obtained by devising these blocks each block is obtained by letting your original map act on
this rank one operator so it can be shown that the positivity of this matrix is equivalent
to complete positivity of the map in particular this is also a way to obtain the crowds representation
of a map as we have seen supposing you have your time evolution map
if you know phi you can construct so you know phi means you know how the map acts
then you construct this matrix diagonalize
this is a positive matrix it can be diagonalized and through the diagonalization you obtain the
crowds operators another way to obtain the crowds representation is to
to suppose to know phi as a transformation as I said before so as an action of following form
we evaluate if you are able the matrix elements of these unitaries
and you obtain your crowds operators
since these are two possible paths that you can follow depending on the situation yes please
there is some calculation seen between but the essential idea is that since it is positive can
be diagonalized on the diagonal when you diagonalize it you have a eigenvalue which are all positive
and these all these positive eigenvalues can be absorbed here because of course I could
introduce a similar representation putting here some values which are
positive okay so this the eigenvalue is not so important provided they are positive they are
important and then you have to go through some matrix representation of the maps
and so there are some calculations in between which I cannot follow but in a sense it's algebra
the eigenvectors provide you essentially with the crowds okay
for doing
if I the point is suppose you are given a map so you know how it transforms the operators that's
on and you want to know whether this map is completely positive or not for example you
by in a phenomenological way you introduce a transformation it's easy to check that the
transformation preserves trace maybe even positivity can be easy to check but you want
to know if it is completely positive in order for example to know whether this is a suitable
ansatz for a microscopic dynamics so is this transformation that I've introduced by
in a phenomenological way can I assume that this transformation comes from a microscopic
dynamics then your interest needs complete positivity because if it comes as as I shown
it comes from a microscopic dynamite is seen then this is perhaps the easiest way to find
where it is completely because what you have to do is to find out the positivity of a matrix
in a higher dimensional space but the positive
you
physical motivation a well the physical to most motivation lies lies in the entanglement
of the states here so I mean it's a mathematical result in the first and and you cannot I mean
you cannot build on it more than it is written in a sense but still still I mean
one should discuss a little better what it means for a state to be entangled and the connection
between entangled state and transformation but the essence is that this entangled maximum
entangled states actually capture the the the basic structure structure written into the fact
that your the composition of system in quantum mechanics go through the space so in a sense
this is the typical quantum states and since the distinction with positivity lies on the
fact that the algebra or observables in the quantum case is of non-commuting objects while
in the classical case they are function which in the sense it's the typical quantum states
that will provide you information about whether the transformation you're considering is
typically quantum also when it preserves it behaves well with respect to this typical
quantum
sorry
yes it's
yes if it's true for this maximum entangled states then for all states they will be transformed
it was a
you
I said this is a typical kind of feature and maybe you can arrive to it through different
past, but yes, the essence lies.
This is the basic property of the tri-metrics which gives you, but it can also be a way
to use it with some steps in between, but it's algebra to obtain the cross-operator.
Suppose you are given a map, maybe you already know that it is completely positive, but
you look for the cross-operator, this might be a tool.
This is the basic meaning, but it can also be useful in that respect.
Now that I've introduced this notion of complete positivity that indeed is maybe not so natural
in the first instance, because from a classical viewpoint you cannot really understand it,
but it plays an important role in the quantum setting.
It was actually introduced in quantum mechanics, well, the mathematicians know about complete
positivity in the 50s, in the basic theorems underlying these results, but the relevance,
the possible reliance of complete positivity in physics, in particular in the quantum setting,
actually arose in works by Krause and Helwig, and those people coming from the Ludwig School,
which was deeply involved with the understanding of the structure of the quantum mechanics,
why Hilbert space is just behind quantum mechanics, how to describe measurement interaction,
measurement transformation, and so on, there it came clear that complete positivity was
a natural requirement for transformation, both in measurement interaction and in general.
How a statistical operator or a state of a system is modified upon interacting with
the external quantities of fluid.
This theorem goes back to the 70s, the early 70s, and it's actually Krause, which is remembered
because he understood this relation, this relevance of the property for the quantum setting, and
also that even certain mathematical hypotheses on regularity of the mapping, indeed one comes
to this simple representation.
So as a matter of fact, many of the tools which I will possibly mention in this setting
of open quantum systems have their roots in the early developments on the understanding
of quantum measurements.
Let me now come back just a second to the notion of quantum dynamical map.
Now I have prepared a setting if you want.
Now let's come back to the dependence on time.
I said for a fixed time we have all these properties, but now let us come back to the
time dependence.
So let me introduce the notion of quantum process, it's just to point into evidence
the difference between considered a fixed time and considered time evolution.
So I use the word quantum process to define the following object, it is to say capital
phi, which is the collection of phi of t such that each phi of t is a quantum dynamical
map.
So it's a collection of these maps defined for positive times, and by quantum dynamical
I remember the basic features are trace preservation and complete positivity.
So the name quantum dynamical map is something that I use to describe a well-defined transformation
in time of a system state which can be seen or eyes from an interaction with the standard
of phi.
So it's really a kind of microscopically motivated transformation.
And the collection of such maps is a function of time which provides us with the dynamics
essentially, which I can call quantum process.
And the points that I will try to discuss is, first, how can we determine relevant classes
of these transformations, because apart from the mathematical properties, now it would
be interesting to see how do they look like, because in general, as I said, the idea is
that you are not able to describe the environment in detail, if you were able to do that, then
maybe you would avoid distinguishing between system and environment, if you could assess
easily all degrees of phi.
So you need effective way to describe the environment, but it's also interesting to
point to possible classes that you can introduce, maybe phenomenological approaches which can
be useful.
So the first point is to determine relevant classes of quantum dynamical maps.
So at least give examples of sensible collections.
For sure, you know one, but it's a trivial one.
A unitary time evolution is a possible example of a quantum dynamical map.
Trivial, not in the sense that it is not important, it is fundamental, but trivial only in the
sense that it has very special features.
Complete positivity is built in itself.
Here you would have just one, Krause operator, which is U of t.
So as you see, you've already encountered completely positive maps, even if you only
studied the earlier quantum mechanics, because the unitary transformation is a CP transformation.
Only at that level, you don't need to put that into evidence, so you just forget.
That is an example.
And the crucial point is that the unitary time evolution is reversible, what makes the difference.
And essentially the statement is that the only reversible maps are unitary maps.
So once we leave reversibility, we have to find something else, but what we retain, we
retain completely positive, that is to say, because we have seen that it arises from the
microscopic dynamics.
So first determine relevant classes of quantum dynamical maps, and the other point is possibly
characterize them in view of certain properties which you might find of interest.
For example, if you can provide a notion of memory or Markovianity, as it is called today,
to distinguish among these possible classes, then you characterize them in view of memory
effects.
And these are, of course, most recent developments.
And the other idea is related to the first one, but I put it into evidence by itself.
Determine evolution equations leading to CP maps.
So the idea is, okay, I know the maps, so the transformation up to a certain time.
It's interesting to see among them which are the ones which I would call responsible or
describing memory effects in a quantum setting.
But most typically in physics, you are not given the time evolution itself, but typically
you are given an evolution equation for your system.
So you are given a certain differential equation, for example, which tells you how the system
changes in a small time.
And then you want to know which are the kind of evolution equations, whose solution, maybe
you find it, you are able to find it or not, but you should know from the very beginning
that the solution, if you find it, is a well-defined evolution.
In a sense, it's the same relationship which you would have between a unit item evolution
and a Schrodinger equation.
Schrodinger equation tells you that maybe you are not able to solve it, but if you were
able to solve it, the time evolution is well-defined and provides you the relevant
probability and so on and so forth.
Then once you know it's well-defined, you won't go through perturbation or whatever.
So we have a coming in second, the two points, time evolution itself and possible characterization
of evolution equation, whose solution are warranted to give well-defined maps.
Completely positive and I add here t, stands for trace percent.
If you have the evolution equation and you are able to solve them, you get the time evolution
map.
But typically, you are not given the time evolution map.
Typically you can face the evolution equations or you can look at, I mean, fancy out or use
phenomenological approaches to write down evolution equations, but if you use a phenomenological
approach, you also want to be sure or have some insight about the fact that the solution
are well-defined.
It's not just that you write down an evolution, but you want to know whether the solutions
can really describe a transformation which will serve the probabilities and so on.
That's an important constraint.
Yes?
Yes.
So, more general with respect to factorized states, yes, this is a, this is a, this is
a possible relevant question.
I will address it later on, but for the time being, I have only shown that if it is factorized
that there are two existent dynamics, the dynamic is Cp and that's this point, but of
course that is also relevant point.
No, I'm not allowing that because I define from the very beginning what I mean by system
and what I mean by environment.
So I, in a sense, I determined at the very beginning where the border lies within the
overall set of, because of which are involved in the interaction, I say where the border
lies between what I call system, what I call environment.
I'm interested in the evolution of the system since I can measure it, I can prepare it.
So in this setting, I don't say that it is insensible to consider that, it is also possible,
but for the time being, that's the view.
So time is running a bit faster, but maybe it's even better because it means that there
were a lot of questions.
I'll try not to dwell into details and provide you as far as the, this part is considered
as a look for evolution equation which lead to a CpT dynamics.
One natural question is, okay, suppose I'm giving as I said before the overall Hamiltonian
system plus environment plus interaction, then am I able, starting from that input plus
the initial state, to write down this evolution equation?
Now the answer is formally yes, that is to say formally we can write down the exact evolution
equation.
The point is that there will be so, in principle, so, as you can imagine, as complex as the
problem itself.
So this help has only up to a certain extent.
For example, to the extent that we can go through a perturbation procedure and stop
at the early times, or that we, and see how we obtained the formal general structure and
we have some cues how to simplify it.
So what I'm going to say now, actually, very sketchy, is that indeed there is a procedure
which formally bring us to this result.
So at least if you have enough computational capability, you are able to write down things
exactly because you know that the map exists.
But it's quite involved procedure so that then I will come to effective equation of
motion which are not so complex but still get out the relevant information that you
need.
So I go for the third part which is called projection operator techniques.
I will have to be a bit sketchy.
Now, the idea goes as follows, in principle, you have your state OSD which contains all
information about system and map.
Now the idea is try to project it, an idea which is also sensible in a classical setting.
So out of your initial state, you consider another one, a primed one, obtain, letting
a certain projection.
Projection means that in a sense you reduced your system to a subspace, a possible picture
could be, to restrict your huge state to a subspace of the possible states.
Subspace which is still large enough to obtain all information about the system but we are
hopefully you leave out certain information which you will not need in order to give the
register.
P stands for projection which means that P is linear, idempotent.
So if you act twice on the operator, it means the same.
It has to preserve positivity so if you apply it to row and row is positive, the transformed
state is still positive, so indeed you are sending state to states.
And of course trace preserving.
So the special feature if you want is idempotency, that's why I use the word projection.
Now this viewpoint set can be put forward in many situations also in classical ones.
So in a sense think about, I don't know, a classical system in which you have both position
and momentum, degrees of freedom and you try to project onto position degrees of freedom
only in a sense averaging out the momentum.
This might be enough for certain observations.
In our setting the idea is to obtain something which is not only a projection but a projection
such that if you take your initial state with all information, you project it and take
the partial trace with respect to the environment, we end up with something which is a state
on the side of the system but this is exactly the same state that you would find out by
taking the partial trace of the original state.
That is to say as far as the system is concerned, you're not losing any information.
So you are simplifying your life to some extent but you don't lose information.
Now in order to do this, one possibility is to consider a projection operator of this
form.
It does nothing on the side of the system and on the side of the environment it acts
with a certain transformation lambda E which is CPT, completely positive trace preserving
and idempotent.
Now you can check that such a transformation needs place the role that we wanted to play
and a particular instance of this transformation is the following.
Take your initial state and transform it to a state which is given by the rho s that is
to say the partial trace with respect to the environment, so this is the proper reduced
state, tensor, a certain rho e fixed.
So what you are saying is that in a sense by means of your projection, you are removing
correlations, you bring your initial state which has possibly correlations to a factorized
state in which you retain the proper reduced state and take this with tensor product with
a fixed state on the side of the environment.
In a sense the most simple situation which you remove correlations and if rho e is fixed
in a sense is any time you apply this projection, you reset the environmental state to be the
one it was at the beginning.
So reset environmental state.
This is so called standard projection because in principle you can, sorry?
No, it's fixed once and forever.
Yes, yes, that would be the case, that would be the case, but what we, yes, but for the
time being I have just introduced the projection, now I am going to introduce it in the equation
and show that the exact equation of motion can be related in terms of these options.
The point you are mentioning is in principle sensible but the point is that I am not doing
it at a fixed time, I introduce it in the equation and in a sense consider both the
projected part and the other contribution, so I keep track of both, that's the key point.
You mean whether this state is uniquely fixed, you have to fix it once for all, of course
it's up to you which state you fix.
Typically for example suppose the environment is, I don't know, a huge set of degrees of
freedom in thermal equilibrium, it would be a standard choice, so rho e is the thermal
equilibrium state of the bath and the idea is that somehow the idea behind this approach
would be the system is small, it interacts with the bath, the bath is essentially not
affected by the system, so it essentially remains in the same situation, but it's so
huge, the very idea of thermostat.
So now the idea is to consider the projected equation of motion, so you know that for the
overall state, now I skip S e in order to write a bit less but it's the state for the
whole system, you suppose that is determined by the time evolution fixed by overall Hamiltonian.
In particular if I consider the interaction picture, here all that remains is the interaction
term, the interaction picture, so this is the evolution, the exact evolution equation
for the whole system or the real phenomenon equation interaction picture.
Let me write it as follows, as a certain operator L of t, which is the commutator with these
objects times i each part, applied to rho of t.
Now the idea is, okay, consider the projected equation of motions, I have p, the projection,
and also the complementary projection, which I write as typically q is the letter, which
is 1 minus p, that's where the correlations are, they will not get lost along the way.
Even though we will end up with equation for p rho only, but they are there.
So I introduce these objects and rewrite, I am in traction picture, so the free Hamiltonian
has already been taken into account.
So if I project the equation of motions, I consider the equation for p rho and q rho.
p plus q is the identity, considering then together I have the whole.
So that this will be p applied to L of t and rho of t, but again I insert here an identity
written as p plus q, which I can always do.
So I have p L, p rho of t plus p L of t, q rho of t.
Similarly, on the second line I have q L of t applied to p rho of t plus q L of t applied
to q rho of t.
So I am playing with identity in a sense.
Now the idea is that p rho is all that I need in order to describe the reduced dynamics.
So the evolution of question of p rho is all that I need to obtain what I want.
This splitting allows me to obtain solution for q rho.
I obtain the formal solution of this equation and insert it in the other one, coming to
the closed evolution of question for p rho.
Now in order not to run out of time, my suggestion is that I write you the final equation and
comment on it.
So essentially from this approach, all that we need for the following of the presentation
is the knowledge that we are able to provide the exact evolution equation starting from
the microscopic information and that these exact evolution equations are put in such
a way that allow for a perturbation expansion of the solution.
This is the only message that I need to convey here.
So of course there are a lot of details and calculations in between, but at the end of
the day, what you obtain is an equation of this form.
I guess the idea is clear, there are a lot of calculations in between, but I will provide
also some details about that later on I will provide reference also.
So what I end up with is the evolution equation for the relevant part, which can be written
as follows, is the integral between zero and t over a time label which I call t1 of pL
of t, so the first part, and then I add the solution of q rho t.
This q rho t can be written as follows, you have this operator g, an evolution operator
from time t1 to time t, I write it in a minute, times L t1 p rho t1, take just a minute.
Now this object can be written as follows, it is the time order exponential of the integral
between t1 and t tau qL of tau.
So of course there is a certain amount of algebra in between, but in the end you solve
this equation introducing the other one, you end up with an expression which is of the
following form.
You have an integral with a certain memory kernel that we call it k t1 applied to p rho
at time t1, and in this memory kernel you have the projection which you know is L which
is the commutator with interaction Hamiltonian and the exponential of this object, the exponential
of this object is something which is liable to an easily liable to an perturbation expansion,
so you find the exponential, and you end up with again commutators, projections, commutators,
projection, commutators, so you end up with a whole nested amount of commutators which
provide in principle with exact solution.
The point is this is useful if you can stop yourself in the first perturbation orders
so that you have only a few times to keep track of, and second if stopping at this low
level perturbation order, you have some further queue that your time evolution is well defined
because this is the exact evolution, it is certainly completely positive, it is preserving
by construction, but if you use a perturbation expansion, complete positivity, since get
lost along the way, it is a non-perturbative feature.
So what you typically do is you go up to second order and then insert further approximation
in order to obtain a structure which warrants you that you still have complete positivity,
and what is this structure, this is what I am going to tell you in the next lecture.
Thanks for your passion, I am almost in time.
I definitely agree, I definitely agree, when I mentioned that this is an approach that
is also valid in the classical case, and not by chance I mentioned the idea of position
and momentum, and the typical situation would be that the position relaxes more quickly
than the momentum goes off here and then you end up, yes for sure.
I am referring here, so this particular framework typically goes back to the paper of Nakajima
and Svansik, but it was approached by Morian, yes.
No more questions, maybe.
