you
you
you
you
you
You
You
You
You
You
Good afternoon all. Welcome to the post lunch session. I am Vishnu from Raman Research Institute. The first speaker of this session is Victor Mukherjee and he will talk about
Thank you and thanks to the organizers for organizing this and for the invitation and giving me the opportunity to present our work here.
So I'll be talking about many body finite time quantum engines. So these are mainly based on these three works.
So I think Revati was probably in the audience.
So first is before I go into engines like what I mean by engines or more specifically in this talk I will talk about this quantum critical engines.
What I mean is like in a classical system we know an engine is a container of a gas and there is a piston and a heat flows from some hot bath to the gas and some of it goes to a cold bath and the rest we get out as work.
Similarly here the idea is the same very similar the difference is instead of the container of gas we have some quantum system here specifically I consider a many body system close to criticality.
So it is taking heat from a hot bath converts part of it to work and the rest of the heat close to a cold bath.
So what the main message of my talk will be that quantum critical engines show universal features in their output.
And this is in spite of the dissipation that is always present in the engines.
And also we have the notion that quantum technologies need very low temperatures close to absolute zero.
But what it appears is the absolute zero may not be always needed or even optimal for operation of quantum engines.
And these are not always like theoretical considerations also in the last few years there are several experiments.
For example using ion traps, NV centers, NMR qubits, superconducting qubits.
For example here they used ion traps to trap a calcium ion and could make a single atom in heat engine.
It was still not quantum because the temperature was quite high but they made an engine with a single atom.
And also with I think this is with NV centers in which they could show that with a coherence in the initial state they could get a higher work output compared to without coherence.
That showed that there is a quantum advantage present.
And there are also several other experiments.
So these are very much like experimentally realizable what I will talk about.
So the overview is first I will start with the universality in many body quantum critical engines.
So that will depend on this quantum phase transitions and kibble direct mechanism.
And I will focus on a free formulaic working medium.
And then I will show that this universality also says that this finite time actually reduces the performance of quantum engines.
So how can we use control to improve their performance?
And finally quantum critical engines at finite temperatures which is I think a more practical case.
And finally I will conclude.
So just to remind you this universality will depend on this kibble direct mechanism which basically says that there is a aerobatic impulse approximation when we drive a system through a quantum critical point.
So the energy gap that goes to 0 at the critical point lambda is equal to lambda c.
And there is an inherent time scale in the system given by this time energy uncertainty relation 1 by delta where delta is the energy gap.
And there is also another time scale given by this rate of change of the Hamiltonian delta by delta dot.
So there is always a competition between these two time scales and whichever time scale whichever wins sets the behavior of the system.
So close to criticality when the inherent time scale is very large does not matter how slow we drive the system it is always going to get excited.
And we always get into the impulse regime with excitations here.
But from criticality delta is large so the energy gap so the time scale is small so we can always we can have adiabatic dynamics.
And this adiabatic impulse approximation can also be used I mean one can use the one can find the kibble 0x scaling form which depends on this kind of approximation which is related to this approximation.
So basically I say if we drive the system this parameter lambda linearly in time with a rate tau then this defect density shows a universal scaling with respect to this rate of quench tau that is tau to the power of minus nu d by nu z plus 1 where nu z d all are critical exponents.
I mean till now it has nothing to do with engines it is just quantum critical systems driven out of equilibrium.
And this also shows that there is the excitation energy that also is related to this defect density and it is it also shows this universal scaling for quenches across the critical point.
Here quenches means slow quenches as a function of some with some finite rate across the critical point it gives this scaling tau to the power of minus nu d by nu z plus 1.
But if we quench till the critical point there is some change that is it becomes nu d plus z by nu z plus 1.
Where d is the dimension nu is the correlation length exponent given by this relation xi is the correlation length.
This is the distance from the critical point and z is the correlation time exponent.
So now we will use this in this kind of a engine which is an Otto cycle which is a four stroke cycle.
So here say we have a many body system which can be any many body system or even a single body system does not matter but in this case as I said I will talk about many body.
So say we start with this at this point d at some parameter lambda 2 of the Hamiltonian.
And we do a unitary stroke from lambda to lambda 1 say across a critical point shown by this red line.
At a we couple it to a hot bath which can be a non-thermal bath also in principle but it should give energy to the system energy qn.
And the lambda is constant at lambda 1 then it reaches b which is a high entropy state.
At b again we decouple it from the birth we take lambda 2 from lambda 1 to lambda 2 across the critical point.
And at lambda 2 again we keep the Hamiltonian constant couple it to a cold bath so that is part of the energy is dumped.
And again we reach d so that we have a cyclic process.
And this this dumping of energy is essential because of the second law of thermodynamics and this q in minus q out that gives the work output.
Here the energy the sign convention is that energy is positive if it enters the system so this modulus.
But in any case the quantification is given by the work output that is the heat input minus the heat output the power that is the work divided by the total time.
And the efficiency that is how much we get out divided by how much we invest.
So the idea is how to have engines with very high values of these parameters.
And if quantum mechanics can somehow help us in achieving that.
So the problem is when we talk about this using kibble's mechanism in this kind of setup.
I mean immediately we see that there are thermal fluctuations which can dominate the dynamics dominate the quantum fluctuations at all nonzero temperatures and that can destroy kibble's mechanism.
And also there are multiple unitary and non unitary strokes in addition to thermal fluctuations which can again destroy the kibble's mechanism or destroy any universality.
So whether we get universality or not is a non trivial question in this kind of settings.
So for that what we do is we again look at the cycle and we say that let's start with this temperature of this cold but going to zero.
Towards the end of the talk I will remove this restriction but for now for getting the universality let us look at this.
Say T goes to zero so that we are close to the ground state at D.
Then we cross the critical point and then this kibble's mechanism gives the excitation energy following this universal scaling law.
And here we couple it to a Markovian birth so that the final steady state is independent of the initial state.
We go to a final row bar which is independent of whatever the state is at A.
And if the entropy is high enough that is the temperature of the birth is high enough.
Then one can show that at C also its state is same as the data B.
Or if there is a first quench in either case the state does not change from the B to C.
And here again we couple it to the cold birth.
So in this cycle what happens is only problem is because of this excitation it reduces the heat input in this A to B stroke.
So now what we can show we see is that the output work is again this thing.
Heat input minus the heat output but the heat input is given by the heat input in the adiabatic limit.
When this tau that is this tau is infinite minus the excitation energy where the excitation is due to this non-adiabatic excitations.
And this excitation follows this universal scaling laws.
So using this one can show that this in the unitary stroke till the quantum critical point this work output minus the work output in the adiabatic limit.
That is when tau is infinity this thing shows a universal scaling given by this tau to the power of minus mu d plus z by mu z plus 1.
This is if we quench till the critical point but if we cross the critical point the scaling changes to this.
So here what it shows is that just the work output will not show universal scaling but this difference will show.
And so what we have shown is that this universal scaling can be shown in this finite term quantum auto engines under very general conditions which at the cold birth has to be at very low temperature issues.
The unitary stroke d2a is at a finite rate tau which gives the this scaling.
This energizing birth takes it to a unique steady state that is it has to be a Markovian birth.
And the unitary stroke from b2c is first or the entropy has to be very high in the hot birth when it is coupled to the hot birth.
And once this conditions are followed we get universal scaling.
And we also get this scaling also translate to this power output the everything.
So the power output is this total work output divided by the time which again shows the scaling's universality here.
Here x is equal to 1 or 2 depending on whether we quench till the critical point or across.
And also one important parameter is when we get the maximum power the tau.
So for very small for very fast quench non-nibidimetric excitation reduce power.
And for very slow quench large tau this power again goes to 0 because tau is in the denominator.
So in between at this value we get the maximum power.
And efficiency at maximum power is also another important factor which again shows part of it shows this universality.
So the point is when we have this criticality different parameters show universal scaling's
which basically connects these two fields quantum phase transitions with thermodynamics of quantum systems.
And one can use this universal scaling's to make this optimal quantum engines.
For example one can then choose materials which has appropriate critical exponents which will give the maximum power work output say.
For example if we just increase the dimension D then this will decrease and the work output will approach the adiabatic work output even for finite tau.
And technically the way we do this thermalization strokes is say we consider a free-formeric medium so that the fermions are not talking to each other.
And the fermions they are the thermalization is given by this limited operator.
Where do we consider say these are fermions coupled to hot and cold boats.
And the boats in this case we have considered a non this non-local kind of birth non-local in free space but in fermionic space it becomes local.
So that each fermion is coupled to its own local birth.
But again even if we consider just thermal births local thermal births the results do not change.
So this CK CK dagger at the annihilation creation operators of the fermions.
So using this we could get the steady states and all the relations and we could verify it the relations.
So for verification we use this transverse sizing model where there is this criticality at h is equal to 1 between paramagnetic to ferromagnetic transition.
And we can go across this transition or till this transition and make this engine.
And these are the I mean we have verified numerically.
So this again this difference W minus W infinity it shows this scaling tau to the power of minus half.
If we quench across the critical point and till the critical point it is tau to the power of minus 1.
And this power and efficiency are given here as can be seen for very large tau when the non-antibiotic excitations are very low.
Both the efficiency is large but as we decrease tau the excitations dominate and the efficiency decreases.
And similarly for power output there is an optimal tau at which we get the high power.
Same it does not I mean qualitatively it is same whether you quench till the critical point or across the critical.
So that brings me to the end of the first part of my talk.
So there is universality in work power efficiency at maximum power in quantum auto engines operated close to quantum phase transitions.
Universality may help in designing optimally performing quantum engines for example by choosing materials with proper critical exponents.
Now this also shows that again the universal this laws also show that finite time is actually bad for quantum engines
because there are excitations which reduce the output and work output.
So what is important is we need to apply control to improve the performance.
So it is like adiabatic or slow dynamics enhances the efficiency but it will lead to engines with zero power because the time appears in the denominator.
But non-antibiotic excitations, non-antibiotic dynamics that is first dynamics will result in finite output power
but again it will reduce the efficiency of quantum engines because of this excitations.
So the questions one can ask is how can one improve the performance of finite time anybody quantum heat machines through control.
Now there are different kinds of control available such as crab where one can do a numerical optimization or say by bath engineering.
Here the control that I will talk about is short cuts to adiabaticity which is analytical form of control.
So here the main idea is first let us look at just simplest case a Landau's in a transition of a single qubit.
Say these are the sigma z, sigma x they do not commute so of course as we change this time t there is excitations in the system.
So say we start from the ground state here at time t is equal to minus infinity or some minus large value set.
Then what we want is say as we change time the system should always follow the instantaneous ground state.
But what happens in reality is that initially it starts it remains in the ground state but when the energy cap is small there are
non-antibiotic excitations when the because of the time scale 1 by energy cap becomes large.
So there are excitations and the system eventually ends up a part of it in the higher excited state.
So and these non-antibiotic excitations reduce power or efficiency in the quantum engines.
So how do we eliminate those excitations so that it always follows this instantaneous ground state given by these red lights.
That is the question and this should also increase the performance of the engines.
So another possibility is also going another part of short cut to adiabaticity is also we do not care what happens in between.
We go across this blue line just from initial to final state that is a kind of a quantum speed limit but I am not going there.
So I will focus on a control which allows us to follow this red line.
So what this short cuts to adiabaticity uses is in general what we have is when you solve a Schrodinger equation
usually we are given some original Hamiltonian H naught which is the bare Hamiltonian I will call it bare Hamiltonian.
And for this Hamiltonian what psi we get by solving this equation that is the usual problem.
But here we turn it upside down here we ask that we already know what psi we want the psi is the of course here psi is always this ground state.
So given a problem we know that psi we want is the adiabatic psi.
So we ask the question what Hamiltonian will give us that psi.
So we solve for this H STA that is H short cut to adiabaticity.
So this H STA is can be given by this original Hamiltonian H naught plus some factor lambda dot a lambda where lambda dot is the rate at which the Hamiltonian is changed.
So if we change it very first the control term will be of larger magnitude.
So one can prove it show it is quite simply.
So say we have this Schrodinger equation and then we apply if we have an unitary that is change of basis to the moving rotating basis.
So then one can show that this psi tilde that is this unitary rotated psi that follows this equation with this Hamiltonian change to H tilde.
That is the unitary rotated Hamiltonian minus this lambda dot a lambda and this by construction u is such that this H tilde is diagonal.
So this H tilde cannot cause any excitations.
All the non adiabatic excitations come from this lambda dot a lambda term.
So the idea is in the control we add an additional lambda dot a lambda to cancel these terms which give rise to the off diagonal terms which cause excitations.
So if we add this lambda dot a lambda term finally in the Hamiltonian becomes just diagonal in the rotating basis and all the excitations are eliminated.
But the problem is this a lambda it actually has this form.
So what it means is even though it has a very nice compact form but it depends on all the energy spectrum.
So we need a full knowledge of the energies of all the levels and that is usually not possible for many body systems which can have a 2 to the power of n number of energy n number of variables.
So in any case what we will do is we will apply a approximate form of shortcuts to adiabaticity.
And the way we do it is again say we have a auto cycle with two unitary and two non unitary strokes and we have the working medium here the spin chain.
So there we have the original Hamiltonian plus we apply another H ct counter diabetic Hamiltonian for the control.
So I mean we will do it in a spin chain kind of system.
So we have this spin chain with transverse field, transverse field longitudinal field and the nearest number interactions with disorder.
And here I mean there is a many body system.
So the exact form of counter diabetic Hamiltonian will involve many body interactions which is difficult or almost impossible to implement experimentally if there are say 6 body, 100 body interactions.
So instead what we say is we apply an approximate protocol suggested by sales public company and also others in 2017.
So there what they say is that look the original actual Hamiltonian may be difficult to implement but by variational principle one can have a good approximation.
So here the approximation is what we say is let us look at a single body term even though the exact will have also multiple body terms.
But for a start look at the single body term and this yj this prefactor is the thing that we want to optimize.
And by optimization procedure which if someone is interested we can discuss later.
So if this optimization procedure is gives us this result.
So again this is just single body terms no interaction is involved in the counter diabetic in the contour protocol.
Then what we find is immediately this power p.
So this is power output as a function of this total time period tau.
So without control which only h naught the power output is positive, positive means that we are not getting any power output we are investing energy.
So the system is not acting as a engine.
So to for it to act as a engine we need a negative power that is power is coming out.
So we when we apply our control protocol what we see is immediately we get a large negative power that is we get power output and that is just with a single body control term.
And this is just this zoomed in form.
And here it is the what it shows is a work output because of this h naught plus hcd it may just go back show you.
So h naught is the original Hamiltonian hcd is the control part.
So this wcd is kind of a cost of control the cost that is the energy that one needs to invest to apply this control.
So what it shows is first this part this is a work output is positive from the additional control term.
What it means is in this regime the system does not act as a engine rather it acts as a hybrid engine plus battery kind of system because we are investing also work output from the control.
But other than that for small tau it acts as a engine with quite significant power output because of the control term.
And this was done with eight spins with a with disorder with exact diagonalization.
And also one can look at the efficiency so the rate is the efficiency without any control as one can see that for very large tau the system is almost adiabatic
because there are no excitations does not matter whether there are control or not excitations are almost zero.
So the efficiency this dashed line is the adiabatic limit.
So even without control the efficiency approaches the adiabatic limit for large tau.
But as soon as tau is small the efficiency without control reduces to zero very fast that is we cannot use the engine in this regime.
But as soon as you apply your control scheme we see that even though it is not perfectly adiabatic because we are using approximate control but still it is a very high efficiency compared to without control case.
And this is the fidelity so fidelity between the for the different strokes between the time evolved state with or without control and the instantaneous ground state.
So the rate is the fidelity with the for one of the utility strokes without control as we see again for very large tau it is fidelity is one that is it is following the ground state.
But for small time it fidelity is almost zero that is it gets excited but with control the fidelity is almost always very close to one except some small time in which it does not act as a engine.
So in different ways what we we check that the control scheme is actually giving a very good almost adiabatic operation with very high power output very high work output and also efficiency.
So what I have discussed till now is the universality in this finite time engines but there and also after that how one can use this shortcut adiabaticity to increase those performance.
But all of this where they had this kind of a impractical this idea that one of the this cold bus has to be at a very low temperature close to zero temperature but of course that is not always possible in practice.
So next what we will talk about is say the same engine but if the cold bus is not at close to zero temperature so it is a finite temperature.
In that case of course there will be thermal excitations.
So again we start with the we have a same kind of a setup but we have the cold bus at some finite temperature TC.
And we start with the working medium that is the spin chain in a thermal state at temperature TC at D which can be at the D can be at the critical point or one one side of the critical point.
And then we drive the system to A far away from criticality.
Now what it has been shown in this paper and some also other papers by Polkofnikov and others that in that case for this finite temperature the defect density at A is given by the defect density at zero temperature that is when TC is zero multiplied by this tiny each term.
This epsilon is the energy of the system at the initial time and TC comes in the denominator.
So in the limit when TC approaches zero again n approaches n naught that is the zero temperature limit but when TC is very high this just becomes kind of one by TC form.
So then for large temperature that is when this temperature of the cold book much higher than the temperature that than the energy scale of the working medium.
This defect density is tau to the power of this minus nu D plus z by nu z plus one divided by TC and this again we have the same kind of a scaling form in this W minus W infinity which is one R by TC tau to the power of this critical exponents.
Now what it shows is again good operation means say in the adiabatic limit we have the high work output because there are no non adiabatic excitations.
So what our aim is for this W to approach this W infinity and what we see is from this relation that W approaches W infinity for this tau much larger than some tau minimum.
But tau minimum is given by this some factor constant factor R which depends on the system which can vary from system to system divided by this temperature of the cold book to the power of this critical exponents.
So what it shows is as we keep on increasing TC for higher the temperature lower this tau minimum.
So for high temperature of the cold book we may not even need shortcut to adiabaticity because the time period might already be larger than this tau minimum.
So we may not need even we may not need shortcut to adiabaticity for finite temperature if tau is larger than tau minimum and that is very much possible because for high TC tau minimum becomes very small.
So we also verified that numerically so this is the work output as a function of this tau for different temperatures.
So as I said that this shows that we should expect the adiabatic limit for a tau which decreases with increasing TC.
So for high TC low TC TC is equal to 0.1 what we see is that as we increase tau the work output increases because excetitions are reduced.
Finally it saturates to the adiabatic limit for large tau.
Now if we increase TC to 1 what we see is again the similar qualitatively similar but quantitatively it saturates much earlier.
So what it means is as soon as this tau becomes larger than this limit we do not need any control to reduce to improve the performance of the engine.
But this does not mean that high temperature is good for quantum machines.
Actually what is happening is that thermal fluctuations dominate any quantum fluctuations.
So applying control to reduce quantum fluctuations does not really improve the engine.
So this also one can see from this work output as a function of this TC.
For small TC the work output is large but as we keep on increasing TC the work output decreases and the tau minimum also decreases linearly with TC following the scaling relations given here.
So what it shows is that both work output and this tau minimum both decrease with increasing TC.
So what it means is that the power that is this work output divided by the tau minimum can even increase with increasing TC.
And that would mean quite contrary intuitively that higher temperatures might actually benefit the operation of the quantum engines and that is actually what we see here.
So again this w approaches w infinity for tau larger than tau min and tau min decreases with increasing TC.
So this power this ratio may increase and that is what we see here the power output as a function of TC.
So this is we get a inverted parabola kind of thing.
So for small time so small temperature or large temperatures are not the optimal.
We get the optimal regime somewhere in between which shows that this optimal temperature for this operation of the engine is not the absolute zero.
It is somewhere in the middle.
But of course it depends also on the constraints available on the setup.
So finally this brings me to the conclusion that is quantum engines with interacting many body working mediums present a rich field.
And what I have shown is that there is a university in work power efficiency efficiency maximum power close to phase transitions.
And for any finite temperature this thermal fluctuations dominate dominate for large tau that is it dominates over any quantum fluctuations.
So any control which only reduces quantum fluctuations are not enough for finite TC as long as this tau is large.
And that also shows that we may not need absolute zero temperature for optimal operation of quantum engines.
Thank you.
I had a knife question regarding the counter diabetic part of the talk.
So is the counter diabetic term unique for a set of states like in the context of let's say quantum annealing and start from a state and I want to go to another state.
Then is it unique it depends on this energy spectrum.
If the energy spectrum and the eigenvectors are same then I would expect they should be same.
But usually it will change from setup to setup.
Because I see there's this you matrix there which is like delta lambda you which you convert to a right or yes.
So you spectrum.
You is the unit tree that allows the I mean it is the unit tree that allows the Hamiltonian to be diagonalized in the moving frame.
And the other question is this locality of this counter diabetic approximate counter diabetic term which you found here which is similar.
How did you get that I missed that but why did you choose Sigma Y.
Okay, so it this one it shows that the actual counter diabetic term will actually also involve many non-local terms.
Yes.
But we say that non-local terms in principle in experimental it may be very difficult to implement.
So we just have a local term with some prefactor yj yj t which we can optimize.
Okay, and optimization will give us to the most closest form to the counter diabetic exact counter diabetic given the constant that we have only single body terms.
And does this work if your lattice is not so linear like in quantum annealing you sometimes solve max set problems and stuff where it is.
So you have to figure out and local kind of counter diabetic term to make these things work.
So you mean when lambda is not just t by two it is like t squared or something.
No, I'm just saying the connectivity between the sites is not like like in a chain.
It's like, let's say randomly connected.
Okay, I have to think about random graph.
I have to think about it.
Thank you.
Any more questions?
So it's a very simple question.
So if you really want to make the engine more efficient wouldn't you all altogether avoid a critical point because you know if you go to the critical point you will anyway generate entropy.
Right.
So this is not good for an engine.
In criticality we use that for looking at the universality.
But I mean this non adiabatic excitation also appear in even if there is no criticality.
For example, in this model there is no critical point we are not going to critical but still there is a lot of excitation.
That's fine.
So that was just to study the universal universality and that also allows us to have this control without knowing the details about the materials.
Another question, I mean, so normally engines I mean, when we like if I take a sterling engine, you just put it in contact with two reservoirs and it starts working that it and you can get work out of it.
In this kind of engines like usually you have this time dependent driving protocol which you have to put in by hand.
So it's not clear how you really extract anything out of it.
Okay, so this work output you mean that by hand you are also investing some work out.
Okay, so yes that also that takes care takes that into account.
So say in one of the strokes you will get say positive power work output in the another strokes you get negative.
So the total sum total should be so that we get the ultimately to be output.
But in real engines you don't have any such time dependent protocol.
You mean real engine like a combustion engine kind of thing that I guess it's like a sterling engine if I take it.
Okay.
Real means classically also this auto cycle is originally a classical engine.
So they are also I mean classically also you can have this kind of a four stroke thing.
I'm saying all you need is heat bus.
No, no, I mean that is actually I think a combustion engine does that, but in any case.
So even that one has this autonomous engine which runs on its own, which is probably closer to what you say.
But they're also the total details are more or less the same the working principle.
So finally what I think you're saying is that if we are investing work, then how are you saying that we are getting work output.
So this investing work also takes that I mean it takes that things into account that how much work we are investing and how much we are getting out.
So if that sum total is actually negative, then we say that we are getting something out.
But I agree that in practice when we actually implement that autonomous engines might be more important.
So in that case, say time crystals or those things they are people are working on those autonomous engines.
If there are no more questions, let's thank the speaker once again.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
The next speaker is as me holder, and she will be talking about dynamical freezing and emerging emerging conservation laws in strongly driven interacting flu came out.
Thank you very much.
So I'd like to start with thanking all the organizers for organizing this very nice and stimulating conference and giving me the opportunity to present my work here.
I'll be talking about dynamical freezing and emerging conservation laws in strongly driven interacting look a matter, and this is a work which is in done with in collaboration with on it, but thus we's probably in the audience.
So the first part will be most of the recapitulation of the dynamical freezing phenomenology, which are enough to talk on a talk about last week.
So this might be repetitive for the people who were here last week, but I'll keep it very brief and you might also see some of the slides in common.
And so, and the next part will be the new results regarding the stability of emergent conservation laws.
So to start with the general question of looking at thermalization that you have a bunch of interacting degrees of freedom, you drive them periodically so I only be talking about close systems.
So you drive it periodically and then what happens to the system in the long time so intuitive expectations are the unbounded heating that there will be energy absorption from the drive and there will be fun is a golden rule type of scenarios.
So there are the very, the recent, all the interesting steady states which are the non equilibrium steady states, we have heard a lot about various aspects in this conference for the last few days.
So, in a bit more details just if you take non interacting many particle system drive them periodically.
And now if you have many particle localized system and in presence of interaction so and drive them periodically.
You have this interesting floquet MBL there are start localization and time crystal is one of the very nice example of this regime.
And then there were discussions about these many particle system with interaction, where there were no intrinsic localization and in general they are expected to go to a featureless in finite temperature like ensemble but there can be of course some very nice examples of these pre thermal states.
So, all of these were very nicely covered in the pedagogical lectures that we had last two weeks by Roderick and until you can just go back for very nice reviews.
So, just to set up the tunnel lodges in for the floquet setup that we have a time periodic Hamiltonian here, which is time periodic in capital T the time evolution operator corresponding to that is the unitary you, which takes the function size zero to site.
So, one can define the effective Hamiltonian, which is time independent over one period like this that e to the power minus i h effective T in general these h effective effective Hamiltonian doesn't commute with any local operator.
So, so, yeah, you observe stroboscopically so after each time period and the evolution, due to the time dependent Hamiltonian h effective that just gives you the function of the time entity.
So, the important thing to note here that that the eigenstates of the h effective which are called the floquet eigenstates.
They play the same role as the played by the energy eigenstates in the time independent drive Hamiltonian in a quench provided we observe only stroboscopically.
So, we, I did not mu eyes are as the floquet eigenstates corresponding to the unitary over zero to capital T.
You can, which form a complete basis. So, you write down any initial state size zero in terms of these floquet eigenstates, and in the long time any the expectation value of any local operator will be given by this diagonal ensemble average.
Which is the floquet diagonal ensemble. So, right.
So, now to start with the concrete example, we have a clean system. So there is no disorder, and it's non integrable, and we drive it under a strong periodic drive so drive amplitude will be strong.
So, in details the Hamiltonian is the undriven part of the Hamiltonian is there is this nearest neighbor rising interaction then there is this next nearest neighbor and if your magnetic interaction then there is also a static longitudinal field.
And then there is also a transverse field, which is static and now we drive the longitudinal field with the drive amplitude hxd.
And so, just as a part as a first glance that we be for example start with a fully polarized state and see the evolution of that state and measure the magnetization.
So, if your drive amplitude is very small then you see the thermalize that the systems are my life lies is very fast, and the magnetization goes to zero.
And if you drive it with a large drive amplitude where here hxd is of the order 30 maybe so then the magnetization remains close to its initial value so the inset in the inset.
The dashed line gives you the diagonal ensemble average and the red one is the real time. So it just keeps on fluctuating around the diagonal ensemble value.
So, now if you look at the diagonal ensemble average of the magnetization as a function of your drive amplitude. It shows this kind of a threshold where in the small drive amplitude regime.
Everything thermalizes and in the strong drive amplitude regime, you see there is a sharp.
So, where you see that the system remains frozen to its initial state.
So, right, and if you look at the system size dependence in the thermalizing regime you'll see that with increasing system sizes that the system thermalizes more and in the in the frozen regime maybe if you if you look at this region, you see that.
With increasing system sizes this this trend is reversed so with increasing system sizes the system is more and more frozen.
So the two points to note here is that the threshold doesn't move with the system size and the final result resolution shows that magnetization is more strongly frozen for larger L above the threshold.
Now, beyond the threshold in the frozen regime, which we call the dynamically frozen regime.
If you look at the diagonal ensemble average as a function of drive frequency, these these kind of a peak valley structure that appears so there are these particular points in.
So this is for a fixed drive amplitude and as a function of your drive frequency.
So, at these points, you see a perfect freezing and bit in between, there are these valleys.
So, and this also basically shows you that how the longitudinal magnetization emerges as an approximately conserved quantity under this particular drive conditions where your drive amplitudes are integer multiples of your drive frequency.
Interesting point to note here that this happens over a very broad region of omega so it's not just the high frequency regime where we understand things a little better.
So, yeah, so it happens for a very large region of drive frequencies.
So, now to understand how well these so this magnetization which emerges as a conserved quantity is conserved.
We basically define these quantities where your ex alphas are your, your computational basis states.
So, ex alpha is the alpha I can state of all the poly X operators and new alpha is the alpha, okay, I can state.
And if you.
So first, if you plot the magnetization of your all the floquet I can states, you see that there is this steps right kind of structures appear for the particular frequencies where the perfect freezing condition satisfies.
And if you move away from the perfect freezing conditions, then this step kind of structure is a little bit smeared out.
So, so we define the quantity delta which is which basically gives you the measure of how well all the floquet I can states are looking at preserves the magnetization.
So, this is basically the expectation of magnetization in the X basis states difference and the difference of the difference between the magnetization of the floquet I can states, and they're some of them.
So, basically, I'll show you later that this delta decreases with L as at the perfect freezing points, like, for, for here, for example, Omega 10 or 20.
So, so delta gives you a measure of the violation of the emergent conservation law over the entire floquet spectrum.
And so how, how general is this phenomena of dynamical freezing freezing and the emergent conservation law is so to show this is just to briefly state that you can take in your in your
uneven part of your Hamiltonian, you can take all possible kind of, for example, you can take a three spin interaction term, you can take a long range interaction term, you can also take a Heisenberg interaction term.
And this phenomena survives and this big value kind of structure also survives for different kind of undriven parts of the Hamiltonian the only thing is important that the right amplitude is large and how this scales with the system size.
So this just for for all the various models that I just mentioned, for all of them with increasing system size there is not much.
I don't see any system side size dependence.
So, now, to, to, to understand how robust this is, how much is of this is a finite size effect, we do do tensor network based so we do the itbd kind of algorithms, which is for the infinite size system.
But of course we can do only for finite times. And now, so here I show the, so the blue one is for a finite size system which is equal to 12, and the diagonal ensemble average which is t tends to infinity.
And the red one is for for an infinite size system but of course for for finite time. So and the red one. So I just plot the final magnetization up to which I can evolve the system until unless you blow up the dimension of so the one dimension of your matrix product state.
And it turns out that this this threshold doesn't move so even for the finite time data of the infinite size system has the same threshold at this same drive amplitude in between somewhere between 15 somewhere around 15.
So, so this is again starting with the fully polarized state. And if you look at the entanglement entropy of the state as a function of time as a function of time.
Then you see that there is almost no entanglement growth for the system for a very, very large time and right so this blue region is the strongly frozen region.
And in the inside I show the show the resonances from that I just briefly talk about later.
I mean, because I've already discussed all these in his talk so I'll just mention that from the partition theory we can get the first sort of resonances and even for the infinite size system.
The resonances are isolated and they are only the so.
So the location of these resonances are from at the same point where we get it from the first order perturbation theory and all of these points of thermalizations are can be explained from the first order resonances.
And so summary of the analytical results that we have is one is the Magnus expansion that an appropriate Magnus expansion in the time dependent frame is consistent up to the initial two orders with the emergent conservation of the magnetization for icing
interaction of any sort in any lattice dimensions and for any two body Heisenberg interactions or on a lattice of any dimension.
And the other analytical result is the floquet Dyson perturbation theory, which was developed by the demand here.
That all the physically relevant resonances that are observed in exact numerics are isolated in the parameter space and are explained completely by the first order part of floquet perturbation theory.
And this is consistent with the fact that our divergent perturbation expansion is asymptotic to a function or convergent series with isolated singularities in the parameter space.
So here you might want to have a look at the talk, the discussions after on of stock where another Lee made a comment about these asymptotic series.
So the summary is that you have an interacting system you drive them periodically and under the strong drive condition.
It frank fragments the Hilbert space in these sectors of the magnetization so that the states from the same magnetization they are free to mix with each other and the states from the different magnetization sectors they are not allowed
to mix with each other. So where HXD was the drive Hamiltonian and MX corresponding to that that part of the Hamiltonian emerges as a conserved quantity.
So that there is no hybridization between various items subspaces of magnetization. Now, the question is that whether everything mixes completely a body clearly within this.
So for example, if you look in one again space of this magnetization sector, whether everything mixes completely a body.
So, to understand that we, what we did was to start with, we take a finite size system for example, L equal to 12, and we start with all possible kind of computational basis states and evolve them with this under this strong drive.
And look at the entanglement entropy after a very long time, which is, for example, 10 to the power five cycles.
And so this is the entanglement entropy in the y axis and x axis is the magnetization of your initial states.
What we observe is that even in the zero magnetization magnetization sector, there are states which have very low entanglement entropy growth.
And there are of course states which has, which grows a lot of, have a lot of entanglement entropy.
So, what we identified that these low entangled states are these, these states, for example, the two new states and there are these up, up, down, down and there are transitional copies of these states.
So, which suggests that these nearest neighbor and the next nearest neighbor for the letters, they are probably also some other emergent conservation laws.
So, in particular, if you take the new state, up, down, up, down state as your initial state and evolve it with time for different system sizes, 8, 10, 12, which is exact, and then ITVD dynamics, which is for L tends to infinity.
The entanglement entropy grows a little bit and then it comes down.
And it keeps on this, the entanglement just keeps on oscillating.
And there is almost no system size dependence.
So, to understand this, we again went back to look at the structures of your Floke-Eigen states as before this is the magnetization of your Floke-Eigen states.
So, we have these separated blocks and also the nearest and the next nearest neighbor terms, they also have this step kind of a structure, but not the, for example, the third order collider, I mean, Cmi, Cmi plus three.
This collider doesn't have this kind of a structure.
Right. And the quantity we define delta as a function of your system sizes for these three emergent conservation laws, there is, they remain at zero.
There is no system size dependence.
And for the other quantities which are not conserved, they have a strong system size dependence.
And another interesting thing to note, I'm not sure whether the inset is visible.
So, in the inset, the x-axis is the static, the strength of the static term which is the next nearest, the next nearest neighbor interaction term, and this is delta.
This shows that at zero, if you're the strength of your next nearest neighbor interaction term in your static Hamiltonian is zero, then delta is quite large.
So, the next nearest neighbor, next nearest neighbor collider is not a conserved quantity when you do not have this term in your undriven Hamiltonian.
And if you put a very small next nearest neighbor interaction term in your Hamiltonian, undriven Hamiltonian, then this becomes a conservation law.
So, the conservation of the terms that commute with the strong field cannot be explained by simple unperturbed energy considerations because the processes that cost much smaller unperturbed energies compared to the size of the perturbation can be prohibited by the conservation law.
So, the strong field prepares a bed where a weak term can produce a strong constraint over the entire spectrum in form of the conservation law.
Now, if we go back to, so this is the very surprising result which is done with, it's from an ongoing work with Shalini.
So, we start with the up-down, up-down nil state as the initial state and look at the entanglement entropy of the final state after these number of drive cycles.
So, x-axis is the number of drive cycles.
So, this one is for a very small system which is l equal to 4, then l equal to 8 and l equal to 12.
What happens here that you started with zero entanglement state and your entanglement entropy very slowly draws with time and reaches one and then again comes back.
And the time it takes to grow the entanglement entropy from zero to one, it is extensive in your system size.
So, for a four-size system, it's from, it takes this time and this is in 10 to the power 7, 10 to the power 9.
So, the half-chain entanglement entropy shows super oscillation, that's how we call it, with a period that scales exponentially with the system size.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, right.
So, how this shows the suppression of the conservation violating processes at every order over a time scale which is exponential in l to see that.
So, again, we started with this nil state, up-down, up-down state, which if you consider that these three are the conservation laws.
So, if you respect these conservation laws, then these up-down, up-down state can only mix with the partner down, up-down, up the other nil state.
But for which you need to flip l number of spins, which is extensive in system size.
And now, here, if you look at the overlap between these two states in the final wave function as a function of time, you can see that the overlap with the other, so basically the overlap they are exchanged in time,
showing that, so throughout the process, the only two states that are involved in the dynamics are these two states and no other finite number of spin-flip states that are excited during the process.
So, right.
So, l-spin-flip processes which takes exponential in the system size of time, all of these is the only process that occurs and all the other processes are prohibited by the conservation laws.
So, to just see whether these are the only three conservation laws which can explain the entanglement entropy, the distribution of this entanglement entropy, we just calculated the page bound considering these three conservation laws.
So, this just shows that there might be other conservation laws, but the page bound gives you the upper bound of the entanglement entropy that is reached by all these kind of states.
So, probably I was a bit quick, and so this brings me to the conclusion that dynamical freezing under strong periodic drive provides a mechanism for stabilizing interacting flow-cake quantum matter via emergence of conservation laws.
These emergent conservation laws are at least stable over a time scale that scales exponentially with l, and infinite size simulation shows absolutely no sign of heating for states that are constrained by the emergent conservation laws.
And thank you for your attention.
Questions?
So, maybe you already said, but this emergent conservation law, it's an exact symmetry of the first order in the madness.
Up to the second order, all the emergent conservation laws, they commute with the effective Hamiltonian up to the second order.
And then third order?
From the third order?
It stops commuting.
No.
It doesn't commute.
From the third order terms, it won't commute with your conservation laws, but probably, I mean, they are small, and that probably gives you the fluctuations around the exact magnetizations that we observe.
And they are the ones which lead to this exponential, like at, you're saying at the exponential.
I do not remember the exact form of the third order term, but the third order term should give you intuitively three spin-flip processes.
So, for these kind of excitations where you need l-spin-flip processes, that will be l-th order.
Eventually, the fact that they're not conserved can be seen from this third order term.
So if you really take the divergence of the series seriously, then everything will eventually heat up because higher order terms are fast bigger, always bigger.
It keeps on growing because there are factorial end processes which takes place, so everything will heat up.
But the thing we see is probably there are some kind of underlying convergences which we cannot directly see from perturbation theory.
It always gives this kind of, like you have in QED or QCD. These are all divergent theories, but you know that this divergence is not taken to be very seriously after a while.
So here, we believe same thing happens, and the resonance things with the found gives us, is consistent with the fact that some convergent series is asymptotic with our divergent perturbation to the fast order.
All the singularities we see in the simulations are captured by the fast order singularities of the theory.
There are second order singularities in the theory, third order are set there, but we do not, do never see those things.
As Anathali told that in Farming-Pastawalam, they have this similar mystery.
So the idea is, you cannot take the divergence of the series very seriously, and higher order terms of the series very seriously.
Now the question is, we have two questions. So whether this long oscillation is a result of the higher order terms?
It's not. It's just a fast order term. Can do that in the health order perturbation.
I mean, in the health spin flip of the thing.
So the idea is, the conservation law does not disallow this process.
Why the conservation law is there? We do not have any idea why this conservation law is so stable, why they are there. This is the mystery.
So, but if you assume these conservation laws are there, this is the only process which is not suppressed, and that really takes the health order process.
So what are we trying to say? There is an official process and there are on-shell processes.
This is the only on-shell process which is allowed by the conservation laws, and it takes an exponentially long time.
And in this time, the off-shell process doesn't kick in.
And in this case, we can see the resonance can be isolated.
Off-shell processes are the only way to thermalize the system, and it doesn't in an exponentially long time. So that's the message.
Okay, so my question is, as you showed us, you essentially apply a very strong field and you use the field to start switching on and off.
And then by doing this, you kind of stabilize this emergent quasi-conservation law.
Have you tried doing this also with other types of symmetries?
Like, can you try and do something that's not like a U1 but another symmetry where you apply a very strong field in that direction and then maybe this stabilizes it?
Not that I tried, but my hope is it might also give you this kind of, I mean, a strong drive should give you this kind of...
Then the second question is, sometimes in this NMR experiments, they consider this spin echo type of dynamics where you apply a very strong field and then you start basically echoing out a bunch of other terms.
So you stabilize effectively quasi-conservation law. Is this mechanism similar or is it fundamentally different?
I wouldn't think it's similar because it's not because you're somehow cancelling the effect of drive because of the echo out, right?
Because for different kind of states, you can see different...
I mean, for example, if you take a very random midstream state which doesn't have this kind of nearest neighbor or the nearest neighbor correlator value quite high, they should show you a lot of dynamics.
So not that they are completely frozen.
Questions?
So when you think about freezing a quantum state, the Zeno effect comes to the mind that you do repeated measurement and you can simply freeze a state.
So is there any connection or interpretation which can be associated with your freezing and the Zeno effect?
So you have local conservation laws, right?
Global conservation laws.
Global? I see.
I mean, if you look at the individual spins, they have a lot of dynamics. They are not conserved. Only the global quantities are conserved.
This is a state where you cannot do repeated local measurement which will freeze the state into this system into this state. This is not possible. This is what you're saying.
You can make local measurements but the point here is...
Destroy the phase.
So if my measurements are non-local, then it can work.
I don't know what kind of non-local basis you want to choose but in general, first of all, this is a unitary process. Zeno effect is non-unitary, projected to something.
You're not projected to anything. As you can see, there are states which can evolve a lot.
As you just mentioned, following the dynamics over a subspace and there is no restriction to that.
Zeno means it just stays there but it's allowed to actually explore a lot.
Only respect some global conservation laws. Otherwise, it's completely free.
And Zeno is just start some initial state and stay there by repeatedly projecting it very fast.
So it's very different mechanism I guess.
So Zeno cannot be a route to really freezing.
Zeno can be a route to freezing but it's very particular. You start with some particular state and you project it in some basis.
And then you keep on doing it fast and it remains projected in that space. You cannot get any dynamics at all.
In order of freezing, you get a lot of dynamics because these restrictions are not just freezing every state.
It's just respecting certain global conservation laws.
All the constraints respected, you can have a lot of dynamics.
Dynamics of the whole web function.
Thank you.
Are there more questions?
If there are no more questions, let's thank the speaker.
We'll come back at four.
We'll come back at four and that will be a summary by Marine of the second week.
And then we'll conclude by thanking a lot of people who were behind us into organizing this conference and that that will be the conclusion of the thing.
