The Age of Entanglement When Quantum Physics Was Reborn
by Louisa Gilder, read by Walter Dixon. A Note to the Reader
Werner Heisenberg, the pioneer who first laid down the laws of the fundamental behavior of
matter and light, was an old man when he sat down to write about his life. The book he wrote is
not an autobiography of the man, but an autobiography of his intellect, entirely a
series of reconstructed conversations. His two most famous papers are solo affairs,
one introducing quantum mechanics, the laws of the fundamental behavior of matter and light,
and the other on the uncertainty principle, which declares that at any given time the more
specific a particle's position the more vague its speed and direction, and vice versa. But the
roots of each solitary paper reach deep into months of heated and careful conversation with most
of the great names of quantum physics. Science rests on experiments, wrote Heisenberg,
but science is rooted in conversations. Nothing could be further from the impression physics
textbooks give to students. There, physics seems to be a perfect sculpture, sitting in a vacuum
sealed case, as if brains, only tenuously connected to bodies, had given birth to insights fully
formed. These Athena-like theories and Zeus-like theorists seem shiny, glassy smooth. Sometimes,
if the light is right, you can see through them into the mysteries and beauties of the physical
universe. But there is hardly a trace of humanity, or any sense of questions still to be answered.
Physics, in actuality, is a never-ending search made by human beings. Gods and angels do not come
bearing perfectly formed theories to disembodied prophets who instantly write textbooks. The
schoolbook simplifications obscured the crooked, strange, and fascinating paths that stretch out
from each idea, not only back into the past, but also onward into the future. While we aspire
to universality and perfection, we are lying if we write as if we have achieved it. Conversations
are essential to science, but the off-the-cuff nature of conversation poses a difficulty. It is rare,
even in these digital times, to have a complete transcript of every word spoken between two
people on a given day, even if that conversation someday leads to a new understanding of the
world. The result is that history books rarely have much of the to-and-fro of human interaction.
Heisenberg's statement suggests that something is therefore lost. When I first started pouring
through the memoirs and biographies of the quantum physicists of the twentieth century,
I felt as if I were watching a movie. The cast of characters was so vivid, and the plot twists
so unexpected. While the strength of science is its ability to slough off the contingencies of
history and reach toward pure knowledge, this knowledge is built, one puzzle piece at a time,
by people living their lives in specific times and places with specific passions.
Science unfolds in some directions rather than in others because of circumstances. Characters,
not disembodied brains, and plot twists, not the relentless forward march of truth,
almost guarantee that this is true. As Tom Wolf wrote at the beginning of the Electric Kool-Aid
Acid Test, I have tried not only to tell what the pranksters did, but to recreate the mental
atmosphere or subjective reality of it. I don't think their adventure can be understood without
that. Wolf was recounting a very different kind of mental history, but his point, I find,
is even more true about the portentous history of science and intellect that unfolded as the age
of entanglement. This is an audiobook of conversations. An audiobook about how the
given take between physicists repeatedly changed the direction in which quantum physics developed.
Just as conversations, subtly or dramatically, change the world we live in and experience every
day. All the conversations in this audio program occurred in some form, on the date specified in
the text, and I have fully documented the substance of every one. Most are composed of direct quotes,
or close paraphrases, from the trove of letters, papers, and memoirs that these physicists left
behind. When occasional connective tissue—for example, nice to see you, or I agree, was necessary—I
tried to keep it both innocuous and also sensitive to the character, beliefs, and history of the
people involved. Here is a sample from the text, from a conversation that took place in the summer
of 1923, on a streetcar in Copenhagen, between two of the founders of quantum theory, Albert
Einstein and Niels Bohr, and its first great teacher, Arnold Sommerfeld.
It's good to see you doing so well, says Einstein. Bohr shakes his head, smiling. My life, from
the scientific point of view, passes off in periods of overhappiness and despair, as I
know that both of you understand, of feeling vigorous and overworked, of starting papers
and not getting them published. His face is earnest. Because all the time I am gradually
changing my views about this terrible riddle which the quantum theory is. I know. Einstein's
eyes almost close. He is nodding. That is a wall before which I am stopped. The difficulties
are terrible. His eyes open. The theory of relativity was only a sort of respite which
I gave myself during my struggles with the quanta. We know that the conversation, of
which this interchange represents a tiny piece, happened, because Bohr mentioned it in an
interview late in his life with his son and one of his closest colleagues. The content
of the conversation is easy to gather from a look at what the three men were working
on and writing friends about around the same time. Here, Bohr, in the interview, describes
that day in 1923.
Sommerfeld was not impractical. Not quite impractical. But Einstein was not more practical
than I, and when he came to Copenhagen I naturally fetched him from the railway station. We
took the streetcar from the station and talked so animatedly about things that we went much
too far past our destination. So we got off and went back. Thereafter we again went too
far. I can't remember how many stops, but we rode back and forth in the streetcar because
Einstein was really interested at that time. We don't know whether his interest was more
or less skeptical, but in any case we went back and forth many times in the streetcar
and what people thought of us, that is something else.
Here is the first quote on which this particular short section of the conversation is based.
It comes from a letter Bohr wrote to a British colleague in August of 1918.
I know that you understand how my life from the scientific point of view passes off in
periods of overhappiness and despair, of feeling vigorous and overworked, of starting papers
and not getting them published, because all the time I am gradually changing my views about
this terrible riddle which the quantum theory is.
How can a passage written five years earlier be relevant?
Some things had changed for Bohr in the intervening years, but what he touches on in the letter
had remained the same—the excitement, dejection, and overwork. During this whole period he
was building his Institute of Physics in Copenhagen. The long, arduous papers only partially published,
and most of all, he struggled to understand the quantum theory, which, until Heisenberg's
breakthrough in 1925, stood unshifting sand.
Here is the second quote from a journey by train taken a year before.
The astronomer of the Paris Observatory rode with Einstein from Belgium to Paris and asked
him about the quantum problem.
That is a wall before which one is stopped.
Einstein replied,
The difficulties are terrible. For me, the theory of relativity was only a sort of respite
which I gave myself during their examination.
His opinions on the subject were the same at the time of our scene in the summer of 1923.
By the following summer an unexpected letter from India would help him chip a crack in
this quantum wall.
As for the filler, Bohr was the kind of person whose happiness was infectious. He would indeed
have been looking well when he picked up Einstein to show him his newly completed Institute,
no matter how overworked and secretly despairing he might actually be.
And Sommerfeld, always intellectually engaged with Bohr during those early years of the
quantum theory, would have known intimately what Bohr meant by this terrible riddle.
I believe the risks of telling the story in this way are outweighed by the reward. A sense
of how, through minds meeting minds, the quantum theory unfolded.
I am hopeful of earning your trust and of honoring Heisenberg's sense of how science
is really done.
LG, October 17, 2007
POST SCRIPT
The risks of telling the story in this way have recently been highlighted. In the note
to the reader, I had picked an example that would bring to the fore the speculative, collage-like
nature of the conversations in the audiobook. So, it is not such a surprise that this example
I used was the one which proved to conflict partially with further research.
Sommerfeld, it turns out, was not in the streetcar with Bohr that day in 1923, and in fact neither
was Einstein. Bohr told the story of his streetcar ride with Einstein in the course of a rambling
conversation during a long Scandinavian summer day at his New Zealand beach house half a
century ago. It was the 12th of July 1961, and Bohr was almost 76. He would die in the
next year.
His son, Oga, and his most devoted assistant, Leon Rosenfeld, were interviewing him. Bohr
guessed that Einstein had come after giving a speech in the Swedish town of Goetheberg,
which was 1923 when the town celebrated its 300th anniversary.
With the Bohr archive, comparing notes with the Einstein archive, now believes that Einstein
visited Copenhagen only once, in 1920, after a speaking trip to Christiana, as Oslo was
called until 1924 in honour of a long-ago Norwegian and Danish king. Immediately afterwards, Einstein
wrote to his father figure, the great Dutch physicist, Hendrik Lorenz.
The trip to Christiana was really beautiful. The most beautiful were the hours I spent
with Bohr in Copenhagen. He is a highly gifted and excellent man. It is a good omen for physics
that prominent physicists are mostly also splendid people.
Einstein and Bohr's biographer, Abraham Peiss, wrote in Niels Bohr's Times, page 228,
I have not found any comment by Bohr on this visit.
It is rather nice to realise now that Bohr's streetcar story is, in fact, describing those
beautiful hours.
Sommerfeld's name came into Bohr's telling of this tale, not because he was there, as I had
believed, but because talking of those events brought him to Bohr's mind. Bohr, Sommerfeld and
Einstein in those days were in close communication. Bohr and Sommerfeld as they elaborated their
atomic model, and Einstein and Sommerfeld as they discussed general relativity during its genesis.
The twenty years between 1908 and 1928 were Sommerfeld's heyday as a mathematical physicist,
during which he supervised the PhD theses of an incredible total of four future Nobel laureates.
What, then, in 1920 would have engrossed Einstein and Bohr so much that they repeatedly missed
their stop? Well, the focus of their discussions and disagreements in 1920 was the same as in
1923, the light quantum. All of which is to say that the mission of this audiobook is
to complement the existing histories and textbooks with a reminder of the wonderful
unsettledness of conversation, interchange, and experiment, and the moments in which these
occasionally flash into inspired clarity. This audiobook is a celebration of the glorious
human mess that incubates discovery, as well as of its flawed and heroic searchers.
LG, March 25, 2009. Introduction, Entanglement
Anytime two entities interact, they entangle. It doesn't matter if they are photons, bits of light,
atoms, bits of matter, or bigger things made of atoms, like dust modes, microscopes,
cats, or people. The entanglement persists no matter how far these entities separate,
as long as they don't subsequently interact with anything else, an almost impossibly tall
order for a cat or a person, which is why we don't notice the effect. But the motions of subatomic
particles are dominated by entanglement. It starts when they interact. In doing so,
they lose their separate existence. No matter how far they move apart, if one is tweaked,
measured, observed, the other seems to instantly respond, even if the whole world now lies between
them. And no one knows how. Strange as it seems, this kind of correlation is
happening all the time, and we know it happens because of the work of John Bell.
Raised in the chaos of Ireland during the Second World War, he spent his working years in peaceful
Switzerland and died just after his sixty-second birthday, the year, unbeknownst to him, that
he was nominated for the Nobel Prize. He called the work for which he is now most famous his
hobby, probing into the logical foundations of quantum mechanics. His second paper on the subject
in 1964 briefly and beautifully demonstrates the utter lack of any common sense mechanism to correlate
these entangled particles. Bell had extended and deepened a hitherto sneered at paper of
Einstein's on the subject, written in 1935 with two little-known colleagues, Boris Podolski and
Nathan Rosen. Forty years after its rehabilitation by John Bell, the paper is, by a massive margin,
the most cited of all Einstein's roster of glittering, earth-shaking work, and the most cited paper
of the dominant physics journal of the second half of the twentieth century, Physical Review.
Entanglement's presence, especially over tiny distances, for example, with a hydrogen molecule,
began to be manifest in the early twentieth century, in the springtime of the quantum theory.
But it was Bell, with his simple algebra and deep thinking, who laid open the central paradox.
The mysteries embedded in quantum mechanics provoked four major reactions from its founders,
orthodoxy, heresy, agnosticism, and simple misunderstanding.
Three of the theory's founders, Bohr, Heisenberg, and Wolfgang Pauli, interpretation.
Three more founders, including Einstein, were heretics, believing that something was rotten
in the quantum theory they had played such a role in developing. Finally, pragmatic people said,
the time is not yet ripe for understanding these things, and confused people dismissed the mysteries
with simplistic explanations. This riot of different reactions had a huge impact on the
future of quantum mechanics, because the theory needed interpretation the way a fish needs water.
This fact alone was a drastic break with the past history of science. A classical,
that is, pre-quantum equation, after its terms were defined essentially explained itself.
With the quantum revolution, the equations fell silent.
Only an interpretation allowed them to speak about the natural world.
Take this analogy. A Bhutanese artist, flown to the Metropolitan Museum of Art,
and introduced to Western painting for the first time, would have no problem understanding the
essentials of the gory story represented by any of the several paintings of Judith,
sword in one elegant hand, the head of Halafernay's swinging from the other.
Before 1900, a painting could be relied on to speak about what the painter intended.
Standing in the Guggenheim before a series of swathes of browns that give an impression
of motion, however, our Bhutanese artist will be pardoned for glancing quickly over to the
little title card, in a now universal art gallery ritual, to find out that this is actually a
sad young man on a train. More scandalous that any Jewish maiden carrying a severed head,
the companion painting to the sad young man, Marcel Duchamp's famous
nude descending a staircase, which rocked the New York art world in 1913, graces the cover of one
of Heisenberg's books. Quantum mechanics represented a perfectly contemporaneous and
analogous break with the past. Just as much as the paintings of Duchamp and his successors,
quantum mechanics needed that little title card to connect with a reality outside its
beautiful mathematics, and in the 1920s and 30s, physicists argued over who would get
descriptive. Here are the protagonists. 1. The Copenhagen Interpretation
Niels Bohr, a lifelong friend and intellectual adversary of Einsteins, who founded the Institute
for Theoretical Physics in Copenhagen, tried to make sense of the mysteries with a concept he
called complementarity. For Bohr, complementarity was an almost religious belief that the paradoxes
of the quantum world must be accepted as fundamental, not to be solved or trivialized by attempts to
find out what's really going on down there. Bohr used the word in an unusual way. The
complementarity of waves and particles, for example, or of position and momentum,
meant that when one existed fully, its complement did not exist at all.
In order to take this view, Bohr emphasized there has to be a big, classical world,
devoid of complementarity, the world of circling planets and falling apples that Isaac Newton
had explained so well, which serves as a platform from which to stare into the quantum abyss.
In fact, instead of thinking of classical-sized things like apples and cats as being made of
quantum things like atoms, Bohr put the dependence the other way. In his famous Como lecture of
1927, he emphasized that waves and particles are abstractions, their properties being definable
and observable only through their interaction with other systems, and these other systems
must be classical, like a measuring apparatus. Rather than urging physicists to find a way
to move beyond such abstractions to a more accurate description, Bohr further insisted that
these abstractions are indispensable to describe experience in connection with our ordinary
spacetime view. That is, quantum things must be talked about in a classical language,
ill-suited to describe them, and the existence of any property we can recognize in a quantum object
must always depend upon finding another system that will interact with it in a classical way.
Classical systems are paradoxically necessary to describe the quantum systems of which they are made.
His enthusiastic supporter, Ferner Heisenberg, and best critic, Wolfgang Pauli, would go so far as to
say that the quantum world is in a certain way created or transformed by our observation of it,
since the atom seems to have no properties before measurement.
Those who are not shocked when they first come across quantum theory, said Bohr in conversation
with Heisenberg and Pauli, cannot possibly have understood it.
Two. Something is rotten. Starting in 1909, only nine years after quantum theory's tentative
debut, Albert Einstein began to worry that it implied a world composed of non-separable pieces
that were not mutually independent. When he tried to treat the individual particles as
individuals, they seemed to exert a mutual influence of a quite mysterious nature on each other,
or even seemed to affect each other in what he ridiculed as
spooky action at a distance, or a sort of telepathic coupling.
To him, it was clear that this meant a fatal flaw in the theory.
Erwin Schrodinger showed that, on its face, the quantum theory, and in particular its
foundational equation that bears his name, leads to a bizarre paradox.
If we do not firmly declare with Bohr that something big, like a cat, does not follow the
laws of quantum mechanics, though it is indubitably constructed of particles that do,
we can prove the cat to be alive and dead simultaneously.
Schrodinger yearned to reject the Copenhagen dualism and believe in a single world
described by his equation, but could never find a way to do it.
Louis de Broglie, a young Frenchman, came up with a version of the quantum theory in which
the Schrodinger equation describes a long-range force that moves faster than the speed of light,
spookily guiding the particles that make up our world. This kind of interpretation is an
example of what is commonly called hidden variables. The concept to remember and link
with this opaque designation, in the case of de Broglie's version of it, is
a quantum theory without observers. A quantum theory where the reality of particles
does not depend on whether they are observed.
3. The time is not ripe.
Paul Dirac, always known in public life by his first initials, PAM, whose equation describing
electrons was one of the most astonishingly powerful results of the quantum theory,
felt that it was too soon to be wasting time worrying about entanglement. It would make sense
someday. 4. Dismissive incomprehension.
Max Born, like Bohr, a lifelong friend of Einstein's and contributor to the Copenhagen
interpretation, could never understand why the others thought the meaning of the theory was such
an important and difficult issue. After the 1930s, it seemed clear that the analyses of
Einstein, Schrödinger and De Broglie were dead ends, and in fact most of the great and lasting
triumphs of the quantum theory did come from one of the other schools of thought.
But no one following Bohr, Heisenberg, Pauli, Dirac or Born dared grasp, measure,
or even name the deepest of all the puzzles, entanglement.
Then along came John Bell. An admirer of Einstein, Schrödinger and De Broglie,
he followed their minority views to their natural conclusions and brought unexpected clarity
where before there had been fog. And what the fog had been hiding was vividly and wonderfully
strange. Bohr used to say, Truth and clarity are complementary, meaning that the more truthful
you try to be, the more unclear will be your statements and vice versa. This was certainly
true of Bohr himself, but Bell wasn't buying it. As he once told one of Bohr's most famous
post-war disciples, John Wheeler, I'd rather be clear and wrong than foggy and right.
Bohr's books and papers, full of careful prohibitions about what cannot be contemplated
and obscure statements about complementarity, indivisibility, and irrationality, have become
wholly writ to be interpreted and reinterpreted by each new generation of physicists. From the
point of view of the history of entanglement, they are not worth one clear sentence from Einstein,
Schrödinger, De Broglie or John Bell, who each said, in a way that opened up a new world, hey,
look at this. Chapter 1 The Sox, 1978 and 1981
In 1978, when John Bell first met Reinhold Bertelman at the weekly Tea Party at the
Organisation Europienne pour la recherche nucléaire near Geneva, he could not know that the
thin young Austrian smiling at him through a short black beard was wearing mismatched socks.
And Bertelman did not notice the characteristically logical extension of Bell's vegetarianism,
plastic shoes. Deep under the ground beneath these two pairs of maverick feet, ever-increasing
magnetic fields were accelerating protons, pieces of the tiny centre of the atom,
around and around a doughnut-shaped track a quarter of a kilometre in diameter.
Studying these particles was part of the daily work of CERN, as the organisation was called.
A tangled history left the acronym no longer correlated with the name.
In the early 1950s, at the age of 25, Bell had acted as consultant to the team that designed
this subterranean accelerator, christened in scientific pseudo-Greek the proton synchrotron.
In 1960, the Irish physicist returned to Switzerland to live with his Scottish wife, Mary,
also a physicist, and a designer of accelerators. CERN's charmless, colourless campus of box-shaped
buildings with protons flying through their foundations became Bell's intellectual home
for the rest of his life, in the green pasture-land between Geneva and the mountains.
At such a huge and impersonal place, Bell believed, newcomers should be welcomed.
He had never seen Bertelman before, and so he walked up to him and said,
his brogue still clear despite almost two decades in Geneva,
I'm John Bell. This was a familiar name to Bertelman, familiar in fact to almost anyone who
studied the high-speed crashes and collisions taking place under Bell's and Bertelman's feet,
in other words, the disciplines known as particle physics and quantum field theory.
Bell had spent the last quarter of a century conducting piercing investigations into these
flying, decaying, and shattering particles. Like Sherlock Holmes, he focused on details others
ignored and was wont to make startlingly clear and unexpected assessments.
He did not like to take commonly held views for granted, but tended to ask,
how do you know? said his professor, Sir Rudolph Pirols, a great physicist of the previous generation.
John always stood out through his ability to penetrate to the bottom of any argument,
an early co-worker remembered, and to find the flaws in it by very simple reasoning.
His papers, numbering over one hundred by 1978, were an inventory of such questions answered,
and flaws or treasures discovered as a result. Bertelman already knew this,
and that Bell was a theorist with an almost quaint sense of responsibility who shied away from grand
speculations and rooted himself in what was directly related to experiments at CERN.
Yet it was this same responsibility that would not let him ignore what he called a
rottenness or a dirtiness in the foundations of quantum mechanics, the theory with which they all
worked. Probing the weak points of these foundations, the places in the plumbing where the theory was,
as he put it, unprofessional, occupied Bell's free time. Had those in the lab known of this hobby,
almost none of them would have approved. But on a sabbatical in California in 1964,
six thousand miles from his responsibilities at CERN, Bell had made a fascinating discovery down
there in the plumbing of the theory. Revealed in that extraordinary paper of 1964, Bell's theorem
showed that the world of quantum mechanics, the base upon which the world we see is built,
is composed of entities that are either, in the jargon of physics, not locally causal,
not fully separable, or even not real unless observed. If the entities of the quantum world
are not locally causal, then an action like measuring a particle can have instantaneous,
spooky effects across the universe. As for separability, without such an assumption of the
mutually independent existence, the, being thus, of spatially distant things, Einstein insisted,
physical thought in the sense familiar to us would not be possible, nor does one see how
physical laws could be formulated and tested without such a clean separation.
The most extreme version of non-separability is the idea that the quantum entities do not become
solid until they are observed, like the proverbial tree that makes no sound when it falls unless a
listener is around. Einstein found the implications ludicrous. Do you really believe the moon is
not there if nobody looks? Up to that point, the idea of science rested on separability,
as Einstein had said. It could be summarized as humankind's long intellectual journey away from
magic, not locally causal, and from anthropocentrism, not real unless observed.
Perversely, and to the consternation of Bell himself, his theorem brought physics to the
point where it seemingly had to choose between these absurdities. Whatever the ramifications,
it would become obvious by the beginning of this century that Bell's paper had caused a
sea change in physics. But in 1978, the paper, published fourteen years before in an obscure
journal, was still mostly unknown. Bertelman looked with interest at his new acquaintance,
who was smiling affably with eyes almost shut behind big, metal-rimmed glasses.
Bell had red hair that came down over his ears, not flaming red, but what was known in his native
country as ginger, and a short beard. His shirt was brighter than his hair, and he wore no tie.
In his pains taking Viennese-inflected English, Bertelman introduced himself.
I'm Reinhold Bertelman, a new fellow from Austria. Bell's smile broadened.
Oh, and what are you working on? It turned out that they were both engaged with the
same calculations dealing with quarks, the tiniest bits of matter.
They found they had come up with the same results. Bell, by one method on his desktop calculator,
Bertelman, by the computer program he had written.
So began a happy and fruitful collaboration, and one day Bell happened to notice Bertelman's socks.
Three years later, in an austere room high up in one of the majestic stone buildings of the
University of Vienna, Bertelman was curled over the screen of one of the physics department's
computers, deep in the world of quarks, thinking not in words, but in equations. His computer,
at fifteen feet by six feet by six feet, one of the department's smaller ones, almost filled the room.
Despite the early spring chill, the air-conditioning ran, fighting the heat produced by the sweatings
and warrings of the behemoth. Occasionally Bertelman fed it a new punch card perforated
with a line of code. He had been at his work for hours as the sunlight moved silently around the room.
He didn't look up at the sound of someone's practiced fingers poking the buttons that unlocked
the door, nor when it swung open. Gerhard Ecker, from across the hall, was coming straight at him,
a chief of papers in hand. He was the University's man in charge of receiving pre-prints,
papers that have yet to be published, which authors send to scientists whose work is related
to their own. Ecker was laughing. Bertelman, he shouted, even though he was not four feet away.
Bertelman looked up bemused, as Ecker thrust a pre-print into his hands.
You're famous now! The title, as Bertelman surveyed it, read,
Bertelman's socks and the nature of reality, J. S. Bell, CERN, Geneva, Switzerland.
The article was slated for publication in a French physics periodical,
Journal de Physique, later in 1981. Its title was almost as incomprehensible to Bertelman
as it would be for a casual reader.
But what's this about? What possibly...?
Ecker said, read it, read it. He read.
The philosopher in the street, who has not suffered a course in quantum mechanics,
is quite unimpressed by Einstein, Podolski, Rosen correlations. He can point to many examples
of similar correlations in everyday life. The case of Bertelman's socks is often cited.
My socks? What is he talking about? And EPR correlations?
It's a big joke. John Bell is playing a big published joke on me.
EPR, short for the paper's authors, Albert Einstein, Boris Podolski, and Nathan Rosen,
was, like Bell's 1964 theorem, which it inspired 30 years later,
something of an embarrassment for physics. To the question posed by their title,
can quantum mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete,
Einstein and his lesser-known cohorts answered no. They brought to the attention of physicists
the existence of a mystery in the quantum theory. Two particles that had once interacted could,
no matter how far apart, remain entangled, the word Schrodinger coined in that same year, 1935,
to describe this mystery. A rigorous application of the laws of quantum mechanics
seemed to force the conclusion that measuring one particle affected the state of the second one,
acting on it at a great distance by those spooky means.
Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen therefore felt that quantum mechanics would be superseded by some
future theory that would make sense of the case of the correlated particles.
Physicists around the world had barely looked up from their calculations.
Years went by, and it became more and more obvious that despite some odd details, ignored like the
eccentricities of a general who was winning a war, quantum mechanics was the most accurate theory
in the history of science. But John Bell was a man who noticed details, and he noticed that the
EPR paper had not been satisfactorily dealt with. Bertelman felt like laughing in confusion.
He looked at Ecker, who was grinning. Read on, read on.
Dr. Bertelman likes to wear two socks of different colors. Which color he will have on a given foot,
on a given day, is quite unpredictable. But when you see, figure one, that the first sock is pink.
What is figure one, my socks? Bertelman ruffled through the pages and found,
appended at the end, a little line sketch of the kind John Bell was fond of doing. He read on.
But when you see that the first sock is pink, you can be already sure that the second sock will
not be pink. Observation of the first and experience of Bertelman give immediate information
about the second. There is no accounting for tastes. But apart from that, there is no mystery here,
and is not the EPR business just the same?
Bertelman imagined John's voice saying this, conjured up his amused face. For three years we
worked together every day, and he never said a thing. Ecker was laughing. What do you think?
Bertelman had already dashed past him, out the door, down the hall, to the phone,
and with trembling fingers was calling Cern. Bell was in his office when the phone rang,
and Bertelman came on the line, completely incoherent. What have you done? What have you done?
Bell's clear laugh alone, so familiar in matter of fact, was enough to bring the world into
focus again. Then Bell said, enjoying the whole thing. Now you are famous, Reinhold.
But what is this paper about? Is this a big joke?
Read the paper, Reinhold, and tell me what you think.
A Tigris paces before a mirror. Her image, down to the last stripe, mimics her every motion.
Every sliding muscle, the smallest twitch of her tail. How are she and her reflection correlated?
The light, shining down on her narrow, slinky shoulders,
bounces off them in all directions. Some of this light ends up in the eye of the beholder,
either straight from her fur, or by a longer root, from tiger to mirror to eye.
The beholder sees two tigers moving in perfectly opposite synchrony.
Look closer. Look past the smoothness of that coat to see its hairs. Past its hairs to see
the elaborate architectural arrangements of molecules that compose them,
and then the atoms of which the molecules are made. Roughly a billionth of a meter wide,
each atom is, to speak very loosely, its own solar system, with a dense center circled by
distant electrons. At these levels, molecular, atomic, electronic, we are in the native land
of quantum mechanics. The Tigris, though large and vividly colored,
must be near the mirror for a watcher to see two correlated cats. If she is in the jungle,
a few yard separation would leave the mirror showing only undergrowth and swinging vines.
Even out in the open, at a certain distance the curvature of the earth would rise up to obscure
mirror from Tigris and decouple their synchrony. But the entangled particles Bell was talking about
in his paper can act in unison with the whole universe in between. Quantum entanglement,
as Bell would go on to explain in his paper, is not really like Bertelman's socks. No one puzzles
over how he always manages to pick different colored socks, or how he pulls the socks onto his feet.
But in quantum mechanics there is no idiosyncratic brain
choosing to coordinate distant particles, and it is hard not to compare how they do it to magic.
In the real world, correlations are the result of local influences, unbroken chains of contact.
One sheep, but another, there's a local influence. A lamb comes running to its mother's
bleed after waves of air molecules hit each other in an entirely local domino effect,
starting from her vocal cords and ending when they beat the tiny drum in the baby's ear in
a pattern his brain recognizes as mom. Sheep scatter at the arrival of a coyote.
The moving air has carried bits of coyote musk and dandruff into their nostrils,
or the electromagnetic waves of light from the moon have bounced off the coyote's pelt
and into the retinas of their eyes. Either way, it's all local, including the
nerves firing in each sheep's brain to say, danger, and carrying the message to her muscles.
Grown up, sold, and separated on different farms, twin lambs both still chew their cut
after eating, and produce lambs that look eerily similar. These correlations are still local.
No matter how far the lambs ultimately separate, their genetic material was laid down when they
were a single egg inside their mother's womb. Bell liked to talk about twins. He would show a
photograph of the pair of Ohio identical twins, both named Jim, separated at birth, and then
reunited at age forty, just as Bell was writing Bertleman's socks.
Their similarities were so striking that an institute for the study of twins was founded.
Appropriately enough, at the University of Minnesota in the Twin Cities.
Both Jims were nail biters, who smoked the same brand of cigarettes and drove the same model
and color of car. Their dogs were named Toy, their ex-wives Linda, and current wives Betty.
They were married on the same day. One Jim named his son James Allen,
his twin named his son James Allen. They both liked carpentry.
One made miniature picnic tables, and the other miniature rocking chairs.
The correlations that Bell's theorem discusses are so obviously twin-like,
so blatantly correlated that the natural thing would be to imagine that they, like these lambs
and Jims, have something approximating DNA. And that is where their mystery lies.
For what the theorem shows is just how strange and non-local, spooky those genes would have to be.
The person who most clearly presented the intellectual puzzle of Bell's theorem to non-physicists
was a solid state physicist named David Merman. And he first became aware of it in 1979
from a Scientific American article by Bell's friend, Bernard Despagnat. Merman hailed from
an opposite corner of the physics world from Bell, studying slow atoms chilled to a few degrees
above absolute zero. But soon Bell's hobby became his hobby too. He boiled Bell's theorem down to
something so simple that I could convey the argument using no mathematics beyond simple
arithmetic and no quantum mechanics at all. From these musings arose something between a
parable and a lecture demonstration, centering around a cartoon version of a three-part machine,
like the one that Bell described in Bertleman's Socks. This machine can be viewed in two ways.
It is a reified, more visual way to talk about the equations of quantum mechanics
and their predictions and results. It is also an abstraction of an apparatus that,
these days, may be found in any quantum optics lab. In the center is a box that,
at the push of a button, emits a pair of particles sending them in opposite directions.
On either side of the box, and far from it, sit two detectors. Each has a lever or crank on one side
that allows a person to realign its internal apparatus so that it measures the particle
along a different axis. We can turn the crank from the normal setting, which measures the
particle head-on, to the vertical setting, to the horizontal setting. Each detector also has
a light on top that, upon receipt of a particle, flashes either red or green.
Merman invites us to imagine that we have just come upon this machine with no further information.
Tinkering, we press Start. And shortly thereafter, each detector flashes red or green.
Garnering as much information as possible, we crank the detectors between the three settings,
all the while pressing the button and noting which lights come on.
Over several hours, we accumulate thousands and thousands of apparently random results.
But the results are not random. They are precisely what quantum mechanics predicts
for certain two particle situations. Looking them over, we find that we can divide the data
into two cases. Case one, when both detectors are on the same setting, they always flash
the same color, both green or both red. Case two, when the detectors are on different settings,
they flash red on one side and green on the other at least three quarters of the time.
In other words, the same color, both green or both red, flashes not more than 25% of the time.
These statistics, Merman remarks, may seem harmless enough, but some scrutiny reveals
them to be as surprising as anything seen in a magic show, and leads to similar suspicions of
hidden wires, mirrors, or confederates under the floor.
Consider the case when the detectors are on the same setting. The same lights always flash.
Given the unconnectedness of the detectors, there is one, and I would think only one,
extremely simple way to explain this behavior, Merman writes. We need only suppose that some
property of each particle, such as its speed, size, or shape, determines the color its detectable
flash for each of the three switch positions. They share some kind of genes. Twin particles
make twin lights flash. This is such a reasonable explanation that it is disheartening to realize
that the very same data prove it to be dead wrong. If we indeed have twin particles, with
properties that cause them to react identically when detected, then we can predict all the
conceivable results such particles might produce on this machine. The way to make this prediction
is first to list the different kinds of possible particles. One pair would trigger the red light
when the machine is on its normal setting, and the green light for vertical or horizontal,
another the green light only for the horizontal setting, and the red light otherwise.
Yet another pair would trigger the red light no matter what setting, and so on,
in eight different combinations. Having written these down, we can reason our way through each
pair's reactions to all nine possible pairs of settings, each time getting one of four results,
two red flashes, two green flashes, a green on the right, and a red on the left, or vice versa.
What we will find if we write down all the possible permutations is that particles such as these,
that is, particles that carry genes prepared to react in predetermined ways to any eventuality,
could never produce the results we actually got. Case one is the same as before, when both
detectors are on the same setting, the same lights always flash, but case two is very different.
When the detectors are on different settings, they flash red on one side and green on the other
less than two-thirds of the time. In other words, the same color flashes thirty-three
and a third percent of the time or more. Thirty-three and a third percent of the time, not twenty-five
percent. This is the kind of result known as Bell's inequality. It lay hidden for so long,
partly because no one, until Bell, thought to solve the equations of quantum mechanics for
the situations in which the detectors were not aligned, and compare these with the predictions
for particles with predetermined attributes. More than forty years after Bell's discovery,
the completely mystifying, unanswered question remains. If there are no connections between
the detectors, and if what is arriving at them is not a pair of particles bearing identical genes,
what in the world causes identical lights to flash when the detectors are on identical settings?
In a sense, Bell's argument in his theorem is really simple. To Bell it was, certainly, but
there's something about it, as he said, that nobody follows originally.
Because of this, Bell himself restated it in many ways, from his original five-line mathematical
proof in 1964 to several formulations that rely on analogy, more than one of which are contained
in Bertleman's socks. His friend, Bernard Despagnat, for example, humorously gave this analogy to
Bell's inequality. The number of young non-smokers, plus the number of woman smokers of all ages,
is greater than or equal to the total number of young women, smokers and otherwise.
It is a logical statement this trivial, a tautology, that quantum theory flouts. The problem is not
the logic, but the premises. That it makes sense simultaneously to assign gender, age, and tobacco
used to a person. Instead, in quantum theory, the whole seems to be greater than the sum of its parts.
The recoil of one ram from the headbutt of another, the lamb trotting up to the call of his mother,
the arrival of the coyote, and departure of the sheep. For all these correlations there is a cause
and effect. They all take place in time. The ram's hard head moves as fast as the ram's muscles and
hooves can carry him, covering perhaps ten meters in a second, roughly twenty miles per hour.
The call of the mother sheep travels both faster and farther, about a kilometer in three seconds,
nearly 750 miles per hour, on a chilly spring day. The speed of the diffusion of the telltale
smell of the coyote is slower and more arbitrary, and, even more than the yew's call, the diffusion
of this musk is at the mercy of the air. Local contingencies of temperature, pressure, and any
changes of these that form a wind all speed or slow its arrival in the quivering nostrils of a sheep.
The signal to the eye is the fastest one, since it occurs near the speed of light,
almost three hundred thousand kilometers per second. Compared this to the speed of sound,
one-third of a kilometer per second. This speed is almost inconceivably fast.
A ray of light could circle the earth seven times in a second. But it is, like the other
local influences, a speed. It is not instantaneous. With the possibility ruled out that Bell's
strangely connected particles start out complete with their synchronized instructions,
we might wonder if instead there is some kind of signaling going on.
Upon reaching the detector with the green and red lights,
one particle might somehow communicate with the other so they can coordinate the results.
On a visit to Paris in 1979, John Bell explained the problem with this idea by
telling a whimsical story about French TV. It has been feared that television is responsible for
the disturbing decline of birth rate in France. He was speaking to a group of physicists at the
University of Paris South in Orsay, who must have wondered what this had to do with quantum physics.
It is quite unclear which of the two main programs – Bell used the word in its old-fashioned sense
as channel – France 1 and 2, both originating in Paris, is more to blame. It has been advocated
that deliberate experiments be done, say in Lille and Lyon, to investigate the matter.
The local mayors might decide by tossing coins each morning which one of the two programs
would be locally relayed during the day. Bell noted that after enough time one could get a
pretty good sense for the number of conceptions in Lille and Lyon, respectively, after exposure to
one or the other channels. A joint distribution of probability involving both towns.
You might at first think it pointless to consider such a joint distribution,
expecting it to separate trivially into independent factors. Bell continued.
But a moment of reflection will convince that this will not be so. For example,
the weather in the two towns is correlated, although imperfectly. On fine evenings people
do not watch television, they walk in the parks, and are moved by the beauty of the trees, the
monuments, and of one another. This is especially so on Sundays.
The investigators must recognize such extraneous factors affecting both towns and remove their
effects from the analysis. It would be remarkable if the towns were still correlated after the
investigators had dealt with these extraneous causal factors. It would be even more remarkable
if the choice of program in Lille proved to be a causal factor in Lyon,
or if the choice of program in Lyon proved to be a causal factor in Lyon,
if the result of showing France won in Lyon produced a spike in pregnancies in Lyon.
But according to quantum mechanics, situations presenting just such a dilemma can be contrived.
Moreover, he came to the center of the problem. The peculiar long-range influence in question
seems to go faster than light. And that is impossible, as the theory of relativity shows.
Space and time are not constant realities unaffected by anything. Space, Einstein said,
is merely what we measure with a ruler. Time is what we measure with a clock. And as it turns out,
the faster an object goes, the more it compresses and the slower ticks any clock it might carry.
For example, its heartbeat. In fact, it compresses just enough, and its clock slows down just enough
that it can never reach the speed of light. Every day, accelerators like the one that John and
Mary Bell helped design, full of particles moving close to the speed of light, bear out in precise
detail Einstein's amazing predictions. 299,800 kilometers per second is the universe's absolute
speed limit. Two years after the Orsay talk, as Bell was publishing Bertelman's Socks, a young
experimental physicist there named Alaa Aspect, with an auspiciously Hercules Poirot-esque mustache,
was about to test if such a long-range influence really must be faster than the speed of light.
Rigging up something very much like the Bell-Merman machine, he found that the mysterious correlations
remained, unfazed no matter how fast he switched the settings on the detectors.
Physical signals traveling at mere light speed could not explain the results.
So there are no genes, and there is no signaling. The world is entangled in a beautiful and mysterious
way. At the beginning of the 21st century, after three quarters of a century of coexistence with
the idea, there is still no clear explanation of its magic. But it changes in the air.
One of the early people to think of trying to build something out of entanglement was Richard
Feynman. In 1981, the greatest and most famous physicist alive. He had actually been thinking
about Bell's theorem along the same lines as Merman had. One of the most beautiful papers
in physics that I know of is yours in the American Journal of Physics, Feynman wrote to Merman in
1984 when he had read it. All my mature life I have been trying to distill the strangeness of
quantum mechanics into simpler and simpler circumstances, he explained, which had led him
to craft a similar, but twice as complicated, Gdankin demonstration, when your ideally pristine
presentation appeared. Feynman had computers on his mind, and he had instantly seen that Bell's
theorem prohibited them from simulating nature on the quantum level. Characteristically, he viewed
this as an opportunity rather than a problem. At the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that
same year, as Aspect tweaked his machinery, Feynman brought Bell's inequality before a meeting of the
best computer scientists in the world. He challenged them to produce a new kind of computer. This
might hardly be recognizable to us as a computer. In fact, the first one made at the end of the
twentieth century was a liquid of specially engineered molecules in a tiny vial. But in
whatever form it takes, the person using it to compute will do so by manipulating the states of
quantum particles. Most important of Feynman, a quantum computer would use the magic of entanglement
and bring us to an understanding of it in the process. Not long after Feynman gave this speech,
a few brilliant minds proved some of the things such a computer might be able to do.
Most significant to non-physicists? A quantum computer could crack all the codes that the
security of our banks, government, and the Internet is based on. As experimental quantum physics groups
in physics departments all over the world turned their attention to the building of a quantum
computer, entanglement remains a mystery. But it is a mystery that gets better known all the time.
Physicists are beginning to look at the magical correlations at something as fundamental and
worth fathoming as energy or information. Famously, it was through machine building
that scientists began to understand both these fundamental ideas. In the nineteenth century,
advances in understanding energy were inseparable from the building and running of steam engines.
In the twentieth century, the rise of computers was inextricably intertwined with the rise of
information theory. In the twenty-first century, hands-on work on the quantum computer and quantum
cryptography, another entanglement-based miracle, will make us both more comfortable and more
awed at entanglement. But it was the twentieth century that first encountered entanglement,
and to tell the story of entanglement is to tell much of the story of quantum physics itself.
The story of entanglement begins near the start of the century with a suspicion of the
spookiness of the quantum theory. For centuries, physics had seemed to be on a relentless march
to total understanding of the world. The dawn of the twentieth century brought the news that the
deeper we delved into both matter and light, the more mysteries we would find.
The Arguments 1909-1935
Chapter 2 Quantized Light, September 1909-June, 1913
During the autumn in Salzburg, a hot, dry wind called the Thun sweeps down the slopes of the Alps
and through the chilly air of the city. It evaporates all haze and fog so that faraway
things appear suddenly clear. But the atmosphere is heavy and unpleasantly unseasonal. People
blame the Thun for their headaches and irritability. Albert Einstein, a rumpled and large-eyed thirty
year old in a straw hat, about to change his official career from patent clerk to professor,
came to Salzburg in late September of 1909 for his first physics conference.
With its pale stucco facades and copper-roofed towers, the city is known for its particularly
beautiful light. And light was what was on Einstein's mind.
Rooster-tail feathers and hummingbirds, the pearly inner chambers of shells and
the wing cases of beetles, soap-bubbles and oil-slicks, thick glass and dappled sunlight
through gaps between leaves. All these, examined closely, show light as a wave. It does not rain
down on us like the Schnellregen or straight-string rain downpours of Salzburg. It ripples and
interferes. While the actual interference is invisible, its calling card is striking.
Precise bands of darkness in places that a string rain of light would illuminate,
and precise bands of light in places that the imagined downpour of light drops would leave
in shadow. Color, moreover, is purely a wave phenomenon. It is the number of times a light
wave rises and falls per second, and each color bends differently when it strikes liquid or
striated surfaces, producing the iridescence of the soap-bubble or beetle. The understanding
of all these phenomena was the climax of centuries of study of electromagnetic radiation.
Light is merely the visible stretch of the electromagnetic spectrum, ranging from radio waves
bigger than a house to x-rays and gamma rays smaller than an atom. Then Einstein, in 1905,
came across the beginning of a great mystery. Sometimes light, so clearly a wave, seemed to
act like drops or particles. This mystery was as strange as the discovery of unicorn horns
on Arctic beaches. Such a discovery encourages some to dismiss it entirely, while others proclaim
the existence of magic-horned horses. Only a few will search for the narwhal, the Arctic whale to
whom the horn belongs. Einstein was going to Salzburg to tell his fellow physicists whom he
had never met that light was made of neither waves nor particles, but some currently incomprehensible
fusion of the two. But the real narwhal is a strange beast, stranger than the mythical unicorn.
Einstein was embarking on a quest to understand each particle of light and matter, as possessing
its own independence disentangled from all the others, its own local reality, its own unique,
separable state. This fifty-year search for separability led him again and again to its
nemesis, entanglement. And the clarity with which he reported his unwanted results made
this unsuccessful quest one of the most fruitful investigations of the twentieth century.
The year before the conference, Einstein's focus on light had reached an intense pitch.
I am incessantly busy with the question of the Constitution of Radiation, he wrote in 1908,
engaging in arguments by letter with H. A. Lawrence of Leiden, Holland, and Max Planck of Berlin,
the two preeminent theoretical physicists in the world, both more than two decades older than
Einstein. He found Planck, an utterly honest man who thinks of others rather than himself,
and because of this, he would show Planck more steadfast loyalty than he gave either of his own
wives. He has, however, Einstein decided in 1908, one fault. He is clumsy in finding his way about
foreign trains of thought. Lawrence, on the other hand, seemed to Einstein in 1908,
astonishingly profound, and by 1909 he was writing, I admired this man as no other. I would say I love
him. Einstein and Lawrence believed that Planck, in the last month of the nineteenth century,
had turned physics on its head. It had all started with light in a box, an image to which
Einstein would return repeatedly. In 1900, after years of work, Planck had come up with a formula
that predicted, for any given temperature, the energy carried by each color of light inside a
box. The box could be any size or shape, as long as it was empty and could hold heat.
In order to get the correct formula, Planck had to count energy in
quanta of a certain size, symbolized by HV. Quantum was nothing mysterious yet.
In German, it just means amount, while V stood for the color, that is, frequency of the light,
and H was a new, tiny, constant number. Then came Einstein's discovery in 1905,
that the data for bluer, high-frequency light, showed that Planck's discovery was not just a
counting device. Ultraviolet light, X-rays and gamma rays behaved, in or out of the box,
as if actually built from mutually independent energy quanta, atoms of light.
The man whose mathematical analysis they were all using to attack this problem was Ludwig
Boltzmann of Vienna, who had done more than anyone to demonstrate logically that matter was built of
atoms. But he lost himself in his ever-present depression and committed suicide in 1906 at
the age of 62. As that tragedy unfolded, his student, a twenty-five-year-old named Paul
Ehrenfest, showed that Planck's new formula had introduced something completely new that could
not be derived from, or even harmonized with, any physics that had gone before.
A pure wave theory led to wildly wrong predictions for high energy, high frequency light.
Ehrenfest dubbed the situation the ultraviolet catastrophe.
This quantum question is so uncommonly important and difficult, Einstein wrote in 1908,
that it should concern everyone. At the time, it hardly concerned anyone aside from himself,
Planck, Lawrence, and Ehrenfest. Early in May of 1909, Lawrence wrote Einstein a long and thoughtful
letter criticizing Einstein's particles of light. I must have expressed myself unclearly in regard
to the light quanta, Einstein replied late that month. That is to say, I am not at all of the
opinion that one should think of light as being composed of mutually independent quanta, localized
in relatively small spaces. What strange things would mutually dependent or non-local quanta be?
Einstein very much hoped that the truth, with further digging, would set him free of such
chimeras. On the way to Salzburg from his home in Switzerland, he had stopped in Munich to see
the only school teacher who had really inspired him, a doctor, Ruse, who taught fourth and fifth
grade languages and history. The perpetually amused, stubborn as a mule patent officer standing before
his old teacher had already accomplished much of what would later make him the most famous man in
the world. He had already shown that, though motion is relative to a reference point, the speed of
light and the laws of physics are not. He had already shown that energy and matter were transmutable,
e equals mc squared. But Dr. Ruse saw only Einstein's frayed clothes, thought he must be there to ask
for money, and sent him on his way. An inauspicious prelude to his first conference.
It is my opinion, Einstein explained, looking out at the assembled physicists in Salzburg,
but the next phase of the development of theoretical physics will bring us a theory of light that can
be interpreted as a kind of fusion of the wave and particle theories. The purpose of his speech,
he explained, would be to justify this opinion and to show that a deep change in our conception
about the nature and constitution of light is indispensable. He showed an increasingly skeptical
bewildered audience that Planck's formula actually required light to be a particle as well as a wave.
Planck immediately stood up after the mystified clapping died down.
He had come from a family of theologians on both sides, and he himself, with his serious eyes,
dignified mustache and thin frame, was in many ways the pastor of German physicists.
I will restrict myself naturally to the points where I have a different opinion from that of the
speaker, he said. He felt that Einstein had made a step that is in my opinion not yet necessary.
In any case, I think that we should first try to transfer the problem of quantum theory into
the area of interaction between matter and radiating energy. The belligerent Johannes
Stark stood up in Ponsnay and a sweeping mustache that dwarfed his handsome face.
He was a thirty-five-year-old Bavarian experimentalist, and, along with Planck,
he had merited one of the few footnotes in Einstein's light quantum paper of 1905.
Einstein, who was not sensitive enough to be bothered by difficult people,
seemed to have made a friend of Stark, who usually made only enemies.
For a decade, he would be Einstein's only light quantum follower. But, as Einstein's fame grew,
Stark's jealousy became a mania. When Hitler rose to power, Stark would lead the cry for
Einstein's blood and for the removal of Jewish physics from Germany.
In 1909, Stark recognized Einstein's valid point.
Originally, I, too, was of the same opinion, he said to Planck. However, there is one phenomenon
which forces us to think of electromagnetic radiation as separated from matter and concentrated in
space. Rentken rays, as x-rays were then called, can still act concentratively, with their full
force, on a single atom even at up to ten meters, the opposite of a wave diffusing out into the
world in ever-widening circles. There is something unique to Rentken rays, Planck agreed.
Stark has mentioned something in favor of the quantum theory. I wish to add a remark
against it. He continued. Most light behavior, most strikingly interference,
can hardly be explained by particles.
If a quantum interferes with itself, Planck said, it must have a spatial extension of hundreds of
thousands of wavelengths. How could a string rain of particles produce those neat bands of light
and shadow? Interference demands a wave explanation.
Stark responded confidently. The interference phenomena would probably be different with
very low radiation density. It would be three quarters of a century before this reasonable
statement could be shown to be false, when experiments would demonstrate that a single
light quantum could indeed interfere with itself.
Einstein stepped in, describing what he would later call his
Gershpensterfelder, ghost waves. An electron, he noted, is surrounded by an electric field,
and each quantum might similarly emanate a field through which these ghost waves would ripple.
On this hopeful note the meeting ended. In the ensuing years Einstein tried to make this
separable one wave per particle description work. The reason for the failure of this idea
would slowly emerge over the decades with ever greater clarity. Entanglement,
where two particles are not really separable because a single wave describes them.
I have not yet found a solution of the light quantum question,
Einstein wrote that New Year's Eve. All the same I will try to see if I cannot work out
this favorite problem of mine. By December 1910 things were no better.
The enigma of radiation will not yield. In the spring of 1911 he wrote to his best friend,
the engineer Michel Angelo Besso. I do not ask anymore whether these quanta really exist,
nor do I attempt any longer to construct them, since I now know my brain isn't capable of advancing
in that direction. He had spent three and a half years exclusively on light quanta and felt that
he had gotten nowhere. In June 1911 he turned to a new problem which would bring him his greatest
success. At present, he wrote in 1912, I occupy myself exclusively with the problem of gravitation.
But the non-separable and hence uncountable quanta remained in the back of his mind.
Even as he repeated that one cannot believe in the existence of countable quanta since the
interference properties of light are not compatible with it, he yearned for the straightforwardness
of separability. I still prefer the honest theory of quanta to the compromises found so far to replace it.
It was a warm June evening in Zurich in 1913.
Einstein was sitting in the garden of a coffee shop, an empty mug before him on the table.
With him were two of his lifelong friends, Ernfest and Max von Lau.
They had just come from a colloquium on von Lau's spectacular discovery in Munich the year before.
A crystal of blue copper sulfate with its regular rows of atoms, von Lau realized,
could diffract x-rays. That is, the gaps between the atoms would cause the x-rays to fan out in
concentric ripples on the other side, as waves do. These ripples, emerging from between each row
of atoms in the crystal, then interfered with each other, wave peak joining with wave peak,
to make a wave bigger than the sum of their heights, or trough canceling out peak, producing
nothing where two waves were before. Von Lau had immediately sent the photographs
to Einstein, who wrote back congratulating him. On your wonderful success, your experiment is
one of the finest things to have happened in physics. How Einstein's quanta fit into this
picture was still a mystery. Handsome, thoughtful and upright, even later in the midst of the
maelstrom of the Third Reich, von Lau was the son of a parapetetic Prussian officer whose career had
sent Max from town to town, school to school throughout his childhood. In 1903, Lau had
received his PhD under Plunk, whose first act was to introduce Lau to relativity. The enthralled
student then spent his summer vacation hiking through the Swiss mountains to meet its author
at the patent office in Bern. After he got over his shock that Einstein was a 24-year-old like
himself, the two talked for hours over cigars so awful that Lau let his, accidentally, fall in the
river. Already famous in Berlin for the high speeds at which he flew down the city streets on his
motorbike, in 1911 Lau published a book on relativity that Einstein regarded as a little
masterpiece. Aaron Fest, on the other hand, had faced the quantum head-on ever since hearing
a 1903 speech of Laurences. Although often suffering from depression, Aaron Fest usually
hit it with his exuberance, and his brilliant criticism would make him the conscience of physics.
He was an unconventional Viennese who had settled in St. Petersburg with his wife Tatiana, a Russian
physicist. But in chaotic pre-revolutionary Russia, much as he loved it, there were no
university positions open to him as a foreigner, a Jew, and an atheist. In 1912,
just as he had decided to move to Zurich to be near Einstein, which is what Lau had done the
same year, Laurence called him to be his successor at Leiden University, a place he would make supremely
home like to hundreds of visiting physicists while never feeling at home himself. Short
and broad-shouldered in his Russian, high-necked, belted tunic, his deep-set,
dark eyes sparkling under his bristling black hair, he would emphasize the crux of complicated
scientific concepts with words like, That's where the frog jumps into the water. Or,
in homage to Einstein, there's the patent claim. Lau had warned Aaron Fest the first time he met
Einstein, You should be careful that Einstein doesn't talk you to death. He loves to do that,
you know. But Aaron Fest could hold his own. On this, his second visit, Aaron Fest and Einstein
had been talking for five days straight, walking alone in the hazy, hot hills.
A few days before, an eager crowd of physicists had joined them on a local mountain,
while Einstein explained his work, Aaron Fest asking ever-sharper questions until it made sense.
His jubilant shout, I have understood it, still rang in Van Lau's ears.
Aaron Fest was now describing his struggles with the quantum theory to Einstein,
who nodded sympathetically. The more success the quantum theory has, the sillier it looks.
Aaron Fest turned to Van Lau.
Did he tell you about the park in Prague?
Van Lau shook his head.
Well, when I came to visit Einstein in Prague a year ago, Einstein, you tell it.
My office had a really quite nice view of a park with trees and gardens, said Einstein,
and people would walk in it. Some deep in thought, others gesticulating intensely at
each other in groups. Einstein grinned. The strange thing was, it was only women in the
morning and only men in the evening. And when I asked what was this place, they told me,
it's the Bohemian insane asylum.
Aaron Fest turned to Van Lau. And he said,
those are the madmen who did not occupy themselves with the quantum theory.
Chapter 3 The Quantized Adam
November 1913
The late November fog accompanied Max von Lau and Otto Stern most of the way up the Uteleberg.
It was five months after Aaron Fest's visit. They were hiking the little mountain on this
gloomy day because they knew that its peak was above the clouds in the sun. That morning,
in the fog-bound streets, Stern and Van Lau had seen yellow placards reading,
Uteleberg, hell. Mount Utele, light.
Lau and Stern had only recently become locals. Lau, a professor at the University of Zurich,
and Stern, a lecturer at the ETH. The letters stand for
the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology. But it is always known by its initials, the
Like the Alsatian Lau, Stern had grown up on the much disputed fringes of Bismarck's booming
German empire in Silesia, the as yet unknown and ordinary town of Auschwitz sat on its border.
Stern was a decade younger than Van Lau. Chunky, long chinned, radiating good humor. He would
brilliantly occupy the border between theory and experiment, but he was so clumsy that he would
do anything to avoid handling the more breakable equipment once he had become a professor with
assistance to do it for him. Even if it was toppling over, you do less damage if you let
the thing fall than if you try to catch it, he would explain, gesturing with his cigar.
Spending his own money to join Einstein in Prague in 1911, he had been Einstein's
sole confidant there. The memories of those beautiful days would bring tears to his eyes
when Stern was an old man exiled by the Nazis on the other side of the world.
On top of the Utla Berg, taking deep breaths of the cold air while sweat chilled between
their shoulder blades, they looked out across the white sea of fog. The city behind them had vanished.
Instead, they saw the thunderous Alps, the snowy trinity of the Eiger, the Monk, and the Virgin,
and the precipitous dark steeple of the Finster Ahorn. The two men made a funny silhouette
against this view, the short and semi-spherical Stern beside the tall and angular Van Lau.
They were talking about the atom, as everyone they knew seemed to be. Ever since it became clear
in 1911 that the atom was something like a tiny solar system, its sun, the positively charged
nucleus, exerting a constant electrical pole on its planets, the negatively charged electrons,
there were problems. A charged object, like an electron, is inseparable from the electric field
it emanates. If it moves, it generates a magnetic field, too. And if it changes its speed, speeding
up, slowing down, or turning, that change makes a wave in the electric and magnetic field surrounding
it. This electromagnetic wave is what we call light. The electrons, charged and orbiting the
heart of the atom, should be making constant light wave ripples in their electromagnetic fields,
leaking energy with each wave until every atom in the universe goes flat like a punctured tire.
This, of course, does not happen. In 1913, a few weeks before Stern and Van Lau climbed the Utla
Berg, the theoretical problem of the inexplicably stable atom had been declared solved by an
unknown 28-year-old Danish physicist, Niels Bohr, just returned home to Copenhagen after a year
in Manchester, England. It had taken him 71 dense pages, and his explanation was illogical.
Rather than radiating light all the time, Bohr said the electrons would emit light
only when they made a kind of ineffable transition, the famous quantum jump.
These jumps, or leaps, were nothing like the smooth bounding of a cat. They were a baffling,
quantized, all or nothing disappearance in one orbit, and emergence in another,
like Earth suddenly materializing in the orbit of Mars. The quantum leaps alone were like nothing
that had ever happened in a physical theory before, but just as unsettling was the frequency of light
that the leaping electron emitted. We perceive the frequency of light as color, but the concept
of frequency applies to anything that cycles, from literally round objects like wheels to things
like the seasons that recur in a cyclical way. The frequency of a carousel, for example, is the
number of times per minute the spotted pony with your little sister on it passes while you stand
and wave. Inside the carousel, a record player cranks out a tinkly band organ tune. The frequency
of the record is its number of rotations per minute, rpm, which is directly related to the
frequency of the sound produced. If the operator happens to set the turntable at a slow 33 and a
third rpms to play a 45 rpm record, the tinkling sound will deepen into a tired pizzicato, while
the opposite mistake will produce a manic speed jingle. But in Bohr's Atom, the frequency of
the electron's orbit is not the same as the frequency of the light it emits. Incredibly,
it is a single, pure frequency equal to the difference between the energies of the starting
and ending orbits, divided by Planck's constant h, as if the electron radiating the light
already knew where it was going to stop.
It's just absurd. I don't think it's physics at all, said Van Lau, finally, turning from the view.
He has simply stabilized the atom by fiat.
Stern grinned. The dictator.
Van Lau laughed a little in his frustration.
They sat staring again at the peaks in the distance. Then they both turned to each other and said,
Have you talked to Einstein?
At this last colloquium when they presented Bohr's theory, Van Lau said,
I stood up at the end and said—
He looked at Stern with a practical expression on his face.
But this is nonsense. If an electron is going in a circular orbit, it has to radiate light.
Stern nodded. But Einstein, he said,
Very curious. There must be something to it.
Van Lau gave Stern a quick glance.
He said that he didn't believe it was pure chance that the Reidberg constant could be
predicted so accurately in terms of basic constants.
The Reidberg constant had been for thirty years an unexplained number in the equation
predicting the colors of light each element of the periodic table might emit.
Bohr's preposterous theory had accidentally and effortlessly yielded this heretofore arbitrary
number, producing meaning where before there had only been mandate.
Well, Van Lau finally said. When he really thinks about it, he won't like the Bohr theory.
I agree, said Stern. This dictatorial decision, laying out flight paths and ordering inexplicable
jumps for the electrons, it might seem successful right now, but it's not physics.
With a sardonic expression, Van Lau commented,
Someone should stand up and stop this nonsense.
Stern, with a mock elegiac tone in his voice, harked back to the fabled fourteenth-century
birth of Swiss democracy. The lone man with two arrows. Where is Willem Tell?
Where are the men of the rootly oath?
Getting into the spirit of Schiller's famous play, Van Lau quoted from it.
No, there is a limit to the tyrant's power. He and Stern were unwilling to accept a dictator,
no matter how benevolent. They both were laughing now.
Do you solemnly swear, Max Lau—Stern grinned and corrected himself—Max
Van Lau, to give up physics if Bohr turns out to be right?
Max's father had been bestowed with hereditary nobility that year, hence the
fawn. Van Lau grinned widely.
Absolutely. I wouldn't be able to stand it. And you, Otto Stern, do you swear?
How does the rootly oath go? asked Stern. Something about the
inalienable and indestructible stars?
No, said Van Lau, stretching out his hand. They were on the Utle Berg, after all.
We need new words, he said, beginning to grin. Stern caught on. For the Utle oath.
Swear by the atom, said Van Lau.
The atom, ever since Greek philosophers in the fifth century BC first postulated it,
has been one of the great mysteries. Is all matter? You, the chair you're sitting in,
the air you're breathing, ultimately composed of the same building blocks?
What would such an ultimate building block be like?
People fumbled through philosophy trying to find an answer. Then, in the mid-18th century,
an inquisitive Scotsman, Thomas Melville, burned table salt and looked through a prism
at the light produced, as Isaac Newton had once looked through a prism at white light
and seen the rainbow spectrum. Melville did not see a rainbow spectrum. He saw
only a pair of yellow-orange stripes, surrounded by darkness.
Sixty-two years later, Josef von Fraunhofer looked through a prism at the sun while calibrating
surveying lenses for a military supply company. He noticed for the first time that there were
dark lines across Newton's rainbow spectrum. The rainbow was, in fact, missing two chunks
of warm yellow, as if it were the salt spectrum turned inside out. This coincidence went unexplored
for almost half a century, until Gustav Kirchhoff, a dapper little physicist who walked about the
medieval halls of the University of Heidelberg on crutches, deduced why that chunk of yellow was
missing. It had been absorbed by the sodium gas swirling about the sun, table salt being sodium
chloride. Coming to his aid was his closest friend, the gentle giant Robert Bunson, who,
twenty years earlier, had lost the sight in one eye due to a sliver of glass from an exploding
petri dish. At present Kirchhoff and I are engaged in a common work that doesn't let us sleep,
Bunson explains to a friend in 1859. Kirchhoff has made a wonderful, entirely unexpected discovery
in finding the cause of the dark lines in the solar spectrum.
Kirchhoff's discovery meant that gases, even from great distances, could be identified by
their characteristic spectra. The composition of the stars was suddenly an open book.
Burned in a sufficiently hot flame that would not produce spectra of its own,
earth elements, even in miniscule quantities, also would declare their names.
Bunson conceived of the necessary burner, while Kirchhoff jerry-rigged an accurate spectroscope,
nothing more than a prism protected by a blackened cigar box, and viewed through throwaway
telescope ends. Hitherto unknown elements began to appear, Bunson wrote.
I have been very fortunate with my new metal. I shall name it Caesium,
because of its beautiful blue spectral line. Next Sunday I expect to find time to make the
first determination of atomic weight. Helium, from the sun, was discovered this way,
and a cascade of new elements followed. A small brotherhood of scientists was making spectroscopy
its obsession. The first volume alone of the Handbuch der Spektroskopie, a list of spectral
lines published in 1900, was 800 pages long. No one knew what mechanism was behind them,
and Bohr remembered, in his idiosyncratic English, that the spectra seemed marvellous,
but it is not possible to make progress there. Just as if you have the wing of a butterfly,
then certainly it is very regular with the colours and so on, but nobody thought that one
could get the basis of biology from the colouring of the wing of the butterfly.
Born in a mansion in Copenhagen that buzzed with the welcoming late-night talk of his father,
a physiologist several times proposed for the Nobel Prize in Medicine, and his father's three best
friends, a linguist, a philosopher, and a physicist, all intellectuals renowned in Denmark,
Bohr let a charmed childhood. He was an impulsive and wild child who did not know his own strength
and in scuffles could leave his friends black and blue. But he was also a boy with an enormous
smile almost entirely without malice. His kindness and modesty, coupled with his sometimes insensitive
strength, wielded intellectually when he was no longer a boy, would be noted throughout his life.
He had arrived in England, the land of subatomic exploration in 1911, when he was 26 years old.
He came to study with J. J. Thompson, the discoverer of the electron a decade or so earlier,
and leader of the cadre of bright young experimenters among the cobwebs and neogothic
hallways and leaky ceilings of Cambridge's great Cavendish laboratory.
One of those bright young experimenters, the New Zealand-born Ernst Rutherford,
was at the forefront of research into the mysterious phenomenon of radioactivity.
Bohr sought him out at his new professorship in Manchester, where Rutherford had just that
year discovered the atomic nucleus. The newly fatherless Bohr became friends almost instantly
with Rutherford, fourteen years his senior. They were both gregarious, natural leaders.
Rutherford beloved for his loud but mostly tuneless rendition of
onward Christian soldiers to inspire his atomic investigators.
They were also both outdoorsmen and football players. Bohr's brother Harold was a silver
medal Olympian. In the summer of 1912, his English year almost up,
Bohr described his atomic hypothesis for Rutherford.
It is chosen as the only one which seems to offer a possibility of an explanation
of the whole group of experimental results, which gather about, and seems to confirm
conceptions of the mechanisms of the radiation as the ones proposed by Planck and Einstein.
Rutherford, who believed that a theory is not complete, unless you can explain it to a barmaid,
thought that Bohr needed some editing. Bohr was not at all interested in being edited.
Instead, back in Copenhagen, he stumbled across a spectroscopic equation,
published in 1885, the year he was born. Its author was the late Johann Jacob Bommer.
At the time Bommer wrote his equation, he was a sixty-year-old teacher at a girl's school in
Basel, Switzerland. The equation predicted the locations of yet unseen spectral lines,
and, in the intervening thirty years, it had proved uncommonly accurate.
In Bohr's hands, this equation describing the butterfly wing colors
became a tool to see inside the atom. Fraunhofer's partially censored rainbow
was the absorption spectrum. The censored colors were the frequencies of light that the atom could
absorb, the leaps that its electrons were allowed to make outward into higher energy orbits.
Melville's burning salt spectrum was just the reverse, the emission spectrum,
with the electrons leaping inward toward the lowest orbit, the ground state,
losing energy by the emission of light. That fall of 1913, when Bohr published his paper,
and von Lauen Stern vowed to give up physics if he was right, Einstein was visiting Vienna.
There, he chanced upon Georg von Hevesi, a Hungarian experimentalist who was a good friend of Bohr's.
I asked him about his view of your theory, Hevesi wrote Bohr and his characteristically erratic
English. He told me it is a very rare interesting one, if it is right, and so on.
Faint praise, remarks Einstein's friend and biographer Abraham Pace, as I know from having
heard him make that comment on other occasions. Hevesi then told Einstein that Bohr had been able
to explain a mysterious series of spectral lines in starlight as belonging to helium.
Bohr's theory had produced a result in exact agreement with the experimental value,
an unheard of feat in the field of spectroscopy.
The big eyes of Einstein looked still bigger, Hevesi reported to Rutherford. He was extremely
astonished and told me, with his excitement, Hevesi's spelling grows more scattershot,
then the frequency of the light does not depend at all on the frequency of the electron,
and this is an enormous achievement. The theory of Bohr must be then right.
He confided to Rutherford. I felt very happy hearing Einstein saying so.
But the reaction of von Laue and Stern was far more common than the reaction of Einstein.
Bohr's work on the quantum theory, in the film ag, has driven me to despair, wrote Aaron Fest
to Lawrence. If this is the way to reach the goal, he continued, I must give up doing physics.
He liked to congratulate students with, and now you've pulled the whole rat out of the soup.
Bohr, he felt, had left a lot of rat in the soup. He proceeded to ignore what he referred to as the
completely monstrous Bohr model. Before most physicists had absorbed the abstractions of
the Bohr atom, and in the midst of the shortages and hardships of the First World War, in 1915,
Einstein produced general relativity, science's greatest work of art.
The earth turns about the sun, but according to general relativity, the sun also turns about the
earth. There is no reference frame that is the correct one from which all the spinning of the
worlds might be viewed. No fixed stars, no stationary observer.
General relativity is necessary to explain not only galaxies in their courses,
but also the tiniest subatomic particle hurtling down from the sky. It is famously
not amenable to quantization. And if Einstein had to pick between the two,
he would choose relativity.
Ehrenfest wrote in 1917 that he only wanted a general point of view which may trace the
boundary between the classical region, which covered non-quantized physics including relativity,
and the region of the quanta, a yearning that in the ensuing years Bohr would be glad to satisfy.
Einstein, on the other hand, wanted a single unified physics and would not be happy with such a truce.
In 1919 Bohr came to Ehrenfest's Leiden University, speaking earnestly with a
soft voice, indistinct pronunciation and involved sentences, carefully qualified as to exclude
possibilities which it was often unduly flattering to suppose one had considered, as J. J. Thompson's
son, G. P., described it in classic British understatement. Bohr lectured on his atom,
accompanying his elliptical explanations were intricate hypnotizing drawings of electron
orbits criss-crossing about a central dot, the Bohr atom. It was to be both the first and last
quantum icon before all such images vanished into clouds of abstraction. Bohr explained that these
orbits were not to be taken exactly literally, but few could hear while everyone could see the
beautiful planetary drawings. Everyone could also see the success of the Bohr theory, even
if they couldn't understand it. Ehrenfest was won over by the theory and the man himself.
Ehrenfest writes enthusiastically about Bohr's theory of atoms. He is visiting him,
Einstein wrote in 1921, to his lifelong friend and colleague, Max Born, whom he had met at
that speech in Salzburg. If Ehrenfest is convinced, there must be something in it, for he is a skeptical
fellow. Chapter 4 The Unpicturable Quantum World, Summer 1921
Do you honestly believe, asked Fernar Heisenberg sitting in the grass beside his bike one late
summer afternoon, that such things as electron orbits really exist inside the atom? He took
a bite of cheese and looked over at Wolfgang Pauli, who was lying in the grass like the dead.
Otto Laporte was drinking the sweet drafts of the really thirsty, holding his canteen above his head.
Pest the cheese, said Pauli, without moving. Heisenberg was 19. Pauli was only a year and a
half older, but had just completed his PhD in Munich under Max von Laus's friend and former
colleague Arnold Sommerfeld, with whom Heisenberg was also studying. Laporte was about to turn 19,
and had come to Munich only a semester earlier from Frankfurt am Main, where his family had lived
until the German army took over their house. Laporte and Pauli had met as fellow sufferers
in the eight-hour-long, old-fashioned experimental physics class of the dignified Nobel laureate
Wilhelm Wien. The three boys had escaped on a bicycle trip in a whore of enthusiasm.
Probably the only time Wolfgang dared enter my world, the outdoorsman Heisenberg wrote of his
urban friend. He passed the cheese and squinted at the dusty road that led to the top of the
Kesselberg. A noise came up from the grass. Pauli, re-fortified, but still lying down, said,
I know, the whole thing seems a myth. He sat up with a huge effort, his heavy-litted eyes almost
closed in the midday sun. He has a secretive face, thought Heisenberg when he first met Pauli
the year before. Pauli and Heisenberg on first meeting could hardly have seemed more different.
Heisenberg was blonde, thin, like a simple farm boy, as his Professor Max Born thought when he
first met him. Pauli, dark-haired, already a little overweight, constantly oscillating and rocking,
spent his extracurricular time in coffee houses and nightclubs.
The physics brought them together. They were already the rising stars of their profession.
In 1920 Pauli had written a monumental 200-page review explaining all of general relativity,
mathematically forbidding even to experts, which had impressed Einstein himself.
And in the confused infant field of quantum theory, both of them were starting to produce
original ideas under the inspired and unusually laissez-faire guidance of Sommerfeld in Munich.
Le Porte managed not to be over-odd. Heisenberg liked his directness, the matter-of-fact expression
behind his big, clunky, dark-rimmed glasses, his easy smile, and his interest in everything.
The talks we began during that tour and continued in Munich, Heisenberg remembered later,
were to have a lasting effect. The difficulty of picturing the quantum world as made of either
waves or particles would lead Heisenberg and Pauli to deny the usefulness of striving for
pictures at all, while Bohr would advocate holding two contradictory pictures in mind.
For pictures are always simpler than what they describe, and oversimplicity can mislead.
But just as deceptive is a repudiation of pictures, nothing is better than language for
drawing an intricately vague veil over truth. It would turn out that what was obscured by
an image-free description of quantum mechanics, or by Bohr's cubist description that welcomed
contradictory pictures, was entanglement. You know, Pauli continued, Bohr has succeeded in
associating the strange stability of atoms with Planck's quantum hypothesis, which has not yet
been properly interpreted either, but I can't for the life of me see how, since he is unable
to get rid of the contradictions. Well, said Le Porte, we should only use such words and concepts
as can be directly related to sense-perception. Pauli's eyes almost closed. Ah, Mock. He always
sounds so plausible, just like the devil. Ernst Mock was one of the main influences on
19th-century German physics, famous for his belief in positivism, according to which only
observables had any meaning. Pauli's eyes opened. He's my godfather, actually.
What? said Heisenberg. He's my godfather, said Pauli, nodding rhythmically. Evidently,
he was a stronger personality than the priest, and the result seems to be that I am baptized
anti-metaphysical instead of Catholic. His apartment was chock-full of prisms, spectroscopes,
stroboscopes, electrifying machines. When I visited him, he always showed me a nice experiment,
for the purpose of correcting thought processes, which are always untrustworthy and cause delusions
and errors. Pauli grinned. He always presumed his own psychology to be generally valid,
but his positivistic doctrine was a waste of time.
Laporte annoyed, said, didn't Einstein arrive at his theory of relativity by sticking to Mock's
doctrine? Heisenberg nodded. I think, said Pauli, gesturing with his wedge of cheese,
that that is a crude oversimplification.
What's wrong with sticking to observables? asked Laporte.
Mock did not believe in atoms because he could not observe them,
said Pauli, with a firm sideways look at Laporte. He was led astray by the very principle
you're defending, and, as far as I am concerned, this was not by chance.
Heisenberg's brow furrowed. Laporte said,
mistakes are no excuse for making things more complicated than they are.
Well, you'll write about that. And my opinion is, these orbits should be the first thing to go.
But Sommerfeld loves them. He relies on experimental results and atomisticism,
Pauli continued. For an instant he raised his eyebrows.
Atomisticism? said Laporte.
Pauli laughed, rocking a little more. This was a word Sommerfeld students had coined to describe
what was, by 1921, called the Bohr-Sommerfeld model of the atom, an acknowledgment of all
the improvements Sommerfeld had made to it. With each improvement the results grew more accurate,
but the whole theory needed to be taken on faith. You'll find that Sommerfeld talks about
the atomic music of the spheres and believes very deeply in numerical links.
Success sanctifies the means, Heisenberg told Pauli with defiance.
Pauli's mouth turned down in amusement. He took a bite from his salami,
reclined against the grass, and then said, Sometimes I think I will be the one to come
up with the next step. His eyes were almost closed, like a Buddha.
But then, the eyes snapped open, Perhaps it's easier to find one's way if one isn't too familiar
with the magnificent unity of classical physics. You two have a decided advantage there.
With a malicious grin he added, But then, lack of knowledge is no guarantee of success.
Heisenberg did not dignify this elaborate jibe with anything but the most oblique of
comebacks. All right, I think it's time we hit the road again, he said in his youth leader voice.
Don't you, Otto?
Absolutely, said La Porte with a grin. Pauli looked up at the steep wooded hill ahead and
muttered, How I let myself get dragged back to nature by a disciple of Saint John Jacques Rousseau
I don't know. As an aside to Otto, he said, Did you know he sleeps in a tent?
No, La Porte didn't. He sleeps in a tent, gets up at some hour I don't even want to think about.
Wolfgang's usually rising and shining at about the crack of noon, said Heisenberg parenthetically.
He gets up while the stars are still out, Pauli continued, and hikes for an hour.
But does this get him to class? La Porte was grinning, Pauli getting deep into his exegesis.
No, no. Then he has to board a train, which he rides into civilization, and finally,
our Wandervogel arrives at Sommerfield's lecture, which, as you know, starts at 9 a.m.
Or so rumour would have him believe, said Heisenberg, he hasn't ever experimentally verified
that that's when Sommerfeld starts lecturing.
I'm a theorist, said Pauli. I leave that to other people.
Heisenberg, laughing, swung one leg over his bike and started again up the hill,
and the world, as it always did, slid away from him. As a child he had been the sickly,
hurt and withdrawn little brother of the more favoured son, Irwin,
Werner's father, a professor of Greek at the University of Munich by the time Werner was
eight, had fostered constant intellectual competition between the two boys. The young
Werner had learned both to force himself to excel in things that did not come naturally,
and to escape into the woods when the effort of it all became too much.
The lonely little brother, who had once almost died of a lung infection,
became a mountaineer, skier, and the trustworthy and protective confidant for a circle of Boy Scout
friends. Pauli's childhood, on the other hand, had been secure and always boring.
All the excitement had happened two years before his birth, when his grandfather died,
and his father, like Boers, a famous medical scientist, reinvented himself, converting from
Judaism to Catholicism, changing his name from Pashares to Pauli, moving from Prague to Vienna.
Pauli's mother was a vivid, vocal, and ultimately despairing feminist and socialist writer,
and Pauli learned from her to loathe the initially popular Great War, but he never took up newspaper
reading. In a small high school class that would produce two Nobel Prize winners, two famous actors,
and a host of professors, Pauli was the class clown, organizing elaborate pranks and imitating
his professors with deadly accuracy. As a college student, he would sharpen his
wit on evenings out on the town, and, upon his late night return to his desk, produce his best work.
For Heisenberg, it was hikes and wanderings that gave him the best chance to think.
And now, toiling up the hairpin turns of the Kesselberg, he was mulling over the news from
Frankfurt of a fascinating experiment that had been in progress when La Porte left for Munich.
Eight years earlier, with Van Lau, Stern had sworn to give up physics if Boer was right.
Instead of fulfilling his vow, he was putting Boers' atom to the test.
Each atom is surrounded by the magnetic fields produced by its circulating electrons.
Sommerfeld had shown that their north poles could point only in a quantized number of directions.
Turning a deaf ear to those who told him not to take these things too literally,
Stern decided to investigate this prediction, and he was lucky enough to have,
as the head of the department in Frankfurt, Max Born.
Born was a self-sacrificing team player, a decorous revolutionary.
Like Stern, he was from Silesia, a motherless child with a sad, distant father,
like Boers and Pauly's a medical researcher, and overbearing, wealthy, maternal grandparents.
With his sensitive, boyish face and eyes defensively squinted against the world,
he struggled with, and sometimes overcompensated for, a lifelong insecurity, hardly shored up by
his marriage to Heidi, an unstable playwright. But when they moved to Berlin at the beginning
of the Great War, a shockingly confident and free-spirited presence entered their lives
in the form of Einstein, who became their dearest friend.
Living alone nearby, he took to stopping in for conversation and music.
Born later described that, dark, depressing time, with much hunger and anxieties, as
one of the happiest periods of our life, because we were near Einstein.
Einstein declared prophetically in 1920 when Born was trying to decide whether or not to move to
Frankfurt. Theoretical physics will flourish wherever you happen to be. There was no other Born
to be found in Germany today. With a knife-shaped magnet designed by the young experimentalist
Walter Gerlach, an unofficial member of Born's lively cutting-edge theoretical department,
and financing, in those grim, money-starved days, from an American philanthropist and
from Born's sold-out lectures on relativity, Stern was observing one of his trademark molecular
beams. This was a ray of hot, gaseous silver atoms that passed through the magnetic field
created by Gerlach's magnet to strike a screen on the other side.
Classical pre-quantum physics would predict a single smeared clump of silver on the screen as the
result. Each atom on its flight approaches the magnetic field tilted at a slightly different
angle, which affects its response to the big magnet, and thus each would land on the screen in a
slightly different place, not too far from the middle. But Sommerfeld, trusting his quantized
calculations, said that the silver atoms should hit the collecting screen in three neat piles,
and he could predict the distance separating them. But what Stern and Gerlach found, no one
had predicted. No silver atoms ended up in the center. The atomic beams split neatly into two
discrete beams, exactly as far apart as Sommerfeld had predicted, though. The response of the atoms
to the field was even more quantized and less classical than Bohr and Sommerfeld had expected.
The atoms had made a yes or no, up or down, either or, response to the field.
The Stern-Gerlach experiment was a sensation among physicists when it was published in 1922,
and it was such an extreme result that many who had doubted the quantum ideas were converted. Bohr
saw the apparent contradictions inherent in quantum theory, emerging more strongly.
A paper by Einstein and Ehrenfest, in which they had tried to understand what Stern's silver atoms
did as they passed through the two halves of Gerlach's magnet, rang an alarm bell for him.
As they exposed so clearly, the Stern-Gerlach experiment presented with unsurmountable difficulties
any attempt at forming a picture of the behavior of atoms in a magnetic field.
Einstein and Bohr would draw different morals from this difficulty of forming a picture of
atomic behavior. Bohr would soon say it couldn't be done. The behavior of atoms and their insides
were irreducibly unvisualizable. Einstein would say there was something wrong with the physics
that would come to this conclusion. One thing was sure. Quantization occurred.
There was no real explanation beyond that fact, much as Sommerfeld might decorate it with musings
on atomic harmony. As Heisenberg remembered, this peculiar mixture of incomprehensible mumbo-jumbo
and empirical success quite naturally exerted a great fascination on us young students.
It would take three years for a solution to emerge. Started as soon as they got back to Munich in a fit
of inexplicable inspiration by Heisenberg and clarified, corrected, and tied to reality by
Pauly, a pattern that the friends would repeat many times. Heisenberg made the math work by
introducing a half-quantum into Sommerfeld's equation, horrifying his professor's mystical
leanings. That is absolutely impossible. The only fact we know about quantum theory is that we have
integral numbers and not half-numbers. Dryly Pauly suggested that his friend would next introduce
quarter-quanta, then one-eighth-quanta, and, in no time, the whole quantum theory will crumble to
dust in your capable hands. But eventually Pauly found that the half-quanta described something
real about the electron. Real, but impossible to visualize. The electron seems to be spinning,
but this is no spin anyone has ever seen. What should be a complete rotation is only
halfway around to an electron. It must spin two full times to reach its starting point again.
No one understands what this means. But the electrons that spin in one direction are attracted
to one pole of the Stern-Gerlach magnet, and electrons that spin in the opposite direction
are drawn the other way. Two piles. Because three hundred sixty degrees is only halfway
around for electrons, they are called by the ungainly name of spin one-half particles.
These deeper mysteries were still in the future when Heisenberg, on his bike, reached the saddle
of the steep mountain road where it prepared to plunge precipitously down to the Valschensee,
a cup of blue among the mountains. He was light-headed from the exertion and the view.
Laporte, with the sound of tires breaking on the dirt, joined him in silence.
This was Goethe's first view of the Alps, said Heisenberg finally.
After a while Pauly appeared, muttering to himself. Then the breeze, like a brook running
through the still day, met him, and he saw the view. He stood, rocking gently, gazing with
those mysterious eyes out over the Valschensee. Finally he broke the spell.
Now I am going to teach you to some physics. Today's lesson is on momentum, speed times mass.
And he took off down the mountain road. Laporte and Heisenberg, laughing, leaped on their bikes,
trying to catch him. But soon their wheels were turning faster than they could pedal.
They swerved down switchbacks, wide grins spread across their faces, the whirring of the tires,
the air thrumming through the hair on their arms and tearing tears from their eyes,
the flash of a sail on the lake in the sun. Everything became an ecstatic blur,
each boy inside his own blurry bubble, quivering to his own heartbeat.
Pauly's greater mass and hence greater momentum had carried him farther than the other two.
The giddy descent done, he was still coasting while they pedaled again to catch him.
The lakeshore beneath the Alps was striped with the gray-skinned trunks of knobby beaches
leaning out over the water. Heisenberg was still exhilarated. He loved the medieval towns,
the little bucks that leaped about on cloven hooves up the cliffs, and these valleys, these lakes,
these ever-present mountains. How could anyone live anywhere else but Bavaria?
He looked at his two companions and knew that they did not feel the same. Not Pauly,
the child of the Viennese coffee shops, the cobblestone streets, the electric light,
nor Laporte, with his dreams of America. But for Heisenberg the beauty had sometimes
been the only thing keeping him going, through the years of the Great War, nearly starving in
the turnip winter and then the catastrophic unexpected defeat, and the civil war afterward,
the Red Terror, the White Terror. Like many others all over Germany, he had driven oxen,
carried guns, and sneaked through enemy lines in the dark to get food for his family.
There were five years of horror and upheaval while his elders repeatedly,
frighteningly proved that they had no idea how to live or run a country.
A generation of intellectual German boys, Heisenberg among them, decided to ignore politics,
with its commonness and militarism, to find a higher order. And many of them did,
and said nothing when Hitler gained power.
In a decade, these three boys' lives would be completely changed. In Ann Arbor, Michigan,
Laporte would be an American citizen. The half-Jewish Pauly would flee because of the racial laws,
first to Zurich, and finally to Princeton. And Heisenberg would remain, trying to save German
science and his own skin from the barbarians. A saying occurs to me that ends thus,
but if it sinks in shining splendor, still it shines a long way back. Heisenberg wrote to
his mother in the waning months of 1930, I believe as long as we ourselves are in this world,
we must be satisfied with feeling this shining back.
About ten years ago, he told his mother, that was the most beautiful time of my life.
Chapter 5 On the Streetcar, Summer, 1923
Niels Bohr is riding the streetcar to pick up the world traveling, and, after the astronomical
confirmation of general relativity in November 1919, suddenly world famous, Einstein, at the
port of Copenhagen. With him is Arnold Sommerfeld, visiting from Munich.
Einstein has just given a speech in Sweden, making up for his non-attendance at his Nobel
Prize ceremony in December 1922. Van Lau, hearing that Einstein was planning a trip to Asia that
year, had written him, in barely cryptic fashion the September before the prize was awarded,
according to information I received yesterday and which is certain,
events may occur in November which might make it desirable for you to be present in Europe in
December. Consider whether you will nevertheless go to Japan. The year after Van Lau's oath with
Stern on top of the Utla Berg, he himself had become a Nobel Laureate for his beautiful
interference experiment, showing X-rays to be waves. Seven years later, the Nobel committee
was recognizing Einstein for suggesting that they were particles.
Einstein's fame had soured somewhat. On June 24, 1922, his friend, Walter Ratanow,
the German Foreign Minister, was assassinated. The latest of more than 300 prominent Jews
assassinated in the postwar search for scapegoats. Einstein knew he might well be next.
It is no art to be an idealist if one lives in cloud cuckoo land, he wrote in a eulogy for
Ratanow. He, however, was an idealist even though he lived on earth and knew its smell better than
almost anyone else. Einstein himself only barely lived on earth, but enough so that he saw it was
time for him to disappear for a while. The faithful Van Lau took his place at a lecture overrun with
anti-relativity and anti-semitic demonstrators, including Stark, who had received his own Nobel
Prize in December 1919, but almost no recognition for it, as all eyes were on Einstein.
Van Lau understood when, in December 1922, despite the forthcoming Nobel Prize,
Einstein sailed as far from Europe as he could.
Independent from a young age, Einstein had renounced his German citizenship at 16. His father,
a repeatedly hopeful but mostly unsuccessful small businessman, who had long before suppressed
his own mathematical inclinations owing to the prohibitive expense of university,
had moved the family from Ulm across Bavaria to Munich, to Pavia, near Milan, and then to Milan
and then to Milan itself. Through all the entrepreneurial disappointments he remained
kindly. The Einstein family was a warm small circle. Albert and his younger sister, Maya,
continued both the family closeness and its wanderings throughout their lives.
The Einstein's succession of houses were full of music from Albert's pianist mother,
who encouraged the children to play. But, upon the move to Italy, they left Albert alone in Munich
to finish his friendless and uninspiring school. Science was entirely something extracurricular,
a miraculous compass his father showed him when he was four and a holy geometry book he received
at age twelve. Now, in the summer of 1923, after belatedly paying his respects to the Nobel Committee,
Einstein was returning to Berlin, the heart of all he had once renounced, and for the last decade
his home. But before that, he would make a stop in Copenhagen.
Einstein and Bohr, destined to spend their lives struggling together over the soul of the quantum
theory, had first met three years before, when Bohr stayed with Planck in Berlin.
The trolley-cars, stilled by a strike, Einstein walked nine miles to Planck's door in the suburb
of Dahlem to escort Bohr back to his house for dinner, such as it was with the post-war food
shortages. Bohr brought Einstein and his family, which now consisted of his second wife, Elsa,
and her two daughters, food from Neutralia, where milk and honey still flow, as Einstein
described it in his thank-you letter. Not often in my life as a person, by his mere presence,
given me such joy as you did, wrote Einstein in 1920 in that first letter to Bohr. I now
understand why Ehrenfest loves you so. I am now studying your great papers, and in doing so,
especially when I get stuck somewhere, I have the pleasure of seeing your youthful face before me,
smiling and explaining. I have learned much from you, especially also about your attitude regarding
scientific matters. What is so marvelously attractive about Bohr as a scientific thinker,
Einstein wrote not long afterward, is his rare blend of boldness and caution.
seldom has anyone possessed such an intuitive grasp of hidden things combined with such a strong
critical sense. Somewhat odd, Bohr wrote back in reply,
To me it was one of the greatest experiences ever to meet you and talk with you. You cannot know
how great a stimulus it was for me to have the long hoped-for opportunity to hear of your views
on the questions that have occupied me. I shall never forget our talks on the way from Dahlem to
your home. The speech that Bohr gave on that trip to Berlin in 1920 was actually the first
time he mentioned publicly his grave doubts about one of those views, the light quantum.
He did so in only the most polite and elliptical way, looking out on his new friend in the audience.
I shall not discuss the familiar difficulties to which the hypothesis of
light quantum leads in connection with the phenomena of interference.
Phenomena which, after all, the wave theory has shown itself to be
so remarkably suited to explain. Einstein, hardly concerned to learn of one more
skeptic on this subject, wrote to Ehrenfest, Bohr was here, and I am as much in love with him as
you are. He is like an extremely sensitive child who moves around in this world in a sort of trance.
To Lawrence, he wrote, it is a good omen for physics that prominent physicists are mostly
also splendid people. So here is Einstein, on the platform of the ferry station in Copenhagen,
and there is Bohr, with his wide, easy lopsided smile, his broad woodcutter shoulders and athletic
stance, and Sommerfeld, squinting genially beside him, with his straight back and waxed mustache.
Doesn't he look the typical old Husser officer? Pauly had whispered to Heisenberg in class.
If Sommerfeld was hatless, you could see the long scar across his forehead from his youthful days in
a drinking and dueling society at Königsberg on the Baltic Sea, with a lively, intellectual mother
and a much older medical father whose pockets always held a beetle, shell, or chunk of amber
to show his son. Sommerfeld became one of physics greatest teachers, the first to include in his
classes relativity. He was Einstein's constant correspondent during the gestation of general
relativity and the quantum theory. He spent an underappreciated decade teaching pure mathematics
to students of mineralogy, mining, and engineering, until, in 1906, an institute for theoretical
physics at Munich was created around him. He had the rare ability to have time to spare for his
pupils. Max Born remembered years later, on skiing trips at coffee shops, with money provided if they
were broke. Such a beautiful relationship between teacher and students is surely unique,
Einstein wrote to Sommerfeld in 1909. The three of them, hats tilted at different angles,
three long coats flapping behind them, step out into the sunlight.
Born and Sommerfeld bearing Einstein's suitcase and heavy bag of books and papers,
while Einstein carries his violin.
Einstein, it's so good to see you, says Born as they sit at the tram near the half-timbered clock
tower of the ferry building. Tell us about Japan, says Sommerfeld.
Probably much more interesting than the Nobel ceremonies in any rate, says Bohr.
As Einstein was officially informed via telegram a hemisphere away, he had received the deferred
1921 prize and Bohr the 1922 prize that year. Bohr wrote him on November 11, 1922,
the same day he found out. For me it was the greatest honor and joy
that I should be considered for the award at the same time as you. I know how little I have
deserved it, but I should like to say that I consider it a good fortune that your fundamental
contribution in the special area in which I work, as well as contributions by Rutherford and Plunk,
should be recognized before I was considered for such an honor.
A month later, when the Nobel ceremonies occurred in Stockholm, Bohr threw down the gauntlet to the
absent Einstein and his fundamental contribution. The hypothesis of light-quanta, Bohr had ponded
in his Nobel speech, is not able to throw light on the nature of electromagnetic radiation.
He was serious, and he would be ready to say so to Einstein's face the next time he saw him.
Einstein, sitting on his deck chair sailing to Singapore,
wrote back on the ship stationery in January 1923.
Dear or rather beloved Bohr, your cordial letter reached me shortly before my departure from Japan.
I can say without exaggeration that it pleased me as much as the Nobel Prize. I find especially
charming your fear that you might have received the award before me. That is typically Bohrish,
your new investigations on the atom have accompanied me on the trip,
and they have made my fondness for your mind even greater.
As for Einstein's own mind, he continued conversationally,
I believe that I have finally understood the connection between electricity and gravitation.
A heroic, perhaps impossible quest for unification that
he would unsuccessfully pursue for the rest of his life.
At that moment, the bread-hungry and bloodthirsty madness of Berlin seemed very far away.
A sea voyage is like a cloister. Warm rain drips lazily down from the sky,
engendering peace and a plant-like state of semi-consciousness.
This little letter attests to it. Yours in admiration, A. Einstein.
Look, here is the streetcar, says Einstein, standing to greet it. Where are we going?
To the Institute, Number 15 on the Bledemschwein, says Bohr over his shoulder as he climbs on,
paying the three fares. Bledemswein is the wide boulevard running past what will become
the long green lawn of Bohr's newborn Institute, only three kilometers from the ferry terminal.
Five young physicists from five different countries,
temporarily reposing in the future library and laboratory, have already come to work with Bohr.
The first paper with the byline, The Institute for Theoretical Physics Copenhagen,
came out months before the building was completed, from two of Bohr's students to excited to wait.
The streetcar lurches to a start, its wheels shrill against the tracks.
The three physicists, making their way down the aisle, are the only people speaking German,
which emerges from the mouth of Bohr with a generous sprinkling of English and Danish for good measure.
So, my dear Bohr, says Einstein, I hear that you have predicted an element.
Oh yes, that, says Bohr. Sommerfeld raises his eyebrows at this uncharacteristically brief
statement. Einstein catches his glance and looks ironic. It was a new triumph for the Bohr
atom that it was able to make sense, in terms of the number of electrons, of the beautiful and
hitherto inexplicable periodic patterns of the famous table of the elements. Bohr had even
described the properties of the missing element with seventy-two electrons.
And then Hevesi, working right there in your new Institute, found it, prompts Sommerfeld.
Hevesi, though a Catholic nobleman, had been fired from his position in Hungary at the end
of the Great War because of his Jewish ancestry. As a result, the friends of Bohr and Hevesi were
reunited in Copenhagen. In Hevesi's charming broken English, he wrote Rutherford in 1922
while he was searching for the new element. Bohr reads the language of spectra like other
people goes through a magazine. The story begins to pour out from Bohr.
We quite innocently dropped into the most terrible muddle of post-war nationalism.
We had never dreamt of any competition with the chemists and the hunt for new elements,
but wished only to prove the correctness of the theory. There was Alexandre de Villiers at the
de Broglie lab. Maurice de Broglie was a well-known experimentalist working on x-rays in his mansion
in Paris. Trying to claim priority for it as Celsius for France. With de Broglie's younger
brother Louis backing him up. And then a Brit emerged, saying he'd found it before anyone else,
and it should be Oceanum for the British navy. No one paying any regard to the important scientific
discussion of the properties of the element. Einstein can't resist. You did not quite avoid
nationalism yourself, did you? Right, says Bohr, beginning to laugh. And when we couldn't decide
whether to call it hafnium, for the Latin name of Copenhagen, or danium, we got a letter from
the editor of Raw Materials Review in Britain, saying the papers claimed we'd discovered two
elements. Was it true? And someone in Canada suggested jargonium.
Einstein roared with laughter so that people on the streetcar turned around, wondering what the
joke in German could be, and Sommerfeld chuckled heartily into his big mustache.
Oh, it's good to see you doing so well, says Einstein. Bohr shakes his head, smiling.
My life from the scientific point of view passes off in periods of overhappiness and despair.
As I know that both of you understand, a feeling vigorous and overworked, of starting papers and
not getting them published. His face is earnest. Because all the time I am gradually changing
my views about this terrible riddle which the quantum theory is. I know, says Sommerfeld, I know.
Einstein's eyes almost close. He is nodding. That is a wall before which I am stopped.
The difficulties are terrible. His eyes open. The theory of relativity was only a sort of
respite which I gave myself during my struggles with the quanta.
But you know, everything is so exciting, says Sommerfeld. This crazy model my young Heisenberg
has thought up. Bohr interjects in what Heisenberg's biographer noted were the strongest words he
would ever use in criticism. Heisenberg's paper is very interesting, but it is difficult to justify
his assumptions. Sommerfeld nods. Everything works out, but remains in the deepest sense unclear.
He begins to smile riley and looks over at Einstein. You know, I can only contribute to the
technology of quantum theory. You have to create its philosophy.
Bohr's brow furrows.
The question is not only the development of the interpretation of experimental facts,
he says cautiously, but just as much to develop our deficient theoretical conceptions.
And here, the hypothesis of light-quanta cannot really help us.
I no longer doubt the reality of light-quanta, Einstein says, although I still stand quite
alone in this conviction. Sommerfeld says, I thought so too, Bohr, but I have amazing news.
While Einstein was in the Far East, Sommerfeld was touring the Far West.
The most interesting thing that I experienced scientifically in America, he says, was the
work of Arthur Holly Compton in St. Louis. It was so interesting that, even though I
wasn't certain he was right, I lectured about it wherever I went.
Compton had shown that x-rays and electrons collide like billiard balls.
Van Lau, while working with Sommerfeld in Munich, had proved that x-rays were waves.
Now Compton demonstrated that they were particles.
Sommerfeld, excited enough to forget about his friend Van Lau for a moment, turns to Einstein
with excitement. After this experiment, the wave theory of x-rays will become invalid, he says.
But Einstein responds with a smile. Well, that might be jumping to conclusions.
I should say so, bursts out Bohr, his voice a little strained. You can understand my concern,
for a person for whom the wave theory of light is a creed. The theory of light quanta can
obviously not be considered as a satisfactory solution of the problem of light propagation.
It excludes in principle the possibility of a rational definition of the frequency,
since it is defined by interference experiments which demand a wave constitution of light.
That's why I wanted to call your attention to the fact that, eventually,
we may expect a completely fundamental and new insight, says the practical Sommerfeld.
Well, yes, says Bohr, but I can hardly imagine it will involve light quanta. Look,
even if Einstein had found an unassailable proof of their existence and would want to inform me by
telegram, this telegram would only reach me because of the existence and reality of radio waves.
Einstein's booming laugh rings out. His entire career, from patent office to Princeton, would
be spent postulating ideas that no one else initially believed in. Sometimes the consensus
of physics would eventually come his way, sometimes not. He is equally serene in the
face of Bohr's disbelief, as in that of Sommerfeld's new enthusiasm.
Einstein, says Bohr, at the same time Sommerfeld, looking out the window says,
Bohr. Yes, says Einstein. Yes, says Bohr.
Where are we? asks Sommerfeld. Bohr looks around and then starts laughing,
which is infectious, with his wide mouth and big teeth and eyes shut.
We have missed our stop, he says, still laughing, by about twelve stops we have missed our stop.
Sommerfeld pulls the wire, the street car eases to a stop, and they emerge onto the street.
It is still a beautiful day, and so it does not seem to be such hard luck as the three
settle themselves on a bench beside the elm-bordered boulevard.
Einstein, if you should be really able to prove that light is particles more or less in the
commonly accepted sense, continues Bohr without a glance at its surroundings,
do you really believe that one could imagine seeing a law passed which would make it illegal
to use diffraction gratings? Or conversely, Einstein fires back. If you could prove that
light is exclusively wave-like, do you then think that you could get the police to stop the use of
photocells? Yes, but must I say, a phrase famous around Bohr's Institute resulting from his idiosyncratic
Danish to German translation, that at the present time we are entirely without any real understanding
of the interaction between light and matter. Einstein is not interested in hiding one mystery,
light sometimes behaves as a particle, behind another, the interaction between light and matter.
There are now two theories of light, both indispensable, he says. And, despite 20 years of
tremendous effort, without any logical connection, we must persist in our helpless attitude toward
these separate results, those of the diffraction gratings and those of the photocells, until
the principles have revealed themselves. But as long as the principles capable of serving
as starting points for the deduction remain undiscovered, individual facts are of no use
to the theorist. Bohr begins to speak, then falls silent, looking out at the canal.
The ducks float into his field of vision and float out, dragging their undulating reflections and
leaving long streamers of interfering ripples behind. James Frank, the beloved experimentalist,
described Bohr deep in thought, in the early years. One thinks of Bohr when one had a discussion
with him. Sometimes he was sitting there almost like an idiot. His face became empty,
his limbs were hanging down, and you would not know this man could even see. There was absolutely
no degree of life. Then suddenly one would see that a glow went up in him and a spark came,
and then he said, now I know. I'm sure it was the same with Newton, too.
The metal tracks in the road begin to hum again, giving Bohr a start,
and all a clang a streetcar arrives going back the way they came.
They climb on, sitting this time a little nearer the front.
Well, says Bohr as he sits down, I suppose that during a stage in science where everything is
still in ferment it cannot be expected that everybody has the same views about everything.
Einstein smiles at this. No, that is something that cannot even in the best of circumstances
be expected. Leaning against the sidewall of the streetcar looking back at his friends,
Bohr says, But Einstein, I cannot quite understand what it is you hope to prove
about the quantum theory. He leans forward, his arm gesturing over the back of the seats to explain.
I am thinking about your famous papers of 1916 and 17, where you showed that when an atom emits
light, there is no telling when it will happen or where it will go. You seem to think it was too
crazy. I have full confidence in the route I have taken, replies Einstein, but it is a weakness
of the theory that it leaves the time and direction of such an elementary process to chance.
To me, continues Bohr, it was one of the most brilliant strokes of genius. It was almost the
decisive point. What if causality does not actually hold for the quantum world?
This was an extreme position to take. The principle of causality, that everything has a cause, is
the foundation of science. The purpose of science is to find those causes. But Bohr's intuition
about causality in the atomic world would prove prophetic. Inexplicable spontaneity remains one
of the most characteristic quirks of the quantum theory.
I am inclined, Bohr says with a half-smile, in this case, to take the most radical or mystical
views imaginable.
Bohr, says Sommerfeld, bemused. What possible calculations could have led you to think that
causality might not be ultimately true?
Sommerfeld is more than fifteen years older than he, but on this point Bohr feels he needs to be
taught. You know how I feel about physics as merely mathematical chemistry. Everything does not
always boil down to calculations. It could easily be that we do not yet even possess the mathematics
with which we can talk about these things. Bohr has actually achieved most of his amazing success,
not through mathematics, but through an intuition, his analogy principle from which almost no one
but he can extract any results. It involves building a quantum theory out of features that
would average out, on a large scale, to produce this world we see. In 1920 Bohr renamed it
the Correspondence Principle, which made it no easier to operate or fathom.
A magic wand, said Sommerfeld in the most recent edition of his indispensable and religiously
updated textbook of quantum theory. Bohr's correspondence of large-scale quantum effects
with classical physics would guide the young quantum theory for years. But Bohr's faithfulness
to the spirit of this principle would also prevent him from discovering the possibility
of long-range entanglement. For him, a concept like that, quantum correlation between two
separated particles, would belong solely to a shadowy netherworld of subatomic semi-reality,
which could never emerge into the bright Newtonian day of large sizes and distances.
Instead, the skeptical Einstein would be the one to repeatedly show the way to the strange
beauties of entanglement over large distances of quantum effects writ large, which, by the turn
of the century, were to become the most vibrant branch of all physics.
Bohr, says Einstein, I greatly admire the sure instinct which guides all your work.
I have learned before that you are brave enough and intuitive enough to try things that others
pass by. But I have to say, abandonment of causality as a matter of principle should be permitted
only in the most extreme emergency.
Einstein, says Sommerfeld with a half grin, I admire Bohr's sure instinct in the realm of physics
as well. But on the streetcar, I would have to say I consider his instinct less than sure.
Look where we are.
Einstein and Bohr both look out the window. Bohr, slapping his hand to his forehead,
Einstein laughing and pulling the wire. They are almost back to the ferry station.
We rode back and forth in the streetcar, Bohr reminisced much later,
because Einstein was really interested at that time. We don't know whether his interest was
more or less skeptical, but in any case, we went back and forth many times in the streetcar,
and what people thought of us, that is something else.
After disembarking, Sommerfeld wrote grandly to Compton,
Your work, showing X-rays behaving as particles, has sounded the death knell of the wave theory.
Bohr, who, as Heisenberg wrote to Pauli back in January, cares more for general theoretical
principles than agreement with experiment, began to work on a quantum theory designed to avoid
light quanta. Compton's work did mark the beginnings of acceptance of light quanta,
strong enough that by 1926 the light quantum would merit a name of its own, the photon.
This word, approximate Greek for light being, came from G. N. Lewis of Berkeley,
the white mustached father of physical chemistry, who also suggested that the time that light takes
to travel a centimeter be called a jiffy. The next year Compton would receive his Nobel prize,
but neither particles nor waves alone would be able to describe the quantum world,
and the wave particle fusion Einstein had been predicting since 1909 laid just around the bent,
in several unexpected guises.
Chapter 6 Light Waves and Matter Waves
November 1923 to December 1924
You know those difficulties about not knowing whether light is old-fashioned waves or
Mr. Einstein's light particles? Or what? A 23-year-old American named John Slater,
touring Europe after finishing his doctorate at Harvard, wrote home to his parents in November
1923. Well, that is one of the topics on which I perpetually puzzle my head, and about a week
and a half ago I had a really hopeful idea on the subject. It is really very simple. I have
both the waves and the particles, and the particles are sort of carried along by the waves,
so that the particles go where the waves take them, instead of just shooting in straight lines,
as other people assume. This idea was related to Einstein's ghost waves,
but it allowed entanglement to remain, unnoticed at the time, by not insisting on a single particle
per wave. It was fated to have a strange history. After Slater, it was more fully proposed twice
more, four years later by Louis de Broglie, and after World War II by another American named
David Bohm. Each time the theory dramatically and impressively failed to attract a shred of interest.
Its downfall stems from its lack of aesthetic appeal to physicists. But it was this thrice-rejected
solution to the problem of waves and particles that would most clearly highlight the mysteries
of entanglement to its most perceptive sleuth, John Bell.
At Christmas time in 1923, Slater brought his doomed theory to the center of it all,
Bohr's Institute in Copenhagen. There, he taught with Bohr's right-hand man,
the kind and ironic Dutchman Hans Kramer's, only six years older than himself, and found that Kramer's
was excited by some of the mathematical elaborations of his idea. Even more thrilling, Kramer's thought
that Bohr, whom Slater had only seen looking exhausted and overworked, would also be interested.
When he got a chance to talk with Bohr, the great man seemed… decidedly excited.
Slater spent his entire weekend in nonstop conversation with the two most important members
of an institute bursting at the seams with people and ideas. A local newspaper reporter came by
while Bohr, Kramer's and Slater were deep in their discussions and wrote that
five to six people sit at one table and compute.
There had, however, been warnings of what was to come.
Professor Bohr wanted me to write it down for him to see, a bemused Slater wrote his parents,
and he told Dr. Kramer's not to talk to me about it until that was done, and then went and spent
all the time talking to me himself. It was a shock to realize what Bohr thought of light
quanta and not just Bohr. The theory of light quanta, said Kramer's, may be compared with
medicine that will cause the disease to vanish but kills the patient.
Slater reported to his parents, of course they don't agree with it all yet, but they do agree
with a good deal and have no particular argument except their preconceived opinions against the
rest of it. Innocently he thought that they seemed prepared to give those up if they have to.
But light quanta dimmed under the full Bohr wattage.
You see, Slater, we agree much more than you think. Bohr's last ditch attempt at a quantum physics
without light quanta needed an idea like Slater's guiding wave, which Bohr rechristened a
virtual field. The electromagnetic field carries energy, this field carried only guidance.
The virtual field, rather than mapping paths for the light quanta, would guide the interactions
between the Bohr atom and ordinary light waves. Pauly, when he heard about it, scoffed at the
resulting virtualization of physics. Without light quanta, Slater's theory lost two related
pillars of physics, causality and conservation of energy. The principle that energy cannot be
created or destroyed, but merely changed from form to form. For Bohr, this was a small price to pay.
And as the years went by, causalities hold on the quantum theory would indeed appear more
tenuous and statistical. The same would not prove true for conservation of energy. Still,
every subsequent crisis in physics saw Bohr suggesting that energy might, this time, not fully
be conserved. In his desperation to prove the light quanta were unnecessary, it took only three
weeks for Bohr to dictate to Kramer's, his favorite form of paper writing, what is known as the
Bohr-Kramer's Slater paper, by far the fastest written paper of his life.
I haven't seen it yet, Slater reported to his parents a fortnight before its publication.
He was pleased when he did. By its rejection of light quanta, the theory obtained a
simplicity, he thought, which, more than made up for the loss involved in discarding conservation
of energy and rational causation. Slater was not the only twenty-three-year-old taken with this
purported simplicity. Pauli visited Copenhagen in April and briefly fell under the spell.
You succeeded by your arguments in silencing my scientific conscience, which, much revolted
against this perception, he wrote to Bohr about the Bohr-Kramer's Slater paper a few months later,
after his scientific conscience had regained its voice. The twenty-two-year-old Heisenberg also
came to Copenhagen in the spring of 1924. He was overwhelmed by the brilliance of Kramer's and
the host of physicists surrounding Bohr, and was touchingly grateful when Slater and the other
two Americans there, Frank Hoyt and the slightly older Harold Ure, a future chemistry nobelist,
took him on a trip to the Danish main peninsula, Jutland. But still better was when Bohr himself
invited Heisenberg to take a walking tour that spring. Rucksacks on their backs, they followed
the Zeeland coast from Copenhagen north to Hamlets Elsinor, and along the beach where
the North Sea meets the Baltic Sea, flinging stones and talking all the time.
Famed for his instinct about physics, Bohr also had an instinct about people.
When they returned from the trip, he told Slater's friend Hoyt,
now everything is in Heisenberg's hands to find a way out of the difficulties.
Difficulties certainly still remained. Einstein's reaction to the Bohr-Kramer Slater paper came
as a surprise to no one. Bohr's opinion about radiation is of great interest, he wrote to Max
Born that April. But I should not want to be forced into abandoning strict causality without
defending it more strongly than I have so far. I find the idea quite intolerable that an electron
exposed to radiation should choose of its own free will, not only its moment to jump off,
but also its direction. This was how the Bohr-Kramer's Slater paper would describe the Compton
effect without light-quanta. In that case I would rather be a cobbler or even an employee in a
gaming-house than a physicist. Certainly my attempts to give tangible form to the quanta have
foundered again and again, but I am far from giving up hope. And even if it never works,
he remarked in vintage form, there is always that consolation that this lack of success is entirely
mine. The newspapers all over Europe began to run pieces on the conflict between Einstein and Bohr.
I was in Copenhagen and talked with Mr Bohr, a friend of Einstein's wrote to him later in 1924.
How strange it is that the two of you, in the field where all weaker imaginations and powers
of judgment have long ago withered, alone, have remained and now stand against each other in
deep opposition. In April 1924 came word that the city of Copenhagen was going to give the
over-full institute some of the land around it upon which to build, and in May the first large
donation of money arrived from the United States. Construction began a month later,
and the Bohrs had a groundbreaking party on the institute's lawn.
Slater found himself talking with Mrs Kramer's, known to her friends as Storm.
They were standing on the grass beside a little table with an ice chest holding bottles of Carlsberg,
agreed among Bohr's students to be the best beer in the world. From the beginning,
Carlsberg was the institute's biggest supporter.
Mrs Kramer's pardon me, but you seem so Danish, he said finally.
She gave him a big smile. I am Danish. They say that Hans has started a tradition which
all foreign students coming to study under Niels Bohr must do.
Mary Adaine. She looked mischievous. Now, Mr Slater, have you any prospects for a Danish wife?
Slater blushed and looked uncomfortable and young.
Well, you still have time, she said.
Actually, ma'am, said Slater, I'm leaving in a week.
You'd better start looking harder, she said, leaving in a week, my my. So how have you liked
your time at the institute? It's been fine, said Slater, towing the grass.
She looked at him sideways, a small smile on her face, her eyebrows together skeptically.
Fine, has it been?
Yes, ma'am, said Slater.
I think you've been having a hard time, young man, she said. Professor Bohr,
much as it is like a religion around here to love him, can be very difficult if you disagree with
him. She looked over in Bohr's direction, where her husband stood beside him. She nodded and then
turned back to Slater and said, Let me tell you a story about my husband. About two years ago,
yes, I think it must have been 1921. We had not been married for very long at any rate. Well,
Hans came up with an idea, an idea about these light quanta.
Slater looked up surprised. Yes, he believed in them in those days. He thought they might
actually be there, even though no one else thought so. Except, of course, Professor Einstein.
And especially Professor Bohr thought that these light quanta were a very bad idea.
Anyway, what Hans had come up with was very similar to your fellow American Professor
Compton's idea. No experiment, but the idea was the same. And he was insanely excited.
He was sure he was on to something very important, and he told Professor Bohr about it.
The brisk spring wind blew her hair into her eyes, and she shook her head and raised her hand to pull
it behind her ear. Well, immediately Professor Bohr started arguing with him, and daily they would
argue. These long, terrible arguments, no holds barred. Hans would come home so weary and depressed
he couldn't even eat his dinner. He was so confused and let down and torn between his idea
and Professor Bohr, whom he loved and would have done anything for.
Finally, he was so worn out that I had to take him to the hospital. No joke. He got better there,
I think because the hospital was just too far away for Professor Bohr to come and argue with him.
She smiled at Slater, but her eyes looked a little weary at the remembrance.
After Hans got better, he and Professor Bohr were perfectly in tune. When he talks to me
about his physics, he never again suggests that Professor Bohr might be wrong. He made Professor
Bohr's ideas and views his own ideas and views. And I have to say, it has been easier all round since.
Slater stood on the lawn, beside the green Carlsberg bottles glinting in the sun. Shocked.
He could hear in his mind Kramer's intoning,
the theory of the light quanta is like the medicine that will cure the disease but kill the patient.
There was Bohr, so genial, chatting with the small group, telling one of his old jokes. Everyone was laughing.
So you see, my dear, said Mrs. Kramer's, I understand what you are going through, and so does Hans.
He tells me about you. He is very sympathetic. He has gone through it all himself.
Now, you should run along. You only have a week to find a lovely Danish girl to marry.
Then she smiled again.
Though I have a feeling you aren't looking for reasons to stay in Denmark,
hopefully some time you will return and you will have a better time of it when you are older.
She walked off to rejoin her husband, her white skirt flapping at her calves and her high heels poking
into the lawn. Slater now stood alone beside the beer, the tall, gawky American boy still shaking
his head. Years later he would say in an interview, I liked Kramer's quite well,
but he was always Bohr's yes-man. Everyone else around was in love with the great man, but
I completely failed to make a connection with Bohr. I've never had any respect for Mr. Bohr since.
He finished. I had a horrible time in Copenhagen.
In the spring of 1924, as Slater was leaving Copenhagen, two unusual pieces of mail were slowly
traveling toward Einstein's desk in Berlin, one from Paris and one from Dhaka, Bengal.
The first came from Einstein's friend, the mustachioed physicist and pacifist,
Paul Langevin, at the Sorbonne. It was the dissertation of a 32-year-old student of
Langevin named Louis De Bruy, the younger brother of the experimentalist Maurice,
the Duke of De Bruy. Long ago, as the secretary for the First Solvay Conference in 1911,
the older De Bruy had been impressed by Einstein's talk of light-quanta.
In the next decade, war cut off communication between French and German citizens,
but in the oak-paneled tapestryed rooms of De Bruy's lab, he was the first to bring x-ray equipment
to France with his footmen as his technician. He showed his little brother how these x-rays
sometimes behaved as waves, sometimes as particles. Now, the younger De Bruy, a thin,
wide-eyed, bushy haired aristocrat, declared that if Einstein had found a granular aspect to waves
of light, then there should also be a wave aspect to grains of matter. He suggested that a stream
of electrons passing through a small enough hole would diffract and interfere as if the electrons
were waves. Langevin, probably a bit astonished by the novelty of my ideas, as De Bruy put it,
and, wondering what to think, sent Einstein a copy. Einstein immediately passed it on to Max
Bourne, saying, Read it. Even though it might look crazy, it is absolutely solid. He wrote back to
Langevin, he has lifted a corner of the great veil. Others were unimpressed.
De Bruy had in the past few years written several papers forcefully advocating slightly
half-baked ideas, delicately dismissed by Kramer's unmistakably boring remarks as,
not consistent with the way in which the quantum theory at present is applied to atomic problems.
With Alexandre Dovillier, he of the Celtium Discovery, De Bruy had that January condescended
to Sommerfeld in a paper that had already been disproved by experimental evidence,
so he had few friends in Munich either. The minutes of the star-studded Kapizekla
at Rutherford's Cavendish Lab recorded the unanimous opinion that the whole thing was nonsense.
It was, in fact, the first step toward the new quantum theory.
Satyendra Nath Bose, a lecturer at the brand-new University of Dhaka, sent Einstein the other
remarkable paper of that spring. Bose was a year-and-a-half younger than De Bruy,
and approximately at the same stage in his education, but, with no experimentalist older
brother or renowned and well-connected professor at his side, Bose, too, started with the premise
that light-quanta were real and derived startling results. Like a scene from the Gospels in which
total faith is spectacularly rewarded, Bose put his precious four-page paper, already rejected by
Philosophical Magazine, on the boat to Berlin as the heat broke and the monsoon rains began.
If you think the paper worth publication, Bose wrote to Einstein, I shall be grateful if you
arrange for its publication in Zeitrift für Physik. An astonishing thing for a total stranger to ask
of one of the most famous men on earth. But the genial and unflappable Bose continued,
we are all your pupils. He believed in Einstein's wisdom and good will, and had, moreover,
a well-justified faith in his own paper's merits. I am anxious to know what you think of it,
he told Einstein, knowing he could not even hope for a reply before the rains ended in early September.
Einstein responded spectacularly. He personally translated Bose's paper from English to German,
sent it to Zeitrift, with a strong recommendation, and, in the subsequent six months, followed it
with three papers himself. He joined Bose's ideas to de Broglie's, applying the results that Bose
had found in light quanta to atoms, and seeing what this meant for the behavior of de Broglie's
matter waves. Bose's key idea was the complete indistinguishability of light quanta, making
meaningless any system that treated them as individuals. This indistinguishability meant
strange things for quantum states. The likelihood of one of these fundamentally indistinguishable
particles entering a given state is affected by the states of the particles that surround it.
Bose's biographers tell a story about the statistics that result,
known as Bose or Bose-Einstein statistics. Paul and Margaret Derock, visiting Calcutta in the
mid-fifties, were in the back seat of Bose's car. Bose invited several students to sit in
the front seat, which already held him in the driver. Alone in the back seat, the Derocks,
whose thinness made a striking contrast with Bose's jovial rotundity, asked if they weren't
too crowded. Bose looked back and said in his disarming fashion, We believe in Bose statistics.
The differences between Bose statistics and any other indirectly express a certain hypothesis
about a mutual influence of the particles, Roteinstein in 1925, for the time being of
a quite mysterious kind. In their 2001 Nobel Prize lecture, the University of Colorado
experimentalists Eric Cornell and Carl Weiman share Einstein's wonder. This mutual influence
is no less mysterious today, even though we can readily observe the variety of exotic behavior it
causes. The exotic behavior that would still be resulting in Nobel Prizes three quarters of a
century later, Einstein described in a letter to Ehrenfest in November 1924. From a certain
temperature on, the particles condense without attractive forces. The theory is pretty, but
is there also some truth to it? Condensing without attractive forces into the same state
means taking on all the same attributes, so that the particles are not only indistinguishable,
but also moving in perfect harmony. Together, they become a quantum matter wave,
visible to the naked eye. Soon to be known as Bose-Einstein condensation, this is what makes
a laser's light so piercing, what allows a superconductor to carry a current of electricity
forever, what makes a superfluid able to flow up walls. Einstein had brought the quantum theory
far past what it could handle in 1924 in his support and unification of de Broglie's waves of
matter and Bose's sociable, indistinguishable particles of light. In the new edition of his
textbook on the quantum theory, Sommerfeld wrote exhaustedly of waves and particles.
Modern physics is confronted here with two incompatible features and must frankly confess
non-lignet. Non-lignet is the archaic spelling of the verdict a jury gives,
in cases of doubt, explains the Century Dictionary, deferring the matter to another day of trial.
Your Frank non-lignet is a thousand times more sympathetic to me,
wrote Pauli to his old teacher in December 1924, than the ad hoc artificial pseudo solution of
Bohr, Kramer's, and Slater. One now has the strong impression with all models, he continued,
that we are speaking a language that is not sufficiently adequate to the simplicity and beauty
of the quantum world. Chapter 7 Pauli and Heisenberg at the Movies, January 8, 1925
Heisenberg and Pauli were laughing until their insides ached. It was Heisenberg's second and
Pauli's third viewing of Charlie Chaplin's The Kid, recently arrived in Germany after the war's
import ban was lifted. Heisenberg had just turned 23 and Pauli would be 25 that spring.
They were meeting in Munich, their old university town, after their Christmas vacations, Pauli with
his family in Vienna, Heisenberg's in the Bavarian Alps. The next day, Pauli would continue north to
his new professorship in Hamburg, joining Stern, now professor of experimental physics there.
Heisenberg to Copenhagen, where Kramer's and he were furthering the Bohr-Kramer's Slater paper.
The plot of the movie revolved around a swindle. Schwindel in German, one of Heisenberg's and
Pauli's favorite words, perpetrated by Chaplin, a figure with whom Pauli identified. Working in
collaboration with him is The Kid, an innocent-looking little boy whom he adopts. The Kid breaks
windows and then the little tramp comes around the corner, carrying new glass, offering his services.
Schwindelig, giddy, dizzy, clown tricks was the consensus of German film critics.
The movie was Incredible Unsinn, nonsense. It was Perfect Unsinn.
Heisenberg and Pauli loved it. So did everybody else, despite the critics' cry that slapstick
comedy was beneath this, nation of poets and philosophers. The music stopped. The projectionist
switched on the lights. The happy crowd began shattering and pulling on their coats.
All these people, bludgeoned by inflation and hunger, were floating out of the theater in
giddy groups. Heisenberg reached for the crutches lying in the aisle beside him,
a token of a skiing accident a week earlier. With the faint pale lines around his eyes where his
ski goggles had obscured the sun, he looked like the archetypal injured athlete. Outside,
a burst of cold hit their faces. Snow was swirling down through the glow from the curled streetlamps.
Heisenberg, the skier, smiled up into it. Opposite them, ghostly in the early dusk of
January, stood the gate in the medieval city wall. Two hexagonal towers with bricks,
mottled and softened with age, muted with ivy, now fringed with snow. Heisenberg and Pauli
started to make their way down the street to the tram stop. Behind them, people were already
lining up before the Liechspiel theater to buy tickets for the late show. The marquee glowed so
bright, it was hard to read the huge, Charlie Chaplin Jackie Cougan, it spelled out. The tramp
giving the kid equal billing.
So tell me, said Pauli. How's Pope Bohr? How's his eminence Kramer's the cardinal?
You know, I don't think my physics career started until I met Bohr, Heisenberg said.
Pauli nodded. It was the same for me.
Bohr is more worried than anybody else about the inconsistencies of quantum theory,
said Heisenberg, trying to describe the difference between his time in Copenhagen
and his earlier experiences in Munich and Göttingen. Their college days with Sommerfeld in Munich had
brought them deep into mysterious and disconnected mathematical attempts to describe the atom,
untroubled by what it all meant. Göttingen, the center of mathematical learning in Germany,
had become the third city in the quantum theorists' trinity. Now that its theoretical physicists
were led by the shy Max Born, with whom Heisenberg had studied in the winter of 1922 and spring of
1923. You know how Sommerfeld is quite happy, said Heisenberg, when he can apply nice complex
integrals. That is, mathematics involving fairly hard calculus. Pauli smiled at Heisenberg's
comment. His eyes closed for a second. And he doesn't worry too much, continued Heisenberg,
whether his approach is consistent or not. And Born in a different way is interested,
mostly in mathematical problems.
It's true, said Pauli. Neither Born nor Sommerfeld really suffers. Well, Bohr can hardly talk of
anything else. But Kramer's. He is a bit strange to me. He makes jokes, said Heisenberg,
when I don't want any jokes made. Pauli grinned broadly into the snow,
thinking of his earnest friend, working with the dryly humorous Kramer's.
I don't know if you'll get the papal blessing with your new paper, though, said Heisenberg.
Almost simultaneous with Einstein's papers on Bohr's Einstein condensation, Pauli had finished
two papers. In the first, he made a funny komish reflection on the Stern-Gerlach experiment of
1922, in which the silver atoms traveling through an uneven magnetic field segregated themselves
into two discrete piles. He realized that this was because the outermost electron in the silver
atom took a quantized position with respect to the magnetic field. These two exclusive options
would soon be called spin up and spin down, though not by Pauli, who found talk of electrons as
spinning balls inadvisable. The second was to become his most famous paper on what their British
friend P. A. M. Dirac would call Pauli's exclusion principle, and Heisenberg and Ehrenfest called
the Pauli verbot, the prohibition. Pauli showed that unlike the particles, that is, light quanta
and many atoms, that Bose and Einstein were writing about at exactly the same time, electrons
would never gather sociably in a single quantum state. The electrons liked making opposite pairs,
spin up and spin down, but would not get closer than that. Ehrenfest would explain,
why is a crystal as thick as it is? Because the atoms are thick. Why are they thick? Because not
all the electrons fall into inner rings. Why don't they do it? Because of the electric repulsion
of the electrons against each other? No. For, if it were only that, they would still be able to
gather around the highly charged nuclei much more densely than they do. No, they don't do it for
fear of Pauli, and so we may say, Pauli himself is so thick, because the Pauli prohibition holds.
The wonderful, the incomprehensible. Again, the quantum theory encountered a
mysterious mutual influence. Again, it moved forward, not with models, explanations or pictures,
but with prohibitions, formal rules and incomprehensibilities.
What I do here is not a bigger nonsense, Unsinn, Pauli told Bohr, than anything else about the
Bohr atom. My nonsense is conjugate to yours. The physicist who finally succeeds in adding
these two nonsense will gain the truth. Bohr showed the paper and the letter to
Heisenberg, who, delighted, shot off a postcard to Pauli.
December 15, 1924, Copenhagen. Today I have read your new work,
and it is certain that I am the one who rejoices most about it. Not only because you push the
swindle, schvindle, to an unimagined, giddy, schvindleic height, and thereby have broken all
hitherto existing records of which you have insulted me, but, quite generally, I triumph
that you, too, a too brute, have returned with lowered head to the land of the formalism pedants.
But don't be sad. There you will be welcomed with open arms.
And if you think you have written something against the hitherto existing kinds of swindle,
of course, this is a misunderstanding. For, swindle times swindle does not yield something
correct, and therefore, two swindles can never contradict each other. Therefore, I congratulate.
Merry Christmas. Bohr, who always took longer than Heisenberg to do anything,
wrote a week later to Pauli that he had not produced an unsinn, as promised, but complete
van-sin insanity. This was not necessarily a bad thing, but Pauli could tell that Bohr,
with his careful phrases like, We are all enthusiastic about the many new beauties you
have brought to light, did not quite feel the same as the truly enthusiastic Heisenberg.
I have the impression, wrote Bohr, that we stand at a decisive turning point,
now that the extent of the whole swindle has been characterized so exhaustively.
Years later, they would still be using the same joke words, including Bohr's famous,
if you do not get swindleig sometimes when you think about the quantum theory,
then you have not really understood it.
In Munich that January of 1925, Heisenberg and Pauli were struggling to understand the
quantum theory and the world. Heisenberg looked effortless on his crutches, and antsy,
as he swayed himself through the snow down the street beside Pauli.
He has no philosophy, and he does not care for clear formulation of the basic principles. Pauli
had grumbled to Bohr a year before about Heisenberg. Despite this, he continued,
I consider him, apart from the fact that he is personally also very nice, as very important,
even as a genius, and I believe that someday he will produce major scientific advances.
Back in the mathematical citadel of Goettingen, Max Bohr was writing what many were thinking.
Mechanics, physics that describes motion and the forces that make things move,
had failed for the atom, and a new mathematical structure was needed. He called for a quantum
mechanic, not yet knowing that he and Heisenberg would produce it.
Could you perhaps, said Pauli to his friend on crutches,
send me page-proofs of this paper you and Kramer's are writing?
He started to grin. Or will that be allowed by his eminence? I am, after all, an infidel.
Heisenberg nodded. He could tell he was close.
I feel that we've—that Kramer's and I have—now come one step further in getting
into the spirit of the new mechanics. It seems, and Bohr thinks so too, that there must be some
kind of wonderful new mechanics if we just push it a little further. His face glowed with excitement.
I myself have discovered something new, said Pauli. In fact, Stern is already calling it
the Pauli effect. The Pauli effect? Does this have to do with your fair boat?
It has absolutely nothing to do with that. It has to do with what a good theorist I am.
Pauli paused. Well, so I guess in that sense it does.
And? prompted Heisenberg. You know how theoretical physicists can't handle experimental equipment.
It breaks whenever they touch it. Well, I am becoming such a good theorist that it breaks
when I walk in the room. Only you could turn a disaster into a compliment for yourself.
Stern will now only shout questions through the closed door to his lab.
You're talking as if you actually believe this happens.
I'm telling you, it does. I can't believe Stern—oh, you think Stern should be practical because
he's an experimentalist? Stern told me a friend of his used to bring his apparatus a flower every
morning to keep it in good temper. Pauli grinned. He himself had a somewhat higher method. In
Frankfurt he would threaten the Stern-Gerlach apparatus with a wooden hammer to make it behave.
You're all crazy. Well, listen to this. Someone borrowed the hammer and the whole
thing stopped working until it was found. With raised eyebrows he nodded at Heisenberg.
Well, said Heisenberg, laughing, I'll tell Boer that Hamburg is treating you well,
even if you aren't returning the favour. Pauli laughed, too.
The astronomers have been particularly nice. I go to the observatory on full moon nights
when it's too bright to make observations and we drink wine.
Wine? Pauli nodded seriously. When I came to Hamburg, I passed, under the influence of Stern,
directly from mineral water to champagne. I have noticed, he continued, that drinking wine
agrees very well with me. After the second bottle of wine or champagne I usually adopt the manners
of a good companion, which, as you know, I never have in the sober state, and then may at times
enormously impress the surroundings, in particular if they are female.
At the moment, physics is again very much in disarray, wrote Pauli a few months later to his
friend, the American physicist Ralf Kronig, now studying in Copenhagen. For me anyhow it is much
too difficult, and I wish I were a film comicker, movie comedian, or something like that, and had
never heard anything of physics. Now I do hope that Boer will save us all with a new idea.
I urgently request that he do so.
Chapter 8 Heisenberg in Hegeland, June 1925
Nord und west und sud sehr splitten, Träune bärsten rache sitten, Fluchte du im reinen Osten?
Nord und west und south splinter, Throne's burst, realms tremble,
Flee you in the pure east, Goethe west Ostlicher divan.
On June 7, 1925, Werner Heisenberg took the night train from Goettingen,
where he was now assistant to Max Born. In the dawn he boarded a ferry to the small North Sea
island of Hegeland. The name of the island means Holy Land, because, surrounded by salt water,
it is blessed with a spring. The island was German again after Danish and British interludes,
but it flew its own cheerful flag, green and white, surrounding the central red stripe of
the German flag, instead of Germany's black and yellow. Heisenberg's face was badly swollen.
When he knocked on the door of an inn, the landlady whisked him to a room, saying,
well, you must have had a pretty bad night. The room was on the second floor, and the window
looked out over the stony village, to the white dunes and the ocean, which Heisenberg could barely
see from under his heavy eyelids. A thin white curtain was blowing from the open window into the
room. Heisenberg said with embarrassment, it's just hay fever, but up here she smiled in
understanding. There are no flowers, no fields, and no fever. Turning his face into the breeze
from the window, he squinted out at the bare and beautiful view. Outside, the day was windy and
clear. He slept, ate, and went walking along the red cliffs. He stripped and dashed into the cold
water. He spent the rest of the day reading Goethe's Persian idol through his watery eyes,
learning poems from Vest-Ostliga-Dieven by heart.
Who the song would understand needs must seek the song's own land.
Looking out at the view, he remembered Bohr on a different North Sea beach,
trying to explain the charms of flat Denmark to the mountain climber.
I always think that part of infinity seems to lie within the grasp of those who look across the sea.
Alone on Hagoland, Heisenberg felt clean and focused. He wanted to see the quantum world on
its own terms, to listen to the atom, and hear what it was telling him. Back in Copenhagen,
he and Kramers had given the Bohr-Kramers-Slater theory mathematical coherence. The month of
April contained both the theory's triumph, the Kramers-Heisenberg paper, and the beginnings
of its downfall, as ever more careful measurements by Compton and others
showed that the principle of the conservation of energy had held against Bohr's predictions.
But this mathematical scheme that Kramers and he had come up with, Heisenberg remembered,
had for me a magical attraction, and I was fascinated by the thought that perhaps here
could be seen the first threads of an enormous net of deep-set relations.
He lost himself in the colors of light emitted by the atom, thin flags of a still unknown realm.
A few days were enough to jettison all the mathematical ballast, he wrote. A clean,
bare idea was rising in his mind, only dimly glimpsed before he left for Hagoland. It
results in a very peculiar point of view, he told his friend Ralph Kronig.
His quantum mechanics would declare time and space non-existent within the walls of the atom,
or so it seemed at night on the island. As he worked and wondered, the North Sea sun began
to set near midnight. The sea was red, the land dark. Heisenberg turned on the gaslight. His thin
muscular back hunched over the desk, his shoulders curved near his ears, his feet hooked around the
legs of his chair. He looked like a boy studying for an exam. Stars came out. The wind whined
against the door to his little balcony. Much later, Heisenberg was to say of the process of physics,
in science, you'd just have to drill in very hard wood and go on thinking beyond the point
where thinking begins to hurt. The clock struck three. He looked at what he had wrought.
I was deeply alarmed. As Max Born had predicted, a quantum mechanics would be very different
from any description of forces and motion that physics had ever known before. I had the feeling
that, through the surface of atomic phenomena, I was looking at a strangely beautiful interior,
and felt almost giddy at the thought that I now had to probe this wealth of mathematical structures.
I was far too excited to sleep. He left his frenzied scribblings and made his way through
the dawning streets to the cliffs. I'd been longing to climb a rock jutting out into the sea.
His hay fever gone, he could smell the salt water. The rough surface of the red sandstone felt
harsher than usual. His trembling fingers felt newborn, his eyes more sensitive to the sunrise
than on ordinary days, each wave carrying before its crest a pale petal of light. The spray
splashed around him, on top of his rock, and he felt utterly triumphant, utterly empty, and filled with
light. On his way back to Göttingen, he stopped in Hamburg for a few hours to present his quantum
mechanics to Pauli, generally my severest critic. But Pauli, ready for all models and
visualizable descriptions of the quantum world to fail, had only encouraging words.
My own work gives me almost no pleasure to write about, because all is still unclear,
he wrote to Pauli a week later. Space and time within the atom were gone.
In quantum theory, it has not been possible, he noted in his paper, to associate the electron
with a point in space. But he did not know what was left.
He had written a crazy paper and did not dare send it in for publication,
remembered Max Born of Heisenberg's return. I read it and became enthusiastic, and began
to think about it day and night. Heisenberg's confidence ebbed and flowed, but of one thing
he remained sure, he told Pauli in early July, no trace of a space and time model,
even one as weird as the Bohr atom should appear. My entire meager efforts go toward
killing the concept of an orbit which cannot be observed any way. With that, Heisenberg
departed on vacation to Leiden, Cambridge and Copenhagen, leaving Born with his paper.
One morning, about the 10th of July 1925, I suddenly saw Light, remembered Born.
Heisenberg's symbolic multiplication was nothing but the matrix calculus, well known to me since
my student days in Breslau. Well known to Born, a consummate mathematician, but unknown to most
physicists less fond of math. The word matrix means womb. An array of numbers arranged in
rows and columns. A matrix, no matter how huge, is a single entity, fitting into an equation
as a number would. Born began to reframe Heisenberg's theory in terms of matrices.
And at once, there stood before me the peculiar formula. qp minus pq equals h bar i,
where h bar is equal to Planck's quantum constant, h, without which no quantum equation was complete,
divided by 2 pi. And i is the square root of negative 1.
i, the first imaginary number, is a common math tool. But this was, as David Wick writes in his
book on the heresies of quantum mechanics, the first use of the imaginary unit in a seemingly
essential way in the history of natural science. Mass is m. So, since the time of Newton,
momentum has been p for impetus, forcing position to be abbreviated by the counterintuitive q.
When talking about a billiard ball, three numbers suffice to give its position.
These are called the Cartesian coordinates, which on a pool table would be something like
x inches from the long side and y inches from the short side, on a table that is z feet off the
ground. Similarly, three numbers give the momentum, so many feet per second in each
direction times so many pounds. But, to describe the same aspects of an atom, an infinite array
of numbers is required, none with any obvious connection to position or momentum. In the
equation born found, q and p are in bold capitals to signify that they represent these infinite
matrices instead of an ordinary single number. Heisenberg, never a fan of the super mathematical
sound of matrix and trying to keep things simple, called them radiation value tables, since they
were essentially a list of all the characteristic frequencies that could be radiated by the atom
in question. These matrices were not like the attributes of a billiard ball in another way.
The order of multiplication matters. The order does not matter when you multiply Cartesian
coordinates. Five times three is not different from three times five. But, Born's equation
shows that the rules change when we enter the quantum domain. qp, a position measurement,
times a measurement of momentum, is not equal to pq. Did measurement mean something different
in the quantum world? Months of mulling provided no solution.
The worst is, Heisenberg wrote to Pauli, that it does not become clear to me how the transition
into classical theory takes place. Neither was it clear to Born, nor to Pasquale Jordan,
a pale, shy, stuttering young student barely Heisenberg's age who
can think far more swiftly and confidently than I, Born told Einstein.
Letters flew back and forth from Göttingen to Heisenberg in Leiden, nor Cambridge.
The work, Heisenberg recalled, kept us breathless for months.
It was thrilling and bewildering in equal measure. Only five days into this work,
Born unbreathlessly, wrote to Einstein, I am fully aware that what I am doing is very ordinary
stuff compared with your ideas and boars. My thinking box is very shaky, there is not much in
it, and what there is rattles to and fro, has no definite form, and gets more and more complicated.
Heisenberg, meanwhile, was lecturing in Cambridge. Not on his, in-coat quantum mechanics,
but on the old familiar atomic spectroscopy on which it was based. In the audience was a thin,
gangly, dark-haired young mathematical genius named P. A. M. Dirac. When, soon afterward,
a series of papers made this byline famous, many wondered what the initial stood for.
People felt that the laconic Dirac cultivated the mystery, but it's more probable that the
mystified never asked him point blank. The answer would have been, in Dirac's high,
precise Queen's English, Paul Adrian Maurice.
Too shy to talk to Heisenberg himself, Dirac eventually read a pre-print of Heisenberg's
paper. He set to work discovering the same idea that, unbeknownst to him or to Heisenberg,
Born was simultaneously postulating on the continent. Born and your dung wrote up their
results, translating Heisenberg's original stroke of genius into matrices. But almost
before they were done, Rutherford sent Born a reprint of a paper by Dirac.
Born wrote, This was, I remember well, one of the greatest surprises of my scientific life.
For the name Dirac was completely unknown to me. The author appeared to be a youngster,
yet everything was perfect in its way, and admirable. In Göttingen, people started talking
about Knabenphysik, the kid-physics. Dirac and Jordan were twenty-two, Heisenberg was twenty-three,
and Pauli was twenty-five. Among these Wunderkinder, Dirac was unique. His paper of 1925
began a half-decade in which mind-boggling papers, three in 1927 alone, steadily flowed from his pen,
in careful, childlike cursive. He had been brought up in Bristol, England by a tyrannical
Swiss father who insisted that only French be spoken at his dinner table, silencing his young
British wife. The result was that the young Paul spoke only when a direct question was posed to him,
or he had something important to say, and then in as few syllables as possible.
These traits remained, in any language for the rest of his life, producing a hundred humorous
tales bandied about the International Club of Physicists, for whom he was the purest soul,
as Bohr described him. One of the most ethereal theoretical physicists of his age,
he emerged from completely matter-of-fact schooling, attending the Merchant Ventures
Technical College. The school where his father taught French. And in an attempt to please his
father with a display of practicality, going on to higher education in electrical engineering.
His only activities outside of physics were long, solitary hikes, invariably in his formal black suit.
Copenhagen knew nothing of Heisenberg's breakthrough. Bohr's Institute was convulsed with
the death, at the hands of Compton and other experimentalists, of the Bohr-Kramer's Slater
theory, or what Bohr and Frank, in a phrase borrowed from Pauli, had taken to calling the Copenhagen
Putsch. At the end of July, a month after Heisenberg's Hegeland breakthrough, Pauli wrote to Kramer's,
I regard it as a magnificent stroke of luck. He started with characteristic lack of subtlety,
that your interpretation was so rapidly refuted by these beautiful experiments.
Every unprejudiced physicist can now regard light quanta just as much and just as little
physically real as electrons. He greeted Heisenberg's new work with jubilation.
We have concurring opinions about almost everything, as much as this is at all possible
between two people of independent thinking. I now feel myself a little less isolated than
I did for about half a year, when I felt quite alone, between the silla of the number mysticism
of Sommerfeld's Munich School and the caribdis of the reactionary Copenhagen Putsch, which you
propagandised with the excessive zeal of a true fanatic.
To the ever-confident Pauli, it was much worse to be a convert like Kramer's than a missionary like
Bohr. Now I hope that you will no longer retard the re-establishment of a healthy Copenhagen physics,
which, in view of Bohr's strong sense of reality, cannot fail to re-emerge. Again,
all good wishes from your devoted Pauli.
Kramer's already knew of Heisenberg's theory because he had visited Göttingen just as Heisenberg
returned from Hagoland. You're too optimistic, he had told Heisenberg. To Bohr on his return
to Copenhagen, he had said nothing. In a chatty letter to his friend Uri, Slater's friend who
had the year before shown Heisenberg around Jutland, all he reported of the trip to Göttingen
was that he saw Frank and Bourne and others. In the death of the Bohr, Kramer's Slater theory,
and the birth of the new big thing, and Heisenberg had only been extending the work that he and
Kramer's had done together, Kramer's had seen his own star fall and a new one rise.
Spiraling into depression, he, who for years had ignored the constant courting of other
universities, accepted a position in his native Holland that September. For almost a decade,
Bohr's cardinal and scientific heir, Kramer's now left Copenhagen for good.
Kept in the dark by an unsure Heisenberg and a miserable Kramer's,
Bohr could say only that the quantum theory is in a most provisional and unsatisfactory stage.
As he had written to Heisenberg on June 10th. This letter would have greeted Heisenberg on
his arrival back to Göttingen nine days later, but only at the very end of August did Heisenberg
respond. As Kramer's perhaps has told you, I have committed the crime of writing a paper on
quantum mechanics. Einstein was also sceptical. Heisenberg has laid a huge quantum egg,
he wrote to Ehrenfest in September. In Göttingen they believe in it, I don't.
When Pauli complained for the thousandth time of Heisenberg's breakthrough being smothered by
excessive Göttingen learnedness, having already severely heard Max Born's already tender feelings,
Heisenberg fired back. Your eternal ridiculing of Copenhagen and Göttingen is a flagrant scandal.
You will have to admit that we are not seeking to ruin physics by malicious intent.
If we are donkeys having never produced anything new, you are an equally big jackass,
for you haven't done anything either. On Christmas Day in 1925, Einstein was writing to
his best friend Besso. The most interesting recent theoretical achievement is the Heisenberg-Born
Yordan theory of quantum states, a real sorcerer's multiplication table in which
infinite matrices replace the Cartesian coordinates. With more than a bit of irony, he added,
it is extremely ingenious and, thanks to its great complexity, sufficiently protected against
disproof. It was also extremely difficult to use, and only the superhuman Pauli was capable of
demonstrating that it could mathematically describe the very simplest real-world application,
the hydrogen atom. Pauli showed that all the ad hoc Bohr-Sommerfeld assumptions about the
atom's size and shape were now unnecessary. These things emerged not by decree, but as a result
of the new quantum mechanics. He submitted the resulting paper in January of 1926. Heisenberg,
who had been attempting the same, rejoiced, and Bohr told Rutherford that he was no longer miserable,
the longed-for quantum mechanics had really arrived. Then, out of the blue and practically
crossing paths in the mail, came a paper conveying a totally different quantum mechanics. It seemed
to completely contradict Heisenberg's, yet it produced all of the same results, and, far from
the thicket of matrices, did so using mathematics that any physicist could command. The Schrödinger
equation had arrived. Chapter 9. Schrödinger in Urosa. Christmas and New Year's Day, 1925-1926.
Erwin Schrödinger, 34 years old, had contracted tuberculosis. In the spring of 1922, just after
he had started teaching at the University of Zurich, he was, actually so kaput, he told Pauly,
that I could no longer get any sensible ideas. With a Viennese chef, and Annie, his wife of two
years, he retreated to an alpine health resort in Urosa, near Davos, where, at over a mile in
altitude, the thin air would curb the tuberculosis bacteria. Einstein had brought his younger son
Eduard, who suffered from constant headaches and earaches to the same hotel a few years before.
When the brisk air of autumn arrived, Schrödinger began reading Hermann Weier. Weier was a friend
of Schrödinger, who had given a series of mathematical lectures and relativity during the
war at the ETH in Zurich. These had been transformed into a famously daunting book, ubiquitous around
physics departments called Space-Time-Matter. Schrödinger noticed a point that Weier made in
which, if followed through, suggested that the electron in an orbit behaves like a standing wave,
whose crests and troughs oscillate up and down without advancing.
Writing in his graceful, small, slanted hand, he sat on the porch with a blanket over his knees,
plugging one equation into another, thinking fuzzily about matter and waves.
These calculations resulted in a small paper, on a remarkable property of the quantized orbits of a
single electron, and Schrödinger gave no further thought to it. Three years later, in 1925, Peter
Debye, at the ETH, cigar clamped in his teeth, walked across the street to the University of
Zurich to show Schrödinger Louis de Broglie's recent paper on waves of matter. He was entranced,
and, as Debye had hoped, gave a lecture on it at the next joint ETH University of Zurich
colloquium. This was on November 23, a week after Heisenberg, born and Jordan submitted their famous
paper On Quantum Mechanics to the Zeitschrift. Felix Bloch, a twenty-year-old physicist, soon
became Heisenberg's first pupil, and then, one of Pauley's first assistants, remembers that after
the lecture, Debye casually remarked that he thought this way of talking was rather childish.
As a student of Sommerfeld, he had learned that, to deal properly with waves, one had to have a
wave equation that described its undulation. Schrödinger plunged into waves. In a paper on
the Bose-Einstein ideas that he finished a few weeks later, he wrote, in stronger words than
either Einstein or De Broglie had used, that he hoped to take seriously the Broglie-Einstein wave
theory of the moving particle, according to which the particle is nothing more than a kind of
white cap on the wave radiation that forms the basis of the world.
The snow was falling on the steep, slanted roof of the hotel as Irwin Schrödinger, laughing,
a woman by his side, made his way around the last kink of the road. He was back in Arosa again
after four years, but now it was winter, and Annie and the Austrian chef were far away.
No one knows anything about the woman beside him. It was almost Christmas. Annie was with Vile,
her lover, and her husband's closest friend, whose book had inspired him the last time he was in
Arosa to thoughts of waves. Vile's wife, continuing the pattern, was the mistress of Pauley's friend,
the physicist, Paul Scherer. Growing up in a cherub festooned townhouse of pink stucco and marble
in the heart of Vienna, within sight of its majestic gothic steppenstone, Schrödinger had been a
home-tutored only child, treated to a constant stream of doting feminine attention from young
aunts, maids, and nurses. His father, supported by an inherited linoleum business he despised,
was an amateur botanist and landscape artist. His mother, the frail and cheerful young daughter
of a research chemist, whose second wife, in grand Viennese fashion, became Mahler's mistress for
a decade. Schrödinger's grandmother, the research chemist's first wife, was British, and the little
boy learned English before German. He grew handsome, cultured, charming, brilliant, and devoid of any
sense that the world did not, in fact, revolve around him. There, looking out through the snow-burdened
pines to Weishhorn, Schrödinger thought about Debye's comment, the practical Dutchman, of course we
need a wave equation. With pearls in his ears to dampen any distracting outside noise, the carols
rising from the porch, the voice of the woman he brought with him, Schrödinger worked straight
through Christmas, wrapped at what he began to see unfolding on the page before him.
Vili Vienn, the ferocious Munich experimental physicist who had flunked Heisenberg in college,
was at his ski hut when he received a letter from Schrödinger, written two days after Christmas.
At the moment I am struggling with a new atomic theory, if only I knew more mathematics. I am very
optimistic about this thing and expect that if I can only solve it, it will be very beautiful.
Schrödinger followed this touching enthusiasm with the explanation that
his theory was beginning to look as if it could produce the frequencies of the spectral lines
of the hydrogen atom better than anyone had before, and in a relatively natural way, not through ad-hoc
assumptions. Schrödinger was beginning to believe, looking down on the undulating whiteness all
around, that the entire world was made of waves. He came down the mountain on January 8th and went
straight to Vile, who helped him solve his equation. A solution to the Schrödinger equation,
describing the state or condition of a given quantum entity, is known as a wavefunction.
The wavefunction is symbolized by the Greek letter Psi.
When the ETH and the University of Zurich met again for their fortnightly colloquia,
Schrödinger stood up and declared in triumph,
My colleague Debye suggested that one should not talk of waves unless one has got a wave
equation. Well, I have found one. Schrödinger's assistant, Fritz London, who a decade later
became a pioneer in the theory of Bose-Einstein condensation, wrote jokingly to Schrödinger,
reminding him of that old paper. Very respected hair professor, today I must talk with you seriously.
Do you know a certain hair Schrödinger who described in the year 1922 a
noteworthy property of quantum orbits? Do you know this man? What, you say you know him rather
well? You were even with him when he wrote this paper and were implicated in the work?
This is truly shocking. Hence, you already knew four years ago.
London went on to list the aspects of Schrödinger's 1922 paper that, to him,
in 1926 seemed to lead, in a blindingly obvious way, straight to Schrödinger's wave equation.
He asked Schrödinger, Will you now immediately confess that,
like a priest, you held the truth in your hands and kept it secret?
Now, hear that! Einstein said, upon hearing that Schrödinger had so unexpectedly replicated
the matrix results with a wave equation. Until now, we had no exact quantum theory.
And now we suddenly have two. You will agree with me that the two exclude each other.
Which theory is correct? Perhaps neither is.
Chapter 10 What You Can Observe
April 28 and Summer 1926
Einstein stood by the window of his study in Berlin, his gray hair glowing in the last daylight.
You do not mention the path of the electron at all, Heisenberg, he said.
But when you look in a cloud chamber, Einstein pointed his finger with squinted eye,
as if he were following the jet trail of an electron. The electron's track can be observed
quite directly. Electrons traveling through a jar of moist air leave trails like those of
airplanes in the upper atmosphere. Don't you think, he asked, that it's strange to say that
there is a path for the electron in the cloud chamber, but there is no path for the electron
in the atom? The existence of the path cannot depend merely on the size of its container.
Heisenberg's whole speech at the Berlin physics colloquium half an hour earlier
had really been aimed at the gray-haired man in the second row.
After all the people left, Einstein said,
would you walk home with me so we can discuss these things further?
Now they had arrived at Einstein's house, and Einstein was finished with the kind questions
about Sommerfeld and Pauli, and was cutting to the meat of the matter, and Heisenberg was eager
to convince him. But we have no way of observing the electron's path in the atom. What we actually
record are frequencies of the light radiated by the atom, but no actual path, said Heisenberg.
With a small flourish, he added, and it is rational to introduce into a theory
only such quantities as can be directly observed.
Einstein sat down in one of the big armchairs before the unlit fire.
Heisenberg, he said, every theory contains unobservable quantities.
Heisenberg looked up in surprise. The principle of employing only observable quantities simply
cannot be consistently carried out.
But isn't that precisely what you have done with relativity? asked Heisenberg.
Einstein smiled a little. Perhaps I did use such a philosophy earlier. Perhaps I even wrote it,
but it is nonsense all the same. Heisenberg looked as if he were being told by his priest
that he did not actually believe in God. You know, people talk about observation all the time,
continued Einstein. But do they know what they actually mean by that?
The very concept of observation is itself already problematic. He searched his pockets
for his tobacco pouch. Every observation presupposes an unambiguous connection between
the phenomenon to be observed. He found the pouch and began filling his pipe,
and the sensation which eventually penetrates into our consciousness.
He lit a match, two fingers of his right hand holding the thin matchstick over the tobacco.
It caught and smoldered, and Einstein blew the smoke out of his nose, leaning back in the armchair.
But we can only be sure of this connection if we know the natural laws by which it is determined.
If, however, and here he looked straight at Heisenberg, who was leaning forward in his chair,
his pale hair shining in the dim room. As is obviously the case in modern atomic physics,
these laws have to be called into question. Then the concept of observation loses its clear meaning.
Heisenberg's quick mind was leaping about. Einstein's quiet voice was opening new doors
all around his brain. In that case, finished Einstein, it is theory which first determines
what can be observed. Heisenberg felt as if a light bulb with a filament made of fireworks
had just lit up his brain. It is theory which determines what can be observed.
Einstein was smoking and looking at him. It is theory which determines what can be observed.
Part of Heisenberg wanted to immediately run out the door with this
shiningly new concept and go ponder all these things. The other part of him wanted never
to leave this chair in the darkening room, listening to Einstein.
Einstein stood up and turned on a reading light near them, drawing them closer together,
while the world outside went dark and the reflections bloomed in the windows.
Let there be light, said Einstein. He sat back down, a trail of smoke following him in the air.
So, in your theory, we have an electron orbiting the nucleus and then suddenly it leaps.
But wait, no, we don't really have that. Einstein smiled, catching himself. No orbits.
We have an electron. It's doing something we don't know what inside the atom.
He looked at Heisenberg, who suddenly understood why people occasionally
described Einstein's expression as impish. Suddenly it leaps into a different state,
emitting a light quantum. One hand plucked an imaginary particle out of the air,
as it does so.
Einstein's brow furrowed and he looked a little teacherly as his glasses slid down his nose.
But we also have an alternative idea, one that says the electron merely, like a little
radio transmitter, beams out a wave motion in a continuous fashion as the atom changes its state.
Einstein puffed on his pipe. Now, in our first scenario, we cannot for the life of us account
for the interference phenomena which have so often been observed and can only come from overlapping
waves. In the second, we cannot explain the fact of sharp spectral lines, each one a single frequency
of light. So what do we do? Heisenberg thought of what Bohr would say.
Well, we are of course dealing with phenomena that lie far beyond the realm of everyday experience,
and so we cannot expect these phenomena to be describable in terms of the traditional concepts.
You are a good pupil of Bohr's, Einstein said. But I am not. In what quantum state then do you
suppose that the continuous emission of the wave is taking place? That is, what list of characteristics
might describe the atom while it emits the wave? Heisenberg was a little taken aback, but,
ever quick on his feet, said, It could be like when you are watching a film, and,
often the transition from one picture to another does not occur suddenly. The first picture becomes
slowly weaker, while the second slowly becomes stronger, so that, in an intermediate state,
we do not know which picture is intended. In the atom too, a situation could arise in which,
for a time, we just do not know what quantum state the electron is in.
You are moving on very thin ice, said Einstein. You are now talking of what we know about the
atom, and no longer about what the atom is really doing. If your theory is right, you will have to
tell me sooner or later what the atom does when it passes from one stationary state to the next.
I admit that I am strongly attracted, said Heisenberg slowly, by the simplicity and beauty
of the mathematical schemes with which nature suddenly spreads out before us,
the almost frightening simplicity and wholeness of the relationships for which
none of us was in the least prepared. I know you have felt this too.
Einstein sat smoking and nodding. Then he said, Still, I should never claim that I really understood
what is meant by the simplicity of natural laws.
Do you believe in God, Herr Professor Schrödinger?
asked the blonde girl sitting beside him in the sand. It was the summer of 1926,
and they were on the Strandbad, the bathing beach of the Lake of Zurich.
She was a lovely fourteen-year-old, awkward and graceful, named Ita Junger.
Beside her sat her twin sister, Roswita, who, like Ita, had long blonde braids.
They were matching convent school uniforms even though it was summer and they were at the beach.
Both of them looked as if they were about to giggle, but the question was in earnest.
I believe more in God the Father with the white beard than I believe in nothing, said Schrödinger.
He was lying on the sand in his bathing trunks. By his side was a small portable blackboard,
dull and chalky in the brilliant sun flashing on the sand.
The water lapped against the wet shore a few feet away.
I thought scientists didn't believe in God, said Roswita.
What people who say that don't understand, said Schrödinger, is that the world picture
of science becomes accessible at the price that everything personal is excluded from it.
A personal God cannot be encountered there.
I do not meet God in space and time, says the honest scientific thinker,
and reproaching him for it are the same people whose catechism says, God is spirit.
Schrödinger had always liked teaching on the beach.
In summertime when it was warm enough, we went to the Strandbad on the lake of Zurich.
Remembered a recently graduated student of Schrödingers.
The students sat with our own notes in the grass and watched this lean man in bathing
trunks before us, writing his calculations on an improvised blackboard which we had brought along.
Ita and Roswita's mother was a friend of Schrödinger's wife, Annie,
who had persuaded him to give them math lessons once a week during the summer,
so that Ita, who had flunked math, could catch up with her class.
Schrödinger asked Vial what was taught to fourteen-year-olds and the great mathematician,
who that January had helped him solve the first Schrödinger equation,
obligingly made him an outline.
Schrödinger was a good teacher, and Ita learned the necessary math.
But along with that were many discussions on other subjects, including Schrödinger's equation.
He told them that it seemed to suggest that everything was made of waves.
What do you mean? Ita asked. Everything is a wave? Even water is little droplets when it's small.
Schrödinger nodded, explaining how much smaller than a water droplet were the waves of matter,
his equation described. The smallest water droplet imaginable,
one dwarfed by a pinhead, would contain trillions of waves of matter.
And matter is like light, he said, and it diffracts.
Squinting into the sun beyond Ita's head, he explained diffraction.
You know how small things with the sun behind them, a lock of your hair, a mote of dust,
a spider's web, light up mysteriously? The single strand of hair itself becomes,
as it were, its own source of light. The bigger and slower moving a quantum mechanical particle is,
the smaller its associated wave. Just as a mote of dust diffracts a light wave,
so the nucleus diffracts an electron. An atom in reality is merely the diffraction halo of an
electron wave captured by the nucleus of the atom. Ita wasn't tranced to imagine she might be made
of diffraction halos, but Roswita had had enough.
I'm going swimming, she said.
Sand flew as Ita, tripping over her uniform, rose up to follow her.
Both girls splashed in, clothed and screaming. Shredding her followed, walking,
watching them as they bobbed off the shore. He broke into his sprint, and in one smooth motion
dived into the water. The girls looked around, kicking in place, swirling their hands in the
water, their skirts ballooning below their elbows.
Well, where is he? said Ita.
I'll bet he's sneaking up on us, said Roswita.
Eek! said Ita, her nerves humming. Roswita shivered with pleased expectation.
Ita looked a little blue in the lips. Then she screamed, her mouth was filled with water as she
was pulled under by her leg. She emerged with the grinning professor, whose hair was plastered and
peaked in funny ways on his head, his face looking years younger, without the little round glasses
in the presence of his wife. Ita was coughing, shivering and laughing simultaneously. Roswita
shook her braids in a tremendous water-splattering circle and then said,
It's too cold, I'm getting out. She began swimming for sure, but her twin didn't follow her quite
yet. She asked the professor, When you were under the water for so long, was it nice to
be surrounded by waves? Was it like your equation?
Shreddinger looked at her and then slowly smiled as they swam to shore.
Settled back on the sand beside her sister, Ita said, I like your theory about the world
being made of waves. The funny thing was, said Shreddinger, a German called Heisenberg,
with the help of my friend Max Born, had come up with another theory half a year before me.
His theory had no space or time within the atom. He shook his head.
I don't know what that means, and because of the, to me, very difficult appearing methods of
transcendental algebra, much shorter than what we're doing here, and because of the lack of
unshowly kite, I felt deterred by it, if not to say repelled.
Unshowly kite, the physical naturalness of an idea, so that it can be pictured in the mind's eye,
was one of Shreddinger's favorite things about his theory, and the area in which he felt it most
obviously outreached Heisenberg. As far as Heisenberg was concerned, Shreddinger could have it.
The more I think of the physical part of the Shreddinger theory, he wrote to Pauli that June,
the more abominable I find it. Mimicking one of those gentle, bore phrases they both knew so well,
he continued, what Shreddinger writes about unshowly kite is probably not quite right.
In other words, I think it is mist, bullshit. He grumpily decided that the greatest result
of the Shreddinger theory was that it could be used to extend his own where the math was too hard.
But then, Shreddinger leaned his thin frame back on his elbows against the sand,
his face still showing the surprise of the discovery. While playing around with his theory
and mine, I found that they were mathematically equivalent. Heisenberg's quantum mechanics
and Shreddinger's wave mechanics were two ways of saying the same thing.
The two decisive moments had come in late June, and they both involved how the wave mechanics
dealt with more than one particle. First came a paper from Shreddinger published in the Analander
Physique. The wave function psi, the solution to his equation he knew, described an electron as a
wave in three dimensions. Perfect. But it described a pair of electrons as a single wave in six
dimensions. Nonsense. Two waves in three dimensions would make intuitive unshowly sense.
The wave function psi cannot and may not be interpreted directly in terms of three-dimensional
space. However much the one electron problem tends to mislead us on this point.
He would spend the rest of his life trying to make a three-dimensional world built out of waves.
Meanwhile, however, an eerie fact lay in the back of his mind. That two electrons together
are somehow a single, six-dimensional wave means they are tied together. Entangled.
Simultaneously came a paper from Bourne published in Zeitschrift für Physique.
Always a bit numinous and hazy, Shreddinger's waves under the gaze of Bourne were evaporating
even quicker. Bourne looked at how Shreddinger's equation described two particles colliding.
He found that one gets no answer to the question, what is the state after the collision,
but only to the question, how probable is a specific outcome of the collision?
Bourne gave the wave its modern interpretation. It became a very useful tool with a tenuous
and undefined relation to reality, a mathematical symbol in a cage that could be induced with
sufficient prodding and squaring to prophesy probable fates of particles.
Max Bourne betrayed us both, said Shreddinger with a half grin. He brought together particles
which I didn't want, and waves which Heisenberg didn't want, and every one has left Heisenberg
and me behind. He laughed wryly. But Bourne overlooked something. If the waves are there
when you don't look, and particles when you do, it depends on the taste of the observer which
he now wishes to regard as real. Like animals talking when we aren't around? asked Eta.
Shreddinger laughed. You don't believe that animals talk when you're not around.
Eta shook her head. Only when I was younger. Maybe my waves are only as real as talking animals,
he said as he rolled over to let the sun onto his sandy back.
He was silent. Finally he said,
But the world, the physical world, can be much stranger than we tend to give it credit for.
Eta wrinkled her nose questioningly. What do you mean?
Well, back during the Great War I had to spend a lot of time on an observation
post near the Italian border and… Did you have a gun? Did you kill anyone?
Roswita, who had been lying on her back with her eyes shut, suddenly turned on her side to
face Shreddinger. Shreddinger looked at her in partial amusement and partial horror.
My father bought me two pistols, a small one and a large one, but luckily I never had to
fire them at man or beast. Eta said,
But you were going to explain about how strange the world is, giving her sister a withering look.
Roswita rolled her eyes and turned back to her supine sun-drinking position.
Yes, said Shreddinger, smiling at her. How strange the world is.
You were on the observation post, prompted Eta.
Right, we would be awake under the stars, watching the mountain pass, you know.
For the enemy, whispered Eta.
Well, one night we saw lights moving up the dark alpine slopes toward us, where there were no
paths. Eta's eyes were wide, even Roswita with eyes closed turned her head slightly.
And it was Saint Elmo's fire, said Shreddinger, in a voice that reflected the wonder with its
underlying warm rush of relief that he had felt. Each barb on the barbed wire of the entanglement
was haloed with fire. Only, it's not even fire. The sharp barbs discharged the electricity in the
air, melting the air into plasma, the same thing that makes up lightning and the aurora borealis
and the sun and all the stars. So, it doesn't even really belong on Earth, said Eta.
Yes, you feel that way when you see it. The Portuguese, in fact, call it Corpo Santo.
Holy body, translated Eta. Sacred body, said Shreddinger, nodding.
Sailors used to see it on their masts and think that it was a saint protecting them from beyond
time and space. And Niels Bohr, another of the quantum physicists, wants to describe the atom
in the same way. He's not surprised that the reality of the wave or particle might depend
on observation, because he believes that a space-time description of atoms is impossible,
he told her. But this I reject a limine. She looked at him.
From the doorstep, he explained. He smiled at her.
Sometimes I think Bohr has no idea what you yourself know perfectly well.
That physics does not consist only of atomic research, science does not consist only of physics,
and life does not consist only of science. She laughed, pleased to be talked to as an adult.
What we cannot comprehend within space-time, he said, we cannot comprehend at all.
He smiled ruefully. There are such things, but I do not believe atomic structure is one of them.
He was about to meet Bohr himself for the first time, and he had no idea what he was getting into.
Chapter 11 This Damned Quantum Jumping October 1926
Schrodinger lay coughing in the guest bed of the Bohr's house in Copenhagen,
his face red and sweaty from a fever. The Bohr's hovered over him, concern in their voices.
Margretta proffering tea and broth, Niels saying,
but Schrodinger, you must admit that the quantum jumps happen.
They had been arguing for three days now, ever since Bohr had picked Schrodinger up at the station.
The whole day for Margretta and Heisenberg, who was still living on the top floor of the
institute, flowed around these two obdurate rocks. Every conversation, every meal, every walk,
was swallowed up by the continuous battering of Bohr against Schrodinger.
Although Bohr was normally most considerate and friendly in his dealings with people,
wrote Heisenberg, he now struck me as an almost remorseless fanatic,
one who was not prepared to make the least concession or grant that he could ever be mistaken.
It is hardly possible to convey just how passionate the discussions were,
how deeply rooted the convictions of each man, a fact that marked their every utterance.
Schrodinger turned uncomfortably in his bed. His voice hoarse, he said for what felt like the
thousandth time, you must realize Bohr that the whole idea of quantum jumps is bound to end in
nonsense. He went into detail, almost sitting up. The jump from one energy level to another is
either gradual or sudden. If it is gradual, how can we explain the persistence of sharp spectral
lines, but if it is sudden, we have no idea how to explain what the electron might be doing during
the jump. Recall that the color of light and its energy are closely related by the fundamental
quantum equation defining Planck's constant, E equals HV. Energy equals Planck's constant,
multiplied by frequency. When a high-energy atomic electron falls to a lower energy level,
it emits the extra energy in the form of a telltale frequency of light, one of the narrow bands of
color known as a spectral line. If the electron moved from one energy level in an explicable
fashion, the result would be a spectrum of color, a visual analog to the increasing hum of a car
engine as the car accelerates from a standstill to sixty miles per hour. The only explanation for
the pure, clear, single frequency that actually occurred, however, seemed to be the inexplicable
quantum jump, as if the car went from a standstill one moment to speeding the next with nothing in
between. Schrodinger's face, drawn and bare of his glasses, looked like someone else's.
He sank down against his pillow.
The whole idea of quantum jumps necessarily leads to nonsense, he said.
Boar, sitting at the end of the bed with one knee up on the blanket, looking calm except for his
intense eyes said, What you say is absolutely correct. Schrodinger looked at him warily,
not turning his face on the pillow. But, said Boar, it does not prove that there are no quantum
jumps. It proves only that we cannot imagine them, that the representational concepts with
which we describe events in daily life and experiments in classical physics are inadequate
when it comes to describing quantum jumps. Heisenberg, sitting in the corner was nodding.
Nor should we be surprised to find it so, seeing that the processes involved are not
the objects of direct experience. Boar's forehead was creased with his effort to cover every nuance.
Heisenberg looked pleadingly at Schrodinger. Can't you understand? Let go of the pictures.
In the petulant voice of the invalid, Schrodinger almost whispered,
I don't wish to enter into long arguments about the formation of concepts. I prefer to leave
that to the philosophers. One hand was fluttering around the edge of the blanket, covering him,
which he made into a fist. I wish only to know what happens inside an atom.
Suddenly he looked straight at Boar and said, reasonably,
I really don't mind what language you choose for discussing it. If there are electrons in
the atom and if these are particles, as all of us have believed, then they must surely move in
some way, and it ought to be possible in principle to determine how they behave. Boar's face was blank.
Schrodinger continued, but from the mathematical form of wave mechanics or quantum mechanics alone,
it is clear that we cannot expect reasonable answers to these questions.
He drank from the cup of chicken stock that Margretta had left by his bedside.
The moment, however, that we change the picture and say that there are no discrete electrons,
Boar shifted his position, looking troubled. Schrodinger's voice strengthened.
The moment we say there are no point-particle electrons, only electron waves or waves of
matter, then everything looks quite different. The emission of light is as easily explained as
the transmission of radio waves through the aerial of the transmitter, and what seem to be insoluble
contradictions have suddenly disappeared. Boar said, I beg to disagree. He sat up straight.
The contradictions do not disappear, they are simply pushed one side. The very interaction
between light and matter that had caused Planck twenty-six years earlier to introduce the concept
of quantization requires discontinuity, he reminded Schrodinger.
I cannot believe that the last word in describing atomic interactions is this picturesque pageantry
of individual molecules swallowing or re-spewing whole energy parcels, said Schrodinger.
Not to disagree, but merely to understand, said Boar. Schrodinger, I think you are far too wedded
to pictorial ways of thinking. But then you, too, have so far failed to discover a satisfactory
physical interpretation of quantum mechanics, said Schrodinger.
Physical interpretation, said Boar, as I said, you place too much emphasis on things of that sort.
Schrodinger said firmly that there was no reason why he should not be able to ultimately come up
with an explanation of the quantized interaction between light and matter. An explanation that
will admittedly look somewhat different from all previous ones.
No, said Boar, there is no hope for that at all. We have known what Planck's formula means for the
past twenty-five years, he stated with papal assurance, and, quite apart from that, we can see
the inconsistencies, the sudden jumps in atomic phenomena, quite directly when we watch flashes
of light on a scintillation screen, or the rush of an electron through a cloud chamber. You cannot
ignore these observations. Schrodinger was again lying flat on the bed. His eyes were closed.
He said wearily, if all this damned quantum jumping were really here to stay, I should be sorry I
should be sorry I ever got involved with quantum theory.
Heisenberg looked at him with shock. Boar finally felt bad. Here was his guest, lying sick on the
bed before him. But the rest of us are extremely grateful that you did, he said. Schrodinger did
not open his eyes. Your waves have contributed so much to mathematical clarity and simplicity,
they represent a gigantic advance over all previous forms of quantum mechanics.
Heisenberg's student and best friend, Carl Friedrich von Weißacker, in his beautiful
reminiscence of Boar in the 30s, described what it was like to be in an argument with Boar over
the meaning of your own ideas. Boar, in the midst of exhausting work trying to help German
Jewish physicists escape from Hitler to Denmark and elsewhere, had asked the twenty-year-old to
write a paper on an arcane subject. When they met, Boar was late and looked infinitely tired.
He pulled the paper from a pile and said, oh, very good, very good. That is a very nice piece of
work. Now everything is clear. I hope that you will publish it soon. I thought to myself,
remembered von Weißacker, the poor man. He probably has had almost no time to read the paper.
He continued, just to clarify something, what is the meaning of the formula on page 17?
I explained it to him. Then he said, yes, I understand that, but then the footnote on page
14 must mean so-and-so. Yes, that is what I meant. But then—and so it went on. He had read everything.
After an hour he was getting fresher all the time, and I came to a point where I had difficulty
with an explanation. After two hours he was flourishingly fresh and complete master of the
situation, full of naive enthusiasm, while I felt that I was getting tired and was being driven into
a corner. In the third hour, however, he said, triumphantly, but without any trace of malice.
Now I understand it. The point is that everything is exactly the opposite of what you said.
That's the point. With due reservations about the use of the word
everything, I agreed that it was so.
Recovering at home, Schrodinger wrote about Bohr to his friend, the crusty old experimentalist
Villivine. There will hardly again be a man who will achieve such enormous success,
who in his sphere of work is honored almost like a demigod, and yet, who remains, I would not say,
modest and free of conceit, but rather, shy and diffident, like a theology student.
I do not necessarily mean that as praise, it is not my ideal of a man. Nevertheless,
this attitude works strongly sympathetically compared with what one often meets in stars
of medium size in our profession. In spite of everything, the relationship with Bohr and
especially Heisenberg, both of whom behaved towards me in a touchingly kind manner,
was cloudlessly amiable and cordial.
He described how Bohr talked, often for minutes almost in a dream-like, visionary and really
quite unclear manner, partly because he is so full of consideration and constantly hesitates,
fearing that the other might take a statement of his, that is, Bohr's own point of view,
as an insufficient appreciation of the others, in this case in particular, of my own work.
In his approach to atomic problems, Bohr is completely convinced that any understanding in
the usual sense of the word is impossible. Therefore, the conversation is almost immediately
driven into philosophical questions, and soon you no longer know whether you really take the
position he is attacking or whether you really must attack the position he is defending.
Heisenberg's response to the debate was evangelical. We in Copenhagen felt convinced
toward the end of Schrödinger's visit that we were on the right track, he remembered,
though we fully realized how difficult it would be to persuade even leading physicists that they
must abandon all attempts to construct perceptual models of atomic processes.
He immediately whipped off a paper with pedagogical intent, he explained to Pauley,
against the lords of continuum theory. Bohr, too, was spurred into action.
We had great pleasure from the visit of Schrödinger, he wrote to a friend.
After the discussions with him, it is very much on my mind to complete a paper dealing with
the general properties of the quantum theory. This was hard, and a few weeks later, Bohr lamented
to Kramer's, how little the words we all use are suitable in accounting for empirical facts,
except when they are applied in the modest way characteristic for the correspondence theory.
Certain Bohr's Einstein condensates, however, which so violate the spirit, if perhaps not the letter
of the correspondence principle, would strangely enough revive Schrödinger's original and thoroughly
discredited interpretation of waves of matter and charge. When thousands of superchilled atoms or
electron pairs are flowing in perfect, numinous union, matter really is made of waves. It is the
particles that have an S. Particles and probability reign only in the heat.
It was too early for this realization. Meanwhile, Max Born admitted to Schrödinger,
it would have been beautiful if you were right. Something that beautiful happens,
unfortunately, seldom in this world. Pauley's take on Schrödinger's ideas was less elegiac.
Local Zurich Superstitions
In November of 1926, this prompted an indignant reply from Schrödinger.
Pauley was kind and almost diplomatic in response. Look on the expression as my objective conviction
that discontinuities are necessary to describe the quantum world, but don't think that this
conviction makes life easy for me. Pauley went on. I have already tormented myself because of it,
and will have to do so even more.
Schrödinger appreciated this frankness.
We are all nice people, and are interested only in the facts and not in whether it finally comes
out the way one's self or the other fellow supposed, he replied. Such capriciousness
serves science better than uniformity. Uniformity, however, was the direction quantum physics was
headed in. Even Born, a good friend of Schrödinger's, ignored his pleas for open-mindedness. In fact,
one of Schrödinger's letters struck Born as so obviously ridiculous, or insidiously dangerous,
that he read it to his students on a walk in order to expose its perfidity,
like a commander-in-chief summoning his army.
On that military walk, where P. A. M. Derock and his polyglot American roommate J. Robert Oppenheimer,
who described the scene to the stuttering quantum mechanician Pasquale Jordan,
he thought that Born put off some of the Americans by how sure he was that his way was the right way.
That same November, in his characteristically brimful phrases, Oppenheimer gave the definitive
description of Göttingen physics. They are working very hard here, and combining a fantastically
impregnable metaphysical disingenuanness with the go-getting habits of a wallpaper manufacturer.
The result is that the work done here has an almost demoniac lack of plausibility to it,
and is highly successful. The demonically successful and implausible ideas
wallpapering Göttingen at the time of Oppenheimer's letter were, of course, no longer matrices,
but Born's waves of probability.
About me it can be told that physics-wise I am entirely satisfied,
Born wrote to Einstein that same November, since my idea to consider Schrodinger's
wave field as a Gespensterfeld, ghost wave, in your sense of the word, proves more useful all the time.
Einstein had never published the Gespensterfeld idea, but many physicists remembered it in some
detail, including Bohr, who wrote of his first meeting with Einstein six years earlier. Certainly,
his favored use of such picturesque phrases as ghost waves guiding the light quanta implied no
tendency to mysticism, but illuminated rather a profound humor behind his piercing remarks.
Whatever Einstein may have meant by Gespensterfeld, it was not the racetrack tote board that Born's
interpretation of the Schrodinger equation represented, in which the odds for any given
quantum event were all that could be known. In early December, Einstein wrote to the Born's,
quantum mechanics is certainly imposing, but an inner voice tells me that it is not yet the real
thing. The theory says a lot, but does not really bring us any closer to the secret of the old one.
I, at any rate, am convinced that he is not playing at dice.
This, wrote Born, came as a hard blow to me.
A few weeks later, in January 1927, Einstein dealt with the other side in a letter to Ehrenfest.
My heart does not warm to schrodingery. It is uncausal and altogether too primitive.
And even his favorite hope, a field theory, where the fundamental idea is not waves or
particles but smooth fields of force, like gravity or electromagnetism, was deserting him.
All attempts of recent years to explain the elementary particles of nature by means of
continuous fields have failed, he wrote in a paper in the first days of 1927.
Max's wife Heidi wrote Einstein a few days later to thank him for his criticism of her
recently completed play. Included in the letter was a drawing.
At the special request of the children I enclose the result of a writing game we played yesterday.
They are sketches which are made up as follows. One person draws the head, the second the trunk,
a third, the lower part of the body, and none of them knows what has been done by the others
before him. Finally, a name is written underneath at random. You are going to be very pleased
with your portrait. Einstein wrote back,
What applies to jokes, I suppose, also applies to pictures and to plays. I think they should not
smell of a logical scheme but of a delicious fragment of life, scintillating with various
colors according to the position of the beholder. If one wants to get away from this vagueness,
one must take up mathematics, and even then one reaches one's aim only by becoming completely
insubstantial under the dissecting knife of clarity. Living matter and clarity are opposites.
They run away from one another. We are now experiencing this rather tragically in physics.
Chapter 12 Uncertainty, Winter 1926-1927
It was late Christmas Eve in 1926. An almost transparent coating of snow had fallen on Blitemzwey.
In Bohr's Institute, under its terracotta-tiled eaves, now fringed with frost, one light burned.
Someone walking by would have seen two men standing in an attic room, far apart.
But the snow on Sidewalk and Street was like an unwritten page. Everyone else from the Institute
had gone home days ago. What the word wave or particle means, one no longer knows.
There are too many classical words for a quantum world, Heisenberg was saying doggedly. But the
mathematics, on the other hand, is now perfect. Dirac has made quantum mechanics as complete as
relativity. For Heisenberg, still squeamish about the word matrix and distrustful of waves,
quantum mechanics was matrix mechanics, which Dirac and Jordan had massively extended at the
beginning of December. He sounded tired. I just want to see where it leads.
Almost quivering, he stood by the dormer window while Bohr wandered around the room.
Heisenberg. Bohr said, The nicest mathematical scheme in the world won't solve the paradoxes we
are up against. Classical words like wave and particle are all we have. This paradox is central.
I first want to understand how nature actually avoids contradictions.
Mathematical schemes like yours or Schrodingers are just tools,
and you shouldn't restrict yourself to just one tool. We must search for the deep truth.
Heisenberg broke in. I don't want to make any concession to the Schrodinger side that's not
already contained in the quantum mechanics. Bohr's heavy eyebrows rose slowly, and he stopped in his
tracks. Heisenberg realized he was shouting and admitted, Perhaps this is just psychologically
because I come from quantum mechanics. He looked up, his eyes still burning. But at the same time,
I feel that whenever the people on the Schrodinger side add something to it,
then I always expect that it will probably be wrong. He tried to laugh apologetically, but
Bohr was serious. Heisenberg, you must understand the torture I'm putting myself through in order
to get used to the mysticism of nature, he said, slowly pacing and slowly explaining.
Bohr continued. He wanted to look at both approaches together and look beyond them to their
epistemological lessons. His quiet voice pressed on until Heisenberg felt he could stand it no
longer, felt all the progress they had once made becoming disordered heat energy in his skull.
I would try to say, Well, this is the answer, Heisenberg remembered. Then Bohr gave the
contradictions and would say, No, it can't be. In the end, shortly after Christmas, we both were
in a kind of despair. We couldn't agree, and so we're a bit angry about it.
After a tense and exhausting month, Bohr went skiing in Norway, leaving Heisenberg to his attic
room. So I was alone in Copenhagen. It was a winter midnight. Heisenberg's chair scraped
against the floor as he rose. Tiredly he dragged his fingers along the desk, hit his pencil,
sending it on an inevitable trajectory across the strewn paper into an entirely deterministic
freefall, accelerating at 9.8 meters per second squared until it slept gently against the floor
and rolled into shadow. With his face next to the window pane, he could see through his own
ghostly reflection the trees bowing over the entrance to Follad Park behind the Institute.
The light was so low that the color-sensitive cones in the inner workings of his eyes could
barely operate. What he saw were shades of glowing gray. The window pane fogged with his breath.
On the desk behind him lay dozens of false starts, electron trajectories sputtering into blank paper,
Greek symbols that meant nothing, mathematical statements that had turned out to be lies.
The Institute was quiet again at midnight, for the first time in weeks. Heisenberg stood by
the window thinking. Before the impasse, while they were still constructing
gedonkin, thought experiments in what Einstein called their thought kitchens,
he and Bohr had made progress of a sort. Coming nearer and nearer to the real thing,
only to see that the paradoxes got worse and worse because they turned out more clearly,
that was the exciting thing, Heisenberg recalled. Like a chemist who tries to concentrate the poison
more and more from some kind of solution, we tried to concentrate the poison of the paradox.
In his mind he replayed the speedy, silent progress of an electron through a cloud chamber
again and again. It was so simple and no one could explain it. No one could describe it
mathematically. The results of his attempts to do so lay on his desk, scribbled out and crumpled.
When I realized fairly soon that the obstacles before me were quite insurmountable, I began to
wonder, remembered Heisenberg, whether we might not have been asking the wrong sort of question
all along. But where had we gone wrong? The path of the electron through the cloud chamber obviously
existed, one could easily observe it. The mathematical framework of quantum mechanics existed
as well, and was much too convincing to allow for any changes.
He felt trapped. He wondered if Einstein ever felt this brain pinch. His frustration was so
palpable it was like another presence in the room. Don't you see, Heisenberg, it is theory which
first determines what can be observed. Einstein's words rang out in his cramped mind, and then,
with incredible relief, the boards that bound it began to fall away.
Don't you see? Heisenberg almost ran out of the little attic room, down the stairs of the
institute, the door slamming behind him as he emerged into the fresh cold air and emptiness
of the park. He walked between the bare trees at the gate, his booted feet leaving dark footprints,
melting the frost that fringed the grass. It is theory, it is theory, it is theory which
first determines what can be observed. We have always said so glibly, Heisenberg told his
frustration, or the trees, or Bohr or Einstein, that the path of the electron in the cloud chamber
can be observed. He turned to see his footprints among the frost, and he thought of the electron
shooting through the cloud chamber, leaving its footprints of dew behind, small condensed clouds.
But, perhaps, he continued slowly, what we really observed was something much less.
Perhaps, he was walking faster now, his breath like the electron leaving clouds behind him.
We merely saw a series of discreet and ill-defined spots through which the electron had passed.
In fact, all we do see in the cloud chamber are individual water droplets which must certainly
be much larger than an electron. He stopped again. The right question should therefore be,
can quantum mechanics represent the fact that an electron finds itself approximately
in a given place, and that it moves approximately with a given velocity, and can we make these
approximations so close that they do not cause experimental difficulties?
Pauli had written him a letter in October which continually makes the rounds in Copenhagen,
with Heisenberg, Bohr, and Dirac all scuffling for it, as Heisenberg enthusiastically wrote
back a week after receiving it. A phrase from this letter was now resonating in his mind.
The first question is, why can't the Ps, as well as the Qs, be prescribed with arbitrary precision?
One can look at the world with the Pi, and one can look at it with the Qi,
but when one would like to open both eyes, then one gets dizzy, schwindlig again.
Why can't the Ps, momentum, and Qs, position, both be known at the same time?
This consequence of the new mechanics was a drastic departure from the old Newtonian system,
where knowing the Ps and Qs was the start to every solution. Once you knew the position
of a billiard ball on the green felt and its momentum, you could tell exactly what the ball
would do next. Knowing the position and momentum of all the other billiard balls on the table,
and the position and momentum of the Qs, you could tell how the whole game would unfold.
In its infinite wisdom, having pinned down the position and momentum for every particle in the
universe, the Marquis de Laplace's hypothetical demon knew the whole future this way.
This was a concept that had become wildly popular in the late 18th century, with the rise of science
and the fall of kings. It was called determinism, and it was, then, thought of as the newly
chic scientific attitude. The great clockmaker had wound up this great clock, the universe,
and everything was playing out exactly as it was constructed to do.
In these similarly unsettled times a century and a half later, the tide had turned against
causality, and ever since Germany's sudden defeat in 1918, Weimar intellectuals, socialites,
and, back to nature boy scout troops like Heisenberg's, yearned foreign irrationality and
wholism that would transcend the mechanical chain of cause and effect.
Fitting the spirit of the age, Heisenberg's quantum mechanics had no determined end.
It questioned the clockmaker and defied the demon. Heisenberg walked back across the frost to the
door of the institute and up the stairs. He sat down at his desk, brushing all the false
starts out of his way, and wrote down an equation almost immediately. The change in P times the
change in Q is greater than or equal to H, Planck's constant.
One can look at the world with the P-I, and one can look at it with the Q-I,
but when one would like to open both eyes, then one gets dizzy.
This is the famous Heisenberg uncertainty principle. It states that the uncertainty in
the exact momentum of a particle times the uncertainty in the exact position of a particle
must be greater than or equal to the tiny number that is Planck's constant,
the unchanging mysterious number that appears in every quantum equation.
It is paralleled by the same equation relating to energy to available time.
Refined in years later so that Planck's constant is now divided by 4π,
the essential point is that, though small, the number on the right is not and never will be zero.
And in the way of equations like this, if there is absolutely no uncertainty in the
measurement of the momentum of a particle, then there must be an infinite amount of uncertainty
in the measurement of its position. It could be anywhere.
The concept of measurement here became a principle of physics, a weird, unwanted, and seemingly
irreversible intrusion, like the moment the ship's rats fatally decamp on a South Sea island hitherto
populated only by marsupials. When the particle is pinpointed in one place, its momentum has fuzzed
out, becoming indeterminate, so that no one, not even Laplace's demon or god, knows what it is,
because it isn't. Against Heisenberg's wishes, the wave nature of quantum subjects has here
overwhelmed their particle nature. Waves do not have a specific position and momentum. These
two attributes are linked in exactly the same way that Heisenberg's principle describes.
A wave in a tiny box, a specific position, caroms off its walls in a wild and jumbled mess.
A wave left to spread out in the world, a blurred position, has room to have a specific momentum.
A world wave-like and causal when unseen, making quantum leaps into particularity when seen,
this was the dilemma of quantum mechanics, leading straight to entanglement.
But Heisenberg did not want to think about waves at all, about particles he wrote in his paper.
In the strong formulation of the causal law, if we know the present exactly,
we can predict the future. It is not the conclusion, but rather the premise, which is false.
Before the end of February, He had written the whole thing up in a fourteen-page letter to Pauli.
The solution can now, I believe, be expressed pregnantly by the statement,
the path only comes into existence through this, that we observe it.
But was it all old snow? he asked Pauli. Slater, in his discussion of the relationship between
time and frequency central to the Bohr Kramer's Slater paper, had introduced the time-energy
version three years before Heisenberg, though not with the same interpretation.
Heisenberg needed Pauli's relentless criticism. To make anything clearer, I must write to you
about it, he told Pauli. In a somewhat wary note to Bohr, he wrote,
I believe that I have succeeded in treating the case where both P and Q are given to a certain
accuracy. I have written a draft of a paper about these problems. Did Bohr here expect him to write,
which I am about to send to you? Which yesterday I sent to Pauli.
Bohr spent that month in scarf and ski goggles, slowly cutting Christie's down snowy Norwegian
slopes. Bohr's new right-hand man, Oskar Klein, described him sympathetically.
He was very tired at that time. And I believe that the new quantum mechanics caused him both much
pleasure and very great tension. He had probably not expected that all this would come so suddenly,
but rather that he himself perhaps might have contributed more at the time. At the same time,
he praised Heisenberg almost like a kind of messiah, and I think that Heisenberg himself
understood that that was a bit exaggerated. Bohr wished that Pauli had been there. Pauli would
have said to Heisenberg, Stop it, you are being an idiot. And to Bohr, shut up. He would have
stormed around as the wrath of God personified, quivering throughout his whole rotundity. With
his barbed wit, he would have pierced every hope and desire until there was nothing left but unity.
The way Bohr loved it to be.
Polls against his sides Bohr turned in a smooth swoop. The snow flew from his skis,
sparkling up to sting his face. He began to feel those past three months slide away behind him,
like his blue-shadowed tracks. Then the wind picked up, and even his tracks were gone. And Bohr's
mind felt clean and empty, as if the snowy air had blown through it too. The hill steepened,
his turns quickened, his smile freezing to his face.
A long dismissed thought was sitting in the back of his mind. There exist particles and waves.
Bohr's head came up, and his eyebrows pulled together as he felt this thought emerging in a
different way than before. As he skied on, the thought came again. There exist waves and particles
together. A turn. There exist particles and waves, both necessary, but not at the same time.
A turn. Why do we imagine that we can observe physical phenomena without disturbing them?
There exist particles when we look for particles, and waves when we look for waves.
A turn. All our ordinary verbal expressions, he thought, bear the stamp of our customary
forms of perception. Particle, wave, space and time, causality. And to these customary
forms of perception, quantization is an irrationality. A turn. What if this is a fundamental
limitation? What if the very nature of the quantum theory forces us to regard pairs of ideas as
complementary, but exclusive, features of the description? Bohr felt an overwhelming sense
of peace and acceptance. There exist waves and particles. They both exist in a complementary way.
He slowly swooped down the mountain, scarf flapping behind. One warm, bundled human with
dark goggles and red nose. One spot of ordered energy through all the vast, disordered whiteness.
Glowing like Moses, he came down from the mountain with his new commandment.
He returned, just as Heisenberg was about to send off his paper. Bohr took a look at it and
decided it was just a special case of his important new concept of complementarity. Besides, Heisenberg
had tried so hard to avoid waves that, experimental physics never having been his strong suit,
in his example, he hadn't even explained correctly how a microscope works. Heisenberg should not
publish. Heisenberg was thoroughly irritated, and sent the paper off anyway.
But Bohr, in his slow, intense way, hounded him, seconded by his assistant Klein,
like all the other assistants self-sacrificially devoted to Bohr's perspective,
and a little jealous of Heisenberg. Bohr told Pauly that he would pay for the ticket if he
would come to Copenhagen. Pauly couldn't. Heisenberg felt he was going crazy with frustration.
And ended by my breaking into tears because I just couldn't stand this pressure from Bohr.
In the end, Heisenberg's paper was published in May with the correct microscope example,
and with thanks to Bohr for helping him with it, and to note that
recent investigations by Bohr have led to points of view that permit an essential deepening and
refinement of the analysis of the quantum-mechanical relationship attempted in this work.
Meeting Schrödinger on his own territory, it was titled
On the Unschaulich, visualizable, intuitive, Content of the Quantum Mechanics.
Bohr said to work on his own paper. Bohr, wrote Heisenberg to Pauly,
wants to write a general paper on the conceptual basis of the quantum theory,
from the point of view that there exist waves and particles. When one starts like that,
then one can, of course, make everything consistent.
Heisenberg preferred the way of Dirac and Jordan.
Un unschaulicher and more general. At any rate, there are essential differences in taste between
Bohr and me about the word unschaulich. Heisenberg's first draft of his uncertainty paper arrived at
Zeitschrift für Physik late that March, a few days before the 200th anniversary of the death of
Newton. This occasion did not mean much to Heisenberg, but had spurred Einstein into composing
a pair of tributes, one for the German-speaking world and one for the English. The German language
essay ended with bravado and uncertainty. Who would presume today to decide the question
whether the law of causation must definitely be given up?
Two weeks later, on April 13, Bohr sent Einstein a copy of Heisenberg's uncertainty paper,
as Heisenberg had asked him to do. In his accompanying letter, Bohr emphasized how
complementarity deepened the significant, exceptionally brilliant contribution of Heisenberg.
In words that amounted to a challenge Einstein would not be able to resist, Bohr explained
that Heisenberg had now reconciled particle-width wave, since the different aspects of the problem
never manifest themselves simultaneously. Bohr wanted to make it clear that, despite the mild
sound of complementarity, he was talking about a violent disjunction. We have only the choice
between silla and caribbdis, the boat-crunching rock and the man-eating whirlpool, particle phenomena
and wave phenomena. Depending on whether we direct our attention to the continuous, smooth,
or the discontinuous, quantized features of the description, Heisenberg still saw the situation
differently. As Einstein sat down to read the uncertainty paper for the first time, its twenty
five-year-old author, in the backseat of a Berlin taxi, was telling the solemn fifteen-year-old son
of the German ambassador to Denmark, I think I have refuted the law of causality.
Einstein responded speedily to these twin challenges. He delved into the Schrödinger
equation to see if Max Born's statistical interpretation, coupled with Heisenberg's
uncertainty principle, really was the last word. A month later, he was whipping off a relieved
postcard to a skeptical Born. I handed in a short paper to the Academy, in which I show that one
can attribute quite definite movements to Schrödinger's wave mechanics without any statistical
interpretation. This will shortly be published in the minutes of the meetings, kindest regards.
The short paper was titled, Does Schrödinger's wave mechanics determine the motion of a system
completely or only in the sense of statistics? As is well known, he began, the opinion currently
prevails that, in the sense of quantum mechanics, there does not exist a complete space-time description
of the motion of a mechanical system. Einstein believed that in this paper he had shown the
reverse, refuting Heisenberg's uncertainty. After two months of fighting, Heisenberg had
just acquiesced to Bohr's concerns and demands over the uncertainty paper, when Max Born relayed
the news of this new attack. Days after sending off the final copy of the uncertainty paper,
he wrote wordly to Einstein of this, paper in which you advocate the view that it should
be possible, after all, to know the orbits of particles more precisely than I would wish.
He was sure that something was wrong, and a month later was writing to Einstein in words
that amounted to the quintessential exchange of views between the two men, using first
Einstein's and then his own favorite phrases. Perhaps we could comfort ourselves that the
dear Lord could go beyond it and maintain causality? I do not really find it beautiful,
however, to demand more than a physical description of the connection between experiments.
It was not Heisenberg's avowed conviction, but a question from the experimentalist
Walter Bota that had already scotched Einstein's new paper. Bota was a meticulous and thin-skinned
physicist who, as a captured German cavalry officer had spent much of his young manhood as
a prisoner of war in Siberia. He passed the time of his exile learning Russian, working on physics
in his head, and courting and winning a Russian wife. He returned to prove the Bohr-Kramer's
Slater theory wrong and causality correct, with two different experiments, one with his mentor,
Rutherford's assistant Hans Geiger, in 1925 and 1926, having the singular good fortune of being
able to discuss the problem constantly with Einstein. In 1927, Einstein was writing a post-script to
his paper. Bota had alerted him to the odd behavior of coupled systems in Einstein's theory. Their
total motion did not seem to have anything to do with the motions of each component's system,
a situation that must be rejected, Einstein believed, from a physical standpoint.
He thought he might avoid such a fate for his theory with a few refinements.
As the Prussian Academy was printing up its minutes, however, Einstein called. Upon his request,
his paper was removed.
Chapter 13. Solvay, 1927
In October, less than six months after Heisenberg published his uncertainty principle,
thirty quantum physicists gathered in Brussels for what would become one of the most famous
conferences ever. A few minutes of those history-making days were captured on film.
Nancy Greenspan, born's biographer, describes the jittery black-and-white video.
Here is Max Born exiting from an ornately-grilled door,
Niels Bohr animatedly conversing with a natty Irwin Schrödinger,
Werner Heisenberg flashing a youthful cocky grin, Paul Ehrenfress making faces,
a rumpled Albert Einstein nodding in acknowledgement to the anonymous cameraman,
and a boyish Louis de Broglie looking about. It is the Solvay Congress, Brussels, 1927.
In what appear to be the first days, all are smiling, determinists and non-determinists alike.
But a few days later, the mood has changed. The last frames of these same men leaving the
conference and descending the stairs show a few pinched smiles and many aggravated looks.
Heisenberg would remember it as a great success for Bohr, Pauli and himself, and the beginning
of the spread of Dirk Copenhagener Geist, the spirit of Copenhagen, classical ideas used in
complementary ways. But the apparent failures of the conference would, from the point of view
of the history of entanglement, prove far more important. The heretical suggestions of De Broglie
and Einstein and Brussels would become the direct intellectual ancestors of John Bell's surprising
theorem four decades later. De Broglie's speech came early in the conference. He described a theory
by which a wave guided, or, in De Broglie's word, piloted the particles, as Slater had tried to propose
four years earlier. This meant that he added, position, for the particles in the wave, and those
positions came to be called hidden variables, hidden from quantum mechanics. The indeterminist
school, De Broglie recalled, whose adherents were mainly young and intransigent, met my theory with
cold disapproval. In the other camp, Schrödinger, who denied the existence of particles, did not
follow me at all. Then Einstein walked up to the front of the room, his stiff collar neatly standing
up with the tips turned down in the best old-fashioned and out-of-date way.
I must apologize, he said, for not having penetrated quantum mechanics deeply enough.
Nevertheless, I would like to make some general remarks.
Imagine we have an electron traveling toward a screen.
He turned around to the blackboard and picked up a piece of chalk. In a few lines, the chalk
skipping dustily, he had the path of the electron, dash dash dash, and the screen, slash.
He half turned. In the screen is a slit, turning back and smudging the center of the
straight line with a finger, which will scatter the electron. He drew a series of half-circles,
spreading from the smudged hole. The Schrödinger wave representing the electron will spread out
from the little opening. Beyond the slit is another screen.
Einstein's chalk made a second slash, which will catch the electron.
Einstein looked like a magician about to pull a rabbit out of a hat,
and at the same time like someone who did not believe in magic.
If I see this one electron arrive here, he tapped a point on the top of the second slash.
Then it is out of the question that it simultaneously arrived there.
He marked his chalk to another point along the screen.
His eyes narrowed. But the wave, the Schrödinger wave,
interpreted as giving the probability for this particle to be situated at a certain place.
The wave covers the whole screen, and not just one point on it, said Einstein,
gesturing at the semicircular ripples billowing from the smudged gap.
His quiet voice pierced the room.
This interpretation presupposes a very particular mechanism of instantaneous
action at a distance to prevent the wave from acting at more than one place on the screen.
Recall that relativity denies simultaneity any meaning, declaring that no information
can travel faster than the speed of light. It seems to me that this difficulty cannot
be overcome unless the description of the process in terms of the Schrödinger wave
is supplemented by some detailed specification of the location of the particle.
He looked over to where De Bruy sat, staring earnestly at his hero.
Einstein nodded and said,
I think that Mansur De Bruy is right in searching in this direction.
De Bruy, who had received no encouragement from anyone, melted with gratitude.
Einstein repeated, if one works only with Schrödinger waves,
the interpretation contradicts the principle of relativity.
He sat down. Everyone was silent. Men suddenly, everyone was crowding around him with something
to say. Lawrence tried to keep order, but Einstein had struck a nerve. In the midst of the fray,
Ehrenfest remembered the Tower of Babel and wrote on the much smudged blackboard,
The Lord did there confound the language of all the earth.
Bohr finally gained the floor.
I feel myself in a very difficult position, he said, because I don't understand what precisely
is the point which Einstein wants to make. No doubt it is my fault.
Kramer's, next to Bohr, was scrivening down the words from the Master.
I would put the problem in another way, Bohr continued.
I do not know what quantum mechanics is. I think we are dealing with some mathematical
methods which are adequate for the description of our experiments.
Using a rigorous wave theory we are claiming something which the theory cannot possibly give.
In other words, the math of quantum mechanics, though indubitably a wave equation,
could come far nearer to describing the quantum world than any theory involving actual waves,
such as Schrodingers or de Broglie's.
We must realize that we are away, said Bohr slowly, from that state where we could hope
of describing things by classical theories. Ominously, as Andrew Whitaker,
John Bell's biographer writes of this exchange, Einstein and Bohr were already talking past
each other. Some mathematical methods adequate for the description of experiments
was hardly any physicist's motivation, even Bohr's. Bohr, who would come to believe that
complementarity solved many of the intellectual woes of humanity. Almost no one really followed
Bohr through the thicket of words and ideas as he launched into a discussion of complementarity.
Naturally, once again the awful Bohr incantation terminology,
Ehrenfest wrote home to his students, impossible for anyone to summarize.
Every night, at 1 a.m., Bohr came into my room just to say one single word to me, until 3 a.m.
Even though Bohr could rarely turn a phrase neatly or halt a run-on sentence,
he still was able somehow to dominate through sheer conviction and charisma.
When Ehrenfest described his overall impression of the conference,
his tone was very different, with his whimsical capitals.
Bohr towering completely over everybody, at first not understood at all, then step by step
defeating everybody. Bohr could not, however, defeat Einstein's simple objection,
which lives on unsolved as the collapse of the wave function, or more generally, the measurement
problem. The wave corresponding to any particle spreads out over the whole world,
but the particle itself is discovered in one tiny discrete location and nowhere else.
The vast wave collapses down to the size of a single particle.
Quantum mechanics does not describe this moment of discovery,
but only gives the probability that the discovery will occur in the place it does.
There is no explanation of the particle's doings while unobserved,
or, alternatively, of its genesis if the act of measurement somehow created a particle where
before there was only a wave. From a wide-ranging, matterless probability wave
to an incarnation as one specific being, it is a postulate so non-intuitive as to sound like
the tenet of a religion. Einstein, who did not believe in a personal deity either, found this
strange. As if the moment some mystic had the idea of searching for God, poof! He's not a huge,
disembodied, omnipresent spirit mind anymore, but just a little tyke in a barn in a specific
hamlet in a specific countryside. The measurement problem is one symptom of the
non-separability of quantum systems. Another, to which the conversation naturally turned,
is the uncertainty principle. Uncertainty is what you get when you try to treat non-separable things
as separate. Couldn't you follow the electron in its flight to the screen? Einstein wondered.
What would repeated measurements of its state show us?
Bohr suggested for this purpose another screen, this one with two slits,
inserted between the original slit screen and the collecting screen. You could then measure
which of the two slits the electron went through on its way to the final screen.
As the elaborated on this thought experiment, Bohr eventually showed that the very apparatus
that might specify the location of the electron in its flight would itself suffer uncertainty,
making that location unclear, just as complementarity and the uncertainty principle dictated.
Like a game of chess, Einstein all the time with new examples.
Ehrenfest described to his students the subsequent Bohr-Einstein debate,
which filled all the extracurricular conference time. Considering his own distaste for both unclear
speaking and smelly pipe smoke, Ehrenfest found apt metaphors at hand. Bohr from out of the
philosophical smoke clouds constantly searching for the tools to crush one example after the other.
Einstein, like a jack-in-the-box, jumping out fresh every morning. Oh, that was priceless.
One day, after Einstein had asked for the umpteenth time if Bohr really believed God
played dice to determine the future, a smile dawned on Bohr's face.
Einstein, he said, stopped telling God how to run the world.
After the same game had been continued for a few days, remembered Heisenberg,
Ehrenfest looked over at Einstein and bemused semi-exasperation.
Einstein, he said, I am ashamed of you. You are arguing against the new quantum theory just as
your opponents argue about relativity theory. Heisenberg gave Pauli a look that said, finally
someone said it. Einstein looked at Ehrenfest with raised eyebrows and a little smile.
Ehrenfest, suddenly serious, said, I will not be able to find relief in my own mind
before Concord with you is reached. Back in Holland, he told his old student Samuel Goudschmidt,
I must make a choice between Bohr's and Einstein's position.
Goudschmidt realized with a start that Ehrenfest was crying.
Ehrenfest looked away and then looked at Goudschmidt again. And I cannot help but agree with Bohr.
Chapter 14 The Spinning World, 1927-1929
Einstein, ever the bird of passage, was going straight to Paris from Brussels.
So, de Broglie, riding the same train, got to spend a few more hours with
the idol of my youth. Among the crowds on the arrival platform of the Gauch Junot,
their train panting and sweating beside them, Einstein said,
this exaggerated turn toward formalism which quantum physics is taking worries me.
He looked at de Broglie. I really believe that all physical theories,
math aside, ought to lend themselves to so simple a description that even a child could understand
them. De Broglie smiled politely, but his raised eyebrows betrayed his skepticism.
Einstein, amused, saw this and ignored it.
They began walking together toward the exit, Einstein nodding to himself with a faint smile.
Almost twenty years ago now, Plunk asked me what I was working on, he said,
and I described the bare bones of the general relativity theory which had just begun to emerge
in my mind. He said to me, as an older friend, I must advise you against it.
Einstein, imitating Plunk, looked solemn and waved his index finger.
For in the first place, you will not succeed, and even if you succeed, no one will believe you.
Einstein's eyes twinkled. So, as an older friend, he said, I must advise you against the course
you have taken. He gave De Broglie a half-smile. In the first place, you will not succeed,
and even if you do, De Broglie finished laughing. No one will believe me.
As they walked out of the station doors and went their separate ways,
Einstein called out, but carry on, you are on the right road.
De Broglie watched Einstein turn and fade into the crowd on the Paris street.
He smiled broadly, his odd face lighting up in a way that was so innocently elated
that a few people bustling past him stopped to look at him again. He didn't see them.
You are on the right road. Einstein's voice rang in his mind. Carry on.
A few months later, however, the discouraged and exhausted De Broglie converted to the unstoppable
spirit of Copenhagen. This left only Einstein and Schrodinger standing before the juggernaut.
Schrodinger was still a skeptic in late May of 1928 when he wrote to Einstein in frustration and
confusion about a discussion he had had with Bohr by letter over the uncertainty principle.
He was again wondering if position and momentum weren't just inapplicable concepts in the quantum
world. Bohr had responded by telling him that there was no need for any new understandings,
the principle of complementarity removes all the difficulties. He asked Schrodinger to pass his
reply on to Einstein, not realizing how incomprehensible his ideas were to them.
What is it that we human beings depend on? We depend on our words. We are suspended in language,
Bohr famously said years later. Our task, he maintained, is to communicate.
His age-old friend, Oga Peterson, explained that Bohr was not puzzled by questions as to how
concepts are related to reality. Such questions seemed sterile to him.
For Bohr there was no meaning beyond the fabric of classical words, spun, web-like, over the
quantum abyss. Einstein was confined to bed, diagnosed with enlargement of the heart.
He wrote back to Schrodinger the very next day.
Dear Schrodinger, I think you have hit the nail on the head. Your claim that the concepts
P, Q will have to be given up if they can only claim such shaky meaning seems to me to be fully
justified. The Heisenberg Bohr tranquilizing philosophy, or religion, is so delicately contrived
that, for the time being, it provides a gentle pillow for the true believer from which he cannot
very easily be aroused, so let him lie there. But this religion has so damned little effect on me
that, in spite of everything I say, not E and V, but rather E or V, and indeed, not V, but rather
E. It is ultimately real. But I cannot make head or tail of it mathematically. My brain is also
too worn out by this time. If you would give me the pleasure of a visit from you again sometime,
it would be good of you and very fine for me. Best regards from A. Einstein.
The relation E equals HV is fundamental to quantum mechanics. It defines Planck's constant H.
When an electron falls from one energy level to another in a quantum leap, the energy it loses
carried away all at once in a packet, and the energy, E, of this light, quantum, is the same as
the frequency, V, of a corresponding light wave. Einstein had written to Schrodinger's friend
Vial a year earlier, In the depths of my soul I cannot reconcile myself to this
head-in-the-sand conception of the half-causal and half-geometrical. I still believe in a
synthesis of the quantum and wave conceptions, which I feel is the only thing that can bring
about a definitive solution. This synthesis was not Bohr's duality, E and V.
Einstein was searching, as in all his endeavors, for a unified view of the world,
not for complementary ways of describing it.
It is very important, he wrote to Vial, to know whether or not the field equations are
refuted by the facts of the quanta. One is indeed naturally inclined to believe this
and most do believe it. But if Einstein could find a field that would subsume both waves and
particles, then quantum theory would become part of general relativity, the most beautiful field
theory of all. In January of 1928, four months before, quantum theory had made its uneasy
truce with special relativity, the part of relativity that deals with frames of reference
moving at constant speeds, in an astonishing equation from Dirac.
The trail to the Dirac equation had actually started four years earlier, before quantum mechanics,
when Pauli and then Heisenberg unleashed their ridicule on the idea of the spinning electron.
This, after all, has nothing to do with quantum mechanics or politics or religion,
it is just classical physics, Pauli groused in a letter to Kramer's.
I appeal to you, as a significant scientist, to destroy this heresy. He signed the letter,
Geisel Gottz, God's whip. P.S., this title Arinfest has given me, I am very proud of it.
The problem was that the electron was so small that if it spun on its axis, its equator would be
moving much faster than the speed of light. It also mysteriously took two full rotations to get
back to where it started. Pauli, in his Comiche reflection of 1925, had described the same phenomenon
as a peculiar, classically nondescribable, subjective, two-valuedness, a phrase that did
not take the world by storm. Instead, everyone was talking about the spinning electron, or the
electron magnet, since a magnetic field arises wherever an electronic charge is in motion.
Bohr was converted to a prophet of the electron magnet gospel, as he joked to Arinfest, by a
train trip during which, at every stop, he was met by a different pair of physicists intent
on convincing him of opposite conclusions, from Pauli and Stern's protestations at the
Hamburg station, to Einstein and Arinfest's decisive reasoning on the Leiden platform.
Einstein was able to show how the spinning electron could coexist fruitfully with relativity.
Heisenberg made a bet with Dirac that it would take three years to understand the spinning electron.
Dirac bet that it would take three months. As it turned out, in three months, Pauli developed
three matrices that described what he still deplored calling spin.
One matrix to describe the phenomenon in each of the three perpendicular Cartesian directions.
Dirac had not, however, made any money. Pauli's matrices were not compatible with the theory
of relativity, and in fact, Pauli had become convinced that a relativistic spin theory was
not three years in the future, but an impossibility. Another bet ensued, this one between Pauli and
Kramer's, who threw himself into a relativistic equation for the spinning electron.
Either fate, or a role of the dice-throwing god, however, had sadly decreed that Kramer's,
throughout his long career, should always be scooped by some frighteningly brilliant young genius.
And this time, just as he finished his horribly complicated relativistic theory of the spinning
electron, it was Dirac. In 1926 and 1927, Ehrenfest was already telling Dirac that his papers were
crossword puzzles. While Einstein was complaining to Ehrenfest, I have trouble with Dirac. This,
balancing on the dizzying path between genius and madness is awful.
Dirac's equation of January 1928 raised the genius and madness to even gittier heights.
In one stroke, he transformed Pauli's matrices almost beyond recognition into a relativistic
equation for the so-called spinning electron that solved all previous problems effortlessly.
But the equation had a second solution, a positive anti-matter electron, which had never been heard
of before and was clearly science fiction. The saddest chapter of modern physics is and remains
the Dirac theory, wrote Heisenberg to Pauli that summer. The spinning electron has made Yorda
melancholic. Pauli retired from physics, as he told Bohr in June, to,
a way to fundamentally new idea, and write a utopian novel. Pauli got as far as his title,
Gulliver's Journey to Urania, and outline, before Heisenberg threw aside all forms of
magnetism to enlist his aid on a unified field theory. They would avoid the Dirac equation
for the next several years. That fall, Einstein proposed De Bruy, Schrodinger, or Heisenberg
for a Nobel Prize. A difficult case, he wrote, with respect to achievement, each one of these
investigators deserves a full Nobel Prize, although their theories in the main coincide
in regard to reality content. However, in my opinion, De Bruy should take precedence,
especially because his idea is certainly correct, while it still seems problematic how much will
ultimately survive of the grandiosely conceived theories of the two last named investigators.
De Bruy won the next year, for his discovery of the wave nature of the electron.
Slowly striding on long wooden skis through the black forest's blue shadows, Max Bourne is falling
apart. Three years ago, he explained Heisenberg's breakthrough in terms of matrices. Two years ago,
he explained Schrodinger's breakthrough in terms of probabilities. Now, he has allowed the
inexplicable outside world to distract him from physics. He feels as if he has been taking poison
through his ears for the last month. It is the last winter of the growing 20s. It is the coldest
winter of recent memory. You could walk the three miles across Lake Constance from Germany to
Switzerland. The sanatorium by the frozen lake where he had gone to heal his frayed nerves had only
frayed them further, with his fellow patients luxuriating in a chatter of hate and harsh laughter.
They talked of the poor fatherland so trampled in the muck and blamed the Jews.
They talked of Adolf Hitler, who would bring back the greatness of Germany.
So Bourne left, and now has come to rest here in the heart of the black forest in a tiny town
called Königsfeld. The trees, their bark ancient, Jurassic, are covered with snow.
Bows bowed down. A few clumps of flakes fall down his neck. Chill his spine.
Out there, beyond the solitary peace, things fall apart. The center cannot hold.
Civilization is crumbling. The old polite veneer is cracking and flaking, and under it
is the ugly beast. The early sun sets among the crests of the trees,
with infinite wistfulness and lingering, and yet, seeming to have happened all at once,
the colors change from white to long purples. He is tired. He is not skied as long as perhaps
he could have before, in the days when confusion was so much cleaner. Confusion in those days meant,
what does quantum mechanics mean? Not how evil will the future be.
At the end of the trail, he unstraps his skis from his boots, pulls his middened hands out
from the loops of his poles, collects all the shafts of wood into one pile over his shoulder,
and walks into town. The twilight makes the buildings seem to huddle together.
Ahead of him stands a tall and spacious white church. Its windows are dark,
but someone is playing an organ. Born leans his skis against the wall, climbs up the outside stairs,
and opens a green door. He finds himself directly underneath a delirious
blare of organ sound that falls from the choir loft like a mantle around him.
He sits down, leans back, stretches his legs. A globe-shaped lamp on the wall by the organ
glows on gilding and baroque swirls, and the bent head and white hair of the man in the organ loft.
Sometimes he plays over and over again one series of bars, as if he is ironing the wrinkled music
with smooth, hot strokes from an iron, and then plays on. The fabric of music, cool and lovely,
hung out on the line, flapping in the breeze. Born's eyes are almost closed. The rolling of the
waves of sound seems to be warming the very foundation of the church, eddying in the arches
of his feet, in the mazes of his ears. When the organist stops, Born is so far out on the waves
of music that he almost does not know what has happened. He can hear, in the thick, reverberating
silence, hands collecting sheets of paper, the scratching of a careful pencil, marking some
detail of performance. Then, out of the darkness of the organ loft, a man with a bushy mustache and
an unruly mop of hair descends. Born is not fully awake. Ah, he thinks, it's Einstein.
So, I had a one-man audience, says the man walking toward Born.
Born gets up to shake the organist's hand. I'm so glad that I happen to be walking by.
The organist smiles. His face is not Einstein's, but it is a face well known and well-beloved.
Born says, it's such a pleasure to meet you. Dr. Schweitzer, isn't it? I'm Max Born.
Albert Schweitzer smiles. Max Born, well, it is quite an honor to meet you, too.
Dr. Livingstone, I presume? He laughs a little. A deep organ-like laugh.
I'm going home now. Might we walk together?
Born and Schweitzer meet often in the ensuing days for long tramps in the snow.
They talk about physics. They talk about Schweitzer's hospital where he lives in equatorial West Africa.
He is raising money for it by playing Bach throughout Europe for six months.
Born finally begins to heal.
In March of 1929, Einstein is alone as well. He has just built a little half-timbered house
on a piney patch of land above the red-roofed village of Kaput, near Berlin, on the river Hovel.
It has no telephone, and is reachable only by a combination of train, bus, and foot.
After a year spent slowly recovering from the weakness of his dilated heart,
he is beginning to feel well again. For his fiftieth birthday that month,
his friends have given him a magnificent new sailboat, the Tümler, Tumbler or Dolphin.
Sailing on one of the Hovel lakes that curl around the city of Berlin,
he is surrounded by the creaking of the boards, the sound of the wet sheets and metal rings
against the mast, the slap of the water, the ripples creasing out from the prow.
Elsa, his second wife, finds the ownership of land in these troubled times consoling,
yet Einstein knows his time in Germany is running out.
What is consoling, what is in fact wonderful, is the meandering water of the Hovel, rushing under
his feet and the ribs of his boat, and its circuitous progress through its necklace of lakes
and the tangle of Saxon rivers to the Elbe and finally the North Sea.
Illness, he remarked in the March 23, 1929 volume of Nature, has its advantage.
One learns to think. I have only just begun to think.
By 1929, Bohr's Institute is triumphant. Both De Broglie and Schrodinger are converted, and a new
generation of talented physicists is flocking to Copenhagen as the center of the physical universe.
In Leon Rosenfeld's description of the Copenhagen Conference that year,
the overriding note is of joy and jokes. A chair breaks, suspiciously spontaneously,
when Pauli is debunking the ideas of its occupant. George Gage,
a young, practical joking physicist, shouts out, Pauli Effect.
Oh, the Pauli Effect, says Ehrenfest. The Pauli Effect is just a special case of the
more general phenomenon that misfortunes rarely come singly.
Ehrenfest shines at the conference, teasing Bohr and keeping everyone honest with his
searching questions and critical thinking. No one guesses how deeply to heart Ehrenfest
still takes Bohr and Einstein's intellectual division, nor his anxiety over the encroaching
Nazi movement, which most people believe will not really come to anything.
Of this inner tension, there was no outward sign, Rosenfeld will remember. To the last,
we saw him as cheerful, witty, and warmhearted as ever. No one knows that the previous August,
Ehrenfest had written to his old student Kramer's, begging him to
please help me. Practically all new theoretical physics stands before me as a completely
non-understandable wall, and I am at a total loss. I no longer know the symbols, the language,
and I no longer know what the problems are. It is here, at the 1929 Copenhagen Conference
that Rosenfeld, a stubby man with a serious round face, given to philosophical contemplation,
as a friend remembered him around that time, first meets Niels Bohr, who explains to him
the importance of the distinction between the classical measuring apparatus and the quantum
object under observation. It was one of the few solemn moments that count in an existence,
Rosenfeld would later write, the revelation of a world of dazzling thought, truly an initiation.
He soon becomes Bohr's new assistant and a manuensis.
John Wheeler, another young physicist on his way to becoming one of the most influential teachers
of quantum theory in the twentieth century, writes of those days,
Nothing has done more to convince me that there once existed friends of mankind with the human
wisdom of Confucius and Buddha, Jesus and Pericles, Erasmus and Lincoln, than walks and talks under
the beech trees of Klampenburg Forest with Niels Bohr.
Chapter 15 Solvay, 1930
Magnetism was the official subject of the Solvay conference that fall. Between the
speeches, however, Einstein and Bohr were back at their old discussion, sitting companionably
side by side, smoking their pipes. Einstein said, I have a new Gedankan experiment for you, Bohr.
Neither man was ever very proficient with experiments in the lab, but they both loved
thought or Gedankan experiments, which could be performed entirely inside the head.
Bohr raised his eyebrows in anticipation.
What if we had a box filled with a certain amount of radiation? said Einstein. Equipped with a
shutter, he explained, moving his hands, which can open and close by means of a clockwork within
the box. He leaned forward, the straight line of his trouser leg from knee to ankle, fuzzy in the
late sun from a window nearby, his hair in an attitude of static shock from leaning against
the back of the couch. Smoke rose from his forgotten pipe and billowed back and forth
with a stray gesture from his hand. The shutter will open when the clock strikes a certain time,
and then close again very swiftly so that just one light quantum is emitted.
Einstein looked over at Bohr with barely suppressed excitement. But we could weigh the box,
and that would allow us to measure its energy due to E equals mc squared.
Bohr's face looked blown open. We have a box with a shutter. His eyebrows came together,
meaning so far out they looked as if they might topple off his face.
With a shutter which is controlled by a clockwork, Einstein was nodding, puffing on his pipe. Bohr
brought the stem of his pipe to his lips. He found it, as he often did, no longer burning.
Einstein, do you have a match? He asked abstractly, patting his pockets.
Einstein delved into his pockets and produced his matches. Bohr slowly lit his pipe again.
We weigh the box before and after a photon is emitted. He continued as if there had been no
interruption, while absentmindedly pocketing Einstein's matches. And now, contrary to the
uncertainty principle, we have both the energy emitted and the time of emission.
I grant you the consistency of the uncertainty principle, Einstein said, laughing a little.
I'm not done with the experiment, Bohr. We can allow the light quantum to travel to a sufficiently
distant mirror, say, half a light year away, Einstein's hand with his pipe extended, to ensure
space-like separation when we decide to learn about it by either weighing the box or checking the
clock. When even an influence traveling at the speed of light will not be able to connect two
events, then they are space-like separated. The closest thing relativity allows to, simultaneous.
Bohr, who was still thinking about the uncertainty principle, nodded with a preoccupied look on
his face. This amounts to a serious challenge, he said quietly. I will have to thoroughly examine
the whole problem. Wait, Bohr, said Einstein. The problem is not yet complete. If, while the
light quantum is half a light year distant, we now check the clock, we will be able to predict
exactly when the light quantum will return to us, which gives us a sharp determination of its position.
If we weigh the box instead, we will be able to predict exactly its energy and, thus, color.
Bohr, his face now devoid of expression, was deep in his own train of thought.
When the exigencies of relativity theory are taken into consideration, he said slowly,
does that indeed allow us to control the interchange of energy between the objects
and the measuring instruments, even when they are serving their purpose of defining the space-time
frame of the phenomena? Bohr, let me finish. Now, according to the uncertainty principle,
the state of a light quantum cannot involve both a sharp determination of its location in time
and a sharp determination of its energy. But we can learn either characteristic from
one or another measurement on the box. Here is my question, said Einstein. Should we assume
that the subsequent measurement we make on the box physically influences the fleeing light quantum,
now half a light year distant? That would be a superluminal, faster than the speed of light,
action at a distance. Of course, it is logically possible, but so very repugnant to
my physical instinct that I cannot take it seriously. So, the real state of the light
quantum is independent of whatever is done to the box. Einstein remembered his pipe,
took a puff, and moved in for the kill. But from that, it follows, every characteristic
of the light quantum, every characteristic we could gleam from a measurement of the box,
exists, even if this measurement is not performed. Accordingly, the light quantum
has a definite localization and a definite color, and the quantum mechanical description is incomplete.
It was quite a shock for Bohr, wrote his new assistant, Rosenfeld. I shall never forget the
vision of the two antagonists leaving the club. Einstein, a tall, majestic figure,
walking quietly with a somewhat ironical smile, and Bohr trotting near him, very excited.
That evening, as everyone was sitting down to dinner, Bohr told first one person, then another,
Ehrenfest, Pauli, Heisenberg, of Einstein's new Gadunkin machine, always stopping at the point
that interested him, the possibility of measuring the photon's time of emission
by reading the clock, and, simultaneously, its energy by weighing the box.
That Einstein's thought experiment did not require this, Bohr had hardly noticed. He would
simply pay no attention when Ehrenfest told him this in so many words nine months later.
He said to me, Ehrenfest wrote to Bohr, that, for a very long time already, he absolutely no
longer doubted the uncertainty relations, and, had, by no means, invented the
wayable light-blitz-flash-box, contra-uncertainty relation. That is, Einstein's box was not
supposed to be a weapon against the uncertainty principle. For Bohr, a discussion about unobserved
reality had no meaning, and he was focusing on the aspect of the experiment that, in his
estimation, did. But, now and later, Bohr's resignation as regards visualization and causality,
his eagerness to, consider this very renunciation as an essential advance, his modesty in trusting
only, the demand of avoiding logical inconsistencies, had blinded him to perhaps the most important
thing. From, irrationality, in the twenties, to, wholeness, in the sixties, Bohr welcomed into
physics the expressions of the zeitgeist. Shadowing the precision of entanglement under
their capacious wings, these foggy ideas ensured that Bohr would never recognize entanglement
itself, like a man who never walks on the land that he has bought.
The year before, Bohr had declared again, any observation necessitates an interference with
the course of the phenomena. This should not be regarded as a hindrance, he explained.
We must only be prepared for the necessity of an ever-extending abstraction from our
customary demands for a directly, unschalable, visualizable description of nature.
Instead of heeding Bohr's declarations and admonitions, Einstein had decisively sharpened
his two decades of worry about separability into a picture of entanglement over half a
light year's distance. If the light quantum was to be disturbed by the act of observation,
as Bohr insisted, this disturbance would have to be non-local, spookily acting at an effectively
infinite distance. But it would take two more presentations of this argument,
one by Aaron Fest the next year, and one in the famous Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen, EPR,
paper of 1935, before Einstein would be able to convince Bohr to focus on what was really
bothering him. Bohr would come to realize, as he wrote about a conversation with Einstein three
years later, that the difference between our ways of approach and expression still presented
obstacles to mutual understanding. What bothered him, and what bothered Einstein about this new
Gedankin experiment, spoke volumes about the two men's ways of approach and expression.
Aaron Fest, it can't be true, Bohr said for the fifth time, and then it will be the end
of physics if Einstein is right. His face looked more solemn and ponderous than anyone
had ever seen it, and more in pain.
Bohr will work it out, said Heisenberg to Pauli and Aaron Fest. He looked sideways at Bohr,
now deep in discussion with Max Bohr. Bohr's face had lit up, but then Bohr was shaking his head,
though small whimsical eyes squeezed into his squint, his mouth a regretful fist.
Bohr deflated, and then just as quickly started on another angle.
Bohr looked thoughtful, raised an objection. Bohr will work it out, Heisenberg had said.
Won't he? he added. Aaron Fest shrugged his eyebrows with a trace of humor,
to hide a feeling that was almost panic. They all stayed late at the dinner table,
and when they moved, they all moved together, an amorphous school of physicists, into the club
where, under clouds of smoke, they clustered around Einstein and Bohr.
Aaron Fest, trying to mediate between the two, felt his head splitting.
The next morning came Bohr's triumph, said Rosenfeld. Bohr strode into the meeting hall,
its tall pilasters and mirrors pale and blinking in the morning light, up to the chalkboard,
where he started drawing an elaborate apparatus. Everyone gathered around began to realize that
it was Einstein's light-blitz box, but now it was realized in minute, buildable detail, and in fact,
the practical joking Russian physicist, George Gamov, did build a mock version of it.
It was the embodiment of all Bohr aspired to in his writing, usually at the costly expense of
clarity. He had anticipated every contingency, every physical effect, bent close to the chalkboard
as he drew in deep concentration. The box was now suspended by a spring, Bohr wrote,
allegedly, spring, with an arrow pointing at a chalky curlicue, from a sort of metal gallows,
and had a pointer on it against a little ruler fixed to the vertical post of the gallows.
Under the box was a hook for a weight to hang on.
Einstein came up to the blackboard, and the two of them together worked out the solution to what
was bothering Bohr. The movement involved in the weighing of the box meant that, ever so slightly,
the clock would run more slowly, as explained by Einstein's own theory of relativity.
This made the time of the shutter's opening to release the photon uncertain, and Bohr showed,
writing the steps out on the blackboard, that one arrived back at the time-energy uncertainty
relation that Einstein had seemed to refute. Einstein, looking quizzical, pulled out his pipe,
but could not, inevitably, find any matches. Bohr spotted this, and for once was able to find
his own, Einstein's. He lit Einstein's pipe for him. Einstein nodded once, as if he were tipping
his hat. Bohr slowly smiled. Once more, again in Brussels, Bohr had shown that
measurement is a messy process, a physical disturbance of the object, the apparatus,
or both. But he had not touched Einstein's pristine light quantum, half a light year away
from the turbidity of measurement. When Bohr finally turned his attention to that untouched,
entangled quantum, the debate would have one more round. It would be, in fact,
the last debate of the golden years of the quantum theory, as war closed in on the physicists,
and cast them to the wind like seeds.
Interlude Things Fall Apart, 1931-1933
Man Only Loves Destiny, wrote Edward Einstein in an aphorism for his high school paper.
It is the worst destiny to have no destiny, and be no destiny for anyone else.
In 1931, two years after his high school graduation, the best of his aphorisms were
published in the Neue Schweitzer Runschau, the new Swiss review, a literary magazine.
By then, the beloved and brilliant Tettle had dropped out of medical school in Zurich,
and abandoned his dreams of being a psychiatrist, rarely leaving his dark rented room and unraveling
mind. When Einstein separated from his first wife and their two sons in 1914,
Tettle was four. An other worldly child with luminous eyes and uncut hair,
he eerily prefigured the beatified icon his father would become.
He had been fearsomely precocious, diving into Shiller and Shakespeare so soon that his father
cautioned him, age eight, to, save yourself some until you're grown up.
As Einstein told his friend and confidant Besso, he had seen schizophrenia
coming slowly but irresistibly since Tettle's youth.
Listening to the teenage Edward absorbed in the piano moved everyone. His friends saw him
without his shell of irony and what one of them described as his usual, slight sense of being
absent. His father heard frantic and wooden music and felt foreboding.
In the early summer of 1930, Edward's self-described rapturous letters, full of literary and philosophical
attempts to catch the attention and love of the distant father he worshipped, turned hysterical,
vindictive, and despairing. This got the attention of his father, who came to Zurich to find all of
his fears for his beautiful son coming true. He tried to tell Tettle that this breakdown would
help him become a really good doctor of the soul, but privately he felt only deterministic dread.
Leaving his son and Zurich in the hands of the psychiatrists,
Einstein retreated to his house in Kaput. He has always aimed at being invulnerable to
everything that concerned him personally, Elsa Einstein said, trying to explain her husband to
a friend. He really is so, much more than any man I know, but this has hit him very hard.
He aged visibly. When asked to summarize his philosophy that summer, he made, for him,
a startling statement. We know from daily life that we exist for other people. First of all,
for those upon whose smiles and well-being our own happiness is wholly dependent.
But the absent father would not change his ways now.
The winter here can bring nothing but sadness, Elsa said at the end of 1930. We intend to go away for
a long time. It is well known, wrote Einstein in an Eden 7000 miles from Zurich in Berlin a few
months later, that the principles of quantum mechanics limit the possibilities of exact
prediction as to the future path of a particle. But what of a particle's past?
Heisenberg, who believed that his principle had bearing only on what was yet to come, had
four years earlier castigated Einstein for not treating a particle as a particle. But Einstein
was beginning to suspect that the past histories of Heisenberg's particles were exactly as fuzzy
as their futures. This was the question on which he mused on a warm Pasadena winter day in 1931.
His pipe spoke trailing behind him as he wandered across campus beside the tall,
thin, neatly dressed Richard Chase Tolman, who was followed by his own aromatic cirrus of smoke.
Tolman was one of the first professors of the New California Institute of Technology,
which had been founded a decade before by a trio of physicists, the physical chemist Arthur Noyes,
the measure of electron charge Robert Millican, and the first director of the Mount Wilson Observatory,
George Ellery Hale. Tolman, appropriately, was a physical chemist who had measured the
electron's mass and now contemplated the heavens. He had just written a pair of books on two of
Einstein's great loves, statistical mechanics, and relativity. Joining them on the verdant
winter lawns was an affable-looking and awkward recent Caltech PhD, a Russian American named
Boris Podolsky, who had just spent his postgraduate time with Heisenberg in Leipzig.
When Paul Ehrenfest, who was always nostalgic for his own Russian days, descended on Caltech a
month before, he and Podolsky collaborated with Tolman on a paper called On the Gravitational
Field Produced by Light. Now, Tolman and Podolsky turned their attention with Einstein to
Knowledge of Past and Future in Quantum Mechanics.
Podolsky had grown up in a little Russian village near where the dawn meets the sea of Azov,
working in his aunt's grocery store, wrapping purchases with heavy twine that he had learned
to break with his bare hands. He arrived on Ellis Island just before the First World War
as a 17-year-old steerage passenger and crossed the country by Greyhound Bus to another aunt
who lived in Los Angeles, arriving the same time as the aqueduct and the movie industry
that would together create the future possibilities of the city.
To pay for college, he worked for a plumber who refused to show him how to seal a toilet into
its flange for fear that his quick-witted assistant would then know too much and start his own
competing business. Instead, Podolsky went from a bachelor's degree in electrical engineering
to a master's in math to a doctorate in physics. His second American job found him designing copper
piping to bring power to Los Angeles from the, then, boulder dam, plumbing and electrical
engineering on a grand scale. Even working for the electric company, he approached problems from
unusual directions. He showed, for example, that the best indicator of the timing of the
important spring melt was not the one the company was using, snow depth in the mountains above the
dam, but high temperatures in Tokyo. Einstein, with Podolsky and Tolman, had found a new use for
his light blitzbox. The purpose of the present note is to discuss a simple ideal experiment
which shows, they explained, that the possibility of describing the past path of one particle
would lead to predictions as to the future behavior of a second particle of a kind not
allowed in quantum mechanics. Einstein's perfect gedonkin experiment had almost arrived.
In a local pub I met your son, wrote Max Born, visiting Zurich, to Einstein in Pasadena shortly
after the paper with Tolman and Podolsky was published. I liked him very much. He is a fine,
intelligent fellow and laughs in exactly the same wonderful way you do. Well, what else is there to
tell you? Things in Europe do not look pleasant, either politically or economically, but things
must surely improve in spite of Hitler and his consorts. I know all sorts of things about
California as I am just reading Ehrenfest's wonderfully vivid descriptive letters about
his travels which he has sent to Heidi. How well that fellow observes and describes his experiences.
Heidi added birthday greetings, writing, I am always very amused to see and hear you in the
weekly newsreel, being presented with a floral float containing lovely sea nymphs in San Diego
and that sort of thing. The world has, after all, its amusing side. However crazy such things
may look from the outside, I always have the feeling that the dear Lord knows very well what
he is up to. In the same way as Gretchen sensed the devil in Faust, so he makes people sense in you,
well, just the Einstein. For none of them will ever really be able to know you,
however thoroughly they may have studied the theory of relativity.
Also in America, Pauley, cavorting about Ann Arbor with Sommerfeld in the summer of 1931,
suffered what Sommerfeld termed as an inverse Pauley effect. When, as Pauley admitted, in a
slightly tipsy state at the Michigan home of his old bicycling friend Otto Laporte,
he tripped on a stair and broke his shoulder. Writing to his assistant Pirels, Pauley explained,
In spite of the opportunity for swimming, I hear suffer much from the great heat.
But under the dryness, I don't suffer at all, because Laporte and Eulenbeck are superbly stored
up in alcohol. One notices the vicinity of the Canadian border. But the cigars Sommerfeld misses
very much. Sommerfeld accompanied Pauley to America because his old student desperately needed him.
The only person Pauley would ever address with,
Why it was just you who managed to instill awe in me is a deep secret, Pauley wrote to him.
One, no doubt, many others would have liked to learn from you,
in particular all my later bosses, including Herr Bohr.
In the last few years of his twenties, Pauley's life had taken a horrifying turn for the worse,
and he needed the stable, reliable guide of those cheerful student days.
First, his vibrant idealistic mother committed suicide while his father dallyed with, and then
married a girl uncomfortably close to his son's age. In late 1930, Pauley's own new bride,
a cabaret dancer, left him for a chemist after one year of marriage. He bravely managed one of his
trademark double-edged insults. If it had been a bullfighter, with someone like that I could not
have competed, but such an average chemist. And spent the night drinking.
1931 was the year of the particle and the box. Einstein took his Kadankan experiment everywhere,
from its debut in Brussels to Pasadena to Berlin to Leiden and back to Brussels.
Everywhere Einstein went, the experiment changed slightly as he explored its contours,
pushed its envelope, and worked his way toward EPR.
Without in any way interfering with the photon, Einstein wrote, we are thus able to make
accurate predictions pertaining either to the moment of its arrival or to the amount of energy
liberated by its absorption. It is theory that first determines what can be observed.
Heisenberg said his student, von Weißacker, to analyze a variant of the light blitz box
Kadankan experiment in 1931. Einstein's musings on the same subject would lead him to the EPR
paradox, paving the way for Bell's theorem and all the experimental magic of long-distance
entanglement. But all von Weißacker and Heisenberg saw was a sterile and correct
exercise in quantum field theory. Quickly laid aside, its buried treasure still buried.
Aaron Fest, like Einstein, thought it was more than an exercise, but did not know how to respond
to it. He did what anyone would do. He wrote Bohr on July 9, 1931, to tell him that Einstein
would be enlightened at the end of October. Could Bohr come too, he asked, with one of his
characteristic explosions of capitalization, so that they might have a quiet exchange of views?
Aaron Fest described the experiment again to Bohr in the meticulous detail with which
Einstein had written him, that is, weigh the box during the first five hundred hours and
screw it firmly to the fundamental reference frame.
It is interesting to get clear, explained Aaron Fest to Bohr, the fact that the projectile,
while flying around isolated on its own, must be prepared to satisfy very different
non-communitive predictions—the kind of predictions denied simultaneous meaning by
quantum mechanics—without knowing as yet which of these predictions one will make and test.
Aaron Fest mailed the letter to Margretta, not Niels, beseeching her in a post-script,
to give it to her husband only if he was not too tired, and,
there is absolutely no need for an answer. Whether or not Margretta handed the letter
on to Bohr, there was no answer. Bohr persisted in misunderstanding Einstein's point,
giving a speech that October in Bristol, England, in which he again demonstrated
his utter incomprehension that the point of the light-blitz box was, in Schrödinger's word,
coined four years later, entanglement. Meanwhile, in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
a graduate student of Slater's named Nathan Rosen was investigating the structure of the hydrogen
molecule, producing the first reliable calculation of its two bound-together hydrogen atoms.
It is a strange object. Only the molecule as a whole has a quantum state.
The component atoms are entangled. They have no states of their own, and, as far as quantum
theory is concerned, a measurement performed on one instantly affects its twin. When the logical
analysis of Podolski married Einstein's light-blitz box to Rosen's entangled hydrogen atoms,
the EPR paradox would be born. That September, Einstein again nominated either Heisenberg
or Schrödinger for the Nobel Prize. Personally, I assess Schrödinger's achievement as the greater
one, he wrote, since I have the impression that the concepts created by him will carry
further than those of Heisenberg. He noted, this, however, is only my own opinion, which may be wrong.
His recommendation went against the opinions of everyone else, and, through the Nobel Committee,
into such confusion that no physics prize was awarded for 1931.
Despite Ehrenfest's plea, Bohr did not show up in Leiden in October. Ehrenfest was unusually muted,
as Einstein again presented the light-blitz box, stressing, as Ehrenfest's assistant,
Hendrik Casimir remembered, that, after the light quantum has escaped, we can still choose
whether we want to read the clock, or, alternatively, determine the weight of the box.
So, without touching the light quantum in any way, we can either determine its energy,
or the time at which it will return from a distant mirror.
Could the state of the long-gone photon be dependent on actions made on the box?
Instead of answering Einstein himself, or asking one of his famously piercing and
clarifying questions, Ehrenfest entrusted his 25-year-old assistant
with the task of opening the discussion, and I explained to the best of my ability
the Copenhagen views on such questions, Casimir remembered.
Einstein listened, perhaps slightly impatiently, and then he said,
and I believe I now can vouch for the exact words. I know this business is free of contradictions,
yet, in my view, it contains a certain heart, a certain hardness, or unreasonable-ness,
as pace would have it.
I think, wrote Casimir, remembering the ironic look of the determined skeptic,
a certain unpalatability comes closer to what Einstein had in mind.
On a liner heading to Pasadena in December of 1931, Einstein was watching the seagulls.
Today, I made my decision essentially to give up my Berlin position,
and shall be a bird of passage for the rest of my life, he wrote in his travel diary.
Gulls are still escorting the ship, forever on the wing. They are my new colleagues.
As the pillars of European civilization vibrated in 1932,
the mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics were made secure.
The obstreperous 29-year-old Hungarian genius John von Neumann showed that the mathematical
structure of quantum mechanics, be it waves or matrices, reduced to a pure and austerely
abstract group of foundational mathematical statements, which mathematicians call axioms.
With the power of this mathematical analysis, von Neumann was able to conclusively demonstrate
that the a-causal nature of quantum theory, Einstein's Bettinoire, was irredeemable.
Its mathematical structure would allow no fuller completion.
von Neumann's book was a tour de force of elegant and fearsome mathematics,
the sort of thing most physicists never read, but its existence and conclusions were deeply
consoling. The phrase, von Neumann has shown, entered the quantum physics lexicon as a debate
ender. Younger than Pauli, Heisenberg and Dirac, von Neumann had already given the same treatment
to a famously paradoxical branch of mathematics, set theory, and also come up with the insight that
would found a whole new discipline of mathematics and economics, game theory. In a year, he would
become one of Einstein's few colleagues at the brand-new Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
entertaining himself with pranks like putting the absent-minded older man on the wrong train.
The five years following the Solvay Congress of October 1927 looked so wonderful that we
often spoke of them as the golden age of physics, wrote Heisenberg forty years later.
Pauli and Dirac, hesitantly, almost in desperation, each predicted a particle.
Pauli's came first. A chargeless, massless particle he called the neutron would be the
only thing that could explain a form of nuclear radiation that was mystifying the entire community
of scientists. Dirac, meanwhile, was suffering with his theory, which predicted both positive
and negative solutions for electron charge, almost as if there were a positive antimatter
electron as well as a negative one that made ordinary matter. It couldn't be the proton,
as his friend Oppenheimer pointed out. If it were, then all of matter would have collapsed
into itself in a blaze of light only ten to the negative tenth power seconds after the Big Bang.
Years later, theoretical physicists would predict particles with gay abandon. But at this point,
the only particle that had ever been successfully predicted was Einstein's photon,
one of only three particles known at all. The other two, the electron and the proton,
had been found experimentally. It seemed foolhardy in those days to say that one's equations demanded
a particle that no one had found with a cloud chamber or a Geiger counter.
Nobody took Dirac's theory seriously, said Cavendish Lab's quintessential experimentalist,
the crotchety PMS Blackett, far too much of a disciple of Rutherford's to listen to theoretical
moonshine about positive antimatter electrons. Rutherford was overheard in the late twenties to
say, there is only one thing to say about physics. The theorists are up on their hind legs and it
is up to us to get them down again. But then an American experimentalist, Carl Anderson,
seemed to have actually found this antimatter in a cloud chamber.
Bohr brought a picture of Anderson's experiment back with him from California to Denmark.
With his sixteen-year-old son, Christian, he rejoined Heisenberg and two of his current students,
Felix Bloch and von Vizacker, at the Oberdorf train station in southern Bavaria.
From there, they skied up to Heisenberg's cabin. Heisenberg nearly carried away en route by a small
avalanche. The next day, lying exhausted on the roof in the sun, with snow like an ocean all around
them and the Alps above, they poured over the picture and argued over whether or not
the curving trail of water droplets was the wake of a so-called positron.
Back in England, Blackett was shocked to get the same results.
Rutherford found it regrettable that Dirac's theory of the positron had preceded its
experimental finding. Blackett did everything possible not to be influenced by the theory,
Rutherford said proudly. But still there it was. I could have liked it better if the theory had
arrived after the experimental facts had been established. Bohr and Heisenberg's ski party
passed the chilly evenings playing poker at Heisenberg's cabin. On the third night, Bohr proposed
cardless poker. His money was on Bloch or his son Christian to win since they were the most
convincing bluffers. With what Heisenberg remembered as, strong grog, to keep them warm,
the attempt was made. My suggestion was probably based on an overestimate of the importance of
language. Bohr admitted a little while later as the game dissolved into absurdity. Language is
forced to rely on some link with reality. Firelight leaped on his genially bemused face as they laughed
at him. In real poker we can use language to improve the real hand with as much optimism and
conviction as we can summon up, he said with a sheepish grin. But if we start with no reality at
all, even Christian can't persuade me he has a royal flush. Rutherford himself in 1920 had
predicted a neutron, a neutral twin to the positive proton, which would solve many of the
mysteries of how atoms, especially the heavier ones, held together. James Chadwick, the assistant
director of the Cavendish lab, found this neutron twelve years later in February 1932.
But it was not Pauley's neutron. He did not give up hope, and neither did Aaron Fest's
student Enrico Fermi, who that year published his great theory of beta decay, an otherwise
mysterious change of an atomic nucleus, made possible by what he called Pauley's little neutron,
the neutrino. Nearly a quarter of a century later, half a world away in the post-war Los
Alamos labs in New Mexico, the neutrino was found. Its finders fired off a telegram to Pauley,
telling him the good news. At the Cavendish, back in 1932, two more members of Rutherford's team,
the laconic John Cockroft, who was known to be working two and a half full-time jobs around
the Cavendish simultaneously, and Ernest Walton, a nimble experimentalist who could repair watches,
were greasing up a homemade accelerator in the former library of the laboratory to do something
even more spectacular. In 1928, the 25-year-old Gamov had realized that the proton, because of its
wave nature, might tunnel into the nucleus of an atom, splitting it apart. Even though,
viewed as a particle, it had no chance of doing so. Rutherford stormed good-naturedly in and out,
giving orders, encouragement, or distraction, occasionally shocking himself by hanging his
wet coat on a live terminal, or lighting overdry tobacco and sending it up, like a volcano with
a great cloud of smoke, flames, and piles of ash, as the experimentalist next door to Cockroft and
Walton noticed with amusement. And on either April 13 or 14, Cockroft and Walton in their
notebooks wrote down different dates. He observed the two pieces of a lithium atom hit their fluorescent
screen. We've split the atom! This jubilant cry was soon heard at the newspapers. The atom,
the unsplittable, had been split. Things fall apart. The center cannot hold.
When the time came for Nobel nominations in September of 1932, after a year of meditation on
the mysterious interconnections indicated by the wave equation for his Kadonkin particle and its
Kadonkin box, Einstein had ceased to waffle and was confidently nominating, only shredding her.
Our understanding of the quantum phenomena has been furthered most by his work in connection
with the work of De Broglie. Aaron Fest, in a footnote to what would be his last paper,
that ominous autumn of 1932, reminded everyone what that meant. If we recall what an uncanny
theory of action at a distance is represented by Schrodinger's wave mechanics, we shall preserve
a healthy nostalgia for a four-dimensional theory of contact action. Certain thought experiments
designed by Einstein but never published are particularly suited for this purpose.
Aaron Fest had titled his paper Some Exploratory Questions Regarding Quantum Mechanics.
He was groping for solid ground and wondering if it even existed, or if the quantum theory was
senseless. Many of the same questions had also occurred to Pauli, for whom the paper was
a source of sheer pleasure. He wrote a reply, under the same title, attempting to put the
quantum theory in terms of action by contact without great success. But Aaron Fest was slightly
reassured that he was not alone. For fear of Bohr and you, Aaron Fest told him, I have struggled
more than a year with the decision to print the few lines until, at last, despair drove me to it.
Schrodinger had spent the summer of 1932 in Berlin with the constant companionship of
Eta Junger, once his laughing fourteen-year-old Tutti, now a beautiful twenty-one-year-old,
and his faithful mistress of the previous four years. But as the days began to get colder,
it became clear that she was pregnant. It was also clear that it was the end of the affair,
and Schrodinger was hoping to move on to his assistant's wife. Still, yearning for a son,
he fondly thought that Eta would give the child to him and Annie.
Instead, Eta had an abortion and left Berlin. Far from the city she had grown up in and shared
with Schrodinger, she married an Englishman. But that was not the end of the story. Schrodinger,
with a series of mistresses, would have three daughters, the first with his assistant's wife
in less than two years. But the scars from the end of the affair would leave Eta childless
after a series of miscarriages. Meanwhile, Schrodinger's unpublished notes of 1932 and 1933
show him beginning to investigate mathematically the action at a distance in his equation that
so agonized Aaron Fest and Einstein. Once in contact, two particles were described only by
a shared wave function, psi, long after they lost all physical contact. As before with wave mechanics,
where he had foreseen the fuzzy outlines of De Broglie's idea but did not pursue it until
De Broglie independently made it clear and definite, he did not follow up on this thought until someone
else articulated it more clearly. In this case, that would be Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen, three years later.
In the Little Tan Institute at 15 Bledemschwey in Copenhagen, everyone has gathered in the main
lecture room in late 1932 for what Gamov called the customary stunt. Gamov himself is not present,
since Stalin, already dizzy with success while Gamov's native Ukraine is purged and starved,
to fraternize with scientists of the capitalistic countries.
Boran Aaron Fest sits smiling and chatting in the third row, behind two empty front row benches,
elbows leaning on the little lecture room desks. There's Liza Meitner, who would soon be the first
to understand the portentious fission of uranium, there are Durak and Heisenberg, the lights dim,
and onto the stage walks Max Delbroeck, inspired by his speech Bor gave earlier that year exhorting
biologists to search for complementarity. He will, though failing to vindicate Bor's philosophy,
become one of the founding fathers of the field of molecular biology.
He looks extremely young and fair and impish under his top hat.
I present to you, most honored guests, the Blitemswey Faust.
Everyone claps and out-walk three archangels, wearing carefully hand-drawn masks of the faces
of famous astrophysicists. Everyone laughs as the angels debate in rhymed German
that carefully parallels Goethe's version of the play, which most of the audience read in school,
when, suddenly, out pops Leon Rosenfeld, wearing a mask of Pauley's face. He is
Mephistopheles. He leaps up to sit at the foot of the shrouded figure of God on a stool on top
of the lab table. As Mephistopheles addresses the Lord, the sheet is swept off to reveal
Felix Bloch, wearing a mask of Niels Bohr. Bloch climbs off his stool and in tones,
till after all around, Bohr in the audience is shaking his head with a huge grin.
But must you interrupt these revels, just to complain, you prince of devils? Does modern physics
never strike you right? Mephisto, Pauley, replies,
No, Lord, I pity physics only for its plight, and in my doleful days it pains and sorely grieves me.
No wonder I complain, but who believes me? The Lord puts his finger to his chin.
You know this, Ehrenfest? Mephisto throws up his hands. The critic? Someone runs in,
holding a cartoon of Ehrenfest, with light glowing all around him and his hair three times as
vertical and wild as usual. Under this cartoon is written, A Vision of Faust.
As the Lord claims Ehrenfest Faust as his knight, Mephisto brashly states that he can
lead him astray. Ehrenfest's face, in the dark in the audience, has a wistful smile,
his hand on his chin. I am Faust, he thinks. How strange.
The Lord sighs. Bloch, behind the Bohr mask,
imitates one of the master's characteristic semi-German, semi-Danish phrases.
Oh, this is really dreadful, must I say. Ya, muss ich sagen, there is an essential failure
of classical concepts, a morass, one side remark, but keep it confidential.
Now, what do you propose to do with mass? Mephisto laughs.
With mass? says Rosenfeld, behind his Mephisto mask.
Why, just forget it. The Lord stumbles.
But, but this is very interesting yet to try it. Mephisto cuts him.
Oh, Quach, shut up. What rot you talk today, be quiet.
At this point the whole room is roaring with laughter. They have all seen this scene between
Pauly and Bohr so many times and told stories of it even more often.
The Lord says, slowly shaking his head, as one would say to a small child.
But, Pauly, Pauly, Pauly, we practically agree, more laughter from the audience,
who know very well that this is Bohr's way of saying that the other person is totally wrong,
as von Weisacker described it, wrapped in the gingerbread of his helplessly amiable way of
talking. There's no misunderstanding. That, I guarantee, continues the Lord.
But if mass and charge go packing, what have you, by and large?
Rosenfeld wobbles on the edge of the lab table in his Pauly-esque excitement.
Dear man, it's elementary. You ask me what remains? Why, bless me, the new Trino. Wake
up and use your brains. Both the Lord and Mephisto are silent as they pace back and
forth on the table. Then the Lord stops and looks out into the audience.
I say this not to criticize. Bohr is nodding and smiling in his chair, recognizing another of
his favorite phrases. But, rather, just to learn. But now I have to leave you. Farewell,
I shall return. He jumps down from the lab table. Mephisto says cheerfully.
From time to time it's pleasant to see the dear old man. I like to treat him nicely,
as nicely as I can. He's charming and he's lordly, ashamed to treat him foully.
And fancy, he's so human, he even speaks to Pauly.
With that, he leaps off the table and skips off.
Delbrook returns, intoning, first part, scene, Faust's study, while waving a hand in the direction
of the lab table. Aaron Fest walks in, carrying a huge pile of books which he stacks before him.
Sitting on the stool behind all this collected knowledge, he begins with a sigh to recite
Faust's introductory speech, altered for the occasion.
I have, alas, learned valence chemistry, theory of groups of the electric field,
and transformation theory as revealed by Sophus Lai in 1893. Yet here I stand for all my lore,
no wiser than I was before. M.A., I'm called, and doctor, up and down. Round and about,
the pupils have been guided by this poor Aaron Faust, the real Aaron Fest grins under his
mustache, and witless clown. They break their heads on physics just as I did. All doubts assail me,
and Pauly, as the devil himself, I fear. Mephisto then bursts in, dressed as a traveling salesman,
here to sell Aaron Fest on Pauly's neutrino, decked out as the radiant Gretchen who sings her
famous spinning-wheel song with altered words. My mass is zero, my charge is the same. You are my
hero, neutrino's my name. The play goes on to have both a classical and a quantum mechanical
Valpurgis knight, recasts Mephistopheles' king and flea story as a tale of Einstein infested with
unified field theories, cavorts through Dirac's theory of the positron, visits Oppie, Oppenheimer,
Kramer's, Sommerfeld and Tolman in Miss Ann Arbor's Speak Easy, the University of Michigan's
Ann Arbor Summer School near the Canadian border, where they are charmed by Mephisto's Gretchen
neutrino. Covering with its off-kilter sweep most of the physics and in-jokes of that year,
the play ends with the semi-comical death of Faust. Mephisto. The changing forms he would
have never pleased him, all's over now. How did his knowledge aid him?
Arinfest's face was drawn amid the laughter, and though he laughed too, his eyes were dark.
Finally, Chadwick arrives with a cardboard black ball balanced on his finger in toning.
The neutron has come to be, loaded with mass as he, of charge for ever free.
Pauly, do you agree? Mephisto Pauly admits. That which experiment has found, though theory had no
part in, is always reckoned more than sound to put your mind and heart in. He nods to Chadwick's
black ball, saying, Good luck, you heavyweight urzats. We welcome you with pleasure, but passion
ever spins our plots, and Gretchen is my treasure. The mystical chorus in the program
credited as Everybody Who Can Sing, breaks into a closing ultimo, as clapping and cheering fill the
room. Van Vizacker later wrote about this play. Our laughter about Bohr was the escape route which
enabled us to say that, although we often could not understand him, we admired him almost without
reservation, and loved him without limit. Looking around at the smiling faces, the masks coming off,
everyone laughing. One can see that this is goodness. The excitement that Rutherford's
Cavendish lab radiated that year like an unstable isotope was goodness. The discoveries,
and the hope of more, were goodness. It is the most exciting year for physics since relativity.
This is knowledge. This is greatness. This is progress. This is civilization.
On January 30 of the next year, 1933, Hitler took power in Germany. Two months later, as spring
began to come to the trees around Kaputt, Hitler's brown-shirted, stormtroopers burst into Einstein's
home. Seeing the abandoned, tumbler rocking in its mooring on the peaceful hovel outside,
they confiscated what they reported as the speed motorboat of Professor Einstein.
The little sailboat was eventually sold, and would vanish from local record and local memory
before Einstein could find it again, though he tried, with orders that it should not be once again
bought by public enemies. Einstein, in Pasadena, wrote to Berlin to officially resign from his
position at the university. He would never again set foot on German soil. Back in Berlin,
Max Planck took it upon himself, as the representative of physics in Germany,
to convince Hitler of the importance to Germany of the Jewish professors who were being dismissed
from their appointments all over the country. Planck had barely gotten a word out of his mouth,
when the hard little dictator began raging and shouting incoherently at the distinguished
seventy-five-year-old gentleman. As Einstein heard it, threatening Planck with imprisonment in a
concentration camp. Planck may not have been in danger, but, in a decade, his son,
implicated in a plot on the Fuhrer's life, was gruesomely murdered by the State.
Meanwhile, Heisenberg found himself, like Planck, and the rest of the Arian professors who remained,
a civil servant of the Third Reich, ordered to submit for scrutiny his parents' birth and
marriage certificates, attend indoctrination camps, and preface all his lectures with Heil Hitler.
In April, Pascal Jordan, Heisenberg and Bourne's stuttering co-creator of Matrix
Mathematics, joined the Nazi Party. That May, outside the university walls, in the squares of
the cities they had loved, Göttingen, Munich, Berlin, smoke rose from the burning of hundreds
of books. All around, things were becoming more and more temporary. People were on the move. No
one knew where the solid ground would be. Things fall apart. The center cannot hold.
The telephone woke Max Bourne up in the middle of the night. At the other end of the line was a
harsh voice, shouting menacing slogans. Bourne, still groggy with sleep, then was treated to a
rendition of the Nazi fight song, the Horst Fessel Lied. He and Heidi and their son Gustav
left Germany in early May of 1933, looking out the train window on books burning in a small town
square, for Selva, just over the Italian border. The little town felt secret and protected,
reachable only by hours of driving on vertiginous mountain roads, past snow-capped roadside shrines
of bleeding Christs and unyendoomed churches clinging to cliff and sky. It was hidden in a
uniquely beautiful crease of the Tyrolean Dolomites, their huge and shockingly near rough peaks and
circling the valley like the ramparts of heaven. It was still deep winter when the Bournes arrived
in May. They rented rooms from a farmer. So we settled down to our lonely life, wrote Bourne.
But soon spring came to the Dolomites in an ecstasy of little yellow trollflowers,
so many that the alpine meadows were a mass of waving yellow. The mountain peaks were jagged
against perfect spring skies. Bourne remembered being overwhelmed by the beauty. Heidi said that
she longed to send a telegram to Hitler, or to his minister of education, Rust, thanking him for
giving us this spring in the Alps. As the spring turned to summer and the Edelweiss began to bloom,
Vile arrived with Bourne's daughters, who had finished their school term staying with Vile
and his wife. With the girls came the Bourne's Airdale, Trixie. Devoted to Vile, Annie Schrödinger
next appeared in Selva. She and Irwin had also fled the Insanities of Berlin into the Tyrol,
and were not far away. Pauley came with his sister, who had been an actress on the stage of
Max Reinhardt's theatre in Berlin until Nazi rules left her jobless. And one, and then another,
of Bourne's students found where he was and came out to join him. Thus, wrote Bourne in his autobiography,
the University of Selva was founded, consisting of a bench in the forest, one professor,
and two undergraduates. I cannot remember what I tried to teach them, but they were a welcome
addition to our circle and accompanied the girls on walks and climbing expeditions.
Pauley had tried to persuade Heisenberg to join them for a little mountain climbing,
but instead Heisenberg, trying to save physics in Germany, was begging Bourne to return.
He did not think someone as prestigious as his old professor could be affected by the anti-Jewish laws.
If Bourne returned, Heisenberg believed that the political transformation could take place
by itself without any sort of damage to Göttingen physics. He thought they could live with the
dualities, just as in quantum physics, and, certainly in the course of time the ugly will
separate itself from the beautiful and politics oppress physics no more. Therefore, I would like
to ask you not to make any decisions yet, but wait and see how our country looks in the fall.
Bourne, reading this, hardly knew whether to laugh or cry. Heisenberg's duck-and-cover strategy would
barely save his own skin and precious few of his Jewish friends or students, and certainly not physics
in Germany. Bourne typed up what Heisenberg had written him and sent it to Ehrenfest.
Here is how the world is seen by our well-meaning German colleagues.
Switzerland remained almost eerily unaffected by all the turmoil in Germany.
Pauly had been made a professor at the ETH and had a circle of terrific students who
spent all the time they could with him, studying physics by day and the Zurich nightlife after
dark. Many of them, including Pauly himself, would flee for safety to the United States before long.
But in early 1933 their thoughts were on more tame terrors.
Their thoughts were on more tame terrors, like being stuck in a car with the recently licensed
Pauly in the driver's seat. Ehrenfest's student, Hendrik Kazimir, tells of Pauly's
slightly disconcerting habit of saying from time to time,
I'm driving rather well, a statement he underlined by turning around to his passengers and releasing
his hold on the wheel. If he was tipsy, the effect was even more disconcerting. Once,
when Pauly was abuliently driving home drunk from a conference, he took a non-existent shortcut,
his car over full with five alarmed young physicists, sitting on seats and on the floor.
Fifteen years later Kazimir happened to meet again the one who had been in the front passenger
seat that night. When I asked him, Dave, do you remember that drive from Lucerne to Zurich,
his answer came promptly. Will I ever forget it?
Boer's acolyte, Rosenfeld, had just given a lecture on a new paper he had written with Boer,
in which they demonstrated that yet another extension of quantum mechanics was consistent
with the uncertainty principle. Rosenfeld was pleased to see the attentiveness with which
the famous face with the black moustache and white mane of hair followed his words.
But when Einstein stood up for the discussion, he talked of uneasiness.
Then he asked, What would you say of the following situation?
Suppose two particles are set in motion toward each other with the same very large momentum,
and that they interact with each other for a very short time when they pass at known positions.
Consider now an observer who gets hold of one of the particles far away from the region of
interaction and measures its momentum. Then, from the conditions of the experiment,
he will obviously be able to deduce the momentum of the other particle,
since their momenta are exactly opposite. If, however, he chooses to measure the position
of the first particle, he will be able to tell where the other particle is, by a quick
calculation based on the wave equation. But sharp momentum and sharp position, of course,
are two incompatible quantum mechanical states. This is a perfectly correct and straightforward
deduction from the principles of quantum mechanics, but is it not very paradoxical?
Einstein asked with an expression of innocence. How can the final state of the second particle
be influenced by a measurement performed on the first, after all physical interaction has
ceased between them? The particles were out of the box. Einstein was even closer to the vision
of this argument that would, in two years, finally catch the attention of Bohr, and by
extension Rosenfeld. But at the time, Rosenfeld thought that Einstein was just making an
illustration of the unfamiliar features of quantum phenomena.
What are you doing, oh child, with white hair about the pain of one who is searching for answers?
Einstein's best friend, Besso, had written from Zurich the September before,
begging him to pay attention to his son. Perhaps you could take Edward on one of your long journeys.
Einstein had written back that he would bring him along next year in 1933.
But next year was too late. By then, psychiatry, electroshock treatment,
insulin shock treatment, and institutionalization had cured the once vivid boy of his extraordinary mind.
In May 1933, on his way to Oxford, Einstein stopped in Zurich to see his son for what was
to be the last time. There is a photograph of this moment, father and son sitting side by side
on a carved floral couch in some formal room. King or ceremony rarely saw Einstein so well
dressed. The handsome tattle, also in crisp gray suit, waistcoat and tie, looks older than 23.
He scowls at a large book open on his knee, while his father stares sadly straight ahead,
his violin loosely held under his elbow, bow in hand.
Max Born, in the Dolomites, wrote to Einstein, care of Ehrenfest,
telling him of all that had happened. On May 30, 1933, Einstein wrote from Oxford,
Ehrenfest sent me your letter. I am glad that you have resigned your positions,
you and Frank. Thank God there is no risk involved for either of you.
But my heart aches at the thought of the young ones. He did not mean Born's children, but Born's
students. He wrote of his and Neil's Bohr's attempts to find money or positions for these
exiles. He finished with a rye post-script. I've been promoted to an evil monster in Germany,
and all my money has been taken away from me, but I console myself with the thought that it
would soon be gone anyway. In Oxford, Einstein gave a speech about Born's statistical explanation of
the Schrodinger equation. I cannot but confess that I attach only a transitory importance to this
interpretation. I still believe in the possibility of a model of reality, that is to say, of a theory
which represents things themselves and not merely the probability of their occurrence.
On the other hand, it seems to me certain that we must give up the idea of a complete localization
of the particles in a theoretical model. This seems to me to be the permanent upshot of
Heisenberg's uncertainty principle. This did not leave him hopeless. But an atomic theory in
the true sense of the word, not merely on the basis of an interpretation, without localization
of particles in a mathematical model, is perfectly thinkable. He explained how a field
theory could accommodate this, finishing. Not until the atomic structure had been successfully
represented in such a manner would I consider the quantum riddle solved.
Many thanks for your kind letter. Born wrote back by return mail.
I wish I could help you to look after the young exiled physicists and others like them, but
he lifted his eyes from the little rough desk out at the protecting Alps.
I am in the same position myself.
As for physics, I have not given up by any means, but I share Ehrenfest's opinion that
those who are younger have a better chance of achieving something.
Early in September 1933, another Copenhagen conference was wrapping up.
Dirac met Ehrenfest, leaving on the doorstep of Bohr's house. His clipped,
high British tones earnest and sincere. Dirac said,
I hope you know how extremely useful you are at a conference.
Ehrenfest's eyes widened, and he turned and rushed back into the house,
leaving the tall, thin Dirac standing on the steps.
The door reopened. Ehrenfest walked back down to the step where Dirac was standing
and grasped his arm. He was crying, silent tears running down his unshaven cheeks.
Dirac, who never knew what to do in emotional circumstances, saw frightening things swirling
behind Ehrenfest's eyes.
Dirac, said Ehrenfest, what you have just said. He took a breath.
Coming from a young man like you, his eyes were so intense and red with tears, set back so deeply
under those dark brows. For Ehrenfest, Dirac stood for all that shining tangle of new physics he
thought he could no longer follow. What you have said means very much to me, because, maybe,
another breath. This was agony. A man such as I feels he has no longer the force to live.
He remained on the step, holding Dirac's arm. Horrified, Dirac looked into his eyes, unable
to speak. Ehrenfest seemed to grope for something more to say, but turned and left without another
word. A few weeks later, Ehrenfest walked into the waiting room of the Professor Vaaturing
Institute in Amsterdam, where his fifteen-year-old son Vasily, who had Down syndrome, was cared for.
Hitler had just passed a law for the prevention of genetically impaired progeny, starting the
organized sterilization of people who were not likely to produce the master race.
Soon, the Hitler ordered, Mercy deaths of disabled children would begin, the job done by doctors in
their offices. Ehrenfest walked up to the desk and said in Dutch, My name is Paul Ehrenfest,
and I have come to see my son, Vasily, calling his son by the nickname he always used.
The receptionist placed a call, as Ehrenfest sat quietly in one of a group of identical chairs.
A nurse led Vossage to the waiting room, his face shown at the sight of his father. They walked out
of the Professor Vaaturing Institute and into the late September day to a park nearby. Then Ehrenfest,
the beloved, conscience of the physicists, pulled out a handgun and shot first his son, and then
himself. Afterward, an unmailed letter was found in Ehrenfest's desk. It was dated August 4,
it was dated August 14, 1933, a little over a month before, and addressed to,
my dear friends, including Bohr, Einstein, James Frank, and Richard Chase Tolman.
I absolutely do not know any more how to carry further during the next few months
the burden of my life which has become unbearable. It is as good as certain that I shall kill myself,
and if that will happen sometime then I should like to know that I have written,
calmly, and without rush, to you whose friendship has played such a great role in my life.
In recent years it has become ever more difficult for me to follow developments
in physics with understanding. After trying, ever more enervated and torn, I have finally given up
in desperation. This made me completely weary of life. I did feel condemned to live on,
mainly because of economic cares for the children. I tried other things, but that helps only briefly.
Therefore I concentrated more and more on ever more precise details of suicide.
I have no other practical possibility than suicide, and that, after having first killed
Vossage. Forgive me. May you and those dear to you stay well.
In a railway car sits Max Born, looking out at the wintry 3am stars as the train rushes far away
from their Italian refuge in Selva. His son, Gustav, is asleep, curled up in one of the seats.
Trixie's furry black and tan head lies in Born's lap. He feels like the only soul awake for miles,
as the terrible year of 1933 draws to its shuttering end. A vision of yellow troll flowers blooms in
his mind. We knew by now all the delightful walks and little climbs around Selva, and we loved them
very much. And now they are leaving. Heidi and the girls have already gone on ahead for
a foreign country and an uncertain future. The foreign country is Scotland, where Born
will live for the next thirty years. The dog whimpers in her sleep, and Born lays a hand on her
wiry back. In December, Heisenberg, Schrödinger and Dirac, with Annie Schrödinger and Dirac's
and Heisenberg's mothers, disembarked at Stockholm Central Station. Heisenberg was coming from
Leipzig, Dirac from Cambridge, and Schrödinger had just settled in Oxford. Heisenberg was going
to receive the deferred 1932 Nobel Prize, and Schrödinger and Dirac, the 1933 one.
The previous month, Heisenberg had desperately tried to keep his old rival in Germany,
since he was neither Jewish nor otherwise endangered. He was angry at Schrödinger's defection and
refused to understand that there could be moral reasons to leave. Meanwhile, Schrödinger's old
friend Weyl, whose wife was Jewish, resigned from his post in Germany at the same time as Schrödinger
did, and left for Princeton. At the ceremonial banquet, Schrödinger ended his toast by saying,
I hope that I may come again soon, not to a celebration hall bedecked with flags and not
with so many formal clothes in my luggage, but with two long skis over my shoulder and a knapsack
on my back. Dirac gave an incoherent toast about how anything to do with numbers should be capable
of a theoretical solution. Even economic depression and religion would only get in the way,
reminding Heisenberg of the Solve conference six years earlier when Pauli had declared,
there is no God and Dirac is his prophet. Heisenberg simply thanked everyone for their
hospitality. No prize for peace was given that year. Heisenberg wrote to Bohr a month later
from Zurich, where the mail was not owned by the Nazis. Concerning the Nobel Prize, I have a bad
conscience regarding Schrödinger, Dirac and Born. Schrödinger and Dirac both deserved an entire
prize at least as much as I do, and I would have gladly shared with Born. Thus went the final
celebration of quantum physics before the whole world, and with it the tiny world of physics,
changed irreversibly with a second world war and the explosion of two bombs.
Hitler's power was increasing by the day. Europe was tensing herself for what atrocities she knew
not. Refugees from Germany were arriving in Copenhagen. The gentle experimentalist,
James Franck, the Hungarian biologist Georg von Hevesi, who would become a beloved fixture there
for the next decade, terrorizing the institute with radioactive cats and other non-Gedankin,
non-physics radiobiology experiments. Meanwhile, still buffeted by the death of
Arinfest, Bohr was to receive another awful blow in the summer of 1934. Before his eyes,
while sailing on their little boat, his seventeen-year-old son Christian, the beautiful,
his eldest, was swept into the choppy water where he immediately drowned.
Things fell apart ever faster as Hitler took over Austria and a pivotal piece of Czechoslovakia
in 1938 with the ascent of a Britain and France desperate to appease him. Early in 1938, Hitler's
laws broke apart the team of erstwhile close friends, physicist Lisa Meitner and chemist Otto
Hahn. From the chilly safety of Stockholm, Meitner guided Hahn, back in Berlin, in splitting the
uranium atom late that year, the first step to a nuclear bomb.
As a newly naturalized American, von Neumann visited Bohr and his brother Harold at Bohr's
Copenhagen mansion that September. I had numerous conversations with the Bohr's and Mrs Bohr,
of course, mostly political, but we even managed to talk an hour and a half on
the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Von Neumann wrote his fiancée,
I'm sure we were showing off, the both of us, giving an exhibition that we can worry about
physics in September 1938. It's all like a dream, a dream of a peculiarly mad quality,
this enormous house with all the gadgets Mr Jacobson, who built it, put in, a great
hot house winter garden, a Doric colonnade, all covered with neoclassical sculpture.
The Bohr's quarreling whether Czechoslovakia ought to give in,
and whether there is any hope for causality in quantum theory.
Chapter 16 The Quantum Mechanical Description of Reality, 1934 to 1935
1. Greta Hermann and Carl Jung
2. In a small basement room of the Physics Institute at Leipzig, Heisenberg, and Carl
Friedrich von Weizacher, are playing ping-pong beside a blackboard covered with equations.
Von Weizacher, once a fifteen-year-old sitting in the back of a taxi while his hero told him
he had just refuted the law of causality. In that moment, Carl Friedrich remembers,
I decided to study physics to understand this, is now a philosophically astute twenty-one-year-old.
With dark, well-quaft hair, he bears a diplomatic expression befitting the son of an ambassador.
Ambassador von Weizacher was so diplomatic, in fact, that he managed to keep his position
while his government convulsed from republic to dictatorship.
Living in Leipzig for these last four fateful years, Carl Friedrich has become a central figure
in Heisenberg's group, and probably Heisenberg's closest friend.
But the experience of learning quantum physics from the source, thrilling as it has been,
has contained a certain disillusionment at its core. Early on, von Weizacher found that his mentor
did not concern himself with the philosophical problems in physics,
the very things for the sake of which I had been tempted by him to study the subject.
Heisenberg is always saying, reasonably, physics is an honest trade, only after you have learned it,
have you the right to philosophize about it. Bluff, pragmatic statements like these,
do not hide the fact that Heisenberg relies completely on Carl Friedrich, his junior,
by a decade, in matters of philosophy, not just in the realm of physics, but also in that of politics.
Outside it is a nervous, edgy spring. Here in this basement room, though, with its equations and table
tennis, there are no Nazis, no moral crises, no outside world. The young men's faces are intense,
but only with the heat of the game. Their jackets are thrown up on pegs near the door.
The only sound is the scuff of their shoes and the hollow, ping, of the plastic ball on wood,
followed by an occasional exclamation. Above, a door opens. Down the stairs comes the unfamiliar
tread of a woman's shoes. Striding into their sight, the woman is thin, and, as the monochrome
look of a greyhound with a narrow, withdrawn face, and boyish, slicked back, done-colored hair.
von Weiziker's father would certainly not approve of her radical political views,
but, within the walls of the institute, such subjects do not carry quite such importance.
Are you here, Professor Heisenberg? She asks. I am here to prove you wrong.
Heisenberg, still holding his ping-pong paddle, blinks.
I believe you have declared causality empty of content as a result of your famous principle,
she continues. Not too long before, Heisenberg had committed himself to a few intentionally
inflammatory words in the newsprint of the Berliner Taggeblatt.
You said, now it is the task of philosophy to come to terms with this new situation.
She raises her eyebrows. Her name is Greta Hermann. She is exactly Heisenberg's age,
and she does not want to come to terms. One of the few female members of a group usually referred
to as Notte's boys, she studied under the great mathematician Emy Notte in Göttingen.
In her thesis, she had done original work on the foundations of what would become known as
computer algebra. One of the fields, along with game theory, which von Neumann, her complete
opposite in almost every way, so fruitfully established and dominated. After her PhD,
she stayed in Göttingen to become the private assistant of the philosopher Leonard Nelson,
an electric personality who took it upon himself to unite philosophy, mathematics, and ethics.
Nelson had gathered around him a circle dedicated to the work of the Neocontian
Jacob Fries, founding, as an outgrowth of this circle, his own political party,
the International Socialist Combat League. Now both mentors are gone. An insomniac,
Nelson worked himself to a feverish early death in 1927, a sacrifice to pure reason and
international socialism. Notte was banished by the coarser calculus of national socialism,
and now teaches in America after losing her post for being insufficiently Aryan.
The next year she would have lost her post anyway for being female.
Nelson died just before his superabundant energy would have been most needed,
and Greta remains to marshal the Combat League into active resistance against the Nazis.
She edits a socialist daily called The Spark, and organizes underground anti-Nazi colloquia,
finding philosophy even more exhilarating when mixed with danger.
If Heisenberg and von Weizacker, standing there with their ping-pong paddles, knew all this,
they would be astonished that a bit of intellectual provocation in the newspaper
could bring her to their doorstep in such troubled times. But Heisenberg's declaration of the
dethroning of Kant was more than academic for one whose whole system of ethics and political action,
her whole life, is based on that source. It was for Kant's philosophy that her hero
had essentially crucified himself. She will not give in easily.
What prevents us, she asks, from assuming that, as our physical knowledge increases,
new formulas and rules might be added to quantum mechanics? What prevents us from
believing that these might render exact predictions possible again?
Her steady eyes hold Heisenberg's. Everything depends upon the answer to this question.
von Weizacker's face lights up at the prospect of a philosophical argument,
the sort of thing for which he usually does not find any serious takers.
He offers her one of the two chairs in the room.
Half sitting on the ping-pong table, Heisenberg gamely starts to explain.
Nature, in fact, tells us that no new determinants exist, that our knowledge is complete without
them. Greta raises her eyebrows and crosses her legs, leaning back in the chair and folding
her arms across her chest. Heisenberg begins to walk, bore-like, in an elliptical curve around
the ping-pong table. In an experiment on a quantum object, he explains, two worlds are meeting,
a quantum world and a classical world, which behave in totally different ways.
Something crucial is lost in that meeting. Bohr had just that year published a collection
of his essays titled Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature. Over and over in its pages,
he emphasizes that measurement disturbs what is being measured, and this disturbance is of
such a nature that it deprives us of the foundation underlying the causal mode of description.
This concept is what he had used with such success in his Solve conference triumphs over
Einstein. It creates an intuitive understanding of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle and the
mysteries of the collapse of the wave-function. But Einstein, with the assistance of Podolski and
Rosen, is about to alert Bohr that it is wrong, or at least far less intuitive than they had thought.
Is a deterministic completion of quantum mechanics possible?
asks Heisenberg. He turns to face Greta Herrmann the short way across the table,
as if they are both referees debating whether or not a ball touched the net,
and answers his own question. This is why not. Both on the quantum mechanical side with the object,
and on the classical side with the apparatus, he puts down his hands, leaning forward over
the net toward his two-person audience. The laws of that side hold precisely. The statistics come
in here. He grabs the net with a smooth and sudden gesture. At the schnit, the cut. You can't measure
a particle without disturbing its causal course. Now, if you were going to hope for, as you said,
new formulas and rules to be added to the quantum theory and bring causality back to it,
they have to enter along the schnit. He shakes the net. But the schnit can always be moved.
You can always describe something quantum mechanically which you were describing classically
before. You can always include a little more of your apparatus in the quantum mechanical system,
as long as some part of the apparatus remains classical. He walks back around the table to
sit back down on it, legs swinging, facing Greta and Carl Friedrich. But, when the schnit moves,
a contradiction between the law-like consequences of the new hidden properties
and the more fluid relationships of quantum theory will be unavoidable. Hence, a deterministic
completion of quantum mechanics is not possible. Von Neumann has just written a book,
and one of the chapters shows this with much greater rigor.
I've read that book, says Greta.
Wonderful, says Heisenberg. Well, then, there you have it.
I think if you look at Neumann's crucial section over again, she says distinctly,
no Von for her. You'll notice that a necessary step to prove the non-existence of such
distinguishing characteristics involves the implicit assumption of their non-existence.
Heisenberg and von Weisacher stare at her. What did you say?
The possibility of other characteristics upon which the course of the motion actually depends—that
is, the possibility of hidden variables—is not excluded by Neumann's results, so much as by
his assumptions, Greta says. Heisenberg gets up silently,
and hands her an eraser and a piece of chalk from the dozen lying end to end along the
blackboard's chalk tray. Turning around in her chair, she clears a little space on the board,
and writes a short equation just behind her. The expected value of the position and
momentum of a particle, both measured at the same time, is equal to the sum of the expected value
for a measurement of position and the expected value for a measurement of momentum.
With this assumption, which is true enough for quantum mechanics, stands and falls Neumann's
proof, she says. He's trying to read off the impossibility of such a deepening of our knowledge
from your uncertainty relations. She looks over at Heisenberg. If the position and momentum of
a particle cannot both be measured with arbitrary accuracy, then how could one gain secure knowledge
of the future trajectory, which is just determined by the present position and momentum of the body?
Van Weiziger frowns meditatively. Heisenberg's brow is furrowed.
But this argument is based on a subjective view of the uncertainty relations. It's looking at the
electron merely as a particle, and saying, since we can't ever know what the position and momentum
are exactly, and its future trajectory is decided by these things, then the cause will forever be
concealed from observation. But this is ignoring the fact that the electron is not at all just a
classical particle, but it is also a wave. Because of this fact, the uncertainty relations are not
about our limited knowledge, but about the nature of the world. This prompts a nod from Heisenberg.
If, according to this reasoning, the electron does not simultaneously have an exact position
and an exact momentum, then its exact position and its exact momentum cannot be decisive for its
further motion. Greta continues. Having dropped this assumption, it becomes an open question
whether one could not find other characteristics upon which the course of the motion would actually
depend causally. Just because the formalism of quantum mechanics does not acknowledge
such characteristics, it does not follow that one is justified to declare them impossible.
The two men are staring at her as if she has dropped from the sky.
As far as I can tell, Greta says, smiling slightly and standing up. It's just another
example of the well-known fact that there can only be a single sufficient reason to renounce
as fundamentally futile any further search for the causes of an observed process.
That one already knows these causes. I am here to find them.
Heisenberg raises his eyebrows, but he is nonetheless impressed.
We are going to have some good discussions this term, he says to von Weiziker.
Welcome to Leipzig, Fraulein Greta-Hermann. You'll join in with us for the whole term then?
Yes, I will, she says. As Greta walks back up the stairs, she hears the ping-pong game
recommending. Around the same time in 1934, Pauli's life was beginning to make sense again.
For the previous three years, the combined effect of his mother's suicide,
his father's speedy remarriage, and his own divorce, his bride having run off with a
mediocre chemist, had been to force Pauli ever deeper into drink and depression.
Recovery had come through becoming acquainted with psychic matters and
the proper activity of the soul, as he told his friend and assistant Ralph Kronig in October
1934, signing the letter, your old and new W. Pauli.
He had been introduced to psychic matters two years before by his new colleague at the ETH,
Carl Jung. Emerging on the psychiatric scene in Zurich as Sigmund Freud's great rival,
Jung theorized a universal unconscious full of primal archetypes that has since intrigued
intellectuals with its supposedly uncanny echoes of the quantum theory.
When Pauli met Jung, he saw the psychiatrist as offering a possible way out of his alcohol-soaked
depression. But Jung had a more opportunistic reaction to Pauli when the formerly buoyant
physicist came for his advice. As he described Pauli, without naming him in his famous
Tavistock lecture of 1935,
in that interview I got a very definite impression of him. I saw that he was chock
full of archaic material and I said to myself, now I am going to make an interesting experiment
to get that material absolutely pure, without any influence from myself. So I sent him to a
woman doctor who was then just a beginner and who did not know much about archetypical material.
He did not mention that the beginner was one of his disciples,
soaking up the dogma on archetypical material right from the source.
Even in the fog of depression, Pauli was capable of fighting back to some extent,
writing to the woman doctor in February of 1932. I consulted Herr Jung because of
certain neurotic phenomena which make it easier for me to achieve academic successes
than successes with women. Since with Herr Jung rather the contrary is the case,
he appeared to me to be quite the appropriate man to treat me. And treat him he did.
After half a year of the experiment, in two years of Jung's personal analysis and friendship,
Pauli shed his depression. In 1934 he met and married Franke Bertram, who would be his companion
for the rest of his life. Whether it was Jung or the sensible Franke who had really brought about
Pauli's recovery, the psychoanalyst had left an indelible imprint on the Geiselgotz, God's whip.
Pauli tapped into a fuzzy thinking and credulous side of himself
that Bohr and Heisenberg would barely recognize, thrilled when Jung would use his
material in lectures, absorbed by the baroque richness of Jung's symbolism and above all,
the cloudy world of dreams. But in the autumn of 1934, half a year after his marriage to Franke,
Pauli wrote to Jung,
I feel a certain need to get away from dream interpretation and dream analysis,
and I would like to see what life has to bring me from the outside.
He enclosed with the letter a token that suggested he was not taking his leave for good.
A recent paper by Jordan. Not on physics, but on telepathy.
Pauli felt that poor Jordan, driven inward by the oppression of an almost insurmountable stutter,
had come close to Jung's idea of the collective unconscious.
Jung, meanwhile, was seduced by a series of experiments on telepathy at Duke University
performed by a botanist named J.B. Rine. Rine's monograph, Extrasensory Perception,
a term of his own coinage, usually shortened to ESP, had just been published in 1934.
Inspired to study the paranormal by a Sir Arthur Conan Doyle lecture,
Rine had displayed the extent of his scientific rigor quite early, in 1927,
the year of Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, the Pauli matrices, and the Bohr-Einstein debate,
by earnestly declaring a horse named Lady Wonder telepathic.
A magician, who investigated her the same year, discovered that in fact,
she was reading subtle cues from her trainer's stance and expression.
Undeterred by the equine debacle, Rine moved on to telepathic humans.
In the most famous of his experiments, just finished in 1934, Rine's graduate student turned
over a deck of 25 ESP cards, one per minute, in their parapsychology room on the top floor of
the psychology laboratory. Across the Duke quadrangle in a cubicle in the library stacks,
a clairvoyant divinity student attempted to guess which of the five simple symbols was on each card.
When they rejoined, they compared results. After seventy-four runs of 25 cards each,
Rine declared that the findings were statistically significant, with ten percent more cards called
correctly than mere chance would predict. Jung thought it was wonderful. Pauli initially
would have none of it. To the end of his life, Jung believed that the Rine experiments had provided
scientific proof of ESP, despite the increasing awareness that Rine, though sincere, had only a
tenuous grasp on the details of scientific method.
These experiments prove that the psyche at times functions outside of the spatiotemporal law of
causality, Jung explained. This indicates that our conceptions of space and time and therefore of
causality also are incomplete. While Jung's credulity is not a surprise, his power of persuasion over
Pauli is. From his early twenties Pauli could tell Bohr to shut up and Einstein that his ideas were
actually not so stupid. Feared by men with the stature of Ehrenfest and Max Born, Pauli was at
his happiest with a letter from Heisenberg in his fist. Walking around like a caged lion in our
apartment, as his first wife remembered, formulating his answers in the most biting and witty manner
possible. But in the words of Franke, Pauli, the extremely rational thinker subjected himself
to total dependence on Jung's magical personality. In 1950 Pauli wrote to Jung,
we had basically agreed in the past on the possibility and usefulness, and also, in view of
the Rine experiments, on the necessity of a further principle for the interpretation of nature,
other than the causal principle. They discussed a complementarity between causality and
synchronicity, Jung's word to describe significant coincidences. Three years later the subject came
up again. Pauli, speaking of the observer and measurement of quantum mechanics, today I do in
fact believe that it is possible for the same archetype to be in evidence both in the selection
of an experimental setup by an observer as well as in the result of the measurement, Pauli wrote to
Jung. Similar to the dice in Rine's experiments. A dream he had had in the waning months of
1934, soon after he had stopped seeing Jung, was still haunting him. A man resembling Einstein
was drawing a graph on the blackboard. In the dream, Einstein drew a simple upward slanting line,
labeled quantum mechanics bisecting a hatched surface representing deeper reality.
I saw quantum mechanics, and so-called official physics in general, as a one-dimensional section
of a two-dimensional, more meaningful world. Pauli continued, the second dimension of which
could only be the unconscious and the archetypes.
Greta Hermann returned to Göttingen, armed with all she had learned in a semester with
Heisenberg, and a philosophical friendship with von Weisecker. She had waded into deep
complementarian waters, and emerged clasping her own personal harmonization of Kant and the
quantum theory. Far more important to her than any demonstration of the faultiness of von Neumann's
no hidden variables proof. From the shaking pillars of quantum physics
still upheld in Leipzig, the correspondence principle and the idea that measurement disturbs
the system, she constructed an elaborate defense of the completeness of the Copenhagen interpretation,
as any combination of the quantum mechanical ideas of Bohr, Heisenberg, and Pauli,
plus those of the often forgotten Born, came to be called, that impressed Heisenberg and von
Weisecker. She even included von Weisecker's version of Einstein's light-blitz box, which
allowed her to make the important conclusion, soon to be emphasized by Bohr, that the quantum
mechanical characterization is not, like the classical one, attributed to the physical system,
as it were, in itself. That is, she explained the state of a particle is not independent
of the observations through which one acquires knowledge of it. Measurement doesn't just disturb,
but creates the measured characteristics. But like Heisenberg and von Weisecker,
she didn't seem to notice that if it does so, it does so at a distance. The Copenhagen interpretation
does not provide the language that allows a physicist to notice that something looks like
spooky action at a distance, let alone to recognize entanglement as a specific,
quantifiable phenomenon. Greta, like so many others, passed over it in silence.
The resulting paper, in its most widely read form, ended up in the pages of
D. Natour Wiesenschaften, a journal founded to foster communication between the many branches
of the natural sciences. This was a dialogue that mathematical formulae were deemed to inhibit,
and Greta's incisive passages on Neumann were left out.
Nelson's Neocantian journal also printed the paper, in its entirety, but this was hardly a
place where the devotees of von Neumann's defective proof were likely to ever discover it.
The year after her paper was published, 1936, Greta was forced to lay aside any further
meditations on the foundations of quantum mechanics. Her anti-Nazi stance seriously
endangering her life, she fled to Denmark and then England, throwing herself into the London
branch of the International Socialist Combat League. Thus it was that no one beyond Heisenberg,
von Weizacher, and Greta's embattled circle, knew of her dismissal of von Neumann's no
hidden variables argument, and none of them, for mysterious reasons of their own,
said anything more on the subject. 2. Einstein,
Podolski, and Rosen In 1934, Nathan Rosen was working at Princeton,
having received his doctorate under Slater and married his high school sweetheart, Anna,
a musicologist, fine art critic, and pianist. One day, he knocked tentatively on the door
of Einstein's room 209 in Fine Hall. The Institute for Advanced Study was essentially
being built around the world famous Emma Gray, who had arrived the previous October.
For now, it was housed in the spare rooms of the Princeton Math Department,
and at the time, von Neumann and Einstein made up half the faculty.
After moving heaven and earth to bring his assistant,
Walter Mayer, along with him, and install him at the Institute out of harm's way,
Einstein found Mayer becoming restive at the thought of another assault on the
Everest of unified field theory. Now here was Rosen, a gentle, boyish, eager-looking 25-year-old
from Brooklyn, who wanted to talk about Einstein's first unified field theory,
the subject of Rosen's master thesis under Slater.
The next day, walking across the green, Rosen got a jolt when Einstein approached him,
saying with his heavy German accent, young man, what about working together with me?
When Einstein and Rosen would meet in room 209, it was not to discuss what the implications would
be if two co-dependent atoms, forming one of the hydrogen molecules Rosen studied,
were to separate like Einstein's gedonkin photon from its gedonkin box. Instead,
they were peering into the giddy depths and vast expanses of Einstein's field equations.
Emerging from these equations was a fascinating phenomenon. A black hole, a star, perhaps that
has collapsed so far under its own gravity that even light cannot escape from its pull,
would create a tiny rip in space-time at its center, the eye of the hurricane.
If two of these rips were to line up, two distant portions of space-time might be connected in a
kind of mysterious shortcut, what was soon being called an Einstein-Rosen bridge, and would later
be referred to as a wormhole. Also at the Institute for Advanced Study early in 1935
was Boris Podolski. Already acquainted with Einstein and his series of light-blitz boxes,
he learned of Rosen's analysis of the hydrogen molecule. It seems that it was Podolski who put
two and two together and realized that Rosen's intertwined twin hydrogen atoms formed a pre-
existing case capable of demonstrating what Einstein had been talking about but never published.
Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen's discussions resulted in a paper titled,
Can Quantum Mechanical Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete?
Einstein reported to Schrodinger that,
for reasons of language, Einstein at the time was limited to about five hundred English words,
it was written by Podolski after much discussion. The absent, the, in the title,
was an artifact of the English of someone whose first language was Russian.
Less certain is how the collaboration between the three authors proceeded.
Rosen's memories on the subject were vague. Podolski told his son that he and Rosen would
talk with Einstein when they thought they were on to something. Late in his life, Podolski,
impishly and unforgettable, told John Hart, his colleague in the physics department,
we added Einstein's name without asking. The EPR argument, in any case, traveled along
the same lines that Einstein's series of light-blitz box-gedonkin experiments had done, though
presented more thoroughly and with more complicated logical and quantum mechanical analysis.
Two systems, be they particles or boxes, interact and then separate. From a measurement of
momentum on one system, the experimenter can learn the momentum of the far away, untouched system.
But if the experimenter decided to measure the position instead, the position of the far away
system could be computed from the quantum mechanical wave function of the nearby one.
So at this stage in the argument, there is an alternative, either measure the momentum here
to learn the momentum there or measure the position here to learn the position there.
But the paper famously and significantly defined an element of reality.
If, without in any way disturbing a system, we can predict with certainty the value of a physical
quantity, then there exists an element of physical reality corresponding to this physical quantity.
In that case, should not both characteristics of the far away system, position and momentum,
be deemed elements of reality? And if so, was not quantum mechanics incomplete for stating otherwise?
The last two paragraphs of the paper were similarly significant.
One would not arrive at our conclusion if one insisted that two or more physical quantities
can be regarded as simultaneous elements of reality only when they can be simultaneously
measured or predicted, EPR admitted. On this point of view, since either one or the other,
but not both simultaneously of the quantities, p, momentum and q, position, can be predicted,
they are not simultaneously real. But they were skeptical. This makes the reality of p and q
depend upon the process of measurement carried out on the first system, which does not disturb
the second system in any way. No reasonable definition of reality could be expected to permit
this. While we have thus shown that the way function does not provide a complete description
of the physical reality, we have left open the question of whether or not such a description
exists. We believe, however, that such a theory is possible.
Podolski had to leave for California at about the time of the paper's submission,
and it is not clear that Einstein saw it before he was suddenly confronted, on May 4, 1935,
eleven days before the paper appeared in physical review, with an article on page eleven of the
Saturday New York Times entitled, Einstein Attacks Quantum Theory, complete with the
hundred-word exegesis that the newspaper attributed to Podolski. But whatever is buried in history,
and in the complications of working with someone whose every move is deemed newsworthy,
Podolski had done a great service to the history of physics in committing the EPR argument to print.
Einstein, with his eyes on the big picture, sometimes neglected to do so.
Von Neumann's proof of the impossibility of hidden variables is a case in point.
Sometime around 1938, Einstein was sitting in his office in the Institute for Advanced Study
with his assistants Peter Bergmann and Valentin Bergmann when the subject of Von Neumann's proof
came up in conversation. Einstein proceeded to open Von Neumann's tome and point to the same
assumption that, unbeknownst to him, Greta Herrmann had just criticized a few years earlier.
Why should we believe in that? He asked. And the conversation moved on.
Einstein's distractedness in not alerting anyone, beyond the equally distracted Bergmann and Bergmann,
marks the second time that Von Neumann's proof managed to escape wider public knowledge of its
error. When Podolski applied for a position at the University of Cincinnati where he would teach
for a quarter century, Einstein wrote his reference. Podolski always goes directly to the heart of the
problem.
