areas of medicine, including RNA chemistry,
coronavirus therapeutics.
Before his current role, he was a member
of the Department of Pathology
at the Stanford University School of Medicine.
Dr. Quay, welcome to the committee.
You are now recognized for your opening statement.
Committee Chair, Senator Peters,
Ranking Member, Senator Paul.
Committee members, invited participants,
ladies and gentlemen.
I am a physician scientist and have a 50 year career
spanning academic medical research,
biotechnology, and scientific fraud investigation.
My biography summarizes my career.
I speak today, however, as an independent scientist.
I do not receive any NIH or NIAID funding.
Scientists dependent on NIH or NIAID funding
may have pressure to publicly agree with orthodoxies
that privately they admit are wrong.
My approach to the COVID pandemic origin
that killed 20 million plus people
caused $20 trillion in economic damage
is based on six approaches to the data and the events.
I'll start with something Dr. Gary said privately.
Quote, someone should tell nature,
meaning the British Journal,
that the fish market probably did not start
to outbreak, end quote.
I agree with Dr. Gary.
Unfortunately, one reason we are having these hearings
is that the public statements of many virologists
have not been congruent with their private conversations.
In any case, I'll describe the six approaches
to the question that all support a lab leak as a source
and can go deeper into each of those with questions.
First, the virus was spreading in Wuhan
and around the world in the fall of 2019,
months before the first case in the Hunan seafood market.
This is supported by 14 observations or evidence.
The evidence includes the calculation of the time
to the most recent common ancestor,
hospital overloads in Wuhan,
antibodies in patients from Italy, Spain and the US,
wastewater samples from Brazil,
sick athletes at the October Wuhan Military Games,
school closings in Wuhan,
and dozens of documented patients.
This dismisses out of hand the market as the origin.
But second, let's look at the market data.
The human infections, the animal samples,
and the environmental specimens,
these generate eight observations.
No infected animals in the market
or the supply chain were infected.
No infected wildlife vendors had SARS.
All human infections are the non-ancestral lineage B.
The environmental specimens with animal DNA have no SARS-2.
One vendor had animals from Southern China
where SARS-2 came from,
but this vendor and his animals are negative for SARS-2.
Now, only one of 14 environmental samples
with raccoon dog DNA contains SARS reads,
and that contains one read out of 210 million.
13 of the 14 raccoon dog DNA specimens had no SARS-2.
With SARS-1, literally 100% of the market animals
were infected.
I frankly think it is shameful for scientists
to mislead journalists in the public
saying these data I just described are evidence
raccoon dogs were infected with SARS-2.
This is why trust in science is broken.
None of these data are consistent
with an infected animal passing SARS-2
to a human at the market.
The 1,500 kilometer distance to the nearest SARS-2
related virus is like the distance from Washington, D.C.
to the Florida Everglades.
Imagine you're at dinner at a restaurant in North Bethesda
near the NIAID labs.
You get sick and you are told that the virus you caught
is only found in bats from the Everglades,
but it also happens to be understudied
at the laboratories you see outside the restaurant window.
That's what the market origin people
are asking you to believe.
Third, documented events add or related
to Wuhan Institute of Virology beginning in March 2019
are consistent with the expected activities
when a lab acquired infection has occurred.
This timeline includes unusual attention
from the Chinese Communist Party,
leading to the PLA physician soldier being put in charge.
Large tender requests to repair biosafety equipment,
a virus database disappearing in the middle of the night.
Large tender requests for a lab security force
to quote, handle foreign personnel, end quote.
Patents for a device to prevent a lab acquired infection.
Rumors in the virology community
of a new SARS virus in the lab.
30 vials of the three most dangerous viruses on the planet
being shipped illegally from a lab in Canada to WIV in March,
and then one of those pathogens being found
as a major contaminant in a BLC lab in December.
These events taken together are a classic example
of closing the barn door after the horse is left.
Fourth, the evidence that is found
in a natural zoonosis with respect to the animal host,
the virus, and the human are missing with COVID.
96,000 animals were tested and are negative for SARS-2.
43,000 blood samples from blood donors in Wuhan were tested.
A natural spillover like SARS-1
would have produced about 260 positives.
A lab accident would be zero, and of course,
zero is what is found.
With respect to the virus,
a spillover produces posterior diversity in the virus genome.
A lab leak does not.
SARS-2 has no posterior diversity.
Natural spillovers, as Dr. Gary indicated this morning,
involve multiple markets.
SARS-1 began in southern China,
had 11 spillovers in 11 different markets
in nine different cities.
Christian Anderson, the proximal origin of SARS-2,
said SARS-2 was one person being infected with one animal.
I agree.
Fifth, the genome of SARS-2 has eight features found
in a synthetic virus that are not found in natural viruses.
The probability that SARS-2 came from nature
based on these features is one in a billion.
These features are the backbone,
the receptor binding domain, the furan cleavage site,
the genetics of the furan cleavage site,
the number, location, and pattern of cloning sites
in SARS-2 that use the Barrick cloning method
and the orphate gene.
Based on SARS-2 cloning sites,
I predicted how SARS-2 could be made in the laboratory.
A year later, Barrick used the predicted steps
to make an infectious clone of SARS-2.
These same features were described in a 2018 DARPA grant
by WIV and US scientists.
With respect to the grant,
SARS-2 had the proposed backbone from the proposed region
in China, the proposed adaption to human killing,
the proposed diversity from SARS-1,
the proposed noceum cleavage site,
number, location, and pattern,
the proposed human cleavage site
at the proposed S1, S2 junction.
Let's close with a thought experiment.
Since 2018, do you think a market spillover
of a coronavirus could have happened in Wuhan?
Dr. Dasek and Xi have studied coronavisors for a decade
and they said no.
How do I know that?
Because they used Wuhan residents as control for a study
looking for antibodies in coronaviruses
in people living in your bad caves in southern China.
The rural residents had a 3% rate,
Wuhan residents had zero.
Let's flip that and ask the reverse question.
Do you think a lab acquired infection
could begin in Wuhan,
a city with the world's leading laboratory
collecting coronavirus from nature,
doing synthetic biology on coronaviruses,
doing petri dish and animal research on coronavirus
with a bat colony for testing,
and that had written a blueprint to make a coronavirus
that had seven unique features found in SARS-CoV-2?
I'll let you answer that question yourself.
I have a number of specific reforms I believe
should be implemented and I would be happy
to discuss them during the questioning.
What happens if we have these hearings and nothing happens?
The one is the virology right now
is testing a Nipah virus in a synthetic clone.
This is a U.S. CDC bioterrorism agent.
It kills three out of four people.
A lab leak with an airborne Nipah virus
would quickly within weeks disrupt food and energy
distribution, fire and police services, medical care.
My analysis of this tipping point event
is that it would set back civilization about 250 years.
The work of this committee is critical.
If we now fail to act with the knowledge we have history,
if it can still be recorded, we'll judge us poorly.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you.
Professor of chemistry and chemical biology
at Rutgers University.
He also serves as the laboratory director
for the Waxman Institute.
