Lecture 2 Land and People of Medieval Scandinavia
In this lecture, I plan to introduce the lands and peoples of Scandinavia.
This is an opportunity to stress some of the major features in the Scandinavian landscape,
and that will notably be the northern climate, the forests and the seas,
that will dictate Scandinavian history really from the start of agriculture
in what we call the Neolithic period, starting somewhere in 4000 B.C.,
through the entire of our course, through the end of the Viking Age in 1100 A.D., and even beyond.
We also want to introduce the ancestors of the Scandinavians,
the people who eventually gave rise to the Danes, Swedes, Norwegians, the people of the Viking Age.
And again, there will be some important points to stress that this population of Scandinavians or their ancestors,
going back at least into the Bronze Age, were a relatively homogeneous group of people,
and the Scandinavians of the Viking Age were therefore the heirs of a very, very long cultural continuity,
a continuity in settlement, which is going to be an important feature about Viking Age civilization.
Well, first I should start with the term Scandinavia.
The term is used geographically to define the peninsula that is shared by Norway and Sweden.
And in that restricted sense, it's correct to speak of the Scandinavian Peninsula.
And that peninsula is really rather deceptive, because it doesn't imply the unity that most maps would tend to give the viewer.
A map is a two-dimensional reproduction of a three-dimensional reality.
Norway is cut off from Sweden by a really impressive mountain range, the Kjølen or the Kjøl,
which essentially breaks off the two kingdoms, the two future kingdoms.
So Norway faces to the North Sea and the Atlantic, where Sweden orients east on the Baltic.
And so when Scandinavia is used in this course, it's more than just that geographic term.
It refers to the Scandinavian peoples. It has much more a cultural sense.
And there we have to include Denmark.
And Denmark, I noted in the first lecture, politically is much larger than the modern kingdom.
It's over twice the size.
But Scandinavia includes the peninsula of Jutland or Jutland, as it's often anglicized,
which is partially German territory today.
Most of Slesvik is now in German territory.
It would have been part of Denmark in the Middle Ages.
It includes the Danish islands, notably the Great Island of Zeeland or Zeeland, as we say in English,
Finn or Funen, as it's sometimes rendered, Lallan and Falster, which are the four big islands.
It includes the islands in the Baltic, Bornholm, now part of the Danish kingdom,
and the islands of Olen and Gotland, which are attached to the Swedish kingdom.
And Gotland will play an extremely important role in commercial activities,
well really from the very start of the Bronze Age and running through the Viking Age and beyond.
Finland, notably the islands between Sweden and Finland today, the Olen Islands,
which are really inhabited by Swedish speakers, but are now part of Finland.
They were awarded to Finland by the old League of Nations.
And Finland, notably its southwestern and southern shores, are culturally very closely linked to Sweden
and therefore to Scandinavia.
Today, Finland is often included in Scandinavia in that cultural sense
because the Finns came under very, very close, very, very profound influence from Scandinavian civilization.
We will find that actually Finns team up with Swedes to form part of the Rus,
the Vikings who operate in Russia from the 8th through the 11th centuries.
And so Finland, while inhabited by peoples who speak a completely different language,
finishes a gluten of language with its own structure,
very, very different from the dramatic languages of Scandinavia.
Nonetheless, culturally Finland is part of this world.
And finally, Iceland, the Faroe Islands in the North Atlantic,
these are colonies that are established in the Viking Age.
They too are part of that Scandinavian cultural unit today.
Well, with that definition, let's look at some of the key features
that will influence Scandinavian history,
and the landscape will shape very much human activity
and the culture that emerges in Scandinavia by the Viking Age.
Well, first and foremost, the northern climates.
This is something that most viewers are familiar with.
Scandinavia immediately denotes a cold place.
And understandably so.
The winters can be brutal, especially in Norway and Sweden.
Denmark is more favored because it's much farther south,
and it receives many of the benefits of the warmer climate
being generated by the North Atlantic Drift, or the Gulf Stream, as we call it.
But even Norway benefits from that Gulf Stream,
so that habitation and certain types of farming and stock raising
is possible in Norway all the way up along the northern shores of Norway,
that is areas that are just below the Arctic Circle, just beyond the Arctic Circle.
It's extraordinary how far north the Norwegians will be able to plant their settled life.
Nonetheless, the winters are harsh.
Sailing conditions are often obstructed.
Sailing perhaps five months a year, six months to the years, the best you can get.
The icebergs in the North Atlantic would pose a very, very serious threat to any early vessel.
And so it always must be remembered, as we lecture in the Viking Age,
that the harsh winters, these conditions are just a given fact in Scandinavian history.
And they're easy to forget, although the Scandinavians themselves
make reference to it all the time in the literature of the Viking Age,
especially in the Icelandic sagas that we'll draw upon
to discuss much of what we know of Viking Age history.
The earliest explanation of some of these conditions
comes from a Greek writer, a fellow named Pythias of Messilia.
Messilia is the ancient city which is now represented by Marseille in southern France.
And Pythias traveled north following the rivers of Gaul, today France,
took passage over to Britain and sailed across the North Sea somehow
and landed at a place called Thule, or Tule, as it's sometimes called,
Thule Ultima, which to him was the edge of the world.
And by best guess, this is the northern coast of Norway.
It could have been somewhere around Trondelog,
or more likely Helogoland, up by the Arctic Circle.
He is the first southerner, actually the first writer of anywhere,
who observes the fact that the natives in this area,
and he seems to be describing the ancestors of the Norwegians,
can grow barley and vegetables,
and they're able to do this because of the,
even though the growing season is short, in those high latitudes,
you have long hours of sunlight or twilight.
This is the land of the midnight sun,
and Pythias is the first person to describe it.
And this allows you to cultivate crops that otherwise would have been impossible.
He also makes a number of important observations of astronomy
on the latitudes and longitudes of the earth,
and it was all eventually published in a book on the oceans,
and later classical authors cited Pythias' work about the northern peoples,
and it was premised on the earth as a globe until the 6th century,
where Pythias comes into criticism by Christian authors
who are convinced that the earth is flat,
and Pythias suffers a decline in reputation in the Middle Ages.
He's usually called a fool, and it turns out that Pythias is right.
The earth is a globe, but so much for publishing and perishing,
if you make the wrong conclusion.
Furthermore, you're in those northern climates.
Again, we get this from Pythias,
that the spectacular emissions of light, the so-called aurora borealis,
which the later Scandinavians of the Viking Age,
assumed with the vultures of Odin, the great war god,
that is his warrior princesses riding across the skies,
it is really quite a spectacular landscape.
And furthermore, Scandinavians very early learned to adjust to this landscape
and exploit its possibilities even in the winters.
For one, a great deal of trapping and hunting could occur in the winter,
as well as a fair amount of local and regional trade.
From an early date, the Scandinavians, and before them the Laps,
the people now known as the Sami,
who were in the extreme sections of Scandinavia and Finland and northern Russia,
learned to travel at winter by the creation of skis and of sleighs and skates.
There's a considerable amount of travel that can go over land on frozen rivers,
and there are occasions when the Sund, or the Uri Sund,
of that narrow strait between the Danish island of Zeeland
and southern Sweden, Skanae, will freeze,
and you can actually move people and goods across the ice.
And so the winters in some ways turn out to be a way of transportation.
Furthermore, the long winters preconditioned a lot of social habits
and attitudes we'll see in Scandinavia.
It was wrong to deny hospitality to travelers, particularly in wintertime.
And in later Scandinavian legends and myth, those could be gods.
And if you turn aside, it could be the god Thor and Loki traveling in disguise,
you certainly don't want to turn away strangers for that.
Poets, bards, men who were an expert in the recitation of the great poems and legends,
would always find a welcome in the great halls of kings and yarls,
and yarls is the Scandinavian equivalent of an earl,
whenever they came knocking in the long wintertime.
In the early spring, before you could do the planting and the sailing,
the great halls were generally the centers of all sorts of festivities,
boasts, religious activities, and so from the start,
the northern climate will precondition or influence a lot of the social
and even religious attitudes of Scandinavians.
And I mentioned two in passing.
And one is the fact that in the Scandinavian conception of the afterlife,
the worst conditions one can come up with is cold and the blue color of death,
and hence Nifflin, the underworld of the Scandinavians, is a cold place.
And I often wonder what early pagan Vikings must have made of Christian missionaries
talking about hell as a place of fiery torment.
That made no sense to Norwegians and Swedes.
This is the image of the fire in the garden being an important from the Near East.
And even the depiction of the devil in later European art,
starting from the 14th and 15th centuries where he's depicted as blue,
that comes out of an old dramatic tradition of the blue color of death.
Hell, the daughter of Loki who presides over the underworld,
is actually described as blueish in color or half-blueish in color.
And so the physical reality of Scandinavia will influence not only their social
and economic conditions, but even their religious outlook.
Another important feature in Scandinavian history will be the great forests.
And here we really have to remove our preconceptions
of what northern Europe in general looks like in antiquity in the Middle Ages.
The farms and the neat villages and towns with their beautiful churches and steeples,
the very carefully manicured landscape of western and northern Europe today,
is something that has evolved over the centuries.
In the Viking Age and before, Scandinavia was covered with dense forests.
And Scandinavia was largely cut off from the rest of Europe by those forests.
The only overland access into Scandinavia was a track later turned into
what is known as a quarter-war or a wooden road.
It's essentially laying logs down.
This is known as the Harvek in Scandinavian accounts.
It means the army way.
And that was a route that traveled from Germany across Jutland to the northern end of Jutland.
A dead ended at the northern shore of Jutland.
And it was a pretty narrow track.
And it was essentially the only route for transportation into the Danish peninsula.
And then from there you would have to take passage by sea.
And so Denmark was largely cut off from outside influence in the 9th and 10th century.
There was no real threat of an invasion.
And this is also true of Norway and Sweden much more.
There was never an external threat.
And throughout the entire of the Viking Age, the Vikings could raid their opponents at will,
not only because they had the ships, but there's no need to maintain armies, the fortifications,
the necessary defenses and institutions that would be essential if you shared a common border with an opponent.
Furthermore, those forests turned out to be an important resource to most of the Scandinavians.
Denmark, which included parts of southern Sweden today, the areas of Skåne, Haaland and Blekingling,
those regions which only passed to Sweden in 1658, parts of southern Norway,
the area around the city of Oslo today, the so-called Vicken, that's the great fjord that cuts deep into southern Norway.
And the regions especially around Lake Malloran in central Sweden.
There you had deciduous forests, especially oak, extremely important for building material,
especially for shipbuilding, for fuel.
Pine trees covered most of northern Scandinavia.
By one estimate, Sweden may have been covered by anywhere from perhaps two thirds to 75% of Sweden,
was covered with forests in the Viking Age.
Lumber was one of the biggest commodities the Swedes had, and it only was over time,
especially after 1100, after the Viking Age, when they really began to clear the forests and put area onto cultivation.
So, the forests are a major feature throughout Scandinavia.
In Norway, the conditions are even more extreme.
The best estimate today is about 3-5% of Norway is really arable,
and that's located in the sheltered fjords along the west and in the area around Oslo and its hinterland, the uplands.
70% of Norway is mountain, above the treeline, perhaps close to 25% of it is pine forest.
So, the forest proved to be a barrier in some ways, and on the other hand, it is also a major resource,
and it's no accident that Scandinavians excel in shipbuilding, in wood carving, all types of timbered construction,
and really never develop masonry architecture.
I mean, the material is not there. You're not in the Mediterranean world.
We have just lots of limestone and marble hanging around the way the Greeks and Romans can work it.
The third feature that I mentioned at the start of this lecture was the sea,
and the sea has to be stressed constantly throughout Scandinavian history.
It is perhaps the common experience that binds all the Scandinavians together, certainly in the Viking Age, but even in these earlier periods.
It is the fastest way to move around, and there are some very, very good figures on this from the later Middle Ages,
provided by the account of Adam of Bremen, who wrote the history of the Archbishop of Hamburg, Bremen.
That is the German Archbishop who claimed authority over Scandinavia, and he gives us some very telling distances.
For instance, in Roskilde, which is on the island of Zelen, the capital of Denmark,
if you tried to travel to Sweden, which would be central Sweden today, to Uppsala, the great sanctuary of the gods,
it would take four to six weeks under the best conditions during the summer to travel by land.
You have to go through some major forest zones.
On the other hand, if you took passage by ship, you could be in Uppsala perhaps within three days, certainly within five days.
Sailing distances are likewise given along the shores of the Baltic.
To reach Heddeby on the eastern shore of Jutland in southern Denmark to any of the ports of the various Baltic peoples,
which today would be Latvia or Lithuania, you're talking of a sailing time of anywhere from four to six,
a travel time of four to six weeks by land, maybe two months in some instances,
whereas at most it's a week by sea, and depending on what type of vessel you take and the sailing conditions.
To be sure, you could only sail in certain times of the year, but the sea is the key link.
And in the case of Norway, it's all essential.
Travel in Norway is always by sea.
The unification of Norway will be by sea power, starting with Harold Finehair at the end of the ninth century.
And here again, we have very good information on the traveling conditions in the Viking Age.
We are told in this important document created at the, written at the court of King Alfred the Great in the ninth century,
a Norwegian merchant prince whose name is Otter, who hunts walrus and trades with the laps up near the Arctic Circle,
explains that it is a month travel from the distant reaches of Norway to the south to Kalpaung,
the main market town, which is in general vicinity of Oslo.
And he's traveling on a slow cargo moving vessel, which is trading along the way.
And he says it's about a month's travel. It's well known.
And you have to remember that is a remarkable achievement.
Norway is over a thousand miles of coastline, and Norway is essentially half the length of Europe.
So these daunting distances can be traversed by the sea.
And that is very, very well captured in Norse mythology, where arduous travel is always through dense forests and mountains.
Whereas in the legends and the myths, traveling by sea is quick, it's speedy.
Actually, you get changes of scenery and of action in Norse myths.
And Saga by simply say, well, they took passage and now they're at the next court.
This occurs very illogically in the Vulsung Saga, where Gunnar and some of his friends travel to the court of Attila the Hun by sea.
Things happen to be located in central Europe, but we won't get into the details of geography and legend.
Therefore, Scandinavia will always depend on seaborne commerce, and here the Scandinavians had several other advantages.
For one, the Scandinavia is essentially washed by two different seas or big bodies of water.
One is the Baltic, and the other is the North Sea and the Atlantic.
Does anyone's guess where the North Sea ends and the Atlantic begins?
The Baltic is an enclosed sea, and sometimes it's compared to the Mediterranean.
That is the northern version of the Mediterranean.
It is almost freshwater lake.
That is, it was created with the retreat of the glaciers after 8000 BC.
It receives enormous amount of fresh water from the Great River systems of Central and Eastern Europe.
The Oder, the Vistula, the Divina, the Neiman, all these great rivers that drain,
which are now parts of Russia and Poland, then dump water into the Baltic,
as well as the different rivers, the Lesser Rivers of Sweden and Finland.
The Baltic is a sea that can be navigated fairly easily.
It's teeming with certain types of fish, especially at the Sund, or Uresund as it's often called.
That narrow strait between Zeeland and southern Sweden, that's a prime herring area.
It becomes an important fishing zone for commercial fishing in the later Middle Ages.
Furthermore, the Baltic's patterns of currents and winds favor travel from west to east.
And therefore, the Danish ports, especially Hedibi in Jutland or ports in Zeeland,
the Swedish island of Gotland, and above all, the Swedish market towns on Lake Malloran.
And Lake Malloran is virtually this arm of the Baltic that cuts deep into Sweden.
Those are prime ports for sailing. That is where most of the sailing goes.
It goes from west to east.
So the Statenavians from the start have an advantage over the other peoples of the Baltic,
because it's much easier for them to navigate. The winds and currents go clockwise.
Furthermore, Lake Malloran offers sheltered ports,
and you can move your ships into places like Helgo or Berka,
important ports in the age of migrations and the Viking age respectively,
load up with lots of goodies, and then take off for points east.
The Baltic is not an easy sea to navigate in many ways.
It's subject to sudden squalls, storms, and above all, mists.
And mists are perhaps the most dangerous conditions for sailing in the Baltic,
and are always seen as ill omen.
And immediately, if your ship is encased in mists, you know,
someone, some sorcerer is throwing a spell over you,
and you better invoke Thor pretty quickly to dispel it.
Who is the god of the skies and the god of rain?
And the advantage that the Scandinavians gained,
starting with the first efforts at shipbuilding in the Neolithic age,
the first effort at sailing, gives the Scandinavians of the Viking age
certain critical advantages in navigational skill and experience.
They become very accustomed to sailing in the Baltic, memorizing landmarks,
experimenting with shipbuilding, and the argument is that the Scandinavians
were able to experiment with shipbuilding and navigation
in the enclosed waters of the Baltic, and then take those skills and expertise
and apply them to tackling the North Atlantic and the North Sea,
which were far more daunting oceans, bodies of water, to tackle.
And there's a great deal of truth to this observation.
We can't prove it archaeologically, but it makes sense.
Even in Western Europe, that is the linking of Norway and Denmark to Western Europe,
again, currents and waves, currents and winds favored the sailing
from Scandinavia to England and Northern France.
And the Scandinavians, with all of their expertise gained in the Baltic,
could apply those skills in sailing to England,
sailing to the North Atlantic islands, eventually to Iceland.
And so, Scandinavia had this position where it faced west,
towards Western Europe, and it faced east into Russia,
and the key connection was, of course, travel by sea,
the fastest and most economical way of moving people and goods around.
The final point I would like to make and close with is
what we know of the peoples living in Scandinavia in earliest times
and through the Viking Age.
And in this case, our evidence isn't particularly good.
We actually lack skeletal remains.
There's a relatively limited number of skeletons that can be studied
from any period of prehistory, and really even in Viking Age history.
So we're depending on literary descriptions of Scandinavians penned at later times.
These include descriptions by Roman authors starting with Julius Caesar
in the 1st century BC and running through Amiens, Marcellinus in the 4th century AD,
Christian writers of the medieval period, Arab geographers,
particularly a fellow named Ibn Fadlan, who will keep reappearing in this course,
who met many Swedes in Russia on the lower Volga in 921-922.
And they uniformly give us an impression that these people are tall,
that they are fair in complexion, hair colors generally blonde or reddish,
a lot of red-haired types, light eyes.
And by the standards of the Mediterranean world and the West European world,
these people are big.
Part of that is diet.
Given the conditions in Scandinavia, stock raising is often preferred over farming.
Farming is extremely difficult, particularly of grains.
Barley and wheat are the earliest grains used.
Cattle are prized in early dramatic society.
So the diet comprises a lot of meat, beef, pork, and above all dairy products.
That influences the size of population.
That can be demonstrated.
And the Roman author, Amiens, Marcellinus, made that observation back in the 4th century.
The reason they're so tall is they're diet.
There also may be genetic reasons behind it.
Certainly one thing is true.
This population is hardy.
All of those southern sources, that is from the Arabic world, the medieval West,
and from the classical world, agree that you're dealing with a population that was in your to cold.
Often the generalization is they can handle cold and lack of food far better than the lack of water and heat.
An observation that's repeated century after century.
The Scandinavians themselves, when we get their records about them,
are not really conscious of any kind of major racial distinctions as the modern world would think.
And this is probably, it must have been very disappointing to Nazi ideologs when they went back into the records.
There is a very, very peculiar poem, which is the closest thing we have to any kind of racial consciousness of these people.
It's known as the Riggs Thula.
It's probably composed in the 9th or 10th century, and it refers to the creation of the races.
Not even the races, the classes of Scandinavia.
The aristocrats, the farmers, or as they're known as a bondy, and the thralls, the slaves.
And the god Himadal, who's the benevolent god to mankind, he guards the bridge of Bifrost,
the rainbow bridge that links Oscard to the Middle Earth where mortals dwell,
and later will slay Loki in the final battle of Ragnarok.
Himadal in the disguise of Rieg, which means king, travels the world, and he fathers the different mortals.
The aristocrats who are depicted as the Nordic hero.
The farmers who, in their description, are very much like Thor.
They're reddish-haired, barrel-chested, strong and healthy with a big hearty appetite.
And then he fathers the lowest class, the so-called thralls.
They're described as dark-haired and swarthy.
Some have tried to look into this as some kind of racial connotation.
And really, if you look at the descriptions of those three classes, and it's an etiological myth, it's a creation myth,
the thralls are really described like dwarfs or elves.
The people who inhabit Elfheim in Scandinavian mythology.
Guys living under the earth, really clever, making lots of things, working away.
Their most famous product is the cord that's used to bind the wolf Fenair, the child of Loki, in the famous myth of the binding of Fenair.
And the Bondi, the carls, as they're sometimes translated, as the farmers, the yeoman, they're described as Thor with the red beard.
I always think Thor's red beard is taken from, you know, the color of the sky.
You know, the old boy scout, what is it?
Red sky at night, sailors delight, red sky at morning, sailor take warning.
I mean, that is probably an adaptation of the physical reality to the description of the God of the Skies and the Reigns.
And the most farmers and sailors worship Thor, and so they're effectively described as Thor in the myth.
And then likewise, the aristocratic heroes are probably taking on the qualities of Odin.
Other than this very, very peculiar poem, which some scholars now put down to a 13th or 14th century creation.
And I don't think that's right, but that argument has been made.
There's no indication that the Scandinavians had anything like a kind of racial presidious, that hair color size actually denoted people's status or ethnicity.
There's lots of reports of people being fair-haired, dark-haired.
And furthermore, we know that overseas, the Vikings were more than willing to intermarry with local populations.
In Ireland, we will see this, where they intermarry with the Celtic population.
It gives rise to a very, really a unique Habernon Norse culture.
They intermix with Slavic peoples in the east.
In Western Europe, English, Franks, Frisians, these people, you know, physically look very much like the Vikings.
And as far as we can tell, what really matters, what will count, will be whether you speak the Norse language, you worship the ancestral gods,
whether you're part of that Norse community that is very, very much shaped by the landscape.
That is, the real test is culture and language.
And in the next lecture, we're going to deal with the origins of that culture and language.
Thank you.
