In this lecture, I plan to discuss the earliest of civilizations and cultures in Scandinavia,
starting in what is known as the Neolithic Age, which technically means the New Stone Age.
And this is a fairly sophisticated level of human development where there's great expertise
in making flint and obsidian stones, weapons and tools.
And also, it is a period that sees the advent of agriculture and the domestication of animals.
And we're going to carry the story through what is known as the Bronze Age, and in Scandinavia,
the Bronze Age lasts a particularly long time, starting around 2300 B.C. and ending around 450 B.C.
This is a great deal of history to cover, but again, we have no really written sources on this.
We depend very heavily on archaeology and anthropology to uncover what these people were like,
and we're looking at their material remains.
Even so, taking the material remains in tandem with what we know of the historical geography of Scandinavia,
as well as what we know of later Scandinavian civilization, it is clear that developments in these periods
set many of the basic fundamentals in Scandinavian civilization in place,
and that the Viking Age drew upon these traditions, these cultural traditions,
perhaps the conception of the gods, as well as burial practices,
the importance of shipbuilding already detected in the rock carvings of this period.
And so, when we turn to the Viking Age, it's very useful to remember that the Scandinavians
are the heirs of a very, very long tradition in their homeland.
Well, with that said, let's turn to these earliest cultures that we can recover from archaeology.
I noted in a previous lecture that human habitation in Scandinavia is relatively late,
that the area was covered with glaciers from the last Ice Age,
and it was only about from 8,000 BC on that humans could actually move into the area.
Until then, it was just impossible. It was a vast glacier and snow field.
And the earliest inhabitants of Scandinavia were the usual hunter-gatherers
that we call peoples of the Paleolithic, the so-called Old Stone Age.
And again, by the time these people arrive in northern Europe,
they are descendants of people who have perfected hunting skills,
going back deep into the Stone Age.
They are probably represented by the later laps, or the Sami, as they prefer to call themselves,
who ultimately evolve into the arctic nomads, people who domesticate the reindeer
and become absolutely expert in traveling the arctic wastes,
the hunting opportunities among the various sea birds and sea creatures,
especially sea mammals, seals, and even be able to get whales and cut them up.
And therefore, your earliest residents would have been in the winter
often called the hunter food-gathering stage of human history.
They are particularly well concentrated also in the regions I keep referring to
as the core lands of early Scandinavia.
And that would be what is today Denmark, or more accurately, the medieval kingdom of Denmark.
That is the Jutland Peninsula, the Danish islands, often known as the Belts,
since they act as a belt that connects Jutland to the Scandinavian Peninsula.
Southern Sweden, notably the region of Skåne that is associated with Denmark.
The Baltic islands of Bornholm, Oland, and Gotland.
The region around Lake Maleron, that is the core of Sweden today, where Stockholm is located.
And the southern shores of Norway, especially the regions which are around the Oslo,
Fjord, and the Vestfold area.
There, the conditions were ideal.
You had deciduous forests, you were teaming with game and fish.
You had easy access to the sea.
And a great deal of our knowledge of the earliest people in this area
is based on studying their campsites, their tools, and also their refuse,
particularly what are known as the kitchen middens,
as the discarded, mostly sea creatures and shells,
that were just stocked up as the garbage heaps for these early communities.
Well, by 4000 BC, there is a significant change in Scandinavia,
and that comes with the advent of agriculture and domesticated animals.
Now, this knowledge was brought into Scandinavia from the outside.
The domestication of animals, notably goats, sheep, and pig,
these are creatures of the Near East, especially the Leventine regions,
and barley and wheat, those two grasses which have been domesticated
into the cultivated grains, those arrive somewhere around 4000 BC,
and that allows for the cultivation of cereals and stock raising.
That is an extremely important change.
Contrary to what most people would think today about Scandinavia,
a rye, and also oats, by the way, are not introduced until after 1100 AD,
that is after the Viking Age.
Those are part of the benefits of becoming Christianized
and getting linked up with Western Europeans and learning their superior agriculture.
So in any case, villages begin to appear.
These villages are rather small, certainly far smaller,
in comparison to those that have been detected in Central and Western Europe,
and certainly far smaller than what we know of in the Near East,
where the origins of agriculture are to be found.
One important aspect already of these communities
seems to be more of a stress on stock raising than on agriculture,
and particularly the raising of cattle.
And again, this is a surmise that is based on physical evidence,
we really are speculating here, but it is a feature of Scandinavian
and early Germanic society in general,
that cattle were regarded as the prime wealth.
We're told this much later in classical sources,
starting with Julius Caesar, also with the Roman historian Tacitus,
who penned this work known as the Germania, written around 98 AD,
where he describes the customs of the Germans,
and from the start, the Germanic peoples,
by which Roman authors meant Central Europe and Scandinavia,
preferred cattle over farming.
That cattle was the mark of rank and was to be preferred over farming,
which is often treated as a more despised occupation,
or at least not as noble an occupation, it's something you had to do.
The contact with Central Europe and ultimately the Near East,
it wasn't Near Easterners who suddenly arrived and brought all this change,
it obviously passed through different hands before it reached Scandinavia,
also brought important innovations in weapons and tools,
their superior tools for agriculture, carts begin to appear,
these are usually documented on rock carvings,
and in contrast, however, to Western Europe,
these people who are part of a wider, what is known as megalithic big stone,
that late Neolithic culture, the Scandinavians just don't have the populations
and resources to raise the great kind of stone monuments one associates
in this period with, say, Stonehenge in England,
where you have much more successful economically anyway,
society where you have the population to raise these great monuments.
There isn't any effort at megalithic monuments beyond, you know, you raise some dolmens,
you circle of stones, fundamentally your population in Scandinavia
is considerably smaller than Central and Western Europe,
and that will be a fact through the whole of Scandinavian history.
Older hunting patterns, of course, were important, held on,
especially in the areas of Finland and the northern reaches of Scandinavia,
where speakers of the Finno-Ugurian languages,
these are gluten of languages that are related to Turkish and Mongolian languages,
they are not related to the Indo-European languages,
the Germanic family or the Romance, the Greek, the Celtic languages,
the Iranian language, the Indian languages,
whole different language structure.
Those people eventually give rise to the Finns or Suami, the Laps, the Sami,
and the Karelians who are the cousins of the Finns dwelling in what is now Russia,
they're immediately to the east of Finland.
And these people were expert hunters, and among them come the Arctic nomads
who tame the northern climates or exploit the northern climates for the Arctic goods.
In the Neolithic age is already indications that there is trade with Western Europe.
Going across the river systems, notably the Elba, the great river that bisects Germany,
the Oda, which is now essentially part of the border between Germany and Poland,
and those two river systems lead from the Baltic to the upper basing of the Danube
and ultimately to ports on the Mediterranean.
And a good deal of influence comes from the Mediterranean
over these river systems into the Baltic.
Well, there's a significant change that occurs somewhere around 2300 BC,
and it's usually associated with the arrival of newcomers.
There is a surmise that there must have been a migration.
And again, we largely depend on physical remains.
Now starting in the Bronze Age, the period from 2300 BC on, we do get graves.
And since the burial is inhumation, that is in the ground rather than cremation,
there are some skeletal remains to study, and they're still in the preliminary stages
of understanding what this means.
But before then, we have very, very little in the way of skeletal evidence.
We have no written records.
But the argument that at least is made now is that in 2300 BC, people arrived
speaking a language destined eventually to evolve into the dramatic languages
from which the Scandinavian languages are descended
and other dramatic languages such as modern German, Dutch and English.
And there's a long way to go before that evolution takes place.
So we believe there was a major infusion of a new population.
That doesn't mean the older population was simply eliminated.
The best guess is that there was intermarriage and assimilation, and it ran a bit both ways.
This is borne out by the fact that dramatic languages, in contrast to other Indo-European languages,
have an unusual amount of words of unknown origin for basic items.
The most common example cited by linguistics is dog, a word that is not represented
among other Indo-European languages.
That word is hound, hunt in German, canis in Latin, kuon in Greek.
Dog is of some unknown origin, and it's suspected a number of basic words were taken over
by the ancestors of the Scandinavians, the dramatic speaking people,
from the existing population there.
Some of these people may have been related to the Finns, the Laps, we just don't know who they are.
What is important is the population's coalesced into more or less a single group,
which we can study from their physical remains.
The bronze ages of importance for a couple of reasons.
One, the new technology, the bringing in of bronze,
enabled the manufacture of weapons and tools that were far more efficient than those of stone.
The bronze for a long time is of course kept more for weapons than tools,
but the advent of metallurgy and with it ceramics is a major improvement in material culture.
Ceramics allow you, for instance, to, especially ceramics made on a potter's wheel,
to turn out storage vessels for grain that protects you against rats,
essentially potteries we created as a rat-proof device.
The skills in metallurgy lead you to fashionable sorts of objects that you couldn't do in stone.
For instance, swords you can make out of metal in a way you can't with stones.
A sword is essentially an elongated knife.
Different types of axes and hand axes can be made,
and above all, jewelry and personal ornamentation,
which becomes an extremely important feature throughout Scandinavian history.
One of the ways that Scandinavians express their artistic genius is in the decorative arts,
particularly in metalwork, not in monumental architecture or sculpture,
but rather in metalwork, and that is already seen in many of the objects coming out of the finds
in the Bronze Age graves, and these are very rich grave goods that we find.
And I always like to speculate, one of the most remarkable are these enormous horns
that have to be held with essentially two hands,
and what their purposes are we don't know.
In textbooks you read that they're for cultic purpose,
which means essentially we don't know what they are.
We assume they're using ceremonies,
and I always like to think that that horn is the origin of the great Gjallar horn of Himadal,
the watchmen of the gods who will sound of the final days of Ragnarök,
but there's no way to prove it, but I would like to think it's true.
Also, the need for metals, especially tin and copper,
to create the bronze weapons meant that you had to have a long-distance trade,
on a scale that you did not have in the Neolithic Age.
There are no tin sources in Scandinavia, you have to bring the tin in,
and copper is in pretty short supply as well,
and that meant the core lands of Scandinavia, southern Scandinavia,
which are going to eventually turn out to be the heartland of early Germanic civilization,
had to get those metals from somewhere.
That meant trade routes into central Europe,
and ultimately to the centers of the eastern Mediterranean,
the area of the Aegean, that is the Greek world,
and above all, the Near East, where you had great urban civilizations in Egypt and Mesopotamia.
Well, what did the Scandinavians or these ancestors of the Scandinavians have to trade?
Well, there are a number of important products.
First and foremost were the products of the Arctic climate.
This would include skins, furs, all sorts of neat items, always in high demand, prime furs.
Often these had to be obtained by trading with the Arctic nomads, that is the laps.
This is a feature running throughout Scandinavian economic history,
that the Germanic speakers, the speakers of Norse, trade it with the laps of the North.
They would get all sorts of products, walrus ivory, whalebone skins, seal skins, furs.
In return, they would swap finished goods, such as metal goods or well-worked wooden goods,
which the laps themselves could not produce.
And this symbiosis goes back, certainly to the Bronze Age, if not earlier.
And we'll continue through the entire of the Viking Age,
and we have some really excellent information on how the later Norse
continued this trade on a wider scale with the descendants of these earlier laps.
There was also timber products, honey, wood, flax, various items,
and above all, amber.
Amber is essentially prehistoric sap or gook, even,
that has hardened into the quality of a stone,
and it was in high demand in the Mediterranean world from the Bronze Age,
well, right through the Roman period.
It was regarded as a precious stone.
Much of the best of the amber was washed up on the shores of Denmark, the Danish islands,
and this was a high commodity product.
You could trade this item and get an awful lot of tin and copper for it,
as well as gold and silver,
which you then could bring back to Scandinavia
and work into all those marvelous objects that we find in the graves.
And finally, there was undoubtedly slave trade.
Distressing to us, but through most of history, the slave trade,
labor, in one form or another, was one of the biggest commodities,
and the easiest way to obtain slaves was to essentially raid and enslave your neighbors,
who may be people very closely related to you,
but since you're dealing with a society that is probably very localized
and ties are very much based on family and kinship,
there's no problem in enslaving your neighbors,
particularly if you have a limited supply of goods,
and from the merchant's viewpoint, it was really rather cost effective.
You simply have the slaves carry all your skins and amber down to the Mediterranean world,
and you just sell everything and then go back north,
rather distressing to us, but I'm sure many of the goods transported out of Scandinavia
to the Mediterranean world were being carried by slaves who would then be sold at the other end.
It's a common feature of slave trade through much of history.
So what happens is that the long-distance trade allows, by 1550,
villages of fairly substantial size to be sustained,
and it also allows enough concentration of power into the hands of local bigwigs,
usually called chieftains and anthropological models,
that you have families of great wealth and rank who could afford to deposit all those grave goods
in the enumation graves of the Bronze Age,
and that is an index of the amount of wealth as well as the importance of long-distance trade,
and so this is another feature I must stress that we see in the Bronze Age,
and that is the ties of Scandinavia to those civilizations of the Mediterranean and Western Europe.
They're always there.
Ultimately, Scandinavia is economically and in some ways culturally tied to those other worlds
through trade, material goods, and eventually political institutions and religions as well.
We'll pass over those trade routes, starting certainly in the Celtic Age
and running through the Middle Ages.
And so the question in Scandinavian history is not that there are these links or these contexts,
but what did the Scandinavians receive and what did they do with what they took from these other cultures?
And again, in the Bronze Age, from what we can see, it was a matter of adapting the imports to a Scandinavian context,
and while, yes, these ancestors of the Scandinavians dependent on long-distance trade,
they did create a uniquely Scandinavian civilization.
So much so that the years about 1550 to 1100 BC is usually called the Northern Bronze Age,
a very, very distinct period, a distinct material culture that implies a certain amount of opulence and success,
and invites comparison to the more successful and better-known Bronze Age of Greece and the Near East,
which is called the so-called Late Bronze Age.
That is the era of Imperial Egypt, the great palaces of Mycenae, the Hittite Empire and Asia Minor,
and these great political orders were linked to Scandinavia through these trade routes across Central Europe.
As a result, population must have risen, the villages are expanded,
and agriculture does not change very significantly, really, in terms of animals and crops from the Stone Age to the Bronze Age.
Most agriculture is pursued by what is known as a slash and burn technique,
and this technique is going to be used really up until almost 1100.
Certainly it's used in the Iron Age, that is the period after about 450 BC,
and Scandinavia must be remembered as really a land of scattered settlements, farmsteads, villages.
There aren't any real towns or cities, these do not emerge until the very end of the Viking Age,
and in this early period, especially in the Stone Age and the Bronze Age,
there is a fair shifting of population, and this is a result of soil exhaustion.
That is, you clear an area, you burn it down by burning the trunks of the trees,
you try to destroy the roots, you cut them down, you plant your barley or wheat.
For the first generation, you get a lot of success, and eventually the soil exhausts.
You move to a new area, you carve out a new village, the old village falls out of use,
the area fills up as forest land, and there's a lot of very good study going on
on how the population moves essentially from village to village,
and so there is a certain amount of migration or movement stretched over generations
still going on, and in that way our agriculture remains in this state
really until major improvements in the later Middle Ages.
Well, the success of this Northern Bronze Age civilization
depended a great deal on long-distance trade, and it brought in the metals
and the raw materials to work those goods, and again, we don't have written sources
and we're depending very, very much on the physical evidence,
but that physical evidence is very suggestive.
In one area, we can make some speculations.
We don't know what these people are speaking.
We assume it's an early form of dramatic, or Indo-European at least,
but we have a number of more objects coming out of the graves
as well as rock paintings that suggest that already the conception of the gods,
as they're known to us in the Viking Age, are taking place.
The most spectacular of these is a gilt bronze chariot that was found in Denmark,
at Trunholm in Zeiland, that is the great island of Denmark,
dated generally around 1200 B.C.
Only one of the horses survived.
The original had a pair, and it's remarkable that you got a chariot anyway.
That's a pretty sophisticated item that's invented fairly late in the Near East.
This is one of their earliest examples of a chariot in Northern Europe.
And the iconography of it, the great bronze symbol that looks like the sun,
suggests that what you're dealing with is essentially the chariot described
in Snorri Stroulson's prose, Etta, pulled by the two horses,
Aravak and Alvzen.
And in Norse mythology, and this is a very, very famous mythological handbook
written around 1220, by this absolutely witty Icelandic author known as Snorri.
Snorri Sturlson, the son of the Sturl,
names in Scandinavian or essentially patronymics,
you're simply named as the son of, or the daughter of, your father.
You know, not last names in the modern sense.
So Snorri, which is what his real name is,
Snorri writes about this myth in which these two horses pull the chariot,
carrying the sun each day, and the sun is being pursued by this enormous wolf
that wants to swallow it and bring on Ragnarok,
which in Norse mythology is the end of days.
And there's also a similar chariot,
carrying the moon with another nasty wolf after it.
And this object apparently is a representation of this notion
that is already evident in the Bronze Age.
There are other representations in the rock carvings
and in the objects found in graves that are suggestive.
Clearly there's a god associated with an axe or a hammer,
and that gives rise to the primary god of the Viking Age,
at least for most Scandinavians who was Thor,
the great red-bearded, barrel-chested, heroic god,
a little dim-witted, but a good guy generally, and easy topies.
And he is the Lord of the Skies.
I've mentioned earlier that he may get his red hair from the color of the skies
at night in the morning, whether there's going to be rain or not.
He also drives a goat chariot, which is a very, very primitive cart,
and a cart that goes back to the Bronze Age,
and it's suggestive already that Thor in some fashion is being worshiped.
And the goat-drawn cart is regarded as a symbol of royalty,
sacred royalty, among all the dramatic peoples in Gaul in the 5th and 6th century,
the Franks, the dramatic peoples who moved into the former Roman province
and took it over, and whose kings are known as the Merovingians,
this is the family of Clovis.
They were paraded around in a cart drawn by goats,
which is a very, very old notion going back deep into Scandinavian and dramatic mythology.
There's also representations of what are clearly fertility gods.
These would be known later as the Vanir.
That is the gods of prosperity.
They're associated also with the ancient animal of the boar.
That is the undomesticated pig,
and that is a common feature that'll come through Scandinavian art.
That is the boar as a heroic creature associated,
especially with the god Njord and his two children, Freya and Freya,
who are the gods of prosperity and worship throughout Scandinavia.
There's very little indication of the classic war god of the Viking Age,
that is Odin, as he's known in English, Woden,
and as we'll see later on, that god in many ways is a creation,
not a creation, but Odin doesn't acquire as importance as the primary god in Asgard,
that is the Norse Olympus, perhaps until the Roman Age,
second or third century AD,
and really becomes the quintessential god of the Viking Age.
It is the Scandinavians who will endow Odin with all of his powers
and his really inimical powers and his changeable nature,
starting from the eighth and ninth centuries.
On the other hand, another aspect of religious life that can be detected
in the Bronze Age is the importance of burials.
I mentioned that you must have elite families that can afford to put all of these displays of goods
into the inhumation graves,
and eventually they start building very large barrows
from multiple generational burials that is various members of the family over time
are buried in the same spot.
And there has to be, I mean again, it's a surmise,
there has to be repeated family rites around these graves, around these barrows,
where the family comes and venerates the ancestors,
and this is a feature of Scandinavian worship through the Viking Age.
One of the most powerful indications of the fact that you're dealing with Vikings or Norse overseas
is if you have Scandinavian type burials,
and these are burials, they could be cremation or inhumation,
but they include all sorts of grave goods and some kind of monument erected
where rites continue to the ancestors, that they continue to be venerated,
and in many ways, and we know this from Icelandic saga, if you don't,
the dead will rise up and walk the earth and do all sorts of nasty things to you,
and the Scandinavians don't have, unlike the Mediterranean peoples,
the afterlife isn't some sort of intangible spiritual world,
the way Homer describes it in the Odyssey.
The dead physically get up and do nasty things,
and especially if they're sorcerers from the Hebrides, that can be a real problem.
So, from the start, in the Bronze Age, we see this feature that becomes a major feature of Scandinavian life,
and will climax in the very, very rich burials of the Vendal Age in Sweden
in 4th through 6th centuries, and the great Scandinavian ship burials
that will be found in the Oslo area in the 9th and 10th centuries.
Well, ultimately, the Bronze Age did depend on long-distance trade for its great success,
and sometime after 1100, this trade seems to break down.
There are fewer grave goods, there is a shift after 1000 from inhumation to cremation,
and that starts to restrict our record because we just don't know as much
when you're burning everything up and you're dealing with the remains of a cremation burial.
And so, part of our impression of the succeeding generations down to about 450 BC,
that it's a period of relative poverty, is simply a fact that we don't have the rich burials
that gave us the physical evidence to surmise aspects about the society.
Yet, we do know from good historical records that in the Near East, starting from about 1200 or 1220s on,
the great political orders of the late Bronze Age do collapse, Imperial Egypt, the Hittite Empire,
and that there is a general decline of organized, literate civilization in the Near East,
and with that, a fall of markets, a fall of demand for the northern goods, the amber,
all of those products of the Arctic, and as a result, repercussions are felt across Central Europe
and ultimately to Scandinavia of the Bronze Age, and there just isn't the same demand.
And so, some families must have gotten poorer, the grave goods get poorer,
and therefore, our physical evidence does reflect a certain important economic change.
And for several centuries, our information on Scandinavia is rather limited.
Nonetheless, starting probably in the 5th century BC, that begins to change.
Trade revives, and it revives not so much because of the revival of civilizations in the Near East,
but the emergence of a new civilization in Central Europe.
This is the La Tienne, the Iron Age civilization of the Celts,
and that civilization will open up a new chapter in Scandinavian history.
