Lecture 4, Scandinavia in the Celtic and Roman Ages
In this lecture I wish to deal with Scandinavia in what is often called the Celtic age and then the succeeding Roman age.
And these are a bit deceptive terms because they give the impression that Scandinavia is part of a wider Celtic and Roman civilization, and that's not really the case.
The terms are really used to indicate the chronological distinction. That is, this is Scandinavia contemporary with Celtic and Roman civilization.
And again, there's a great deal of trade and exchange that goes on, but in neither instance, either in the Celtic or in the Roman age,
should we think of Scandinavia somehow being assimilated into those other civilizations or as an adjunct or peripheral part of it.
The ties are close, but again, as I've stressed in a previous lecture, Scandinavians pick and choose what they want and in many ways retain many of their cultural distinctions and heritage going back to the Bronze Age.
So with that provision in mind, let us use these terms Celtic and Roman age that way.
The Celtic civilization that exercised such an important influence over Scandinavia was actually what we call the La Tienne civilization.
This was a later stage, centering especially on Eastern France, or what the Romans would call Gaul. It emerged about 450 BC.
Its heartland was the Rhine and the rivers of Eastern France, which drew the Celts up to the North Sea to the British Isles and by trade routes into Scandinavia.
This is the last of a series of civilizations in Central Europe. It's really the climax of tremendous skill in metallurgy.
Furthermore, Celtic Europe, which would be Gaul, southern Germany, the Lowlands, sees a emergence of towns. The Romans called them Apida.
These are large enclosures, including many acres with specialized areas for manufacturing, areas enclosed for agricultural purposes,
and they really are the urban basis for the success of Roman provincial civilization in Britain, Gaul, and the lands of the Danube, starting in the 1st century AD and running through the 5th century AD.
So when you're dealing with the La Tienne civilization in Celtic Europe, you're dealing with an extremely sophisticated, almost certainly town if not urban-style civilization.
And being towns with large populations, specializing in metallurgy, mining, all sorts of activities, there is an enormous appetite for labor, for luxury goods, and for food stuffs.
And so Scandinavia all of a sudden springs into prominence again as one of those areas where Celtic merchants can tap in for raw materials and luxury goods, and these would be the same goods we saw in the Bronze Age.
The products of the Arctic, the slaves who would be sold off to supply labor in the Celtic world, amber is a product in high demand or a commodity in high demand.
They actually, the Celts will work it into their own jewelry techniques, and above all, apparently a fair amount of timber and products of the forest begin to also arrive.
So Scandinavia prospers a great deal with the emergence of Celtic towns in Central Europe. It can be illustrated by a couple of examples on how life was so enriched.
The most obvious is the acquiring of expert metallurgy and ironwork. Starting from 450 or 400 B.C., Scandinavians, either imported Celtic Smiths, or they learned or were trained by Celtic Smiths, are beginning to turn out some quality ironwork, still in limited supply.
They depend a great deal on imports, but this is a significant difference from the experimentation in ironwork that went on in Sweden around 800 or 700 B.C.
Another important area where they gain in technology is in carts and even in ships. These are two areas where the Celts excelled. One is in carts and harnessing.
This is seen in, for instance, the Latin language. Romans were the first to admit that the Celts were first-rate in wheeled vehicles, and many of the words for various types of carts in Latin are actually Celtic loan words.
That is, the Romans had borrowed them from the Gauls. We suspect the same was going on in Scandinavia where we begin to get first-rate carts and harnessing systems, compliments of the Celts.
It is an interesting aspect of Celtic civilization. You know when you are dealing with the Celtic burial, because there is a cart there usually, and the Celts always think going to the other world is by cart, whereas the Scandinavians and the people of the Mediterranean always think it is by water.
Scandinavian burials always have ship imagery just as you very often get in the Mediterranean world, and the Celts in between, of course, have the carts.
In any case, shipbuilding was also affected by Celtic trade. Our first paddle boat, if you want to call it that, is the York Springs ship, which is excavated from a Danish island around 200 or 300 BC.
It is the first effort to create a coastal vessel, propelled by, I think, 20 men using paddles rather than oars, but it is of wooden construction, and it shows some of the features of Celtic construction, which is using ribs and skin boats, only you are applying it to wooden construction.
And this boat seems to be based on Celtic experimentations, and it will be the first in a line of archaeological finds that lead us from this first effort at a coastal vessel and will climax in the great ships of the Viking Age.
So that is a very, very important gift coming from the Celtic world, that is, superior skills in shipbuilding as well as carts.
Also, Celtic civilization enriched and transformed the aesthetics and the arts of early Scandinavia in this age. Again, this doesn't mean that Scandinavia became part of the Celtic world, per se, but many fine prestige objects arrived in trade, by which I mean jewelry, plate.
Later with Romans, you get glassware and other types of objects, which the noble classes could afford. The most remarkable of these is known as the Gundistrup cauldron, which is a beautiful silver rapuset work.
It's again coming from Denmark, and it's in a fine of a grave good. And what it is is a Celtic object that depicts heads. The Celts were big on head taking, so there's always worship of heads.
And also what are clearly marching warriors and sacrificial scenes, human sacrificial scenes. Again, we have reports of this with Druids and Celtic traditions and God wearing antlers and other gods that could easily be associated with Scandinavian divinities, the
of the Viking age. And what we have here is a Celtic object, a religious object, which could be very easily applied to a Scandinavian religious context. And there must have been many instances of this where the Scandinavian gods or the ancient
dramatic gods, if you will, because the dramatic peoples who emigrate from Scandinavia worship these same gods, that in many ways they are enriched with the iconography and the rituals of the Celtic world. They're still dramatic gods, but they have been elevated and
ennobled by being associated with the rights and the objects of the superior civilization to the south. And this is a feature that is common in many ancient religions where you have this type of exchange. Doesn't necessarily mean that the ancestral gods have been abandoned. They've simply been articulated and enriched in their conception by contact with other peoples.
This explains, for instance, why Tacitus, a Roman historian writing around 100 AD in his Germania, mentions that the Danish tribes move the cult statue of a goddess, he calls her Nerthus, which seems to be a feminine form of the later Scandinavian god Njord, around in a sacred cart, probably a ritual that came from the Celtic world, which by Tacitus' day is quintessentially Scandinavian. That is some 300 or 400 years later.
One could even argue that perhaps the dramatic gods were rather abstract figures until they came into contact with the Celts and they became more humanized and more myths created about, we're not sure, but clearly the gods were conceived differently as a result of this exchange in contact with the Celtic world.
On the other hand, it's important to keep in mind that all of this influence does not necessarily mean Scandinavia was part of the Celtic world, far from it. I said the irony is we're using this term chronologically and it is in this period from say 450 or 500 BC on that several important features are clearly noticeable about Scandinavia.
One is at this point philologists' best guess is we have the early dramatic language being spoken. This language in its structure and vocabulary is very, very distinct from Celtic, from Latin, and its related Talic languages from Greek, which are all Indo-European languages being spoken in Europe at the time, there's others as well.
The dramatic language has a distinct verb system, a whole different set of nouns as a result of continental shifts. There's significant changes in dramatic pronunciation from other Indo-European languages. By 500 BC or 400 BC, those dramatic languages have emerged in the core areas of Scandinavia and all the dramatic languages ultimately descend from that earlier dramatic language.
They are not part of the Celtic world linguistically. Burial practices. Scandinavians never adopt using carts and burials. They very much adhere to the ship imagery, which goes back very early in Scandinavian tradition. They are also switchovers to burying of mail, deceased with weapons, notably spears and shield, a tradition that will continue along into the Viking Age.
The Scandinavians never adopt towns. Despite all the trade and activity with Central Europe, and the fact that maybe some of the Scandinavians may have seen a Celtic opiedum, there is no movement to the sort of town life that we see in Central Europe. Scandinavia still remains largely a land of villages, sustained by this long distance trade, which allows expansion of villages more arable, perhaps burying brought under control, improved tools, carts, harnessing, but still the pattern of life.
Essentially the same it was in the Bronze Age. You are living in relatively scattered communities. And this is a feature of early dramatic civilization that lasts well into the Roman Age also. Roman authors can distinguish very carefully and accurately between Celtic populations who live in towns as opposed to dramatic peoples who live in villages.
And from the Romans, it's always from the military viewpoint. The Celts are so convenient to fight because they run into towns and the Romans can bring up their artillery and batter them senseless and capture the towns as a military objective.
And the Germans are nasty because they run out of their villages into the swamps and bogs and you never can find them. So the Romans are extremely annoyed with the Germans. They don't play fair.
But that distinction is clearly made in Julius Caesar. It's also made later on in Tacitus that there is a difference in the social pattern in economic life, especially the Germans putting stock raising especially cattle above agriculture.
The Romans also notice a difference in religious practices between Celts and Germans and these are not just stereotypes. One aspect about this contact between the Celtic and Scandinavian world is Scandinavia has never seen to adopt a priestly caste.
There is nothing equivalent to the Druids, subject to a lot of myth and rumor and modern recreations of the 19th century. But there is not the kind of religious caste of Druids that you have in Celtic Gaul ever appearing in the dramatic world, whether in the Roman Age or even later in the Viking Age.
And that is the worship of the divinities are not organized into some sort of overall hierarchy.
And furthermore, sacrificial rites in Scandinavia are particularly Scandinavian. The Toland man, who is a poor fellow who was excavated from a Danish bog, was probably strangled or hanged as a sacrifice to an early form of Odin.
And the sacrificial rites of human sacrifice in Scandinavia that we can detect in the Celtic and Roman Age are completely consistent with what's later on described in the Viking Age.
So for all of its contact, in many ways, the contact of that Celtic world precipitated the formation of a very, very distinct Scandinavian Germanic civilization.
And that civilization had a chance to expand, unexpectedly, compliments of the Romans.
And many a German scholar of mine and friend, his colleague, is always a bit annoyed whenever I make the point that the reason Germany exists is because the Romans created it.
Julius Caesar between 58 and 50 BC conquered Gaul and began the Roman conquest of central Europe up to the Danube.
His successor, adopted son Augustus, completed it. And what the Roman conquest did within less than a generation was to shatter the Celtic world, to incorporate most of it into the Roman Empire and leave central Europe open for migration by Germanic peoples.
And somewhere between maybe 100 BC there was already dramatic movement into central Europe.
But with the Roman conquest of Gaul and the upper Danube regions and their incorporation into the Roman Empire, the Germanic tribes spread out of the Scandinavian heartland and essentially filled up the lands between the Rhine and the Vistula and north of the Danube.
And this is the region that the Romans called Germania, by which they met central Europe and Scandinavia, which was predominantly, but not exclusively, dramatic speaking peoples.
All of these dramatic speaking peoples, the West dramatic people, who's later became the Franks, the Saxons, the Angles and Utes, who eventually moved to England, the East dramatic peoples, the Goths, who invaded the Roman Empire,
in the third, fourth and even fifth century AD, all of these peoples ultimately traced at least part of their ancestry back to that Scandinavian heartland, so that the Roman conquest of the Celtic world had a major impact on Scandinavia.
The second important impact was that the scale of trade and contact between the Celtic age and the Roman age was, the difference was geometric, not arithmetic at all.
The Romans had enormous demands for goods and the Romans, for instance, stationed 150,000 soldiers on the Rhine.
These men had to be fed. Most of the cattle industry of western Germany and Denmark was feeding the Roman army on the Rhine.
That has now been demonstrated archaeologically, that is, there was an enormous market for Germanic and Scandinavian beef.
There was also an enormous market in labor, slave trade, obvious, but also the Romans needed just day laborers.
They needed auxiliaries, that is, warriors. They recruited into their auxiliary army.
There were large numbers of German tribes that moved in under Roman arrangements to settle as agriculturalists.
And so what happens is the Roman world becomes part of a safety valve, at least demographically, where the Scandinavians and their kinsmen in Germania, Central Europe, can export their excess population to the Roman Empire,
and as a result, there's still no cities in Germania or Scandinavia.
The volume of imported goods from the Roman world into southern Scandinavia is truly extraordinary.
The Danish Isles and southern Sweden, Skane, which would have been part of the later Danish kingdom, show a range of goods that indicates that, at least for the upper classes, their material life had significantly changed with that Roman contact.
Fine tableware, including glass, silver, all sorts of fine Roman ceramics.
We believe at this point that the Germans are accustomed to drinking wine.
Tacitus writing his Germania, which is a highly romanticized version of the Germans, it's actually, it's hard to describe Tacitus.
I always think of him as a cynic who does history as a sideline, and he writes his Germania largely as a way of saying, see how noble the Germans are and how depraved and decadent the Romans are.
And yet Tacitus is clearly not running off to live in Scandinavia, he wants to live in Rome.
But in any case, one of the points Tacitus says, well, we're unnerving those Germans because we give them wine and they gamble their freedom away in order to get vintages.
Archaeological evidence does bear out that Scandinavians and Germans become accustomed to drinking wine as a prestige item.
This notion survives through the Middle Ages.
There's references to consumption of wine by the great heroes in the Valsong saga.
Later, the early Danish heroes of the 6th and 7th century AD.
These are not anachronisms.
There's enough testing of residue to indicate that the import of wine was a very important commodity to the upper classes in Scandinavia and the Roman Age.
Besides wine, ceramics and jewelry, there's other items that get to Scandinavia which is a little bit more alarming to the Roman government.
This includes really good weapons and armor.
Our earliest chain mail armor comes from Danish deposits.
These are dedications probably to an early form of Tyr or Odin.
One is from Vimros in Denmark.
It's a chain mail or brinja as you say in Norse.
It's a big hunk of chain mail that's been thrown in as a dedication which meant you had the money to throw armor away which indicates there's a fair level of trade going on despite imperial regulations not to export weapons and arms.
We also find a number of finely wrought swords and in the Roman Age, swords become the weapon of choice.
We also find weapons and are remembered as the weapon in heroic legend, the weapon of Odin that he gives out to his favorite heroes.
That is one of the benefits of Roman trade.
There's superior weapons, armor, helmets, all sorts of equipment, very often recovered from deposits from say 200 to 400 AD.
This is understandable.
The Romans appreciate the skills of the Germanic peoples.
Many Germanic tribes have been served in Roman armies.
Some of it is coming through the simple fact that the veterans being discharged or returning home carrying the weapons and in other cases it's through trade goods.
So Roman impact on Scandinavia is dramatic and substantial.
Another feature of this Roman trade and again this is one of the reasons why one makes the argument he does or I do in the Bronze Age is the trade goods coming into Scandinavia
again allowed consolidation of power around petty kings or dynasts.
The Roman historians assure us in the first century AD that the Germans are extremely disorganized and they're very happy about this.
They're always inciting tribes to fight each other.
But from 100 AD on and this starts with the description of Tacitus into the fourth century AD as Germans begin to move into the Roman Empire.
Steadily the dramatic peoples of Central Europe and Scandinavia become more organized and there's several reasons for this.
One is that the trade enables people to amass wealth in Scandinavia or Central Europe and make themselves kings.
Regaces the Romans would call them.
We're told that some of these kings keep around them retainers.
These are professional warriors who are devoted to their lord.
They have taken service with their lord.
They're expected to fight and serve them.
And the description that Tacitus gives of these warriors is quite consistent with the description you get in Norse literature later on of the berserkers.
That is the great warriors who work themselves up into a frenzy and charge into battle.
Bare shirts as it means that they're impervious weapons.
They have been inspired by Odin the god of ecstasy and warfare to fight for their lord.
Well, Tacitus is already describing these groups around warlords around the year 100 AD.
And this is probably a change emerging as a result of the arrival of more arms and prosperity which allows some of these petty dynasts to set up great halls served by these warriors.
And you already have in embryo those military societies so important in the Viking age.
Another feature about those warriors is they become increasingly better at fighting.
Tacitus and later Roman authors mentioned the Germans forming up what is called a wedge in Latin cuneas.
That is a shield wall is the term that's often used in the Norse sources fighting as dense infantry formations with a great yell and charge.
The Barrettus in Latin is what they call it.
And in Scandinavian legend and myth the wedge the secret of the wedge that is the dense infantry formation that can be defensive or offensive is the gift of Odin to his favorite heroes like Rolf Krocky or Harold Warthuth or Ivar the Far-Reacher.
All these great figures of the 6th, 7th and 8th centuries.
And again this is because the dramatic peoples are taking their political and military hierarchy from the Roman army by close association.
And by the year 200 to 300 in that third century as Germans and raid the Roman Empire more frequently as this is a result of Roman civil wars and other obligations.
They get increasingly better at organizing themselves politically and militarily.
And this is a feature of dramatic life that's common across most of Grimania and Scandinavia.
The emergence of what you would call incipient kingships is how some scholars would call that.
By 260 AD in central Europe for instance already major confederations around kings have emerged.
Franks, Saxons, Olamani, the Goths who are apparently emigrants from Sweden who arrive on the eastern frontiers of the European province of the Roman Empire in the 250s and 260s.
So that organization is one of the gifts that comes to Scandinavia, more political organization as a result of that contact with the Roman world.
Another important benefit which is still being debated quite a bit because people don't really associate ships with the Roman world.
And that's largely because of the Roman conceit.
And that is there are two important ship burials.
One is at Nidum in Denmark about 350 AD.
And the other is the impression of a ship burial in England in East Anglia called it's really a cenotaph.
It's an empty tomb and we don't have the ship but we have the impression in the sand and it's at a site called Sutton Ho about 625 AD.
These two ships are very, very controversial.
They're both funerary burials and there are various grave goods that are put in the center of the ship.
But enough of the construction has been recovered to indicate that the commercial contact with the Roman world, the Scandinavians and the German peoples dwelling on the shores of the Nile.
Particularly the Frisians and the Saxons who play such an important role in the early Middle Ages that all of these people are probably becoming familiar of using sails with ships, which is a feature of Roman ships.
And if we are to believe the extent of dramatic raids on the Roman Empire in the third and fourth century, these raids must be conducted by ships that are propelled by sails.
One of our best authors, Amianus Marcellinus, the last great imperial historian of Rome, tells us that these Germans sail their ships, not row.
Nawegare is the Latin word. He means they are sailing.
Now the two ships that have survived in the archaeological record do not preserve sails and often it's argued, well, you know, Amianus got it wrong.
Anyway, he's from Beirut and what does he know? Actually, Amianus has served in the Rhineland. He knew Northern Europe quite well.
And both of those burials are funerary vessels and the best guess is that the mast that was there was removed because that's where your funeral goods were put.
So you're not really looking at a complete vessel. You're looking at a burial vessel and it's perfectly likely that by 350 AD the Scandinavians and Germanic peoples figured out how to put sails on their ships.
Which is a very important innovation that leads us to our Viking ships.
Finally, if that's the case, those vessels that were constructed by the 4th century were extremely important for launching not only Viking style raids on the Roman Empire in the 3rd and 4th century,
but in propelling the migration of the Anglo-Saxons, that is the ancestors of the English, from Denmark to Britain when the Roman Empire begins to break up in the 5th century AD.
And the argument is that enough Germanic speaking peoples got over to England from what is Denmark and Northwestern Germany that they linguistically and culturally changed Britain into England.
And if you have sailing vessels, your ability to move large numbers of people increases dramatically rather than open rowboats.
The second important point is that the Goths, if they did indeed come from Sweden, they probably crossed the Baltic, followed the Amber Roots and it ended up in the Roman Empire.
And that migration of a large number of Gothic people out of Sweden would have again been facilitated in the late 2nd and 3rd century by the improved shipbuilding.
So there's every reason to believe that the contact with the Roman world probably resulted in superior ships for the Scandinavians and was an important step on the way leading to the Viking ships that emerged at the end of the 8th century.
So as a result of the contact with the Roman world, Scandinavia benefited enormously with its trade goods.
The trade acted as a demographic safety valve, the importation of all sorts of weapons, ship technology that allowed for the consolidation of petty kings around holes, served by retinues of warriors who in many ways had no sense of nationality.
The loyalty was personal, it was to their lord, it was to the war god, which you have already in many ways is the embryo of that Viking civilization that is described in the legends and sagas that will be coming up very soon.
However, the drawback to this is that in the 5th century, the Roman Empire, at least in the West, collapsed.
The barriers were breached, dramatic people settled in Britain, in Gaul, and with the collapse of that Roman political order also went all the trade benefits.
And the succeeding centuries from 400 to 600 AD, known as the Age of Migrations, was a very mixed benefit to Scandinavia.
In some ways it benefited because all these excess tribes had left, but in other ways it had broken down old trade routes, had realigned the peoples of Western Europe, and would open a new chapter in the development of Scandinavian civilization.
