Lecture 7, Runes, Poetry, and Visual Arts
In this lecture, I wish to follow up on some of the themes I've talked about in the evolution
of a distinct Scandinavian civilization in the age of migrations.
And I want to particularly concentrate on the runes, that is the Scandinavian form of writing
that had arrived to the Northern lands, perhaps as early as 200 BC,
as well as some information on the decorative arts, particularly jewelry, wood carving,
other objects that are some of our best information for the period of migrations,
as well as for the Viking Age.
And then conclude with the importance of poetry, particularly oral composition,
which I've mentioned briefly in the previous lecture,
and why that was so important in the lives of Scandinavians,
and how that technique actually worked,
and how the Scandinavians also innovated on the basic, dramatic verse,
so that by the 9th and 10th century, the varieties of verse patterns
and the means of expression were many times greater in the Scandinavian world
than it ever had probably been in that earlier, dramatic period when these legends
were first recited and transmitted to the North.
Norse poetry evolves in a very distinct and beautiful way
with all sorts of possibilities in its verse patterns,
and that in part is a legacy of the Viking Age.
They become more and more adept about celebrating great heroes
who were emulating the deeds of the past.
And so these three themes, the runes, the visual arts, the poetry,
are all avenues into understanding how that Scandinavian society of the Viking Age emerged.
Well, the runes have excited a lot of popular imagination,
and one could go on the Internet and find many examples of popular books
of how to cast your runes.
Usually these involve either your love life,
or less likely to do in your rival and business.
And in a way, that's not a bad use of the runes in the modern age,
or abuse, whatever, because the runes were an alphabetic system,
and they come in two versions.
There is an earlier alphabet of 24 letters known as the long foothark.
The foothark is their word for alphabet.
It's taken from letters that are put together to indicate the writing system.
And then there is a later version used in the Viking Age of 16 runes.
That is the short foothark, and that's the type of inscriptions one encounters
starting from about 079800 on.
And I think the shortening of that alphabet from the long system
used by all the Germanic peoples to the short system of the Viking Age
is one of the changes associated with the evolution of Scandinavian languages,
the reducing of syllables, and all the changes in pronunciation
I discussed in an earlier lecture.
Well, the runes are apparently devised on a North Italic alphabet
that is an alphabet that would have been used by Etruscans or Italic people,
and that alphabet had been transmitted north of the Alps to the Celtic peoples,
who in turn had carried it to Scandinavia, probably somewhere between 200 and 100 BC.
We do not have inscriptions from that date.
Our earliest inscriptions may be from 200 or 300 AD.
One of the earliest I read in an earlier lecture is inscribed on a very famous golden horn.
There is actually a pair of gold horns that were found in Denmark
and eventually stolen out of the Danish Museum and melted down, we fear, from 1802.
But they're known from reproductions and drawings,
and the runes were very faithfully inscribed in those reproductions,
and we were able to read them, and that dates from about 350 AD.
That's one of our earliest runic inscriptions.
Based on the letter forms, we can give a pretty good guess of when these inscriptions were first made.
The runic letters were never applied to, as far as we can tell, writing of documentary information.
It did not lead to a literate society, and that's an important point to stress,
because most of the poetry as it comes down to us in written form on manuscripts from Iceland
are based on what are known as oral techniques of poetry.
That is poetry that is recited to an audience that is not going to follow with any written text.
There is no written text.
Most understanding of law and knowledge is going to be by memorization, by reciting,
either verse or chanting, and that prose, continuous prose, narrative documents, legal documents,
historical records, etc., are not going to be used in Scandinavian civilization.
That is something that the Scandinavians learn when they convert to Christianity
and acquire the literate civilization based on Roman literature.
On the other hand, the runes were extremely important.
They were regarded as the power of Odin.
They were a way of communicating with the gods, and in many ways,
it's best to look upon the runes as a version of drawing, a magical version of drawing.
Those runes that have survived are usually found on objects,
and they have two aspects to them.
One is to denote ownership.
They give the name of the owner of an object.
This could be jewelry and particularly weapons.
And I mentioned very often these are swords or sometimes spears.
They're given names like tester or the cutter, whatever.
But also we get many indications of the runes being simply the same letter repeated many times.
And the best guess is that the runes also had mathematical qualities,
that each letter represented a number or a power.
So by multiplying the numbers of the letter,
thorn, the TH symbol, which actually is used in Anglo-Saxon as well as Old Norse,
would be a way of augmenting the power of the sword or the object involved.
Runes were seen as ways of casting magical spells.
There's runes that are reported to protect you from poisoning.
In the Volsang saga, for instance, the reason why Sigmund, the father of Sigurd,
the great hero who slaves Faftner, the Dragan, and wins Brinehill,
does not die from poisoning.
He has the power of runes.
And one of Sigmund's son who doesn't drinks poison and properly dies,
he has the power to prove himself against this.
Runes are also seen as a way, there's a ceremony of casting the runes,
usually associated with a vulva who's a prophetess,
who is dedicated to the goddess Freyja, the sister of Freyja,
the goddess of fertility, who has many of the same powers of Odin.
She has magical powers.
She's conceived as a goddess who can fly as a falcon or a bird
that she can go to the other world.
Odin also assumes the guises of birds to fly off
and understand the other world, the upper regions.
And this ceremony is an ability to cast the runes
to try to understand what the future has to tell.
And there are reports of this ceremony as early as the time of Julius Caesar.
Very often runes are cast to determine who among the prisoners
is going to be sacrificed to Odin, which is usually done by hanging.
Hanging is a ritual to Odin.
It's the sacrifice of one of the powerful foes you've captured.
And this practice goes on quite frequently in the Viking Age.
The most famous that comes to mind is in 845 A.D.
when the Vikings capture part of a Frankish army, 111 of them were told,
and hang them on one side of the Seine River,
and then Charles the Bald and his army sees it and panics and runs away
in the Vikings-occupied Paris.
But we'll get to that.
Any event, those hanging ceremonies, those sacrificial rites,
are also associated with the casting of the runes.
And they finally, as I said, as part of a form of drawing,
they are finally used also in commemoration of the dead.
And that, again, is in communicating with the ancestors.
Large numbers of runestones were erected in central Sweden,
particularly from the 10th and 11th century.
These were put up by warriors and merchant princes, as I would prefer to call them.
Men who made their reputations very often in Russia,
in the slave trade, serving in Byzantine armies,
and in a fair number of them who actually fought for King Canute in Denmark.
And they erected these runestones, or their relatives did, to honor them.
Sometimes these runestones were also associated with drawing.
I mentioned the famous runestone that shows episodes from the Volsan saga,
in which the dragon Faughnor is this sinuous creature
upon which the runic inscription is carved,
and then you have figures showing incidents from the legend.
Well, that type of artwork is very, very common on runestones.
And these runestones are often dated based on the decorative motifs,
the various types of animal-style designs,
that are also found in wood carving and especially in jewelry.
And we have a great deal of jewelry from the age of migrations and the Viking age,
and very often the runes are lined up with decorative motifs,
which puts them pretty much in close with jewelry.
And that's one reason why I always think of the runes as sort of a form of drawing.
And the runes are therefore extremely important and associated with the cult of Odin,
with the commemoration of the dead, communication with the gods,
and reinforcing all of those heroic values associated with the cult of Odin.
The Scandinavians are also heirs to a very ancient decorative arts,
a tradition of decorative arts that were common among all dramatic peoples,
and I've made mention of two in particular.
One are the Anglo-Saxon objects that have come out of the Sutton Ho treasure,
the distinctly English objects.
These include some marvelous jewelry, a great helmet that's been almost intact,
as well as the decorations on a shield boss.
All of these, in what are known as animal style or geometric techniques,
are very, very close to contemporary styles that are usually often called vandal style in Sweden,
where again, weapons, jewelry, personal ornaments are done in very, very elaborate geometric patterns
or animals, usually having animals swallowing something, serpents, fantastic animals.
Very often, some of these forms of jewelry are depicting what I think are some version of the midgarth serpent, the dragon.
And the genius of our artistic traditions in the dramatic world were really put on personal ornamentation,
and you can trace the development of these ornamental styles very, very well,
starting from the Vendal Age and running really into the early Christian period.
And somewhere from approximately 500 AD to 1200 AD, Scandinavian craftsmen, jewelers, woodworkers,
and runemasters, people carving the runestones, devised an exquisite succession of different stylistic designs.
The earliest of them, the so-called Bore style, which is in the early Viking age, is a rather stocky and thick style.
It is pretty close to the dramatic styles you would have seen in Suttonhoe or Gothic arts, I mentioned, from the 4th and 5th century.
But from it, you evolve into far more sinuous figures, more fantastic creatures come in,
especially in the 10th and 11th century with the Mammon style, which is based on a famous inlaid axe.
You get very, very imaginative depictions, and the Scandinavians are often borrowing from Western Europe,
for instance, floral designs are taken in from Carolingian art.
There are certain influences of geometric patterns from later Islamic art.
All of this is taken by the Scandinavian craftsmen and really turned into a marvelous native style decoration.
And it climaxes, especially in the 11th and 12th century, and of all things, the door panels of early Christian churches,
the so-called stave churches, in which not only are the ancient myths depicted,
particularly the tales of the Volsansaga.
Sigurd slaying the dragon or Gunnar in the snake pit, where he is trying to play the harp to lure the serpents to sleep,
and the one adress is piercing him.
Regan the Smith, who is the treacherous Smith who makes the sword of Sigurd,
and then is going to do in Sigurd, but Sigurd learns of this and slays Regan.
All of these incidents out of the Volsansaga appear in one famous set of church doors from Norway,
done in what are known as the Ernest style, that is, the last of these great decorative styles that came out of the Viking ages,
almost baroque in its fussiness, and is a very, very distinct, really uniquely Scandinavian form of artwork.
And it's important to stress these visual arts, just as it is the literary traditions.
This is a very, very powerful way in which these people identified themselves.
Scandinavian society did not have freestanding masonry architecture.
They did not build great monumental buildings the way the Romans did and the way early Christians eventually did,
with their great cathedrals in the Middle Ages.
Nor did they have a tradition of sculpture.
Now, part of it was simply materials.
They don't have all the limestone and marble hanging around the way you do in the Mediterranean world.
Also, their major building material was wood.
And in wood, the Scandinavians really expressed their genius in wood carving.
Unfortunately, much of this wood carving does not survive.
We have some coming out of ship burials, notably the ship burial of Osseberg that dates around 834 AD.
Probably to the Norwegian queen, Asa, who is the grandma, the paternal grandmother of King Harold Finehair,
who's the first king of Norway, or something kind of resembling Norway.
And that includes some absolutely stunning examples of wood carving, including two dragon head posts,
one of them the most famous, the so-called academician style, very, very close to the jewelry style,
the boray style, close to some of the styles you see on the runestones.
It also has a cart, which is probably a ceremonial cart,
very similar to the carts used to move the cult statues around in festivals to the goddesses, the Vanar goddesses.
Furthermore, there are ordinary objects that are decorated both in metal and wood with human heads.
These seem to be totems that either represent the gods or the ancestors.
And we have numerous reports of this veneration of the ancestors, particularly quite a spectacular report
by one of the Arab geographers who explains how Swedes on the Volga in the 10th century,
Swedish merchants, set up posts with heads or totems to their divinities or their protective spirits.
They may be the ancestors whom they invoked for good market.
So there's this very, very powerful tradition of wood carving, decorative arts, textiles,
certainly tapestries, there's lots of references to tapestries, and the weaving of runes and tapestries.
Bryn held in the Valsund saga at one point is visited by her rival, Gudrum,
and what is she doing? She's weaving a tapestry of heroic deeds and runes at the time,
and this was undoubtedly a common form of decoration.
These decorative arts repeated the myths and the legends of poetry.
They emphasized the deeds of the current heroes,
and they were also extremely important ways of marking out rank within Viking society.
And as the Viking age progresses, it is no accident that the numbers of jewelry styles proliferate,
that the amount of jewelry found in graves increases significantly,
and that there is also evidence of importation of silk and fabrics,
and that one way in which the Vikings identified themselves was very, very much in their personal ornamentation.
That is where their artistic genius was, and they were a distinct people both in their dress and decoration.
This would be everything from ordinary objects such as belt buckles to elaborately engraved hilts,
and that is an extremely important component in the Viking age.
Personal display, putting your wealth in that way of projecting your rank,
projecting your association with your ancestors, with the gods, and with the great heroes.
And therefore, the visual arts become a very, very important way of in effect testing
what we were told in the myths and the legends, and they correspond generally fairly well.
As I said, there are certain myths such as the fishing for the midgarth serpent
that actually appears on jewelry themes and in runestones.
Perhaps the best idea of how this must have impressed all Scandinavians,
these constant visual representations of the myths and legends,
come from some statuettes that have come down to us, which probably represent cult statues.
There's a very, very famous one of Thor standing over his hammer.
There's another one of the god Frey. These are often reproduced in most textbooks.
And these types of statuettes and cult statues, rare in archaeological finds,
must have been extremely common.
And it reminds me very much of a passage in the Lux-Dala saga,
written probably around 1240 or thereabouts in Iceland.
And it's really one of the finest romantic saga, probably the best romantic saga of all of Iceland.
And in that, one of my favorite characters, Olaf the Peacock,
and he's really incredibly lavishly dressed, even by Viking standards,
and that's how he got the name Peacock.
Olaf the Peacock, who is actually illegitimate,
his father Huskel supposedly had an Irish princess that he picked up in Norway on the slave market.
But any event, Olaf the Peacock makes a journey to Norway, gets Prime Timber,
goes back and builds his own farmstead, which is an Icelandic version of the Great Hall
that you encounter in The Legends and Myths.
And we're told in Lux-Dala saga that he commissioned the best craftsman he could find
to decorate the hall's interior with marvelous wood carvings of all the stories of old.
We're told, these are the stories of the Vulsongs, coming up in the next lecture,
Rolf Krocky and his contest with Adels, the King of Uppsala,
the myths of Thor, the elements of the cosmology that would be repeated in the Volospa,
and that the figures were so marvelously done that when Olaf threw his lavish feasts,
and he really was regarded as one of the top gothe or chieftains who settled legal disputes in Iceland,
and you went to his feasts, and you have to imagine the tapestries there,
that the figures in the illumination of the Great Hearts seem to come alive and dance
and almost, you know, played out the myths before you.
This must have been extremely common in most Scandinavian halls,
and so when we look at this material, we have to really exercise our imagination
to see how it fits in with the daily lives of these people
and how it plugs in very much with their religious belief
and their social values that are so fundamental to the Viking Age.
And this brings us back finally to that third point I want to make in this lecture,
and that is besides the runes and the visual arts, once again the poetry.
And I mentioned the power of the poetry, especially in transmitting legendary figures
from the West Germanic peoples to the Scandinavians,
indicating there was this common Germanic culture that begins to break up in the 7th century
as the Scandinavians articulate and elaborate their Germanic civilization into Viking Age Scandinavia,
and their kinsmen evolve into Western European Christians.
Well, that poetry, that poetic tradition, and I mentioned briefly,
is based on a poetry that was devised for recitation.
And oral poetry is not an act of memory.
It is not a case where the poet sits down and memorizes 2,000 lines.
You have people today who will proudly tell you,
I can recite in ancient Greek 6 books of the Iliad,
I can recite in Anglo-Saxon, Beowulf, or the Norse poem.
That is not how poetic composition occurs in an oral society.
The written versions we have of those poems are at the end of a very long tradition.
What this poetry involved was training a poet to understand how meters worked.
And in dramatic meter, that was a half line.
That was usually four or five syllables with two stressed syllables,
followed by another half line with at least one important stressed syllable.
And the idea was to make sure those stressed syllables alliterated.
They had the same initial sound to it.
And that then tied the line together.
Those half lines could be arranged in various types of patterns.
You could have two following.
You could put together a group of eight as a single couplet where each line is syntactically related.
You could break them up into a full line, into two or three short lines.
So there were an infinite set of patterns of arranging this verse,
and the poet fought in terms of half lines.
He also, since you're dealing with a poetry that wasn't so concerned about the number of syllables,
as opposed to the number of stressed syllables, it followed very much the cadence of spoken language.
And so most poets composed with a harp were told this in Beowulf, were told this in the Norse poems.
That harp allows you to keep time.
And so what the poet had was an ability to think in these half lines,
and you have to remember he has no writing.
It's just that, oh, Garm Beys loudly, Borgiepna cave, breaks his fetters and freely runs.
The fates I fathom, yet father I see, the mighty gods, the engulfing doom,
which is a very good rendition of one of the refrains in the Velospi.
The power of the poetry almost carries itself along with that alliteration if you have the style.
Furthermore, the poet had a lot of extra techniques to help him out.
This included what most linguists and philologists, people who study language and literature, call formula.
That is, there were phrases worked out which identified figures for you.
And these could be metaphorical expressions.
Norse poetry, in contrast to the earlier Germanic poetry that's represented in Beowulf
and some of the other continental versions which are, well, they're not really oral poetry.
They're based on oral traditions. They're really literary epics.
But Norse poetry had a metaphorical expression called kennings, which I'll speak about later on in terms of skeptic poetry.
And these were metaphorical phrases that were worked out referring to mythological situations.
So Granny's burden, which fills a whole half line, means gold.
Granny is the horse of Sigurd in the Valsan saga.
He carries off the horde of the niflans, the poisoned horde, which had been cursed by Loki, in effect,
and gets, you know, Gunnar eventually gets a handle on it.
And so it's both a learned illusion, and at the same time, it fits very nicely a half line.
And the poet would memorize a number of these kennings and phrases, which metrically worked for half lines.
And so as he's composing, he not only has a structure, a verse, that he knows, follows the cadence of the language.
He knows he needs so many illiterating syllables in a line.
He knows that he could think in half lines, he could boom.
One could, you know, two together is a sentence, or one is a short sentence, a reframe.
He also has these phrases he can use. Each composition is independent.
He's reciting a story well known in a poetic form of recitation, well known.
And as a result, when he stands in the hall and accompanies himself with his harp,
each poetic recitation is an independent creation.
The best analogy I think I can give on that would be to think in terms of the kind of very, very structured form of a Bach fugue.
And anyone familiar with organs know that there is a very, very set standard for a fugue.
On the other hand, within that formula, there is infinite variation.
And the same one actually applied to jazz musicians who have their own sort of techniques of composition.
And many jazz musicians really don't read music, but they know the form very well.
And within that form, there's infinite variation.
And this is the genius of Norse poetry, this infinite variation in oral recitation of stories extremely well known
and exploiting the dramatic technique of surprise over expectation.
So when the poems are recited, the audience already is anticipating what's going to happen,
the poet has all of these marvelous techniques to retell the story,
and he can slow it down or speed it up depending on how his audience is reacting.
And they could elaborate. For instance, in some of these Norse poems,
all of a sudden, you know, the action goes along, it slows down.
We're going to describe the shield of Ragnar and what everything was on it.
And there's this delight in explaining all the various images on it.
And then he will return to the action and really get to the punchline
when Ragnar is captured and thrown into the snake pit of Ayala.
And along the way, there's all sorts of marvelous illusions.
This is a, this is a famous poem known as Ragnar's Drop,
which is probably composed in the early ninth century by Braggie the Old.
And there's this marvelous ability to adapt the poetry, the stories, the legends
to whatever setting is necessary.
Now the reciting of these poems and the knowledge of all of these stories and myths and legends,
taking in conjunction to what we know of its visual arts, what we know of the runes,
these were powerful bonds of society.
The poetry, even though in its fragmentary form it survives in late examples from,
or late manuscripts from Iceland, the poetry is the main means of communicating
and educating within the Viking world.
The launching of the Great Viking Rays in the ninth and tenth century
actually was a great stimulus for a whole new wave of poetry,
for improvisation and innovation on traditional meters.
Viking heroes such as Ragnar Lodbrok, and I mentioned it briefly with his poem,
The Shield of Ragnar, the Ragnar's Drop.
Vikings of the ninth and tenth centuries are known to us,
not only from the literary accounts of western Europeans who see them as foes,
but some of them are known from references to poetry,
where they are immediately cast into poetry and immediately compared to the heroes of old.
And the poems become a marvelous way of perpetuating not only the memory of the past,
but incorporating all these heroes of the present and linking them to those memories in the past
so that for many Vikings and Veni-Skenevians in the ninth and tenth century,
they were just the emulators and continuators of the great heroes
that stretched all the way back to Sigurd and Gunnar.
And there was this almost timeless quality of heroic ethos that was perpetuated in the poetry
and in the various legends of the great figures of the past.
And that is a very good point to stop at this lecture,
this creation of a poetic medium for transmitting these traditions.
And in the upcoming lectures, we're going to look at what some of these traditions were,
particularly of the early Scandinavian heroes of the sixth and seventh century,
who in many ways are going to be presented in this poetic form as the precursors of the Vikings.
