In this lecture, I plan to conclude the discussion of the cultural and religious background of
Scandinavia in the Viking Age. In this particular lecture, I want to concentrate on the earliest
heroes of Scandinavia who are celebrated in the traditional verse I spoke about in the
previous two lectures. These would be heroes associated with eventually the kingdoms of
Denmark and Sweden. And this lecture is an important transition into the Viking Age
for several reasons. The heroes date from the 6th and 7th century AD and in many ways
they were not only examples to emulate such as the legendary figures Gunnar and Sigurd
from the Valsang saga or the great gods Thor and Odin who were told in the myths. These
were figures who were historical characters. They were actually kings who ruled in what
later came to be Sweden, Norway and Denmark. And so these figures had a dual influence
on the later Viking Age. One is yes, they were great heroes, they were someone you would
emulate and they in turn were probably emulating the heroes before them. But on the other hand
they also became associated with the great halls at Lidr or Herat which is on the island
of Zeeland or Zeeland as we say in English, which is the largest Danish island and therefore
acted as a model for the later kings of Denmark who came to unite the kingdom of Denmark and
many ways saw themselves as the heirs to these, not only to the courage and the deeds, but
also to the political legacy of these early kings of Denmark. The same is true with a group
of heroes and kings who are known from the area of central Sweden, who are associated
at Uppsala, which continued to be a great sanctuary through the Viking Age and probably
was still operating as a pagan sanctuary into the early 12th century AD. That was associated
with another line of kings, the Jenglinga or the Jengling kings who claimed to be associated
with the god Frey, the god of prosperity, the god of the other life associated with
bores and there was a great hall there, especially remembered with the rather avaricious and nasty
king Adels, who is the opponent of Rolf Krocki, the great king in Denmark, who is at the
whole at Lidar. And finally, there is a memory of heroes who would become associated with
eventually what became the basis of the kingdom of Norway, even though today that area is
part of Sweden, and these would be the so-called West Gotor or Gautar, the Gietes of the Old
English Poem of Beowulf, and the hero Beowulf, who is, while not really remembered in the
Scandinavian tradition, is part of yet another political legacy that fed into the creation
of the kingdom of Norway. So what the legends give us, and these would be legends covering
events from roughly about 490 AD to maybe 700 AD, is not only another version and insight
into this heroic ethos, but also a window into some of the political geography that is
beginning to take place in Scandinavia on the eve of the Viking Age, as well as the
types of sea kings, and I prefer to call them sea kings rather than chiefs, who would launch
the great Viking attacks. Now, what these figures don't have in the 6th and 7th century
are the ships that will be capable of conducting those Viking raids. And we will discuss the
ship technology in an upcoming lecture, and that ship technology is going to essentially
be revolutionary in its military and political implications, and eventually even in its economic
implications. These legendary figures in Scandinavia in the 6th and 7th century, the earliest Scandinavian
heroes to be celebrated in Poem and later in Saga, are still dwelling in a world where
ships have not yet progressed to the sleek long ships of the Viking Age, and a good
deal of the trade, as far as we can tell from the surviving archaeological evidence, is
really in the hands of Frisians, that is, the West Germanic peoples settled along the
islands of Holland, who are under the protection of the Frankish kings and carry out most of
the carrying trade between the Frankish world in England and Scandinavia in this period.
Well, how do we know about these legendary figures of the 6th and 7th century, who came
to be regarded in some ways as the first kings of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway?
Well, we have some rather unusual sources on this. One is that Old English epic of Beowulf,
which I mentioned in another context. Beowulf is a very peculiar poem. It is based on oral
poetic techniques, that is, it goes back to the early dramatic poetry, but it was created
as a literary masterpiece. It was written by a man probably living in a monastery of
noble birth. It's an anonymous composition. It uses the Old English techniques, but it
was written as a single epic in which he took really probably three or four stories and
combined them using probably the Aeneid of Virgil, the great Roman epic, as his model.
It is also imbued with various Christian ideas. Beowulf is set in pagan Scandinavia,
but this English author being a Christian, probably his family had been Christians at
this point for maybe one or two generations, has updated it religiously so that references
to the ancient gods are removed, although the action and the ethos in the poem is very,
very pagan indeed in many ways. That epic, which was perhaps composed in its current
form, somewhere around 675, 725 AD, survives on a single manuscript that goes back to the
Cotton Library, which is a very important library established in the early modern age,
and the poem does reflect events in Scandinavia in some ways more faithfully than the later
Norse traditions. The ancestors of the English who carried these traditions over to England
came from a Scandinavia that had not yet coalesced into anything remotely looking like
the kingdoms of Norway, Sweden and Denmark, and therefore they remember the ghettos, or
the gotar, as an independent group dwelling on what is now the western shore of Sweden,
which historically was associated with Norway and only become part of Sweden under a treaty
in 1658, and that is the homeland of Beowulf, which is often referred to as West Gautland,
the Western Goths. It's pretty much around, it's just north of the modern river Gota that
feeds into Lake Vanirin and hooks around towards the Oslo Fjord, so that Beowulf's kingdom,
where he lived in, say, 500 AD, that of his lord, Heijlich, was really in some ways the
eventual political basis for the Norwegian kingdom that grew up around the Oslo Fjord
and the uplands. They also remember the fact that the Swedes, the Sviar, Sweden actually
is an Anglo-Saxon rendition of the Norse name of these people, dwelled around Uppsala,
that they lived around Lake Maleron, and that much of what is now Sweden was divided up
into independent tribes and peoples, and there was great distance separating the Swedes
from the Danes, who are primarily located on the island of Zeeland. Jutland, the peninsula
that most people associate with Denmark at this point, was probably home to a whole bunch
of different tribes that had very little to do with the Danes. The information that comes
from the Norse sources is much later. It comes from Icelandic tradition. There were a number
of poems associated with the heroes of this period, but these poems are usually quoted
within prose, narrative, sagas. The most famous of them is the Saga of Rolf Krocki,
written in the 13th century AD, and the Saga of Rolf Krocki talks about the same figures
that you have in Beowulf. There are two significant differences between these accounts. Beowulf
is talking about figures among the Danes and the Swedes, probably from the first half of
the 6th century AD. The Saga of Rolf Krocki concentrates on the generation after, on the
King Rolf Krocki, who ruled at Lidar, the Great Hall of Zeeland, who was obviously the
favorite of Odin, who was in many ways the model king for later Danish kings that would
like to think of themselves as descendants of this king in Zeeland, one way or the other,
or at least to his political legacy. Nonetheless, he is only a tangential figure in Beowulf's
account. He isn't very important in the poem of Beowulf. He's only mentioned in passing
because Beowulf is really more interested in the Gaute sheeery, the Gaute here, the Gothic
hero from what is now what the Scandinavians would have called Norway, as well as the Danes of
that generation. There are a number of chronicles that have come down to us in Latin written by
Danish authors and legendary histories. And the most important one that I'll mention quite
frequently in this course, which is a major source not only for this period, but running through
the whole Viking Age, is a chronicle written by an ecclesiastical historian by the name of
Saxo Grammaticus, a Danish cleric writing in the age of Waldemar I, who was a Christian king of
Denmark from 1157 to 1182, and in many ways made the Danish medieval kingdom a great kingdom in
the 12th century. And Waldemar presided over a very important literary revival in Denmark in
which there was a great deal of composition in Latin, in which these Danish Christian kings are
trying to project themselves as the Christian heirs of the kings going back to Rolf Krocky and
earlier, the so-called Skuldingar or the Skulding kings of Denmark, that is of the family of Rolf
Krocky. Well, that means that the Norse accounts are written without the same benefit of political
geography of Beowulf. Beowulf is actually much closer to the very, very broken and fragmented
political geography that must have existed in Scandinavia before the Viking Age, where Denmark,
Norway and Sweden at best were in embryo, whereas the Norse accounts writing of these heroes have
cast these heroes already into, well, this is the king of Denmark, Rolf Krocky, this is going to be
the king of Norway. They are thinking already in the classic three kingdoms, which are really a
result of the Viking Age rather than a cause. The realm of Beowulf, which is along the western
shores of Sweden today, north of the so-called Gotø River, and bordering on the shore, is also
borne out in the archaeology as a royal center. There are a number of important and impressive
barrows, some early runestones from the area. It clearly was the center of royal power. Beowulf
himself is never really remembered in the Norse tradition. The best guess is that he is represented
as Bothvar Bjarki, who is a hero at the court of Rolf Krocky, who is said to be a Norwegian. By the
time the Norse authors wrote, the region which was Galtlan in Beowulf's time in the 6th century
had long passed under the control of largely Norway, some of it under Sweden. And so Beowulf is
remembered as a berserker at the court of Rolf Krocky, or a part of this legendary figure who
fights in the form of great bear. He has actually two brothers who are part animals as well. It's
really wild and rather woolly group that comes out of Norway to serve the Danish king. What we
can tell is that already in the 6th century on the island of Zeeland, both the Anglo-Saxon and the
Norse sources really agree, there was a powerful kingdom ruled on that island from kings at this
great hall, which in many ways was probably seen as the equivalent of Vahala. It's called Herot in the
Anglo-Saxon tradition, or Lidar in the Danish tradition. And in many ways it is the predecessor of
the later Christian capital of Raskilde. At the time, the legendary kings ruling there, the so-called
Skoldingar, or the Skolding kings, the kings of the shield, traced their descent back to an
eponymous hero who was supposed to be perhaps descended from Odin. Furthermore, these Danish
rulers had very little control outside of the main island of Denmark. They may have exercised
control in Skanae. There's very little evidence that they ruled in Jutland. Their contemporaries
and rivals were the Yingla kings of Sweden, who claimed descent from the god Frey and were
remembered in the epics as great opponents. And again, archaeology does verify the fact that there is dense
population settlements and graves around the Uppsala Lake Molleran area, on the island of Zealand, as well as
I've mentioned the apparent heartland of Beowulf. So those three regions will end up becoming interesting
and significantly enough the nucleus for the later Scandinavian kingdoms. In Beowulf, the legend and
the action of the poem is really concentrated on this hero who travels to Denmark to rid the Danish
Hall herorot of the hard creature Grendel. And to the English poet, Scandinavia is a remote, misty
land populated with Grendel, who's a monster who's never really very well described. There's been
several suggestions of what his name means. It might be related to a Norse word of the blowing
wind. There's another one where he's essentially translates as a bottom figure, bottom feeder,
he's some creature from the depth. But in the Anglo-Saxon tradition, Beowulf fights Grendel,
then Grendel's mother in these fantastic combats. He goes back to rule over his kingdom. Once his
lord Heijlich is killed in a raid in Frisia and dies fighting a dragon and a dragon that comes
right out of dramatic mythology. As in all dragons, why do dragons get angry? Is someone
stumbled into the lair and stole some of the gold treasure so the dragon lashes out and Beowulf
combats and fights this monster. So in the Anglo-Saxon tradition, while they do remember the
names quite accurately in some ways in the kingdoms, this is all a fantastic legend. It's
associated with great creatures and beasts from a primeval past. In the Norse tradition,
the legends are quite different. Concentration is on human action, on great kings like Ralph
Crocke, who's the generation after Beowulf, or his rival in Sweden. There's conflicts between
personalities. The kings attack each other and are trying to strive for gaining control of the
great heroes of the Northland. Now some of these elements are also in Beowulf, but they're not the
primary action. And so the Norse saw these kingdoms in some ways as the prototypes for their, where
I should say the Norse writers of the 12th and 13th century saw these kingdoms as sort of the
prototypes for the kingdoms of their own days, the foundations of these later states.
Ralph Crocke, without a doubt, must have been a remarkable figure. He gave rise to a legendary
figure, remembered not only in Scandinavian tradition, but also in the Viking, in Anglo-Saxon
tradition, but also in the Scandinavian tradition. He probably lived somewhere between 550 and 575
AD. And he was remembered in the tradition as one of the favorite of Odin. His great court was
built around a oak tree symbolic of Yigdrasil. He was, in turn, the son of a great figure who had
been a Viking chief and a rather minor figure in the Beowulf poem. He's actually the result of an
incestuous union between his father and his sister, Yersa. The father marries the daughter in a rather
complicated etiological myth. His father's name is Helge, who is remembered also in the Anglo-Saxon
tradition. What's important about Ralph Crocke is he is the epitome of what not only a king of the
age of migrations is, but also a king of the Viking age. It is by his charisma, it is by his
gift-giving, it is by his favor of Odin that he collects around him the greatest heroes of the
Northland. And they come from different places, such as Bjarke from what is now Norway, Yaltes,
Fypdag, a famous Swedish hero. Much of the traditions about Ralph Crocke, and there was,
there would have been a very, very extensive poetic cycle in which poems would be recited,
really concerned as heroes. And in many ways, Ralph Crocke presided over his hall the way Odin
presides over Vahala. That is, Odin's hall is populated with all the great heroes of the past.
He is waiting for the final day of doom, Ragnarok, and he keeps adding these heroes into his hall.
And so, Ralph Crocke in some ways is presiding in Denmark in the way Odin presides in Asgard.
So, the result is numerous heroes and figures, many of them probably unrelated to Ralph Crocke,
and even that period, get incorporated into this Danish legend, Legendary King, and become part of
the great group of retainers. In the era of the sixth and seventh century and in the Viking area,
these men were probably known as berserkers. That is, the frenzied warriors who understood the
power of runes and could work themselves up into battle rages, where they charged into battle
without any regard for themselves. And the word still survives in English, to go berserk,
that is, to go into a rage. And by the time you get to the 13th and 14th century, where
Scandinavians or Christians, they kind of are a little standoffish on berserkers. This isn't
really what you want to recommend. You're thinking more in terms of chivalrous knights, and
berserkers don't really work out very well as chivalrous knights. And so, in the prose accounts
of the traditions of Ralph Crocke, the berserkers become these crazy heroes, these crazy warriors
that the heroes like Ralph Crocke or Bjarke actually defeat. And so, they become sort of a
class of strange opponents. And the berserkers of Ralph Crocke's court then become heroes who are,
you know, a little more respectable in Christian eyes. But they all probably
were in this class of berserkers that are discussed in classical and medieval accounts of the
professional warriors. Ralph Crocke, remembered as a valiant king, clashed with his contemporary
in Sweden, and that is a fellow by the name of Adels, who in the legend ends up marrying
Ralph Crocke's mother, Yersa, who's actually also his half-sister in the myth. And there was a
recollection in the myth, in the legend, that Ralph Crocke had made a famous ride to Uppsala,
that he had left his court at Clydar, crossed over to what is now Sweden's Skani, and with his
heroes galloped up to challenge the king of Uppsala. And the cause of this attack is a little
obscure. It involves treasure, it involves honor, it involves some sort of dynastic issue. And this
is what always sets the heroes off. Somehow their honor has been in one way or another
sullied, and they have to assert it by going off and somehow besting their opponent in contests.
In the saga of Ralph Crocke, Ralph travels through the forests of Sweden, and as I mentioned,
that is probably a journey of at least a month to six weeks to ride from Denmark, you know,
up to Uppsala. Along the way, he meets Odin disguised as the farmer Ronnie, and Odin tests
Ralph Crocke's warriors on various occasions. And when Ralph Crocke started out on this ride,
he had his 12 champions, he had a bunch of berserkers and a hundred other men, and the
course of meeting Ronnie on several occasions, Ronnie keeps reappearing at new locations,
which should have tipped Ralph Crocke off that this guy is not just an ordinary farmer, but
you know, it's a legend we won't go into the details too much. And in each case,
everyone fails but the 12 companions. And so the lesser men are dismissed and set back to
Denmark. And while when Ralph Crocke emerges at Uppsala, he's only accompanied by his 12 warriors.
And you're certainly not going to get much political history out of this, but you're
certainly going to get a great deal of the social ethos and the warrior ethos in this tale.
When they arrive in Uppsala, which would have been a great hall comparable to the one in Denmark,
what Ralph Crocke and his men do is they move into this hall and take over. Ralph Crocke presides
over the hall, there's Swedish warriors waiting to trap them, they slay them behind, they're hiding
behind the tapestries. The Swedish king, Adels, has to run away. Ralph's mother comes out,
presides over the hall. And what is established there is Ralph Crocke is a greater king. He's
moved into the hall of his rival. He's taken it over. He presides over with his warriors.
He starts giving gifts. He takes over the treasure of the Swedish king who's known to be
a miserly king, a man who doesn't win much loyalty to him. And as a result, he's usurped that position
in Uppsala. Well, eventually the Swedes come back. Adels goes off and raises a huge army,
and Ralph and his companions ride off to escape. In the course of their escape, they throw the
gold they've captured across the fields of Uppsala. They sold the gold on Friesveller plain,
as it's called, and the Swedes jump down and fight over the gold and the Danes gallop away.
Well, it's an odd story to us who think in terms of kingdoms and nation states, perhaps,
and we would think while this raid represented an attempt to assert the hegemony of the Danish,
you know, there's all sorts of speculation about it, what it was was a test of Valor and the test
of who was a greater king. It wasn't a question of taking territory. A great king was a man who
attracted to him great warriors, who showed an example of generosity to those warriors who could
assure them of riches, and those riches were given out as gifts that honored not only the giver,
but those who received. That is what makes Ralph Crocky a great hero. And the fact that he could
move into the Swedish court and take over and preside in Sweden, just as he did in Denmark,
is an indication that everyone agree he is the greatest king of the Northlands.
And yes, he does retreat, he does not stay in Uppsala, but the act of throwing the gold
in which the Swedes, you know, jump off their horses to fight the gold rather than pursue the Danes
is yet another indication to the Scandinavians who delighted in this story is,
Ralph Crocky has just bought the retainers of his rival Ottols, who are now his retainers as much
as they had been of the Swedish king. And that really captures the sense of what politically
was important in the age of migration. Great kings who could go out on careers, gain riches, gain fame,
build a great hall, attract the warriors to them. Kingship was something that you acquired
due to your personal reputation and charisma. It was useful that you were descended from other kings,
that you understood the profession of arms, that you had the favor of Odin.
But kingship was only effective if it was made effective and exercised by that ruler. And that
is an important point to stress because the Viking age will give many men the possibilities
to become sea kings and gain riches and powers and therefore establish their own kingdoms,
whether overseas or later in Scandinavia. That notion is already evident probably in the clashes
that you see among those insipid kingdoms in Scandinavia in the 6th century. It's that same
world is captured very vividly in Beowulf in the boasting that goes on at the Great Halls because
halls, as I mentioned, were not only political centers were a king rule, but there were also
places where religious ceremonies took place, especially in the spring and early summer before
the campaigning season. Before sinking, sea kings would launch out on raids, before you would go attack
the hall of your rival king to search your valor. You would have great ceremonies. There would be
feasting. A lot of mead would pass around and probably wine imported from the Carolingian world
and their boasts were made. And those boasts were extremely important. You raised your toast.
You claimed what you were going to do. And when you made those claims, you swore it on rings,
rings which would be associated with Odin, and then you had to deliver. And this sort of fellowship
goes on in the in the Epic of Beowulf. It goes on in the the sagas of Ralph Krocke. And it continues
as a theme even into early Christian times amongst Scandinavian kings. The most famous of them,
we'll mention later, occurs somewhere shortly after 986 when these professional Vikings,
the Joms Vikings, show up at the Danish court and boast, well, we're going to punish
Yarl or Earl, Hakan of Norway, because we're being hosted by our great kings,
Sven Bjorkbeard. They swear all of these oaths and boasts in the great hall in this in this
religious political ceremony. And then the next morning when everyone sobers up and the
Joms Vikings are thinking, well, we must have a great time. I can't remember what I said.
Sven Bjorkbeard immediately reminds, don't you remember, you swore on the rings, you know,
the Odin's rings, and you said you're going to sail to Norway and beat up King Hakan for me.
And they say, oh, yeah, I guess we did. And sure enough, off and running into one of the great
naval disasters of Danish history. So these traditions are extremely powerful to the Scandinavians
when you're looking at these early legends of Beowulf and Rolf Krocke. You're seeing the way
politics are played out in the Viking Age. They're extremely personal. They're tied to great kings.
Great kings make their reputation by going out raiding, by warring great deeds as warriors.
They acquire the wealth, the women, the warriors that allow them to establish a hall. And from that
hall, they rule as monarch over an area that is really rather vaguely defined. These are not
kingdoms in any kind of Roman sense or medieval sense. They are very, very much personal monarchies
and they are personal monarchs who are very much motivated by issues of a personal honor,
revenge, pride, all of those motives. And so the legends in the epic of Beowulf capture this
aspect of political life far more effectively than any kind of modern analysis of what motivated
these rulers. Well, what was the point in the importance of these, these legendary figures to
the Viking Age? To some extent, they were added into that great hall of heroes going back to the
Volsons. They were seen as prototypes of what a king could be in Scandinavia and they also reveal
a very important point which is now being debated among scholars. I mentioned there's a revisionist
scholarship that has taken the position that the Vikings in some ways have been greatly exaggerated.
That they are essentially pirates. They're rather marginal to the development of Western Europe.
Most of our information we have about them has been written by monks who are usually the victims
of Viking raids and these guys are generally rather hysterical and they're bound to exaggerate
five Viking ships into 50 ships. It is also pointed out that Western Europeans in both Anglo-Saxon
England and Carolingian Europe were hardly models of Christian piety, that the warrior caste was
pretty brutal. There are records of monasteries being sacked or damaged in battles among Christian
warriors and there's a great deal of truth to this and there is a reason to accept some of these
caveats. On the other hand, when you look at the legends and the myths and particularly the legends
associated with Rolf Krocke, the epic of Beowulf, the Scandinavians who launched out several
generations later from when these epics are placed in time were not burdened with any notion of just
war. To be sure, monasteries were sacked in Europe, but that was an outrageous crime and an exception
and not the rule. The Western Europeans were in no way prepared for the types of warriors that would
descend upon them in those long ships. They are dealing with Scandinavians who see themselves
as the emulators of these great heroes who not only exceed all expectations in battle,
they revel in battle, they go into battle with ecstatic joy. Whether they win or lose
doesn't matter because they join the great Hall of Odin and honor, riches, entrance into Vahala.
This is what is going to motivate the Vikings more than anything else over the next 300 years
and battle and in battle success goes to those who have the will and determination to prevail
and with figures such as Odin, Sigurd, Rolf Krocke, the Norse had in these heroes traditions
which gave them the will to dominate battlefields, sweep away better and more numerous opponents
and the Western Europeans were really completely unprepared for the type of invasions they are
about to experience.
