In this lecture, I want to discuss the importance of warfare in the Viking Age and particularly
look at a number of issues that is weapons, training, tactics, and the performance of
Vikings as warriors.
And this is an obvious matchup with the lecture dealing with shipbuilding and the nautical
skills of the Scandinavians.
And very often in popular literature, these would be novels, film, the notion is that
the Vikings were a group of savage warriors, homicidal maniacs, had marvelous ships, come
dashing into towns, cutting and slashing everything in their path.
And it leads to all sorts of stereotypes.
One of the most common is, what is his name, Hagar the Horrible, the comic strip figure,
running around with a horned helmet.
And I'm sorry to disappoint a lot of people, but the Vikings did not wear horned helmets.
The only horned helmets we have come from the early Bronze Age, and they may well have
been ceremonial helmets, if you think about it for a moment, they're really not very
practical in battle, it gives your opponent something to hang on to and yank it off.
In any event, that image of the horned helmet has not yet died in the popular perception
and is going to be long with us.
In any event, I think it's important first to look at the types of weapons and armament
available to the Vikings, and these were pretty similar to the armaments that would have been
used by many of their opponents, especially in Western Europe, and to a lesser extent
in the Eastern lands, especially the Byzantine Empire.
Many of these weapons come out of a common Roman and dramatic tradition, and the Vikings,
in terms of their physical size and overall look, they're not too different from most
Northwestern Europeans, their opponents, the Franks, the English, dramatic peoples, or
the Celts of the British Isles, and a lot of the same weapons would have been used on
both sides, or variations of them.
Foremost, it's important to note that the primary weapon of attack was going to be the
steel sword, and these swords that were used in the Viking Age were extremely long broad
swords, as you would tell them.
They come out of a Roman spatha, a saber.
They're anywhere from two and a half to three feet in length.
They're considerably longer than the classic Roman jabbing weapon, the gladius.
Very often, swords were required to, well, you needed two hands to wield some of the
larger ones, but these swords required a great deal of space and skill and training and strength
to use, and in the Icelandic sagas, for instance, the ability of men to wield swords is extremely
well known, and they're very, very precise on these skills and the types of blows that
can be delivered.
Someone like Gunnar and Njall Saga, one of the major figures, is reported to have been
one of the most skilled swordsmen, and he could wield that sword so quickly that it looked
like three swords at once in the air, and that really gives you some idea of how agile
these guys were in using these weapons, and it also required people to be trained in this
type of weapon from a very young age.
So, you were going to be trained to use a sword to handle a shield, spear, whatever
the weapons were.
A very free Scandinavian, that is, a Scandinavian was not a thrall or a slave, had familiarity
in handling these edged weapons.
By the Viking Age, the Scandinavians were quite adept in forging iron and steel weapons.
The sword was the main weapon of attack.
Actually, the best swords that were used in the Viking Age were Frankish manufacturer,
especially in the Rhineland, where the best weapons were forged at Cologne.
That was a major weapons center, and we are often told, especially by Arab and Western
European sources, that the Scandinavians preferred to get Frankish weapons and modified their
swords based on Frankish designs.
Large numbers of Frankish weapons have been found in Scandinavia, and the depressing fact
is that, from the Frankish viewpoint, is the Carolingian king, starting with Charlemagne,
banning the export of weapons to Scandinavia, and yet they keep appearing in Scandinavian
graves.
No one is paying attention to regulations, which is probably true of the arms market
of all eras.
I think there are 79 swords from Denmark and Sweden from one Frankish manufacturer alone,
so from the 9th century, so so much for government regulation.
The sword was the primary weapon.
The Scandinavians also used the axe as a serious fighting weapon.
In much of Western Europe at the time, the axe had essentially gone out of fashion.
There were various types of throwing axes.
These could have ranges of maybe up to 40 feet.
Scandinavians were extremely deadly in hurling this weapon, usually when about three or four
gyrations before it hit its opponent.
Later in the 10th century, they developed an axe, a long axe that requires two hands,
based on models from the Byzantine and Islamic world.
These are the classic axes that are used by the professional warriors and say the armies
of Canute.
They're actually hired warriors in the Varyngian Garden, Constantinople, or even the English
kings.
They're depicted on the Bayotapestry, by the way.
Those are essentially Danish or Anglo-Danish warriors fighting in the center of the English
army for King Harold II against William the Conqueror.
The axe was retained as a serious weapon, both as a throwing weapon and then as a primary
weapon for close combat.
Also the spear always remained an important Scandinavian spear, particularly long, two
and a half, four feet, fit it with an iron head, and they're very, very good in catching
their opponent on the shield and ripping a shield off his arm or unbalancing an opponent.
There are a number of descriptions of individual combats in Icelandic saga, and these are usually
two families who are feuding with each other, but the audience is extremely keen to know
how were the weapons used, how they wielded, how effectively was a spear used, and we have
very, very precise information on how these weapons were used in combat, and the audience
understood and appreciated all of this and expected to be entertained by it.
They also had pretty good defensive armor, again, contrary to popular perceptions where
they're clad in all these furs and running around with various stages undressed in different
movies like the Vikings and the Longships.
Most Scandinavians took the effort to acquire body armor.
They were acquiring their first significant amounts of body armor in the Roman age, and
as the Viking age progressed and the Vikings raided widely and traded widely, many Scandinavian
forces, certainly by the late century, were sporting chain mail.
It's not the body armor familiar with many readers such as what you'd have in the year
of the Crusades. Chain mail is a set of interlocking iron links or steel links. It takes about
35,000 or 40,000 to make a suit, and it would cover most of the vital parts of the body.
Usually it was a short sleeve, leaving the arms free. The legs were not actually covered.
Those were so you could move quickly, but it covered most of your vital parts. You would
wear it over a linen padding, and you would also equip yourself with a helmet, and these
are helmets that are based on a late Roman design. They're usually known as Spengelhelm
from the German version of it, and they're conical helmets. Usually they're multiple
parts, although they're some single-made ones, and these helmets would sit on your head,
and you'd be protected with a nose guard, and your eyes were open, and there's parts
of your necks that are exposed, but it pretty much protected you from most of the types
of blows you would receive on the head, which would be overhead blows, and usually these
helmets were good enough to deflect most sword blows. You had to have a pretty sharp weapon
to get through it, and it might take two or three blows to damage the helmet so it essentially
fell off, and then your victim was exposed to an attack, and there's lots of comments
made in all accounts of some king who didn't wear his helmet in combat, ergo, he got killed.
So the body armor that Vikings protected themselves with was pretty comparable to their opponents,
shield, chain mail, helmet. They didn't use too much the so-called lamella armor that's
more common in the Byzantine world. Those are interlocking scales rather than chain,
chain mail, but they carried perhaps somewhere between 30 and 40 pounds worth of armor, shield,
and helmet for protection, which is about the weight that an infantryman today goes
into battle with when you count all of his equipment that he's carrying around, and this
body armor was articulated so the weight was distributed over your body, and you're dealing
with men who are used to hard labor, who are in prime condition from rowing ships, who
are skilled in hunting, and therefore wearing this armor in combat is not as arduous as
it seems, and it really does give protection. The most exposed areas are the arms and the
legs, the lower legs, and there you might sustain wounds from arrows or from a well
timed blow, but in close order fighting with a large round shield, a chain mail arm and
one of the Spengle helmets on, you could go into that combat with pretty confident sense
that unless you really fouled up, that you're not going to get too badly damaged. It was
a matter of your skill in using the weapon against your opponent. In terms of missile
weapons, which would be javelins and bows and arrows, these had rather limited range.
The bow was about four feet in length, and it's essentially an adapted hunting weapon.
The Scandinavians are very good at shooting arrows. Someone like Harald Hoddery, who is
the great Christian Viking warrior, I think if there's a Christian vahala, certainly Harald
Hoddery is one of the great figures of the 11th century, who ruled Norway from about 1047
to 1066. He dies at the Battle of Stamford Bridge in England, and Harald Hoddery was
just a superb bowman, and he could hit his enemies, but it required real skill in aim,
and it was extremely effective in ship combat, where two ships come close together, and it's
essentially boarding tactics, so you can really see your opponent, and you can aim that arrow
at someone who's forgot to put on his helmet, or you can try to get him in the neck or an
exposed arm, and then incapacitate him and then board over and finish him off. Javelins
likewise, relatively limited range, maybe effectively 40 yards, and again, these weapons
were extremely deadly when used by Scandinavians, especially ship combat, which was essentially
ships coming together and fighting these deadly boarding tactics, and whoever clears
the ship of another opponent takes that ship and wins the battle. We're told that Norwegians
were so good at javelins that they could actually catch a javelin thrown at them, sort of deflect
it and catch it, and then turn around and throw it back at their opponent, and there's
a number of references to this in Icelandic sagas, particularly in the Himskrilinga saga,
which is the history of the kings of Norway, which is one of the many works written by
Snorri Struelsson, and we have a number of important combats of great sea battles fought
between Norwegians and Dades, and these incidents report it quite frequently and can't really
be discounted as literary creations. So in terms of weapons and armament, when the Vikings
launch out on their attacks in 790, they have comparable equipment to, say, the Carolingian
armies of Northwestern Europe, their Anglo-Saxon opponents. They are certainly much better armed
than the Celtic peoples of Ireland and Northern Britain, who do not have nearly the same amount
of weapons and equipment, and they are better armed than the Slavic tribes in Eastern Europe.
The only people who are going to be superior in armament might be Byzantine armies or armies
of the Cayley fate, which were really on the fringes of the Scandinavian world anyway.
Furthermore, Vikings, as soldiers, always appreciated mobility just as they did at sea, and we are
told in sagas and legends that all, certainly Viking heroes, that is, people who would
be Yarls, the Nobles, or Sea Kings, or anyone of substance, the Norwegian term later on
would be a man who's a member of the Lenderman, that is, the magnates, the Squires. They all
knew how to ride horses, and in any important Viking raid, the first thing that was done,
if they were going to penetrate inland in the ninth century, is gather horses, and they
would use horses as a form of transportation, that is, they'd ride to the battlefield, but
they would dismount and fight essentially as infantry. And part of the speed of Viking
armies operating in Western Europe was their ability to hit areas, acquire horses, move
rapidly, dismount and fight. Unlike many infantry formations of the Middle Ages,
Scandinavians were more than determined to meet cavalry charges, particularly in the
later 10th and 11th century, and we'll discuss one of those, the Battle of Hastings in 1066,
which is essentially pitting a feudal cavalry army of knights against the Anglo-Saxon army,
which is really a Scandinavian army in many ways, the shield wall, and the English army
almost wins. It's only at the end of the day that it's finally broken by cavalry charges.
Most of the time, Western European armies, up until the early 11th century, were fighting
as infantry. They had a very small cavalry component, and an argument is made that cavalry
increased in importance in the later 10th and 11th century in continental Europe in
large part to counter Viking raids, and there's a legitimate argument to be made for that.
By fighting so many diverse foes, the Vikings gained invaluable lessons in mobility, weapons,
tactics. They're constantly innovating, and if their weapons and armament were not too
dissimilar from most of their opponents, well, what gave them the edge in battle? And there
are certain aspects of fighting that come into this that do not deal with just necessarily
the weapons and tactics. One was the incredible bonds of cohesion within these Viking groups.
Some scholars have tried to compare the Vikings, for instance, to the pirates of the early
modern age, say the Spanish Maine. A brilliant book on that subject is by Reddicker, Between
the Devil and the Deep Blue Sea, where he really analyzes the different European pirates
of the 16th, 17th century as outsiders, and even the privateers. This is not what Viking
armies were like. They were not a group of pirate outsiders. They were commanded by sea
kings and yarrows. They comprised lendermen, that is, squires, plus the free members of
community. Most Viking fleets comprised anywhere from three to ten ships. They came from a
single area of community. They had built the ships themselves. Certainly in the 9th and
early 10th century, many of them expected to go back home. And so they brought within
the kind of social cohesion that you would expect in a society where all men of freest
rank know how to use weapons. They're all engaged in hunting, and they have the common
bond of rowing these ships and being an absolutely prime fit condition as a result of that.
So you're dealing with a far more coherent group of warriors than, say, a pirate band.
Furthermore, in rowing those ships and in living the conditions of Scandinavia, the Vikings
had several advantages over their opponents. One, they were incredibly agile, especially
in leaping and jumping. You have to be in order to do the boarding tactics described
in the sagas. And you can almost think of the Vikings as communities of a whole bunch
of crew rowers that you would have in a college team. This is an extremely fit society going
out to war. They also lived in harsh conditions and had to learn to get through Scandinavian
winters. Scandinavians were extremely good in determining logistics. What were the food
requirements? In foraging and above all, in campaigning in winter. Much of the transportation
in Scandinavia in the wintertime is done by skis. It's done over frozen rivers and
by sleds. Campaigning in winter in a place like France and England was a cake walk for
most of these people. And repeatedly, English armies get caught short because the Scandinavians
show up in a winter campaign. That's how they surprised Alfred the Great in 1978. They
hit them at his winter court in January. There wasn't any English army anyway and all of
a sudden the Danes decided to do a winter campaign. They're very good at seizing stocks
of grain and supplies, generally just after the harvest. And then they stock up and they
know exactly how much they need to do to do one of these lightning winter combats.
So in terms of logistics, in terms of morale, in terms of the bonds of cohesion, in terms
of their skill in determining logistics, these people are superb warriors. They are not the
stereotypes of a bunch of armed homicidal maniacs. They wage war violently and effectively
and they have enormous numbers of advantages besides just their weapons and those ships.
And this is a very important point to stress. The Scandinavians of free rank and they're
not very many slaves in Scandinavian society compared to the overall population. These
free men were all familiar in the use of arms from childhood as well as many of them were
expert in hunting. And this is in strong contrast to what had evolved in Western Europe from
say about 500 on. Most Western European societies were built around a warrior caste. And so
the warrior caste that is the nobility of the Carolingian Empire, their equivalents
in Anglo-Saxon England, these men were very, very skilled in weapons. But the majority
of the population actually had come to see military services a burden. Large numbers
of forces were nothing more than essentially militia forces that were called out for immediate
service, defense of the immediate area. In English that would be the so-called Ferd.
And these soldiers lack that kind of coherence and experience. They could be very, very easily
ambushed by Viking columns. There's reports of that. But above all, they were very often
easily induced to make reckless attacks on a Viking shield wall. That attack would be
broken and then the Vikings would counterattack and mop them up. And so while the Western
European armies did have very fine warriors indeed and some of them were mounted on the
hull, you have to keep in mind that the majority of Western European population just didn't
know how to use edge weapons. And when you're fighting in close combat with edge weapons,
it's determination and skill and strength that counts. And the Scandinavians had it.
Most of the Viking females knew how to use these weapons very efficiently and in a very
deadly fashion. There were some differences when you were dealing with, say, the Celtic
populations of Ireland and Scotland, which are much simpler societies, more hunting societies.
But there, they didn't have the same level of weapons. They were very good at stealth
and ambush, but they couldn't stand up to the Vikings and say a set-piece battle, at
least in the ninth century. Irish weapons and equipment would, of course, improve over
time. Now, with that notion in mind, the exact numbers of these Viking forces are difficult
to calculate. And there is a tendency by some scholars to minimize the size of Viking armies
and fleets. But whatever the numbers are, even if you say a Viking force is only 1,000
or 2,000 strong, and I think those numbers are too low, nonetheless, those 1,000 or 2,000
men have the courage and determination to defeat a foe several times their size if they're
made up primarily of militia. According to my reckoning, and if I follow a school that
is reacting against this revisionist tendency to down-date, in the ninth century, especially
from 840 on, the size and scale of Viking attacks go up significantly. And certainly
by the end of the ninth century, the small contingents of Vikings, who might represent
fleets of 10, 15, 20 ships, can very easily assemble into larger groups of 100 vessels,
120 vessels, and all of a sudden you have 5,000 or 10,000 very seasoned and well-trained
warriors. And this is the only way to account for the remarkable success the Vikings had
in England, particularly between 865 and 878, or the kinds of attacks they can wage in the
Carolingian Empire where they can put Paris under siege, and really bring the Carolingian
monarchy to its knees. One other point that's often overlooked in this, and besides having
all these skills in actual fighting, most Scandinavians, as I mentioned, are very, very
skilled in woodbuilding, woodwork. And the Vikings applied this very skillfully to warfare.
Contrary, again, to popular imagination, any Viking force that was going to operate
in an area for some length of time, that was not just a hit-and-run attack, as some of
the initial raids were, were going to fortify their bases. And they are extremely good at
building fortifications. These are simple earthen ramparts with stockade. And our best
evidence for the type of work they can do comes from Denmark. And there are two remarkable
sets of constructions, which most people wouldn't at first associate with Vikings. One of them
is the Danverka, which is a set of fortifications that essentially seals off Jutland from Central
Europe. Its earliest construction, based on dendrochronology, which is a method of dating
constructions by tree rings, is dated around 739, 740. And it runs from the Aidaea River
to the town of Hedibi, which is at the base of the Danish peninsula. And what it does is
act as a barrier for any invading army. There are several later building phases, one in
the early 9th century, another in the mid-10th century, clearly to be associated with the
Kings Gorm the Old and Harold Bluetooth. And the full, full system by the, say, about
960 AD is a very, very impressive set of fortifications with an earthen wall about 30 feet wide with
a stockade anywhere from 6 to 8 feet high, depending on how you reconstruct it. There
is a huge moat in front of it. It is a pretty effective barrier for keeping out an invading
army. At the same time of this last building phase of these defensive works, we have excavated
four Viking camps that could house anywhere from two to four thousand warriors. The most
famous one is on the island of Zeeland, that's Trelleborg, which is one of the largest ones.
And these are fortified camps, circular camps, almost built to Roman specification. And again,
they are fortifications to be associated with Harold Bluetooth, who rules from 958 to 987.
And Harold Bluetooth is probably responsible for the construction of these fortifications.
His son Sven actually, I think, abandoned them. And these construction, therefore, date
from, say, the 960s and 970s. And the camps were clearly used to house professional warriors
that were used for securing the kingdom of Denmark by Harold Bluetooth. So that in terms
of waging wars overseas, you're dealing with a population of warriors who understood essentially
positional warfare, taking fortifying bases for their ships. And Viking camps were difficult
to assault. We have a report of one assault on one of them, the so-called Battle of the
Dial in 891, where a German army moved up. These would be a Frankish army from what is
now Germany, led by Arnoff the Bastard, who's a rather colorful figure. And he orders his
army to dismount and assault the camp. And though they do carry the camp, they get over
the walls, the fortifications are such that the Vikings are able to get to their ships
and essentially escape and then head off to England, where they have a happy time plundering
England for the next three or four years. So the building of bases was just assumed in
any of these campaigns. Well, to get some sense of the effectiveness of Viking warfare,
let me close with an example, and we'll return to this campaign when we're discussing the
Scandinavian impact in England. And this is the campaign that stretches over approximately
the years 865 to 878. And in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, which is the main record we have,
it actually survives in seven different accounts. But the main accounts are covering the ninth
and 10th century, which are a record of the deeds of the kings of Wessex, the West Saxons.
This is the family of Alfred the Great that eventually unifies England. In the Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle, we have a very detailed account of what they call in Anglo-Saxon Micahere,
the Great Army. And this is an army of Danes and some Norwegians, many of them fighting
for 10 to 15 years in the Carolingian Empire, who in 865 come together in a great force,
probably because they've ransacked the Carolingian Empire so much that they're not getting any
more booty out of it, so they decide to relocate to England. And this army shows a lot of the
qualities of the fighting abilities of the Vikings I've just discussed. The army arrives
in the autumn of 865 in East Anglia, and they literally intimidate the local East Anglian
king to allow them to build a base in East Anglia, where they gather provisions and horses.
Then in the fall of 866, about a year later, they carry out a lightning advance about 180
miles north and seize the city of York, which is the largest city in Northern England and
the capital of the kingdom of Northumbria. Northumbria at this point is happily for
the Vikings in the middle of a civil war. The Vikings occupy the Roman city, fortify
it. They actually rebuild part of the Roman wall. The two Anglo-Saxon kings decide maybe
it's a good idea to take out these invaders. They join arms and attack in early 867, and
it's a classic example of the Norse setting themselves up in a defensive position with
their shield wall. They drive back the English levies in disorder and then counterattack and
mop them up. Both kings are killed. Ayala is actually, well, he's supposedly blood eagle.
We'll get into that later on. Then the Vikings, mostly Danes, and the English tend to refer
to him as Danes, move into Mercia in the midlands of England, set up another base at Nottingham,
and eventually raid that kingdom and force to be paid off, relocate back to East Anglia.
King Edmund gets a backbone and decides to oppose them. The Vikings wipe them out. They
actually martyr King Edmund by tying them into a tree and shooting with arrows, probably
to dedicate them to Odin. Then they turn back on Mercia and the southern kingdom, Wessex,
by seizing control of the Thames Valley and waging these essentially positional wars from
fortified bases that essentially knocks out Mercia, the kingdom of the midlands, and almost
brings Wessex to collapse. Wessex is only saved because King Alfred takes over in 871
from his brother and rallies the English army and fights determined battles and eventually
wins a victory where he's able to negotiate a treaty in 878. But the Viking army withdraws
into the midlands in northern England. It's not really defeated. It withdraws. It's a
That is a stunning piece of campaigning. Within 15 years, this Danish army, which could
have numbered between 5,000 and 10,000 veteran warriors, and it composition changes as some
of them move off to raid Ireland and newcomers in from Scandinavia. But this Danish army
showed a remarkable knowledge of logistics, the political situation, fortified bases,
winter campaigns, seizing towns, setting up defensive positions, forcing ill trained
levees to make these attacks, counterattacking. All the advantages of Viking warfare is seen
in this campaign in microcosm, and it shows the type of determined and violent foes the
Vikings could be. And in the end, the only reason they pull out of Wessex is that Alfred
is able to make it just costly enough and pay them off with dangal that they move into
England. But in 15 years, they had destroyed three English kingdoms and almost had destroyed
a fourth, and they had conquered an area which took 150 years for the Anglo-Saxons to master.
No army has done this in Britain since the Roman age.
