Lecture 12 Christendom on the Eve of the Viking Age
In this lecture I plan to introduce the wider medieval world in order to give an understanding
of the extent and range of the Viking impact.
This lecture acts as something of a transition from the first third of the course to the second
third of the course.
We might take a bit of time to think of where we've been and where we're going.
We've looked at developments in Scandinavia going back into the Bronze Age, the influences
of outside civilizations, the evolution of a uniquely Scandinavian civilization expressed
in its decorative arts, in its cults, in its martial ethos, the achievements in warfare
and shipbuilding that made the Viking Age possible, and also the rather undervalued
and underplayed importance of Scandinavians in medieval commerce.
And starting with this lecture we're going to expand our view and look at the Scandinavian
impact on the wider medieval world in the Viking Age from 790 to 1100.
These are the lectures that I believe earned my course at Tulane the name History 315, better
known as Pillage and Plunder 315.
We're going to look at the range of Viking attacks and settlements overseas, and in some
cases even the creation of kingdoms overseas, from Ireland all the way through Russia.
And in the process the Scandinavians come into contact with three distinct civilizations
which are all civilizations that emerge out of essentially the late Roman world.
And so I think it's important for us to look at those three different civilizations and
to try to get an understanding of how the Scandinavians would have viewed them, and
perhaps also pose some questions, even if we really can't answer them, how did the Scandinavians
view these worlds and the people who populated them, who come to be in many cases, at least
in the early stages, foes and captives, and eventually in many cases become neighbors
as they settle among them, and even in some cases become assimilated into these civilizations.
Well the first one we shall look at will be Western Europe, and it's better to use the
term Latin Christendom, that is the kingdoms in Western Europe that acknowledge the spiritual
supremacy of the Pope in Rome, and will eventually evolve into modern Western Europe of today.
The second civilization we'll discuss is the Byzantine world, centered on the city of
Constantinople, Istanbul and Turkey today, the capital of a great bureaucratic state,
which is really right in line with the Roman traditions, that Constantinople rules over
the Aegean world, the lands around the Aegean Sea, primarily the modern land of Greece,
and also the great peninsula of Asia Minor or Anatolia, which is the Asiatic heartland
of Turkey today. And finally we'll look at also that Islamic world, and there will be
a little briefer on it, because Scandinavians did not really travel much to the Islamic world,
and this is a world that stretches from Spain, across North Africa, to the heartland in the
Middle East, through Iran, into Central Asia, clearly the most impressive political and
cultural order at the time, the only rival being Tang China at the other end of the Eurasian
land mass, anyone looking at the medieval world in the year say 800, at the start of
the Viking raids, would clearly see the Islamic Empire centered at Baghdad, and the great
Chinese Empire is the two greatest civilized orders on the globe. So the Scandinavians
come into contact with all three of these civilizations, and into different degrees they influence
and interact with them. The greatest interaction is in Western Europe, and our greatest information
is about Western Europe. They do have a very, very profound influence in Eastern Europe,
it isn't as well documented, although archaeology now is constantly amplifying that picture.
And the Islamic world is much more a case of providing commodities, particularly slaves,
to the Islamic world and gaining great wealth, and few Scandinavians ever entered the great
cities of Islam. There are some very important Danish and Norwegian raids into Spain in the
840s and 850s, they actually captured the city of Seville very briefly, and Spain at
this point is ruled by an independent Muslim ruler, the Amir of Cordova, and these raids
however never really amount to any kind of significant conquest, and they're pretty much
sideshows to the more important attacks going on in the Carolingian Empire. They are quite
spectacular and they're daring, and it's certainly scared the Muslims, actually causing to send
missions off to find out who these strange people are coming from the north, but in the
long run they don't have nearly the kind of impact that Scandinavian attacks and settlements
do have in both Western Europe, Latin Christendom, or in Eastern Europe. Well let's look at Western
Europe, Latin Christendom, at the onset of the Viking Age in the 8th century. Clearly
to most Scandinavians the Carolingian Empire, and this is the empire that stretches from
the Pyrenees across Western Europe to the Elba, that is the great river that bisects
Germany today, and also across most of northern and central Italy. Rome is included within
the domains of the Carolingian Empire, it is the seat of the papacy, and the popes rule
over their own domains, the so-called donation of pep and which were lands granted to the
papacy by the Carolingian King, pep in the short, and the future papal states. So when
you speak of the Carolingian Empire, you're essentially talking about most of the core
areas of Europe that became the original common market which eventually evolved into
the now European Union, that is the Low Countries, Western Germany, most of Italy, except for
the far south, France, parts of northern Spain, and that constituted most of Latin Christendom.
There was a small Spanish kingdom in the northwest, Asturias, which battled the Muslims of Spain,
and there were the British Isles, which were part of this Christian civilization, but the
Carolingian Empire constituted most of Latin Christendom at the start of the Viking Age,
and certainly by the standards of the Scandinavians, it was an impressive order. Several important
changes, however, had occurred since the last significant contact of Scandinavians with
the Frankish world, I discussed it in the period of the age of migrations, and that
is there was a major change of dynasty in the mid-eighth century when a new family, the
Carolingians, took over ruling the Frankish heartland, which had previously been ruled
by the Merovingian kings, that is the descendants of Clovis, and in 751 or 754, you can date
it either way, Pepin the Short, who had previously been the major domo, that is the manager,
the mayor of the palace of the Merovingian kings, takes the crown for himself, he's
eventually recognized as king of the Franks by the papacy, that's in 754, when he's given
a papal coronation, and he establishes a new line of kings, the Carolingians, the son of
Pepin will be Charlemagne, and these Carolingian kings really do forge medieval Europe. In
some ways, the Carolingian order is precocious. It is the first synthesis of Roman Christian
and Germanic institutions into a major political order since the fall of the Western Roman Empire.
In many ways, Pepin and Charlemagne saw themselves as the heirs of the Roman tradition. For Charlemagne,
this would climax on Christmas Day of 800, when he was crowned Holy Roman Emperor, or
Emperor of the West, and henceforth, Carolingian monarchs and their descendants in Western
Europe ruled as Roman emperors. The Byzantine emperor and Constantinople, who had a claim
to that, didn't quite agree with this, but it's an important point to stress that the
Carolingian emperors saw themselves in many ways the heirs to the Roman legacy. And they
did inherit a significant number of those Roman institutions that enabled them to build
this political order. And the fact that the Carolingians, and to a lesser degree the English
kings, had those Roman-style institutions, in part explains why they were more successful
in fending off Viking attacks than other areas that did not have Roman institutions. That
were towns, there was some sort of fiscal basis, there was population, eventually, once
you had intelligent leadership, to organize resistance to Scandinavian attacks. Charlemagne
also greatly extended the range of Frankish political control. He conquered central Europe.
And from the Scandinavian viewpoint, this was kind of frightening. Starting in 772,
really extending through a series of campaigns, not ending to about 802 or 804, Charlemagne
campaigned repeatedly in northwestern Europe and conquered the region known as Saxony,
which is northwest Germany, a region that the Romans had never brought under control,
and a region inhabited by Germanic-speaking peoples who worshiped the ancient gods and
were in close contact with the Danes. The conquest of Saxony was also accompanied by
a forced conversion. There are several reports of massacres of Saxons, if refusing to submit
to Christianity. There are reports of cutting down the sacred trees. These efforts to convert
the Saxons and incorporate them into the Frankish Empire resulted in many Saxons fleeing to Denmark.
There is a famous resistance leader, his name is Rudikind. He carries out a series of rebellions
in the 770s and 780s, and he is supported by kings in Denmark. And so when Saxony was
finally brought under Frankish control, the Eder River, that river that cuts Jutland off
from central Europe, became the northeastern boundary of the Carolingian Empire, and the Danish
kings, and there were many kings in Denmark, but no king of Denmark, the Danish king saw the
Franks as an aggressive, threatening Christian power. One argument could be made that many of
the early raids conducted against the Frankish Empire, particularly the first significant
attack on Duristad, which occurred in 810, by a very large Danish fleet commanded by
a royal figure, who is known as Godfreyd in the Frankish sources, and probably his
north name is Guthfrith. This attack was probably in retaliation for Frankish violations
along the border, or threatening moves by Charlemagne.
So the Carolingian Empire was politically very impressive. Without a doubt, it fielded
the most impressive army in Western Europe, an army that was extremely large, and at the
time of the start of the Viking Age, a very well-seasoned army that had a tradition of
victory behind it with Charlemagne. Although, as I stressed in an earlier lecture, fighting
was essentially increasingly becoming the monopoly of the warrior caste, and many of
the subjects of Charlemagne really knew very little about military service.
The other important feature I should stress about the Carolingian Empire, it is the basis
for our understanding of the association of political and ecclesiastical institutions
in the medieval world. It is with the Carolingian kings that the prelates of Europe, that is
the bishops, the archbishops, the great figures of the Latin Western Church, are essentially
also secular princes. That they administer royal revenues, properties, they dispense
royal justice, they are members of the same military warrior caste as the nobility. And
in the course of the development of Latin Christendom, it is this Carolingian vision
of the episcopacy, that is, or the prelates, that is the senior officials that comes to
triumph. So that Christianity, in its institutional organization, in its hierarchy of the higher
clergy, is closely associated with the political order of the monarchy. These are two aspects
of a single political order, and it is this Carolingian vision that is eventually carried
to England, and eventually carried across Western Europe, it is transplanted in the
Crusader states. Now there will be a debate over authority between pope and emperor as
to the relationship of the pope and emperor, but no one would disagree that cooperation
between the church and the monarchy is expected. Bishops and kings operate in alliance. This
is the type of political organization that Scandinavians will learn as a result of the
Viking raids, and will use to establish the kingdoms of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark.
Finally, as impressive as Charlemagne's empire was, from the Scandinavian viewpoint, it
was extremely wealthy, it was a wonderful target if you could get to it, and fortunately
for the Scandinavians after 814, that became much easier. Charlemagne was succeeded by
his son Louis the Pius, and as I always mention to my students in class, whenever you encounter
a medieval monarch named the Pius, that is an immediate signal to watch out. He's received
the title from monks who like him very much because he's given doubt a lot of property
of the church, but they're generally politically very ineffective, and in the case of Louis,
he sets new standards on low performance and leadership, especially paying attention to
his second wife, Judith of Bavaria, which was a mistake to marry her in the first place,
but in any case. Louis succeeds to the Carolingian empire, and always within the Germanic tradition
of kingship, whether it be Christian or pagan, there's a question, is the kingship a matter
of personal property? That's certainly what Scandinavian sea kings think, that any king
in Scandinavia who succeeds to a great hall and has three sons, well each son has to build
his own hall, or is the monarchy a unitary state in the Roman sense? And this is an issue
that will dominate Western political thought through the whole Middle Ages, and eventually
the Roman notion will win. That is, the monarchy is a single institution, and succession should
go not only within a family, but to a sole member of the family, and this is what immediately
comes at issue under the reign of Louis the Pius. He tries to transmit power to his oldest
son, Lothar, to follow his emperor. His other three sons at the time contest this, and starting
very early in the reign, from the 820s on, there are civil wars that plague the Carolingian
empire over this issue. Is it a single empire, or should kingdoms be provided for all of
the members of the royal family? And in this case, it is the partition, the notion of partition
that wins. In 843, the first significant partition is carried out by the three surviving sons
of Louis the Pius. Lothar receives the so-called Middle Kingdom, stretching from the North
Sea to Italy with the capitals of Aachen and Rome, and the imperial title. And that would
essentially be represented today by the lands of the Low Countries, Alsace, Lorraine, Switzerland,
and Northern and Central Italy. What will evolve into the Kingdom of France goes to Charles
the Bald. And what will evolve into Germany, the East Frankish lands, goes to another son,
Louis the German. Well, this partition and these civil wars are an ideal entree for the
Viking attacks of Western Europe. And it is important to stress that many of these Viking
raids, which started off as raids in the time of Charlemagne, and really couldn't do much
because Charlemagne had built naval defenses, there is no effort to maintain the naval defenses
after Charlemagne's death. The Frankish nobility is too involved in fighting civil wars. And
these candidates for the throne, the sons of Louis the Pius, at time even hire Vikings
as allies and mercenaries to war against an opponent. And the failure, especially of Charles
the Bald, the son who receives the western portion of the Carolingian Empire, to halt
Viking attacks, will bankrupt the Carolingian monarchy, end with the demise of that dynasty,
and will really end with the Kingdom in the West, which will be divided up into feudal
states. The Viking attacks have an immediate and dramatic political impact on what is to
become France and the core of feudal civilization. The other element in Western Europe were
the various kingdoms and, in some cases, Iron Age chieftains in the British Isles.
And here we had a mix of populations, Celtic speaking and dramatic speaking, that is the
future speakers of English, and there was no political unity here at all. The only common
bond was the fact that there were all members of the Christian Church. The Anglo-Saxon kingdoms,
and these are the kingdoms created by the descendants of the dramatic peoples who had
moved from Scandinavia and Northwest Germany in the Age of Migrations. By 800 AD, linguistically
and culturally, were many ways part of Western Europe. They used Latin as their literary
language, they also used Anglo-Saxon, that is a form of, you know, Old English, perhaps
as more accurate, which was now heavily influenced by the Latin literary tradition. They were
members of the Christian, wider Christian community, and very, very much embraced the
monastic life and the arts of Western Europe, and it's important to stress that while the
bishops became, in effect, administrators and advisors to the crown, those who were
really engaged in spiritual and cultural activities went into the monastic institutions, which
is a separate outfit going back to the traditions of asceticism of the late Roman world. Britain,
England, particularly, and Ireland, their monastic institutions flourished, and Irish
and Anglo-Saxon scholars and monks, they're almost all monks, are regarded as some of
the finest in Western Europe. Many of the monasteries in Ireland and on the English shores were
important economic centers, as they were in the Carolingian world, and they were totally
undefended. The site Lindisfarney, the greatest monastery in England, a beautiful view of
the North Sea and an absolute ideal target for Viking attacks. Second, England had politically
simplified itself by the time of the Viking Age. There were four leading kingdoms, I've
mentioned earlier, Mercia and the Midlands, which looked like the leading kingdom of England.
It was ruled by a king named Afa, who at least attempted to style himself as the English
equivalent of Charlemagne. He imposed his authority over the English kingdoms south
of the Humber, which essentially divides England into two zones. He ruled Mercia, he controlled
London and Canterbury, which are the commercial and the religious centers of England. He had
subjected the kings of East Anglia and Wessex to his hegemony. North of the Humber was the
kingdom of Northumbria, and Northumbria was the center of most of the important monastic
and cultural life associated with early Anglo-Saxon England. Northumbria on the eve of the Viking
Age was in trouble. It essentially consisted of two kingdoms. One north of the T's, the
so-called Bernicia, the old core, centering on a port at Bamberg and embracing what eventually
became the Scottish Lowlands in Northern England. The southern portion of the kingdom, Daira,
centered around York and the York Shore regions, and these two regions were never really particularly
well integrated. When the Vikings started to raid England in the 780s and 790s, not
only did they find undefended monasteries along the shores, they really found very, very little
organized political and military opposition. Northumbria was in the throes of constant civil
war. There were some serious economic problems with the kingdom, and an argument which will
come up later on in another lecture, another three or four lectures from now, will explain
how the Vikings in some way revived Northern England economically once they settled there
after they had trashed the place, and the southern kingdoms, it was by no means sure
that Mercia was going to end up being the winner. The kings of Mercia were challenged
by the kings of Wessex, that's in the southwest of England, so Wessex and Mercia were often
fighting among each other while the Vikings started their raids. As for the rest of the
British Isles, those were really not organized in any fashion as states. Wales, Cornwall,
and the region known as Cumbria, today Northwestern England and parts of Lowlands Scotland, often
referred to as Strathclyde. Their Britons, the descendants of the original inhabitants
of Britain who had been under Roman rule, there they survived. They had been pushed
out of England by the dramatic invaders and became the Welsh, the Cornish men and the
so-called Strathclyde Britons who had memories of once ruling over England. This is where
the legends of King Arthur emerge, among the Welsh particularly, of this ancient ancestral
battle against the English, and there's always a bitter irony to me that their name, Welsh,
and often the English refer to the north Welsh, the Welsh of the south meaning Cornwells,
the west Welsh, the real Welsh, and Welsh in Anglo-Saxon means foreigner, and only the
English can turn people into foreigners in their own homeland. I think a significant
point in Anglo-Saxon history. To the north were various peoples dwelling in what would
become Scotland, and the Scots were Irish immigrants, Gaelic speakers who had arrived
in northwestern Scotland during the time of the age of migrations, and the Viking attacks
on Britain will not only make the Kingdom of England, but they will also determine that
the Scots are going to end up uniting Northern Britain into the Scottish Kingdom, and politically
these Viking raids are going to be extremely important in precipitating the consolidation
of both Scotland and England. Both of those kingdoms would not have emerged in the way
they do without the Viking attacks. Ireland was a collection of different tribes, regional
kings. Monastic life was the key cultural element to Ireland, and the monasteries in
Ireland not only were cultural centers, but they were also important economic centers.
Politically, Ireland was divided in essentially Iron Age warlords. The population subsisted
on stock raising and hunting, and contrary to many popular notions, there was no Ireland
in any sense other than a geographic expression. We're not even sure of the different types
of dialects that were spoken there, and when the Norwegians begin to attack Ireland at
the end of the 8th century and the beginning of the 9th century, they find very, very little
organized resistance, and most of the 9th century and a good deal of the 10th century,
the Scandinavians will just politically and militarily dominate Ireland with very little
difficulty. They find in Ireland actually a society in some ways they can understand
and respect because it is a warrior society, and in time there is a great deal of intermarriage
between Irish and Scandinavians, and you create a rather distinct Herberno-Norse or Irish-Norse
civilization in Ireland. But at the start, there really isn't anything like an organized
state of Ireland. There's a series of competing chieftains for the title of High King of Ireland,
and one of the reasons for that is Ireland never had a Roman conquest and doesn't have
the cities, the roads, and the institutions to build a kingdom the way you do in England
and the Carolingian Empire. Finally, I should mention briefly the other two civilizations.
Let's take a look briefly at the Islamic world. Without a doubt, I mentioned in a previous
lecture, this is the greatest civilization, and it is the main economic force driving
trade and economic development in the early Middle Ages. And this is true up to about
1100, about to the time of the Crusades. And the Crusades actually marks a decisive shift
in many ways, and one is an economic domination on the Eurasian land mass, which is shifting
and increasingly to Western Europe. Few Scandinavians ever encountered the cities of Islam. They
did encounter Islam on the banks of the Volga. They trade with various Turkmen tribes who
were essentially the peripheral martial lords of the Islamic Empire, the Bulgars, the Khazars.
But that trade route diminishes after 975, and that can be documented archaeologically
as Muslim coins and products cease to come up the Volga to Sweden. And the trade route
will shift to the Nyepur to a Western trade route, a trade route that had never really
been very important before the Scandinavians, and that will lead the Scandinavians into
that third civilization, the Byzantine Empire. In Constantinople and the Byzantine Empire,
the Scandinavians encountered a great bureaucratic state. And in contrast to the Islamic world,
they actually saw it and visited it. Based on the city of Kiev, which is about 500 miles
up the Nyepur from the Black Sea, the Swedish Rus, the Scandinavians who operated in Eastern
Europe, managed to bring those ships down the Nyepur and cross some really treacherous
rapids and dodge the Turkmen horse archers who were some of the nastiest people you'd
ever want to encounter, notably the Pecheniks. Delightful figures. They're organized into
nine hordes at their basic social institution. And get to the Black Sea and eventually sail
to Constantinople. Constantinople at the time is without a doubt the greatest city
in the Christian world, Western Europe or in Eastern Europe. It may have been a population
of close to a million. Perhaps it was 500,000, but it's on an order of magnitude between
five and ten times greater than the largest cities in Western Europe, which is Cologne,
which is about 50,000. In Constantinople, Scandinavians encountered a empire that was
heir to the Roman political and military traditions that had an organized trade system and was
also the fount of silks, gold and spices that they were acquiring through middlemen
on the Volga. And one of the reasons why in the ninth century they shifted their activity
to Constantinople is they could get directly to the access of all those goodies they wanted
on the northern trade arc. They could get to Constantinople and trade in the great
city. It is difficult to really exaggerate the impact of that experience of Scandinavians
entering really the one city they saw in the Middle Ages. And as I mentioned, in Norse
texts, it's often known as Miclegaard, that is great city. You know, you say the great
city or the city, they mean Constantinople. Many Scandinavians, not only from Sweden,
but from Norway, Denmark, from distant Iceland, will take the road to Byzantium, or Constantinople.
Byzantium is the early Greek name for the city. And in there will take service as mercenaries.
They will make fortunes as merchants. Some will settle in the Byzantine Empire. And it
is in Constantinople they encounter it at the time under the great Macedonian emperors
who are responsible for the political revival of the Byzantine world. And they also encounter
an Orthodox Christianity that is very rich in its iconography, its icons, and its traditions,
and is a religion now associated with victory, with the victory of the Macedonian emperors.
Quite in contrast to the way Christianity was doing in Western Europe. The Viking attacks
on Western Europe in the 9th and 10th century, in my opinion, probably led many Scandinavians
to consider Christianity, you know, a religion of slaves and the defeated. In Constantinople
it was quite different. And some of the earliest conversions occur amongst Scandinavians who
have been in Constantinople, particularly Queen Olga, or as she is known in her Swedish
name Helga, who is reported to have attended a church service at Hagia Sophia and converted
on the spot. God has got to dwell in a church like this. Anyone who can build something
17 stories high with a great dome has got to have God on their side.
So the contact with the Byzantine world will have a very, very profound influence. It will
lead to the adoption of Orthodox Christianity by the Scandinavians in Russia, who will then
go on to create Orthodox Russia. It also has an important influence in state formation in
both Sweden and Denmark. Both the kings of Denmark and Sweden looked east. They looked
to the principality of Kiev and ultimately to Constantinople as models for their own
political organization of kingdoms as well as to Western Europe. So this is the world,
as it was seen from Scandinavian eyes, Western Europe, the Islamic world and the Byzantine
empire. And this is the world that is soon to be attacked in the upcoming lectures by
the Scandinavians. And in all of these regions, they will have a very profound and immediate
impact.
