In this lecture, I plan to look at the Viking attacks on the Carolingian Empire, and I'm
this lecture can be understood essentially in three parts. We'll first look at the initial
raids and really political clashes between the Scandinavians and the Frankish kings Charlemagne
and his son Louis the Pius. And this is the initial stage where Viking attacks were of
two kinds. They were either sort of pirate raids. For instance, a very brief raid on
the monastery of Noam Moutier at the mouth of the war, where apparently a group of Norwegian
showed up and sacked the monastery and scurried away with the goods, as well as clashes between
the kings in Denmark, and I keep stressing that there are kings in Denmark, but not of
Denmark, and Charlemagne and Louis the Pius over the common frontier, and that has wider
political ramifications. There are these rulers in Yutland who control the market town of
Hedibi who are clashing with the Frankish king over various issues like borders and
tolls. The second phase of the Viking assault on the Carolingian Empire is when the raids
really intensify from the eight thirties on. When the Carolingian Empire goes into a period
of civil war, the struggle among the various sons of Louis the Pius, that is the grandsons
of Charlemagne, and this really climaxes with attacks on the Seine, the Loire, the Somme,
all the critical river systems that lead into the heartland of France, as well as the coastal
regions stretching from the Seine all the way up to the Elba, that is the north shore
coasts, where the important cities and markets of the Carolingian Empire are located, and
this is really the height of Viking attacks, and it corresponds largely with the reign
of the King Charles the Bald, and it really marks the failure of the Carolingian kings
to control these attacks. There's a period of relative inactivity that starts around
1865, and that's because most of the Vikings relocate to England, and that's in an upcoming
lecture. Then the third part of this lecture will look at the renewal of Viking attacks,
and in many instances these are fresh arrivals from Scandinavia, they represent a new generation,
and to some extent men with new aspirations, and they also represent veterans who are coming
out of England returning to continental Europe in search of plunder and lands, and in the
later phase there's an increasing interest on some of these Viking sea kings to acquire
land as well as booty, and that's a good point to close this lecture because the attacks
of the 9th century will undermine the Frankish monarchy, the Carolingian monarchy in many
ways, and set up the conditions for the emergence of feudal states in the 10th century, and
particularly the most important feudal state that is founded by Vikings themselves, that
is Normandy, but we'll reserve that for a later lecture. So this lecture comes in three
parts. Another important point that should be stressed throughout the entire period of
these attacks, and we'll be going into them in some detail, it should be noted that not
only does the character of the attacks change with regard to the Carolingian Empire, that
is to become more intense, they go from raids to political demonstrations to serious attacks
and plundering, and eventually to efforts of settling in the Carolingian Empire, this
will also affect the Vikings themselves and the Scandinavians who are conducting these
attacks, so the changes are going both ways, and in the course of the 9th century, certainly
by the 840s and 850s, by the middle of the century as the attacks intensify, increasingly
Scandinavians are not carrying out seasonal raids from their homeland, such as the great
attack on Paris in 845, where apparently they left Denmark and southwestern Norway, they
sailed to the mouth of the Seine and then up the Seine to occupy Paris on Easter Sunday,
instead the Vikings begin to stay in the immediate vicinity, usually operating off the river
systems at the mouths of important rivers, they fortify camps and bases, they start to
set up relationships with towns within the Carolingian Empire, where they market captives
and booty and even sell many of their victims off to Christian merchants as slaves and those
fellows then take them and sell them in the markets of Muslim Spain, and so what happens
in the course of the mid 9th century and later is the emergence of these veteran Viking companies,
let's call them, and you have cases of men who will serve together for 5, 10, 15 years
under a powerful sea king such as Bjorn Ironside or Halfton, the sons of Ragnar, Lodbroke and
others, and they acquire real sense of identity as professional warriors, and this starts
a tradition that will continue into the 10th and 11th century, it's celebrated in the great
Icelandic saga called the Saga of the Jums Vikings, and the Jums Vikings are actually
located in the Baltic, and they are a legendary professional warrior group, and those groups
go back into the 9th century and come out of these Viking raids, and eventually those
companies will be the basis of the royal armies of the late 10th and 11th century, which are
used by the kings of Denmark and Norway to consolidate territorial states in Scandinavia,
so that you have in the course of these attacks on the Carolingian Empire very, very significant
changes as well going on among the Scandinavians, as well as the repercussions for the Carolingian
Empire. So with that perspective, let's take a look at the initial phase of Viking attacks,
and that is during the time of Charlemagne and his son Louis the Pius. The earliest Viking
attack in the Carolingian Empire was a pirate raid at the mouth of the Loire River, I mentioned
the monastery of Noamutie, which was sacked, and it's repeatedly sacked during the 9th
century, and the Vikings get very good at pillaging monasteries, and they figure out
very quickly that not only are they the precious objects as well as the peasants that you
can carry off, and you have to remember, monasteries are major economic centers in the Carolingian
world in England and in Ireland, so it's just not attacking a group of buildings, there's
villages attached to there with specialists, craftsmen, peasants, their whole families,
and these people can be carried off and ransomed or sold into slavery or taken back to Scandinavia
with expert skills, if they're smiths, whatever, but they also learn that they very quickly
can ransom certain captives, particularly Abbots and Christian relics, for which the Vikings
have very little interest, and they probably are rather astonished that Christians will
pay so much money to get Abbots back, and these strange relics like, you know, bits
of the True Cross and the like, and they're more than willing to market this stuff back
after they take it. You can think of some of these, you wonder why some of these monasteries
in Ireland and the Carolingian Empire repeatedly sacked, and my suspicion is, and I can't prove
it, is that they figured, well, we can carry out our usual blackmail routine, it's time
to raise some money, let's go get some relics and blackmail the Christians form.
So in any event, you had some of these pirate raids occurring in 799 in the early 800s,
there is that clash I described in a previous lecture between Charlemagne and a king of
Denmark who is usually referred to by the Frankish name Godfred, it's probably Guthrith
in Old Norse, and he was probably the king who controlled Hedibi, and may have been responsible
for some of the construction of the Danvik, the fortifications along the southern borders
of Denmark on the Eider River, and he carried out a massive naval demonstration off the
shores of Frisia, exacting tribute according to one account, 200 pounds of silver, he threatened
the town of Duristad, that important Friesian town on the shelf on one of the lower tributaries
of the Rhine, which was the premier market city of northern Europe, and clearly the jewel
in the economic system of the Carolingian Empire, no Frankish king could afford to see
that city threatened, and Charlemagne countered with a threatened invasion of Denmark, Godfred
got murdered by one of his rivals Heming, a treaty was patched up, but those attacks
and that clash convinced Charlemagne that something had to be done to protect the ports
stretching from the Sain River, the mouth of the Sain River, up to the mouth of the Rhine
River, and the Rhine, as you recall essentially, as geographers like to say, surrenders its
identity and name into a series of tributaries that flow across Holland, and on the lower
Rhine was Duristad and other important ports, and the Rhine offered access up to the city
of Cologne, by the Mosul Valley to Trier, farther up to Mainz, these were the most important
cities and manufacturing centers of the Carolingian Empire, some of the most densely populated
areas of western Europe, and again they would have to be protected, and so Charlemagne sets
up a series of naval defenses, it's significant he does not build a navy, he makes no effort
to counter Viking ships, no one really does, but he does set up signal towers, fortified
posts, these would be probably stockades and rampart constructions, they're not stone castles,
militia forces are conscripted, roads are built, and there's a series of forts to defend
the area, and particularly to give early warning of Viking attacks, and he's able to maintain
them, as is his son Louis the Pius in the first years of his reign, and they act pretty effectively
as a barrier against significant Viking attack, they can't control all of it, and as I mentioned
earlier, the great advantage that the Scandinavians had in their ships is not only could they
penetrate up rivers because of the low draft of Viking ships, but also they could beach
these ships anywhere, they did not require deep water ports, and it was very common for
Vikings to beach their ships on a quiet cove, perhaps set up a fortified camp, and then move
in and ravage an area or attack a town or a monastery and retreat to their ships and
their base, and very often what happened after a raid is then there was a big market
where they sorted out booty and captives, people were ransom, locals would show up to
ransom the abbots, and then they would decide what to keep and what to sell off, so it was
very very hard to stop these raids uniformly, there would always be a certain amount of
raids, but at least Charlemagne could protect the main ports from sneak attack, well Louis
the Pius as I mentioned is not a inspiring monarch by Carolingian standards, and actually
his name is one of the best names that any Carolingian monarch has because his descendants
get such names as the fat, the simple, the bald, and the Carolingians have a delightful
sense of naming their rulers after their weaknesses rather than their virtues, it's a sort of
characteristic of the family. In any case, starting in the eight twenties, Louis has two
major problems, one is his sons are competing for control of the empire, they want to carve
up the Carolingian empire into independent states, they do not like Louis's notion that
the eldest son Lothar should get the whole thing and rule as emperor, the second problem
he has is viking attacks, as the various vassals of the Carolingian empire line up among the
sons of Louis and fight it out for who's going to get what good, the naval defenses are neglected,
naval interests and finances cannot be put into defensive purposes, and furthermore the
competing sons of Louis are more than happy in some circumstances to hire vikings as their
allies or mercenaries in some of these struggles, so starting in the eight thirties the raids
begin to mount up and it is immediately indicated by the fact that Danish companies commanded
by sea kings we know nothing about, we're not told who they are in the chronicles, between
eight thirty four and eight thirty seven every year show up and sack duristad, now we're
not sure what that means, did they burn to the town to the ground, probably not, but
they certainly exacted booty, they got into the town, maybe it was a massive blackmailing,
and these attacks repeatedly occur at the mouth of the Rhine river, it's tributaries,
and it disrupts trade very very dramatically and very quickly, and these attacks on duristad
continue through the eight forties, eventually the town is abandoned, by the eight forties
it has lost its primacy in the north sea trade, which is beginning to shift to the Scandinavian
market towns, Heddaby and Berka, and that is a direct result of these viking raids,
and the second point is that the best guess from archeologists is that the course of the
river shifts and duristad loses part of its port, so it starts to silt up, and it's finally
abandoned in the eight sixties, to defend the area around duristad and Frisia, what
Lewis does is hand out a thief to a Danish sea king by the name of Harald Clark, and
he is allowed to rule Frisia as the vassal of Lewis, if he will control the raids, Harald
does a reasonable job, but it's clear that he also gives a lot of information navigators
to viking raiders, he cooperates, and very often provides a very convenient market to
sell off the booty and plunder, and all that does is essentially direct viking raids farther
down the coast to the Somme, to the Seine, the Loire River, and eventually even the Grosne,
that is the river that goes right into southern France, into the Aquitaine, all of these areas
begin to be raided extensively in the eight thirties and eight forties, and when Lewis
the Pius dies in eight forty, there's a second round of civil wars, and the three surviving
sons, Lewis had four, but only three survived his death, the three surviving sons divide
off the Frankish Empire at the Treaty of Verdun in eight forty three, the western third, which
pretty much looks like France today, it's essentially the French kingdom, western Franckia
as it would be called, goes to Charles the Bald, and the door prize for getting the western
Franckia is the bulk of the fighting against the Vikings, and Charles the Bald for all
of his efforts, and I can understand his problems, in the end really failed to do the job, for
part he lacked the manpower and the money, he was operating with a much smaller kingdom
than his father and grandfather, but furthermore he had to spend a good deal of his time countering
the ambitions of his brothers, and then his brother's descendants, that is his nephews,
the Vikings also had acquired a knowledge of the Frankish Empire, and superb skill in
negotiating the river systems, understanding the political divisions within the Frankish
Empire, so as the second phase opens up in the eight thirties and eight forties, they
are very very adept at going up the rivers, deep into the Frankish kingdom, attacking
towns, and extorting ransom or tribute, and it really does, the fancy word we use today
is dang, dangled, payment to the Danes, it's a term that comes really out of, more properly
out of English documents, but what it refers to is payments in silver, hard cash to the
Danes not to attack, Charles the Bald becomes extremely good at making these payments, that's
one of his claims to fame, he pays off large amounts of dangled, and between the reign of
Charles the Bald and his final descendant Charles the Simple, who's at the early tenth
century, comes to throne in 897, we know from the literary sources at least 45,000 pounds
of silver was paid out, and by best guess, these are only partial, you know, records
of what went on, this is probably on about a third of the, the species that was carried
out, about 120,000 pounds of silver was carried out, so this will begin to put the Frankish
monarchy really behind the eight ball fiscally, by the eight sixties and eight seventies the
Frankish kings are having serious difficulties in meeting their bills, and that's one of
the reasons why you move over to a feudal system of handing over lands to vassals to
take care of the defense, because the kings themselves just cannot control these viking
attacks, the second important point about Charles's reign is he suffers some very embarrassing
attacks, in 843 on June 24th at the festival St. John, a group of Norwegians sail up the
noir, and enter the city of Nantes, a major city, it's actually the commercial center
of Brittany and of central France, and sack the town, they burn it to the ground, they
take off prisoners, the rumor is the local count was actually assisting the vikings and
shared in the plunder, attacks continue in the next reign, the next year up the Garonne
on the Seine, and the most embarrassing of all of the attacks is in 845, and I discussed
that earlier in a lecture dealing with shipbuilding, when a large fleet about 120 ships show up
from Denmark and Norway under the legendary figure Ragnar Lodbrok, which means an old
Norse, he who wears the shaggy breeches, apparently he has these trousers that are fringed with
some sort of leather fringe or fur, and it was a rather remarkable costume he wore, and
he's regarded as the quintessential Viking sea king, and gets celebrated in scaldic poetry,
and compared to the heroes of old, this fleet sails up the Seine, encounters an army of Charles
the Bald, which Charles foolishly divides into two halves, one is on the left bank, one
is on the right bank, Ragnar hangs 111 prisoners, which panics Charles the Bald, who flees
and the vikings are free to occupy Paris unopposed, and I think Ragnar, I wonder what
he did with this, he carried off the keys and the lock of the gate of Paris, and took
it back with him to Scandinavia to show he actually made it to Paris. In any case, this
raid climaxed not so much with the plundering of Paris, but Charles paid the vikings 7,000
pounds of silver if they would just get out of the Seine. This payment becomes a precedent
and an inducement for other Viking groups to attack, and Charles finds most of his reign
trying to counter a multitude of Viking attacks coming in on four different river systems,
the Seine, the Loire, the Garonne. Most of the time his vassals have to take action
themselves, the royal army is too late and arriving. In one instance, Charles comes over
with the idea of hiring one group of vikings to destroy another. The vikings operating
at the mouth of the Seine, commanded by a guy called Bjorn Ironside, Charles goes to
another Viking company, and this is indication that they are staying around and becoming
professional groups, commanded by a fellow named Wiland, or Weyland, and probably an
old Norse's name is actually Voland, but he induces Weyland's group to attack and wipe
out Bjorn's group, and he pays them a large sum of money, several thousand pounds of silver,
and Weyland shows up, puts the Seine vikings under siege at their base, Bjorn contacts
Weyland and says, look, we'll be glad to pay you X amount of money if you let us go. Weyland
says no problem, and those vikings take off and go raiding in the Mediterranean. They
actually end up sacking the city of Luna, which is on the northern shores of Italy, which
used to be the center of the marble trade in the Roman age and was sort of a decayed
city in the ninth century, and they saw the city from the distance from the Mediterranean
shores of Italy and thought, this must be Rome, it looks really big. They sacked it,
they found out it wasn't Rome, they were kind of depressed, but they got a pretty good
haul and eventually got back into the Atlantic. It was sort of a three-year Mediterranean cruise
for that outfit, and by the time they returned, Weyland had been killed by one of his followers
in a duel, and they could go back into business raiding the Frankish Empire. So the idea of
trying to hire vikings to eliminate viking really didn't work very well, and Charles,
in a sense, admitted the fact that his reign was a failure when in 864, he summoned the
various nobility of his kingdom and issued a series of capitularies or laws in the tradition
of his grandfather, Charlemagne, and these are known as the edicts of Petra, and Petra
was a bridge system. There's an important bridge over the Seine there, and it defended
the approaches to Paris. If you could hold Petra, you could prevent someone from sailing
the fleet up Paris, and out there are some very, very interesting precision and really
telling provisions in those laws. One of the points Charles states is that towns and
cities should be fortified. There's also a series of rules that the nobility should
not be requisitioning horses and men and labor services in the name of fighting the vikings.
By the 860s, a number of prominent vassals in the Frankish Empire are using the viking
attacks as a means to consolidate regional control in their areas. One such figure is
Robert the Strong, who establishes himself as the strongman at Paris, a Baldwin of Flanders.
Many of the feudal states that emerge in the 10th century have their origins in these vassals
who are actually exploiting the viking attacks to carve out their own thieves. There's also
rules about don't sell arms to the vikings. No one pays attention to these. The bridges
at the Seine should be fortified. That's never done. Most of them are really at least
an affirmation on the part of Charles of what he would like to do. Fortunately, Charles
gets a respite from viking attacks in the next year and has nothing to do with Charles's
success or really lack of success, his payment of dangal or any law he ever issued. In 865,
most of these professional viking companies came to the conclusion that they had been
sacking the Frankish Empire for 15 or 20 years and then decided to move across and
attack England. And the only reason they have a respite in the Carolingian Empire for
the next 15 years is most of the viking focus goes on England, which we'll deal with in
another lecture. When they have satisfied their aspirations in England by 878, 879, many of
those same companies as well as fresh arrivals from Scandinavia return in effect a new wave
of viking attacks. And these start in 879 when a large viking force that had been fighting
in England crosses the channel and seizes the city of Ghent, fortifies it as a base
and proceeds to ravage the regions of today, Holland and parts of Western Germany. That
is, the areas that I mentioned earlier were the guts of the Frankish Empire. These included
the cities of the Mosul and Rhine Valley. Trier and clone are both sacked. This is an
extremely dangerous attack. This is more than just a humiliation for the Frankish Kings
that they got this deep into the Empire. One of the viking columns is intercepted and
destroyed by the King of the Western Franks, Louis the Third. He is the grandson of Charles
the Bald. It's a small force destroyed at Sankor. It is the first victory won by a Carolingian
King over the Vikings, either on land or sea. It is celebrated in one of the earliest German
emperors we have, a form of old high German as it's called. It's called the Ludwig's
lead and it's a highly exaggerated account of Louis intercepting and destroying these
viking raiders. And this occurred in 881. In 881 there was another significant change
beside this victory. A man by the name of Charles the Fat, the ruler of the Eastern
Frankish Kingdom, came to the throne and in the next several years he reunites with
the consent of the nobility the old Carolingian Empire. That is, the Empire that had been
divided in 843 is united under Charles the Fat. He's crowned emperor in Rome and he holds
this position until 888 when he's deposed. And the reason why the nobility agreed to
this is because of the renewed viking attacks. They had become so serious, especially in
the lowlands and along the Seine, that they agreed we need a single Carolingian ruler.
And this was a major concession on the part of the nobility who for the last 30 years
have been more than delighted to play off various monarchs to carve their out their own positions
and Charles the Fat instantly proves that he's just not up to the job. He infifts Frisia
to a viking sea king, a guy by the name of Godfreyd or Guthrid, who proceeds to turn
Frisia into his own base. That doesn't work. Eventually they have to get rid of this viking
vassal in Frisia because he's essentially using it as a way to assist other vikings.
But the real bankruptcy of this reign is shown in the Great Siege of Paris. In 884, 885,
large viking forces descend on the Seine River. And in the spring of 885 they sail up the
Seine under a commander named Sigurd. Siegfried is the name they use in the western chronicles.
He's carrying the same name as the hero of the Vulsong saga. And Paris is put under siege.
It holds out for almost 18 or 19 months. Defended by Odo the Count, who later is the, he's
the ancestor of the Capetian kings of France. Charles the Fat rushes to the rescue, rages
a huge army. And instead of fighting Sigurd and the vikings, he pays them off. He pays
them in a dangled payment of again 7,000 pounds of silver, plus carte blanche to plunder
Burgundy and pick up all the good wine you would want while the payment is being collected.
Well this is pretty much an indictment of the Carolingian dynasty. Sigurd and the vikings
had a great time. Eventually left the Frankish nobility in disgust deposed Charles the Fat
and dumped them in a monastery where Charles could contemplate his sins and his failures,
which were many, and proceeded to elect new kings in the eastern Frankish kingdom, a man
named Arnoff the Bastard, who was a descendant of the Carolingians, and in the western Frankish
king none other than the Capetian Count of Paris Odo, the first Capetian king, the hero
of Paris, who's supposed to run the western Frankish kingdom. Now both of these kings
have modest success in coping with the vikings. Arnoff the Bastard actually attacks a Viking
camp at the base of the Rhine on the Dile River. He storms the camp, but the vikings
are able to withdraw back into England. Odo does not face any really serious Viking attacks
during his reign, and when he dies in 897, the situation looks more or less stable. But
by the year 900, somewhere between 895 and 900, a new generation of Viking warriors come
out of Scandinavia, and one band is led by a Danish fellow named Rolf Orolo, and they
come with the intention of essentially starting a third wave of attacks, first one in the
830s and 40s, then again in the 870s and 80s, and essentially these periods represent
different generations. Now the situation changes dramatically. By the time Rolf, that's what
he's called in his Latin version of the name, Rolf, the same name as the legendary Danish
Kings, his old Norse name, and as I mentioned, there's sometimes difficulty in distinguishing
who these people are because Norse names are very difficult to render into Latin and vernacular
West European languages. By the time he arrives, he encounters a Frankish empire that is now
politically very divided, fragmented, and also a Frankish empire that is bankrupt. The
monarchs no longer have the money to raise the forces or even to pay the Dengau, which
was common earlier in the 9th century. And so what happens with Rolf eventually is that
he and his Viking company, who operate off the Seine River, threaten Paris, just as Sigurd's
group had done in 885, had Ragnar had done in 845, doesn't get a payoff, doesn't fight
a major battle, but instead is invested with land. And it is the decision of the Frankish
King Charles the Simple, descendant of Charles the Bald, to hand over a thief in Normandy,
to give land to a Viking sea king and attempt to turn him into a Frankish vassal. And this
time the deal works. And that has major implications for halting Viking attacks into the Carolingian
empire, as well as the evolution of feudal states in the former Carolingian empire. And
that will be the subject of the upcoming lecture.
