In this lecture I plan to look at the Viking assault on England and in some ways the attacks
on England in the 9th and 10th century were comparable to those that were going on in
the Carolingian Empire.
And we will see a certain number of similarities, that is the attacks start off as raids, usually
as a sort of pirate raid, they then escalate to far more serious attacks, climaxing with
essentially an army of conquest, the so called Great Army, or the Mikal Herre as it's called
in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, which from 865 to 878 nearly overthrows all of the English
kingdoms.
It comes as close as any Viking army in conquering an area at least in the 9th century.
And then there is a period of also settlement, there is a settlement of the so called Dane
Law, that is about half of England, that would be the eastern and northern portions of England
today, where Dane settled in large numbers and that is comparable to the settlement in
Normandy.
We'll discuss that in more detail in another lecture.
So these features are very similar to what we've just encountered in the Carolingian
Empire, yet there will be a very, very important significant difference.
The Viking attacks in England will not result in political fragmentation, but rather will
galvanize the one English kingdom to survive the Viking assault, that is the Kingdom of
Wessex under a truly remarkable ruler, Alfred the Great, the only king to have the name
Great in all of English history from a race that is known for its understatement, so that
he does deserve this title in many ways, will forge a Kingdom of Wessex that will not only
defy the Vikings, but eventually become the basis for his successors to drive back the
Vikings and to unite England into a Kingdom.
And it is extremely important to stress that without the Viking assault, it is very unlikely
that England, as we understand it today as a unitary state, may have ever occurred and
we'll really develop that theme in a second lecture.
So our task is to look at those 9th century attacks and to compare it against the attacks
going on in the Carolingian Empire.
Now at the opening of the Viking Age, Scandinavians were pretty familiar with England through
trade connections for some time, and the Viking assaults on England essentially followed
trade routes, which I discussed in earlier lectures, and they came from two directions.
There was a northern trade route that was developed, and in the early 9th century was
extremely well known, and that is a northern route pioneered by Norwegians, and these would
be especially Norwegians living in southwestern Norway in those deep fjords that are nestled
up against the mountains, areas such as Hordalan, Rogalan, the Songye fjord area, usually referred
to in 11th and 12th century Norwegian accounts as Vestlandit, that is the western regions.
These had long been the layers and dens of Vikings, that is the population becomes overcrowded
very quickly.
It's from these areas, for instance, that some of the immigrants who crossed over to
Britain in the 5th and 6th century came.
That is Norwegian people who arrived and settled the northern portions of the Kingdom of Northumbria,
that is Bernicea, back in the 5th, 6th and 7th centuries AD.
So they were aware of northern Britain, and the Norwegians in effect followed the trade
routes.
They crossed to the Shetlands, came down on the Orkney Islands, and along the northern
coast of England to attack the unwalled monasteries on the shores of the Northumbrian Kingdom.
The other direction is coming from essentially Denmark, and many of the Vikings who ended
up attacking England and eventually settling in England were clearly Danes, and that can
be demonstrated not only by the names of the Viking leaders, but also the number of loanwords
that passed into later standard English, which apparently coming much more from a Danish dialect
rather than a Norwegian dialect.
And those Danes were the same people who were operating as Vikings against the Frankish
Empire, and so they're following the coastal routes along the North Sea, attacking into
the English Channel, so they're hitting the southern shores of England, as well as southeastern
England, especially the shores of East Anglia.
So the attacks come in these two directions, and it's useful to look at least briefly at
some of those initial attacks in both areas.
In the north, where the Norwegians primarily operated, at least in the early 9th century,
this region was ruled by a kingdom called Northumbria, which was essentially two kingdoms, one
of them Bernicia, which comprised land stretching from the Tees River today up to where modern
Edinburgh is.
And so it included essentially the eastern Scottish lowlands and northern England.
Its main center was at a town called Bamberg, where they had a major royal center.
The other portion of the kingdom was Yorkshire, the area around York, the kingdom of Daira,
and the name of this kingdom, Northumbria, simply meant all of the English north of the
Humber.
And the Humber River is the great river that essentially bisects England today and divides
the Midlands off from northern England, that is the southern portions of England off from
northern England.
That kingdom had been consolidated in the 7th century AD and was the first of the successful
Anglo-Saxon kingdoms.
It was very precocious in some ways, it owed a great deal not so much to influence from
the Carolingian Empire, but from Irish monks.
Many of the great monasteries founded along the northern shores of England, particularly
Lindisfarne and Jaro, were founded by Irish, by Celtic monks in the tradition of St. Colombo,
establishing the discipline of Irish monks.
That includes the private confessional, which was a feature of Irish Christianity that eventually
gets adopted into Western Christianity.
I always think this is one of the great genius of Irish monks, that is you make your confessions
privately because before that confessions were public in the congregation and people
are a little kind of nervous about publicly announcing what they did wrong.
And also they brought the great manuscript tradition, which is very well celebrated in
all sorts of arts exhibitions, such as the Book of Kells.
So in many ways, northern England had very close cultural ties to Ireland at the start
of the Viking Age.
The Northumbrian kings also ruled a diverse set of subjects.
Many of them were English speakers, but they included many of the pre-English population
Britain speakers, speakers of the old British Celtic dialects, particularly in the Western
areas.
And from the start, there was always a tension between the northern and southern half of
the kingdom, that is, Bernicia versus Daira.
There was always a rivalry within the royal family, members of the royal family, each
wanted to carve out a kingdom for himself.
And several times in the 7th, 8th and 9th centuries, there were major civil wars pitting
the two halves of the kingdom against each other.
And the great Viking conquest in 866, 867 was a case of exploiting the last of those
civil wars.
Northumbria also represented a very rich target to Viking raiders.
And that is the monasteries, just as in Ireland, were major economic and cultural centers.
They had a reputation of being some of the finest cultural centers in Christendom at
the time.
This is where Bede, the venerable will be Bede, who wrote the ecclesiastical history
of the English.
He was a scholar from Northumbria, Alchem of York, who ended up being the great mentor
of Charlemagne and was imported to the Frankish court to preside over the Carolingian Renaissance,
was again another Northumbrian monk.
So that Northumbria, as a cultural center in the Christian world, really had a major
role play.
And when the Vikings hit this area and really leveled the kingdom of Northumbria, they culturally,
as well as politically, removed the access of power in England's south into the Midlands
and into southern England.
Because prior to the Viking invasion, Northern England was, in many ways, where the cultural
and economic action was.
And those Viking raids will significantly change the balance in England ever after.
In 793, a group of three Norwegian ships unexpectedly sailed across the North Atlantic, came down
the coast of Scotland in Northern England, and landed at the monastery of Lindisfarne,
one of the great Celtic-style monasteries in England.
It's dedicated to St. Cuthbert and is really regarded as perhaps the most venerable of
all the shrines in the Northumbrian kingdom.
When they arrived, the monks immediately thought that the newcomers were actually merchants,
which is significant.
They had apparently been dealing with Scandinavian merchants before.
They came out and greeted them, only to find out that these guys were interested in other
matters, which was attacking the monastery.
Some of the monks were slaying, the monastery was sacked, and the Norwegians withdrew.
This attack is usually taken as the start of the Viking Age.
Now, it's not the absolute earliest attack.
There are some other raids, but it's one of the earliest attacks that we have in Western
Europe.
The next year, a similar type of raid was conducted on the sister monastery of Jaro.
Again, another great cultural center noted for the venerable bead, that's where he wrote
his ecclesiastical history.
This monastery, too, was sacked by Norwegian pirates.
But in the course of the early 9th century, there were a number of reports of these types
of attacks.
Northumbria was totally unprepared for this.
They had no navy, there were no fortified cities or ports.
As I mentioned, the Northumbrian kings were repeatedly engaged in civil wars.
Usually the king of Bernicia was trying to impose his authority over York and keep the
kingdom together.
That led to all sorts of complications, fighting between the two branches of the royal family.
There's also evidence of fiscal and economic problems that are reflected in the debasement
of the coinage.
In the course of the early 9th century, it seems that mostly what went on in Northern
England were a series of raids by Norwegians.
This is confirmed largely by archeological reports.
That is, large numbers of English goods begin to show up in Norwegian graves in the early
9th century.
These include some Christian objects as well as vessels and glasses and all sorts of items.
These are not trade goods.
These are obviously coming in from raids.
They're not found in contemporary Danish and Swedish context.
Northern England was subject to some rather severe raiding well before the Great Army
showed up in 866.
There's also a legendary account in the saga tradition of the Norse that the greatest
Viking of that first generation, Ragnar Lodbrok, the fellow responsible for capturing Paris,
somehow got caught off the shores of Northumbria.
Maybe he was scouting out a transfer of action to go to England and was captured by the Northumbrian
king Ayela, who threw him in a snake pit.
And actually Ragnar is presented in the saga as dying as the same way Gunnar does in the
cycle of the Valsongs.
He's downed.
He's thrown in the snake pit.
The snakes finally get some.
And he makes some sort of comment.
When the porcars hear the grunt of the pig, they will come and avenge him.
That is, his sons are going to come and avenge him.
And the comparison is to a great boar, the animal of Freya and Frey, the symbol of royalty
in Scandinavia.
And one of the points made in the saga tradition is when the Vikings show up and crash into
York in 866, 867.
That's the sons of Ragnar who after King Ayela to punish him, and they reportedly capture
Ayela and do a blood eagle on him, which is a sacral official right to Odin, where in
effect you rip out the lungs of the victim and turn them upside down so the back sort
of looks like an eagle, the bird of Odin.
It's a rather grisly way to die.
In any event, these attacks on the Northumbrian shore up until 866 didn't result in any kind
of major political change, but they did significantly aggravate the problem of running Northumbria
for those kings.
The other place of action was Southern England.
And at the time of the start of the Viking Age, it was really a question which of the,
well there were really three kingdoms in Southern England.
One is East Anglia, the other is in the Midlands, Mercia, and the third is Wessex.
And at the time of the Viking raid, it was essentially a duel between Wessex and Mercia
as to who was going to control Southern England, England south of the Humber.
And the Viking raids eventually shifted the balance in favor of Wessex.
Again, initially the raids were nothing more than dames who were cruising across the channel
to hit ports.
This occurs quite frequently between 800 and the 850s.
But in 865, there is an important decision made by Viking companies operating off the
river systems of the Carolingian Empire.
And it's apparently two of the three sons of Ragnar, Halfdan and Ivar, decide to relocate
and attack England.
We're not sure what convinced them to do this.
Part of it was that they'd had more than enough fun ransacking the Carolingian Empire, time
to look for new areas.
But they also had apparently fairly good information on the divided political situation in England
and probably concluded that they would not meet much serious resistance.
Some of these English rulers might have seen the Vikings as possible allies.
That's not certain.
But in 865, large numbers of fleets crossed over into East Anglia.
And at one point these fleets may have been 250 to 300 ships.
And this great army could have numbered anywhere from 5,000 to 10,000 warriors.
They landed in East Anglia and set up a base near the modern city of Thetford, essentially
by blackmailing the local King Edmund.
They concentrated supplies and forces.
And then in autumn of 866, they swiftly moved into Northumbria, captured the city of York,
and in the spring of 867, defeated a Northumbrian army commanded by two rival kings, Ospert and
Ayala.
Both of them probably killed in the fighting, although the Norse claim that the sons of
Ragnar got ahold of Ayala and did a blood eagle on them.
The conquest of Northumbria was stunning.
I think even the Vikings were probably a bit dismayed by their own success.
Well, what do we do with it?
They immediately established a client king, that is a puppet king, an English king to rule
in York.
They also invested power into the Archbishop of York and immediately set off to attack
Mercia in the Midlands.
They seized the royal center at Nottingham.
They fortified it.
King Bergrid of Mercia showed up to fight the Vikings, and he was accompanied by his
brother-in-law, then the reigning king of Wessex, Ethelrid I, and Ethelrid's younger
brother, Alfred, the future king.
The Mercian army could really do very little against the Vikings, and Bergrid decided to
pay them dang out.
The great army withdrew back into East Anglia and overthrew the East Anglian kingdom when
Edmund told the Vikings to leave, which was the wrong thing to do.
We had invited him in in the first place.
He was in no position to run them out, and the Vikings conquered East Anglia with as
much ease as they did in Northumbria and just eliminated English kingdom number two.
Edmund was not blood eagle.
He was tied to a tree, and they shot him full of arrows, apparently to Odin's favor.
Later, Edmund gets turned into a martyr king, saying he's canonized.
So in less than three years, the Danes have just overthrown two of the four English kingdoms,
and the success spread across Scandinavia.
I mean, there were recruits everywhere coming in to join this outfit, including new forces
arriving by 870 or 871, new king by the name of Guthrum, and you have to think of this
great army as an army that keeps changing in its composition and size.
As it's successful in one area, some of the groups break off.
We know some groups went over to Ireland to attack, others went up to Scotland.
Other groups would come in from Scandinavia, so it isn't as if it's a single army.
It's a constantly changing force.
Nonetheless, by 870, 871, there is, again, a very, very large Scandinavian force in England
determined to finish the job that was started by Ivar and by Half Dawn, and one of the new
rulers, one of the new commanders at this point is apparently Guthrum, who arrived somewhere
between 870 and 871.
Well what they do is they seize the city of Redding in the Thames Valley and use that
as a base to ravage both Mercia and Wessex.
Now King Bergerid of Mercia turned out to be a rather feckless figure.
After a while, he just couldn't cope with Vikings.
He decided to abdicate and go to Rome and become a monk.
And this is the best retirement policy one can have as a medieval king, and he essentially
abandoned his kingdom.
His wife, by the way, the princess from Wessex, she was stronger, so she stayed on and tried
to hold the kingdom together.
But essentially Mercia becomes disorganized, and the Vikings move into the Midlands.
They occupy the northern section, the so-called five boroughs, that is the five leading towns
of Mercia, and they turn that into an area of Danish settlement, and the southern sections
of Mercia are essentially turned into a client kingdom, a vassal kingdom.
They're also attempting to do the same thing in Wessex, that is to overthrow that monarchy,
and there they meet with a Tuthra opponent.
Ethelr I brings his army and fights the Vikings, and Ethelr is the descendant of King Eckbert
of Wessex, and they are determined to be what in Anglo-Saxon is known as Bret Walda, that
is the rulers of Britain, they're determined to fight the invader.
The fighting between 871 and 878 is very, very inconclusive.
In the course of the fighting in the spring of 871, Ethelr I dies, he has no sons, and
so his younger brother Alfred is declared king.
And Alfred turns out to be the one serious royal opponent that the Vikings meet in the
entire ninth century.
He is probably remembered more for his defeats than his victories, but Alfred is always ready
to raise another royal army and to oppose the invaders.
And he is also quite willing, when necessary, to pay out Dengald.
Actually in 871, after 12 inconclusive battles, he pays the Vikings Dengald in the summer
of 871, and the Danes withdraw into their conquests in northern England with a large
sum of money and proceed to organize their conquests and eventually divide up the land
of Northumbria and East Anglia into Danish settlements.
In 874, the great army reappears in the Thames Valley, this time commanded by Guthrum.
Houghdon and Ivar have both gone off in other directions.
Ivar is killed apparently in Ireland somewhere.
Houghdon goes up and plays around in Scotland and also disappears from the scene in the
mid-870s.
So Guthrum in effect takes over the main command of the army, and this is indicative
of this changing composition of the great army in England.
This is again a war of conquest.
It's waged in a typical Viking fashion.
It's a war of position.
Guthrum occupies the Thames Valley, and the Thames Valley really is the artery of southern
England.
It terminates in London, which is already the commercial center of southern England.
It gives you easy access to Canterbury, the great archbishops there who are the primates
of England.
And so control of the Thames Valley essentially would give the Vikings a strategic position
to conquer Wessex.
Guthrum's army moves south.
It begins to ravage sections of Wessex.
It builds fortified camps.
It attacks the port at Exeter.
And this army that ravages through Wessex is accompanied by a Viking fleet operating along
the southern shores of England so that there's essentially a coordinated operation between
land and sea.
And the idea is to force the English king to his knees, to pay dangal, and eventually
to submit to the supremacy of the Viking sea kings.
Well, Alford hangs on.
He learned in his initial fights back in 871 not to take the Vikings on head on.
Most English armies had gotten defeated because the Vikings pursued a typical battle formation.
They did this at York.
They did this against the Mercians.
They also did it against Ethelra I.
They draw up their formations into a tight shield wall.
And that shield wall is a dense infantry formation, usually occupying either a fortified position
or a high point.
And they provoke the English into an attack.
And these Viking veteran warriors who have fought in the Carolingian Empire usually can
repel these attacks.
And as the English fall back and disarray, they counterattack with devastating force and
sweep them off the battlefield.
Alford doesn't make that mistake.
He's seen what Viking tactics are like, and he knew that the only way to defeat them is
eventually to wear them down strategically.
And there is a war of strategic movement for several years.
And in the fall of 877, Guthram finally agrees to pull out of Wessex.
He goes into winter quarters at Gloucester, signs a armistice, and gets a payoff from
Alford, who also goes into winter quarters.
And it looks like the wars ended inconclusively.
And then Guthram does what all Vikings do.
He launches a winter campaign.
And on 12th night, January 8th, 878, the Viking army comes out of Gloucester, bounces
down the Avon River, and almost captures Alford, who's holding his Christmas court at Chippenham.
And Alford runs for his life.
His army is scattered, and the Viking sees this royal center.
And it looks like Guthram is going to take out Wessex.
This is the period of Alford best known to most English school children, because it's
in this period of exile where Alford goes into the forests of Western Wessex.
And the story about him being received by the English peasant woman as a rather bedraggled
and I'm not sure I would have accepted Alford into my household at this point.
He comes knocking on the door, looking for shelter and food, and says, that's fine, whoever
you are, but make sure you pay attention to the oven.
I'm baking a group of cakes, and Alford, who has a lot of more important things on his
mind like, what do I do with the Danes in the spring, falls asleep and the cakes burn,
and the lady comes along and chides her king, not realizing who he is.
And he says, yes, madam, you're correct, et cetera.
And he very politely takes the criticism.
And it's a great story that stresses the Christian humility of Alford, and he never reveals
to her who he really is.
In any case, Alford comes out of exile in the spring, raises an army and takes on Guthrum
in a very, very hard fought battle, and eventually, and this is the battle of Eddington, forces
Guthrum to a treaty.
That treaty is often known as the Treaty of Wedmore, concluded in May of 878.
What is agreed upon in this treaty are two important provisions.
The Danish army withdraws back into its areas of conquest.
That is, most of Mercia, Northumbria, East Anglia.
They also, at this point, hold London.
Alford agrees to pay them a dang out to do this.
He agrees to respect their conquests.
On the other hand, the Danes have to accept baptism and accept the fact that Wessex is
an independent kingdom.
Alford has won a significant victory.
He's able to negotiate out of this war with his own legitimacy intact in Wessex and now
as the only English king left in the island.
The Danes withdraw.
That is, some nine years later, Alford is able to retake London in the lower Thames
and renegotiates the treaty to bring London into his kingdom as well as parts of Mercia,
but essentially, that treaty holds through Alford's reign.
That buys Alford in valuable time.
It is at this point in 878 that Alford really does get the name great.
Not only did he check the Danish attacks, but he then proceeds to reorganize the English
kingdom and he drew upon classical models as well as his own pragmatic experience to
organize a very effective royal army.
He maintains a permanent royal army.
He imposed taxation on his kingdom.
The kingdom is divided up into shires.
They are now called counties, but the county system that exists in England today, especially
in its southern portions, go back to these reforms of Alford and military obligation
is imposed on the shires where every five hides, a hide is a fiscal unit of 120 acres,
every five hides of land have to provide a soldier to the Ferd or the militia force to
defend the area against Viking attacks.
There is a concerted effort to fortify towns, bridges and roads, unlike the edicts of Charles
the Bald, these work.
Wessex within the next 15 years is bristling with fortifications, bergs as they're called
in Anglo-Saxon, and these are strong points in which to concentrate supplies, in which
to mobilize militia forces, and to restrict the movement of Viking raiding columns.
And Alford has figured out the winning combination to check that Viking war of attrition that
nearly brought his kingdom down.
That is, if you can deny the Vikings mobility and supplies, they're not going to be able
to in the end overthrow your kingdom.
He does make an effort to build a fleet, and there's a lot of discussion about this.
It's really pretty hopeless.
He brings in some Frisians who try to build big longships, they're hopelessly ungangly.
I think it takes nine English ships to run down six Viking ships, three of them escape,
two of them abeached, one of them gets captured.
It really isn't worth the effort.
This is an incident.
And when a real Viking fleet shows up, none of these English ships bother to go to sea.
So the Navy side of it, me and I really didn't work.
But in reorganizing the kingdom, it did.
And these reforms are also taken in tandem with the revival of monastic and cultural
life associated with Alford, who is usually hailed as the Solomon of England, as a great
law giver, as a patron.
And Alford himself writes English translations of several important classical works, particularly
the consolation of philosophy by Boethius.
And this is part of an effort not only to give legitimacy, but to restore ecclesiastical
and cultural life, and is one of those important steps taken in shifting the cultural access
from Northern England, which had been overthrown by the Vikings, to Wessex and to the South.
So by the time that a new Viking army shows up in the early eight nineties, and these
are Vikings who'd been operating in the Carolingian Empire, they do attack Wessex again.
They use very much the strategy used by Guthram and the Great Army.
But Alford has made it just costly enough that this army withdraws, it can be paid off.
There's no significant loss of territory.
Some of them go and settle in East Anglia.
Others of them go back to continental Europe, so that Wessex gets through this second big
attack by Vikings in very good order.
In conclusion, Alford in effect carries out the types of reforms in England that Charles
the Bald would have loved to have done in Western Francia.
Now there's reasons why it can do that.
Wessex is much more compact, Alford was a much more able ruler than Charles the Bald,
and he was also building on a lot of important local institutions that can be traced back
to the achievements of some of his predecessors.
Nonetheless, if the Viking Great Army deserves a name great for its military campaigns and
the achievements in conquering these English kingdoms, their opponent, Alford likewise,
deserves a title great because he alone of the kings of the ninth century, checked a
major Viking conquest, turned it aside, reorganized his kingdom, and gave to his heirs not only
a kingdom, but the means to drive back the Vikings, subdue them, and to create the kingdom
of England within less than a century.
