In this lecture, I plan to look at the Viking settlement and impact on England in the late
9th and 10th centuries. And as mentioned in a previous lecture, the settlement and
transformation of these Vikings eventually into Englishmen has some similarities to the
settlement of the Vikings in Normandy, but there are also very important distinctions.
And those are probably more important than the similarities. There's really two themes
we have to deal with in understanding this problem. One is the nature of the settlement
itself. How many Danes, and they are primarily Danes, there may be some Norwegians, but
how many Danes did settle in England? What were their numbers? What were their cultural
and linguistic impact on the English regions they settled in? And these would be essentially
the northern half of England, later known as the Dan Law, Danilaogu as it's called in
the reign of Canute. These are regions of England where Danish law and custom ran and
were recognized. And actually those Danish laws and customs were recognized right down
to the reign of King Henry II, who is credited with the creation of the English common law.
He reigned from 1154 to 1189. And up until Henry II's reign, these regions still were
using Danish customary law. These would be the regions of Northumbria or southern Northumbria
around York, the northern midlands, the northern half of Mercia, the so-called five boroughs
and East Anglia, which is close to about half of England today.
The second subject we wish to look at is why did these Danes who settled in England fail
to establish some type of kingdom or state the way the Normans did in France? Because
eventually all of these regions will come under the control of the successors of Alfred
the Great, that is the kings of Wessex, and really Alfred's son, Edward the Elder, who
dies in 924, could realistically and legitimately style himself on his inscriptions and coins
as Rex Tothius Brentanii, that is king of all Britain, or as Rex Anglorum, king of the
Angles, the English. And this is a really remarkable point. Given the success of the
Great Army in 865, 878, the extensive Danish settlement in England, one would assume that
a more effective Scandinavian type kingdom would have emerged in England, and yet it
does not, and that is the second subject we'll look at today in this lecture.
Well, let's first look at the nature of the Danish settlement in England. It is clear that
there were two periods of division of the land. In 870 for 875, Halfton, who was at
that point commanding the northern column of the Great Army, carried out a major division
of the land in Yorkshire in the old southern regions of the kingdom of Northumbria. He
then went off to get himself killed either in Scotland or Ireland, but there was a partition
of property to endow many of the older warriors and veterans with land where they could settle
with their families. There was a second settlement carried out by Guthrum, that is the man who
took over the command of the Great Army and attempted to conquer Wessex in the early 870s,
and that partition involved the northern portions of the kingdom of Mercia, the so-called five
boroughs, which are five major market towns. Today, those are the towns of Leicester, Lincoln,
Darby, Stanford, and Nottingham, which are important market towns in the northern Midlands,
and those towns later became mints as well as market centers in the Danish settlement.
Also, there was a division of the land in East Anglia. Guthrum was able to carry out
that division because after 878, he was baptized with Alfred standing in as his stepfather,
as his godfather, and ruled under the English name Athelstain, that was his baptismal name,
and actually was apparently responsible for accommodating not only his army, but other
Vikings who arrived later in the 890s. So these settlements in the 870s and apparently
in the 890s led to the appropriation of a lot of land by Danes, and the best study indicates
that in certain sections of England, where the Danes settled, particularly in the region
of the five boroughs, that the Danes tended to occupy areas that were not really settled,
for various reasons, portions of northern England particularly had a fair amount of
vacant land, that is, you didn't have to dispossess large numbers of people. The second important
point about this settlement is it seems that there were large numbers of Scandinavians
who moved in, mostly Danes. There is still a debate on numbers, and given our literary
sources and our really incredible lack of any kind of statistics that a modern scholar
would expect, these are really, really guesses. I would take a very, very bold position of
guessing that perhaps in the Danish areas that fell under, the English areas that fell under
Danish rule, maybe there were 100,000 to 150,000 residents in say 878. Over the course of the
9th and 10th centuries, somewhere around 20,000 to 30,000 Danes may have shown up, that would
include not only warriors, but their families, their attendants, their slaves, whatever, and
moved into this region. You could play around with the statistics as much as you want, but
there had to be a significant settlement, that is, the Danes represented an infusion
of maybe 20% or 25% of the existing population, because they had an impact in this part of
England that they did not have in either Normandy or Ireland. First is, significant number of
Danish words passed into what became standard English. There are at least 600 basic words
in modern English today, and I'm speaking of the standard literary English that gets
fixed in the 16th century, that are Danish origin, and these are not specialized words.
These include such obvious and common words as husband, fellow, law, outlaw, knife, egg,
race, thrift, window, sister, every word, SK, skirt, ski, sky, all of these words are
basic vocabulary words that came in from a Danish dialect into the standard English language.
There were also a large number of Anglo-Saxon words, for instance, that were modified in
their meaning by analogy to Danish words. One such word would be the word dream, for instance,
that acquires its modern meaning of dream as a result of analogy to a Danish cognate.
The pronouns in the third person plural are Danish forms. The forms they, them, and theirs
are adopted from Danish into standard English as a way of distinguishing the third person
plural from the third person singular, which is not extremely, which is not very well done
in the Anglo-Saxon literary language at the time of Alfred the Great. Now, these are significant
additions to the vocabulary and even a certain amount of a change in morphology and grammar
in Anglo-Saxon. It's assisted by the fact that old English and old Norse are related dramatic
languages. But that number of words to pass into the standard English, and standard English
is essentially based on a Midlands dialect. It's from a southern English dialect that
wasn't under Danish influence. When you look at the English dialects north of the Humber,
or Scottish English, or the English that's spoken in the Hevertees and the Shetlands,
the islands of northern Britain, there the number of Scandinavian words is enormous.
A lot of specialized words that survive in those dialects. This suggests a fairly substantial
immigration, and it is, again, significantly different from the situation in French, where
the Danish loan words are very specialized, and the same will be true in Ireland and also
in Russia, where the Scandinavian words do not influence the basic vocabulary.
One important way of measuring this, and as I say, we really can't give you any kind
of numbers one would be satisfied with, is the fact that many place names in northern
England, where the Danes settle, show Danish origin. Especially names ending in Thorpe and
By. There has been remarkably detailed studies on geographic names in northern England, and
when you plot them, they show very, very dense concentrations in Yorkshire, in the northern
Midlands, and of course in East Anglia. And these are suggestive that the settlement was
established by Danes, who essentially gave the name to the area. Very often terms such
as Thorpe and By are combined with the name of the man who founded the settlement. So those
two pieces of information alone are significant cases that we're not dealing with the Danish
group that moved in and established themselves as a small military caste of landlords and
eventually knights. But people who had settled more as farmers, the word that's used in Anglo-Saxon
text is drangs as opposed to thangs. That is, it's a, drang is a Norse name that means
a man of substantial property, a freeholder who has the right to bear arms. And the later
English law actually uses the Norse designation of these farmers to indicate who they are.
There's also another set of evidence that's extremely important that indicates not only
the size of the Danish settlement, but also its impact. And that is the influence it had
in administrative and legal institutions in the English kingdom in the 10th and 11th centuries.
I mentioned that the Dan law, the region settled by the Danes, retained customary Danish law.
This included some very important aspects of running local community, and that includes
the jury. The earliest reference to a jury of presentment, which would be, today you would
think of that as essentially a grand jury where you'd bring an indictment against someone
for a criminal offense. The earliest reference to this in any English document is in the
Wontog Code of Ethelrith II dated to 997, and it is clearly a legal system that is associated
with the five boroughs. That is, the areas of the Northern Midlands settled by the Danes.
It is a jury of 12 men who are sworn to render verdict on issues that have been brought before
them. These would be what we would call today felony issues, felony and treason cases.
And it is argued by many English legal historians and scholars that this notion of a jury of
presentment goes back to Scandinavian models, although it's probably developed and modified
by the Danes in England for their own purposes, and it passes into the English legal system.
It is particularly used by the Norman Kings, that is, William the Conqueror and his successors,
as a way of gaining administrative information on England to compile Doomsday Burke, which
is the great document detailing the resources of England, which William commissioned after
he conquered the Kingdom of England. And it is, by the way, the basis of any statistics
we have of medieval England, at least early medieval England anywhere.
There's other cases of this. For instance, the administrative units of the counties or
shires in medieval England. In the areas of Mercia and Wessex, the areas that remained
under English control, these are called hundreds. In the areas of Danish control, they're known
as whopping takes, which is a English adaptation of a Norse word, which means essentially weapon
taking or weapon brandishing, and probably refers to the type of elections that would
occur in Scandinavian things or assemblies, that is, you beat on your shields with your
weapons as a sign of approval. That is probably a very old way of electing kings for war,
going back to early dramatic traditions, and that name in the English administrative unit
retains that memory. There's also divisions of great counties or shires, such as Yorkshire,
into writings, which is simply an Anglo-Saxon translation of the Norse word for third. That
is, York is so large, it's divided into three parts, the thirds, they use the Norse name
for it. And you can multiply the examples of this influence. So that suggests that the
Anglo-Danish settlers, and let's call them Anglo-Danes, meaning the Danes who settled
in England within two or three generations, because of their numbers, because of their
property and wealth and their status in society, were able to change significantly the language
and customs of their new homeland. And that is a very significant difference from both
what we will see in Ireland, where they only settle in the towns, as well as in Normandy,
where they very much take on the Carolingian institutions in the French language. Therefore,
these Danish land at class, these Anglo-Danes, these Drangs, as they would be called in English
documents, turn out to be a very tough and wealthy ruling class, a landed class, who
in the end become the local elites of Northern England. And one of the facts of life for
the successors of Alfred the Great, when they take these areas over and integrate them into
an expanded King of Wessex, which becomes the King of England, the only way you can
run East Anglia, the five boroughs in York, is if you co-op these Anglo-Danish elites.
You must come to terms with them. And the reason these legal institutions survive and
these other, these administrative institutions survive is that the English kings themselves,
the kings of Wessex, or sometimes we call them the West Saxon Kings, Wessex means West Saxon,
came to terms with the fact that they were ruling part of England, which is many ways
a Scandinavian land, and the only way to rule it effectively is to co-op those people and
respect their institutions. The Danes also had a very, very profound
effect on life in the Dan law in the ninth and tenth centuries. Now, granted, the initial
Viking attacks were destructive. There's no way of getting around it. One did not want
to be in York when the Great Army occupied it in 866, 867. Any large army moving into
a city like that has a tendency to grab onto property and commit all sorts of acts of violence.
Nonetheless, once the Treaty of Wedmore was concluded in 878 and renegotiated in 886,
the Danes settled down into these new areas, and there were certain advantages. In the case
of York, the Danes are responsible for relocating the city of York from its original Anglo-Saxon
settlement, which was outside the old Roman city, back into the old Roman core, and some
very, very good English archaeology has demonstrated that the street patterns in the center of
York are really Roman street patterns, which are then remodeled and adapted to accommodate
the Scandinavian city that emerged in the tenth century, and that the Anglo-Saxon settlement
had actually been outside of the Roman city, and the Vikings relocated into the old Roman
core, and the Viking name for York, Jorvik, is the name that York is derived from, not
from its Anglo-Saxon or Roman name. Furthermore, York as a Scandinavian town in the tenth century
just booms. At least economically, it never quite gets back back cultural position. It
would have had under the Northumbrian kings, but it becomes a major town perhaps peaking
at 10,000 residents by the year 1,000 or the year 1066 when William the Conqueror comes
to England, and you have to remember it's at the western terminus along with Dublin
in Ireland of that northern trade arc that the Scandinavians are developing in the Viking
age, and therefore York becomes a major center of exporting grain and other foodstuffs out
of northern England to Scandinavian markets, to Irish markets, metals and other objects,
and it is right on the main drag for importing all sorts of great and neat goods from the
distant eastern markets, notably silks, silver, various spices, aromatics, glassware, finished
products. Furthermore, York plugs in northern England with the trade network in the Carolingian
Empire in the tenth century as stability returns to the Carolingian world under the feudal
states, such as Normandy. Trade actually resumes, and it's a very brisk trade in the tenth
century between the continent and York, and this can again be demonstrated by imported
goods and the fact that the Vikings who settle in northern England introduce into that part
of England the standard hammered silver coins that are current in southern England in the
Carolingian Empire, the so-called pennies and deniers, which were not used in northern
England before the Viking age, and in some ways the Vikings integrate their new homelands
into the monetary system of southern England and Carolingian. They mint coins that are
able to pass current with the standard currencies of western Europe. Those coins are also indicative
of some of the change going on. They carry a multiplicity of images that are very, very
telling about how the Danes themselves are transforming their own customs and their own
lives. The use of coin money means they're accustomed to dealing in markets, in long-distance
markets, they're not a subsistence economy, but the images on the coins, particularly
the coins issued in the tenth century by what are known as the Herberno North Kings, these
are Vikings from Dublin who show up in the tenth century in takeover York, show a mixed
imagery of Christian and pagan symbols. Usually on one side of the coin, often the obverse,
is a symbol that is clearly Scandinavian, such as the sword of Odin, the raven, a typical
Norse banner, the hammer of Thor. On the reverse may be a cross and often an inscription honoring
Saint Peter who is the patron saint of York. In East Anglia, there is a remarkable set
of coins issued at the end of the ninth, early tenth century, celebrating the martyred King
Edmund of East Anglia. That is poor King Edmund who got tied to a tree and shot by the Vikings.
These descendants of the Vikings are issuing coins in the name of the deceased king who
is already being celebrated as a martyr in East Anglia. Again, that doesn't necessarily
mean that the Vikings have become complete believing Christians, but it does indicate
that the Danes settled in East Anglia recognized, well, he is a powerful spiritual figure, this
is our new homeland, we will honor him along with others, and the process of conversion
takes two or three generations. That is initially Danes come to agree, well, there is this powerful
Christian god, this is the god of our new homeland, he has these saints, we accept him
as a god, we add him to our pantheon, and it takes two or three generations before they
figure out, oh, this also is monotheism, and it's really only in the late tenth century,
and very much due to the ecclesiastical reforms and efforts of Archbishop Dunstan of Canterbury,
that significant progress is made in converting these Danes into really Christian English,
and by the year 1000, the Danes who have settled in the Danelore are all very, very much Christians
and members of that wider institution, and would identify themselves as Christians, and
by the end of the 10th century, many of them are beginning to understand really what this
Christianity means, so that is a very important step in integrating these people into the
wider English kingdom. Well, it's a remarkable success story in some ways, few of the Scandinavian
settlements had such a deep and profound influence on their new homeland, yet there's an irony
in this settlement in that the Danes who are the descendants of some of the finest sailors
of all time, certainly the Middle Ages, great warriors, failed to forge a kingdom. In fact,
many of the Danish settlers begin to lose the ability even to build ships. Those who settle
as farmers and merchants in the towns and in the countryside of Northern England essentially
lose contact with that shipbuilding. They are being turned into an Anglo-Danish identity,
no longer really Scandinavians, and another important point over most of the 10th century,
there aren't, certainly after 925, there aren't any significant reinforcements coming into
Denmark, and there's several reasons, sorry, any significant reinforcements coming into
England from Denmark or Norway, and there's some reason for that. Part of the immigration
is heading off to Ireland and Iceland. Many Scandinavians starting in the early 10th century
found land there, and we shall also see in later lectures that kings in Norway and Denmark
are keeping some of those Vikings and their fleets home in order to build kingdoms back
in Scandinavia. So the Danes in England have to come to terms with their new surroundings
and they do by in some ways assimilating into the English countryside, establishing themselves
as landed elites. Well, the question of their failure to forge the English kingdom is a
topic that is closely related to the success of Alfred's creation of Wessex as the eventual
center of gravity of English political power. Alfred was succeeded by a brilliant son and
grandson, that is Edward the Elder and Ethelstain, and those two successors together essentially
brought the Danish regions back under control. Edward the Elder essentially overran East
Anglia with very little opposition. The cities of the five boroughs or the five boroughs,
the regions of the five boroughs, those five towns in the northern Midlands all agreed
to come under English control, retain their local customs and law, became important market
towns, and north of the Humber in 920, Edward the Elder was acknowledged as the overlord
of a Viking king ruling in York, so he could legitimately style himself as king of all Britain
or king of the English, and that is a title that his son Ethelstain takes as well. There
is a point in the mid 10th century where it looks as if the Danes in Yorkshire at least
in the northern portions of the settlement might combine with their kinsmen who have
settled in Dublin and create a Scandinavian or a Viking state based on the cities of York
and Dublin which would act as an effective Scandinavian kingdom in the British Isles.
And there is a complicated political history behind this, and most of it actually belongs
more properly to the north settlement in Ireland, but nonetheless it didn't look that far fetched
in the mid 10th century. York and Dublin were both Scandinavian settlements in many ways.
They were connected on the trade arc, that northern trade arc. Second, the north kings
ruling in Dublin, starting from really 900 on, 917 on with Cyctrick II, came in at a
powerful fleet, dominated the Irish Sea, and northern England is closely linked economically
to the trading center of the Irish Sea and to eastern Ireland. In 917 the ruling king
in Dublin, Cyctrick, was run out by his brother Guthrith. He went to York with apparently
a group of warriors, took control of York and ruled York as a king, but he acknowledged
the authority of the English king at the time, and that would have been Edward the Elder
and then Edward's son, Athelstain, the grandson of Alfred the Great. In 927 this Cyctrick
died and Athelstain took over York directly, but the brief rule of a Norse king from Dublin,
who's Norwegian in descent, gave a claim of legitimacy over that group of Danes and York
shore, Yorkshire by the Heberno Norse kings of Dublin, and starting from 927 down to 954
there are several efforts by Norse kings in Dublin to move in and take over the northern
sections of the Dan law and fuse them into a much larger Norse kingdom, straddling the
Irish Sea. The closest it ever came to success is when Olaf Guthrith's son, who was the
son of Guthrith, the king of Dublin, who crossed over in 939-940, took over York, got the five
boroughs back under control, and by the time of his death looked like he was going to pull
it off, but it failed. By 944 you have this constant changing of power, that is the Heberno
Norse kings come in, they're kicked out. On two occasions, an exile prince from Norway
we'll talk about later on, one of my favorite characters, one of the sons of Harold Finehair,
he unites Norway. Eric the Blood Axe, he comes flying in with the Norwegian fleet, tries
to grab the throne of York, but in this very complicated political situation several things
become clear. First, the Danes living in the Yorkshire come to regard these Norse adventurers,
whether they're from Dublin or Norway, far more as foes and conquerors rather than as
kinsmen. They have by this point begun to accept Christianity, they are a settled landed
class, and many of them are beginning to look at a Christian English king as preferable
to a restless Heberno Norse or Norwegian sea king. The English kings, the successors
of Alfred the Great also understand this, and they always assure their Danish subjects,
we will respect your laws and your customs. The Anglo Danish elite landed classes are
going to be put in charge of local institutions, and in the end, the reason why this kingdom
fails is that most of the Danish settlers by the mid 10th century realize that their interests,
their political interests, their legal interests, and their religious affiliations have a lot
more in common with the successors of Alfred the Great than they do with their kinsmen
in Dublin or the Norwegian princes coming in from Norway. So the system fails largely
because there's just a lack of support for bringing in a Heberno Norse or Norwegian king.
And the last guy who had a real shot at this, Olaf Kaviron, essentially leaves England and
goes back to Dublin. He rules very successfully as the Viking king of Dublin, well, until he
runs into the Irish army at the Battle of Tara in 980, but in Ireland, he rules over a Norse
population that is still largely pagan, that is engaged in the slave trade, that still has the
traditions of seafaring and Viking attacks, and there he can be very, very successful while
trying to rule Christian Danes who are worried about their states and that popular laws be
followed. They're just not suited to do this. And so by 954, all of the Danes have come to
recognize the English king as their lord, and there's a bit of still negotiation. But by 954,
in the reign of King Idrid, the Kingdom of England has emerged. England that we have today more or
less conforming to the political boundaries has been created by the successors of Alfred the Great.
That is an astonishing achievement in a period of the Middle Ages when the norm for most of the
states in Western Europe is to see breakdown, fragmentation, divisions into smaller units.
The son, the grandson, the great grandsons of Alfred pull off in less than three generations the
unification of all the English into a great kingdom. The big surprise is why did this kingdom
fail to check a Danish conquest in the 11th century? That is a Danish king will come to rule over this
England. That will be King Canute and he's coming up in a future lecture. Well, there's a couple
of reasons for that. One is the eventual heir to this legacy, Ethelrid the Unrede, is really one
of the unimpressive kings of English history. And one of his big mistakes was to alienate that Anglo-Danish
ruling class in Northern England, which went over to Canute and invited a Danish king in. But nonetheless,
the achievement of the 950s, the unification of England, and the intercreation of the Danes into
the English kingdom is a stunning political achievement. And England as we understand it today is
ultimately a combination of the institutions of Alfred and the Danish attacks that force those
institutions to be created.
