Lecture 18, Norse Kings of Dublin and Ireland.
In this lecture I plan to look at the Norse Kingdom of Dublin, particularly in the late
9th and 10th centuries, which is often seen as the height of Viking power. Ironically,
from about 902 to 917, for about a 15-year period, the Norse actually didn't control
Dublin and had been temporarily occupied by Irish. Nonetheless, in 915 the Norse returned
and there's a revival and expansion of Norse power in some ways in the 10th century.
And so what we wish to do in this lecture is look at Ireland in the 10th century, which
is an extremely important point because it's in this century where the Norse have a chance
to construct some type of political and economic order that could either at least, if not unify
all these Irish kingships, at least play a predominantly important role in the future
development of Ireland, politically, militarily, and economically. This does not happen. Traditionally,
many Irish school children are taught that in 1014 at the Battle of Clontorf, Brian Baruma,
who was then the High King of Ireland, defeated the Vikings and essentially ended the Viking
Age, defeated the threat of a Viking conquest of Ireland, and this is really a national
myth. The Battle of Clontorf has a lot more to do with a dynastic struggle for who should
be High King of Ireland rather than any defeat of a Viking conquest. The really significant
battle that broke Norse power was actually earlier in 980 at the Battle of Tara, which
has effectively ended Dublin as the leading political force in Ireland. In order to understand
then how these developments took place in the 10th century, I think first it's important
to look at the nature of the Viking settlement in Ireland and make some comparisons to it
in England and in the Carolingian Empire and then to trace events in the 10th century and
take a new look at the Battle of Clontorf based on what we have now learned of the 10th
century from archaeology and the study of the sources. As I mentioned in the previous
lecture, the Norse very quickly developed market towns. These were originally base camps.
Most of the major ports of Ireland today traced their ancestry and their names back to Norse
settlements. Waterford, Wexford, Cork, Limerick, Dublin are the best known. In all of these
towns from the start, it could be argued that the Norse were only part of the population
and some instances may have quickly been a minority of the population. There was a rather
limited number of Scandinavian women who came with these companies. Most of the Norse seemed
to have taken local women as their wives or their concubines. And there are several pieces
of information that points in this direction. Those graves that have been excavated, particularly
in Dublin, have shown a mixed material culture that is you have both Norse and Irish items
as grave goods. It is also a fact that the number of Scandinavian words that passed into
Gaelic are very similar to the types of words that passed into French. In the case of the
Normans and Normandy, that is specialized language words, commerce, navigation, fishing.
That there was not the kind of swap of words and impact on the Gaelic language the way
you had in England, where substantial number of Danish words entered into standard English.
Second, the Norwegians very quickly learned to respect the Irish's warriors. They could
defeat them in a pitched battle. They had naval superiority, but they were not about
to venture into the hinterland of Ireland, which was broken up into a complicated set
of different petty kingdoms with different clan ties. And a land that was broken up
by forests and bogs that was extremely inhospitable, and it was extremely easy to get ambushed.
And there were several instances of that in the ninth century, which taught the Norwegians
very quickly to respect their Irish opponents. When it came to stealth and ambush skirmishing
tactics, the Irish absolutely excelled in this type of warfare. They had been doing it
for centuries.
Furthermore, besides the fact that the Norwegians got large number of Irish slaves, some of
them who were classed as thralls, that is, they did manual labor. Some of them taken
into Norse households and treated very well. They also conducted matrimonial alliances
with leading warrior families or royal families in Ireland. In some ways, Norwegian and Irish
societies were similar. You had warrior elites, to be sure, differently armed. Nonetheless,
they came to respect each other in a sense of honor, in a sense of martial ethos. So
there was a fair amount of exchange that went on, certainly from the late ninth century
and throughout the entire 10th century. So very often, it's a little arbitrary when you
speak of Herberno Norse or Irish, because the upper classes would have intermarriage
on both sides. The last really great king of Dublin, Norse king of Dublin, his name
is Marvellous. His name is Citrig Silkbeard, Citrig the Third. His mom was a very famous
Irish priest, a princess, actually the driving force of the coalition against Brian Baruma,
the high king of Ireland. And he had at least one other Irish grandparent. And so in terms
of his Celtic ancestry, he's probably more Celtic than he was Norse, even though he apparently
preferred to speak Norse, saw himself as a Norse king, liked to compare himself in later
years to King Canute of Denmark and England, and used to have the ancient poems recited
so that it was more of a matter of language and culture. So it has to be kept in mind.
There is a great deal of intermarriage and cultural exchange going on throughout this
entire period. Also, the Norwegians had to come to terms with the Irish, not only in
terms of, for political and economic reasons, but just pure demographics. Starting in the
later 9th century, and this is why the Irish could temporarily reoccupy Dublin, they were
not getting the same number of reinforcements from Scandinavia. The last great fleet that
showed up was an 852 that was brought in by Olaf, sometimes known as Olaf the White.
And thereafter, the Norse and Ireland were largely on their own. That is because in 870,
Iceland was discovered, there was lots of land for the taking. Many Norwegians went
to Iceland. Some of them actually in Ireland relocated to Iceland, because they discovered
Iceland didn't have any nasty natives who would bushwhack you, Iceland was unoccupied.
There were no natural predators, human or otherwise, and anyone who wanted land trekked
out to Iceland for the next 50 years. Furthermore, in Norway, another important development was
King Harold Finehair was using the Viking fleets to unite Norway into a kingdom of sorts.
And so the Irish, the Norwegians in Ireland, throughout the late 9th and early 10th century
were largely on their own. And this allowed for the Irish kings, particularly in Meath
and Leinster, to reorganize themselves, to counterattack, to restrict Norse movements,
and in 902, the Norse were actually driven out of Dublin for a while.
Well, Ireland was still too attractive, and the land in Iceland filled up very quickly,
and King Harold Finehair had more sons than he knew what to do with, so that he reputedly
lived for 50 years and had, I don't know, 200 wives, according to one account. And virtually
every other yarl in Norway, three generations later, could claim to be a descendant of Harold
Finehair. There's no way to disprove it otherwise, given the king's prodigious activities.
In any case, in a third great Norwegian fleet set sales in 914, 915, it's actually several
major contingents. There are several leaders, several yarrows or sea kings. The most important
of them is a man named Sickthrick, who is a very common name used by Norwegians, and
they arrive off the shores of Ireland about 15 years after the Norse had been defeated
back in 902, and proceed to reoccupy the old ports and settlements. There is a major
battle in which Sickthrick defeats Nyall, the high king of Ireland, who's the king of
Mith, outside of Dublin in 917, and takes over Dublin and reestablishes the Norse kingdom
in Dublin as a power. In fact, he conquers not only Dublin, but it's hinterland, and
if you look at the area of where we think Norse settlement was, that region that is
consolidated in the 10th century by those Herberno-Norse kings, Sickthrick and then his
brother Guthrith, essentially corresponds to the later section or area of English settlement,
the so-called Pale, the area where the Anglo-Irish would establish themselves, and then outside
that region, the English for many, many, many centuries had really very little control over
the country. So what they've occupied are the important valleys that are the immediate
hinterland to Dublin, Dublin, its port facilities, and of course those other critical towns,
which operate, especially Limerick, more or less semi-independently, fell by the name
of Ivar, another very common name among the Norse kings, reoccupied Limerick and made
that a base for raiding in the west. So in the 10th century, a powerful succession of
kings reigned from Dublin, and their aspirations are really pretty wide-ranging. They often
claimed to be kings of all the Northmen or the Norsemen in Hybernia. There are several
Irish Chronicles as well as other documents in which those titles are applied to them,
and as I mentioned in an earlier lecture dealing with the Viking impact on England, the Norse
kings in Dublin did see a connection to their kinsmen in York and Northern England, and
there was a concerted effort in the first half of the 10th century not to conquer the
Irish hinterland, especially Mithan Ulster, where there were powerful descendants of the
High Neal Clan, kings who would aspire to be High King, who would be eventually a potential
threat, but rather to look to the sea to bring the various islands of Scotland, the northern
shores of Scotland under control, to control these strategic crossings between the Firth
of Clyde and the Firth of Forth, that is that very narrow strip that essentially cuts Scotland
into the highlands and the lowlands so that they could move ships, warships and cargo ships
over to Northern England and get in contact with York. There was also extensive settlement
in Northern Wales and in regions now, which would be Cumberland and Lancashire in England,
Galloway in Scotland, where Norwegians established themselves on the shores of Western England,
Southwestern Scotland, Northern Wales, and set up trading communities, but also farm
states, and there's a significant number of Norse place names. And you might wonder,
well, why didn't they just establish bases and walk across to York, and there's this
nasty thing known as the Pennines Mountains that essentially bisects Northern England,
and for the Norse who always think in terms of ships, it's much easier to sail from Dublin,
drag the ships across that narrow isthmus and go by sea, then attempt to land forces in
Wales or Western England in March on York. The movement is always by sea, and that always
has to be remembered when dealing with Viking history. So the kings in Dublin established
a very, very powerful connection of economic routes across these diverse areas, and they
were tied together by trade connections, especially by the prophets of the slave trade, by the
fact that all of these people had the premier Viking ships, they had the warships and the
cargo ships to do it, and that the kings in Dublin had a real sense of themselves as great
sea kings, they were pagans, well, probably into the 11th century, it's only with Cyctric
silk beer that the Norse and Dublin really begin to convert to Christianity, and they
are also, feel themselves as descendants of the great heroes of old. We are told that
at the court of Dublin, Icelandic poets were always welcome, we know this of Cyctric silk
beer that he always liked to hear the ancient Norse legends, the kings in Dublin, the Norse
kings in Dublin are extremely well known in Icelanders, there's references to them in
Icelandic sagas, we actually have an Icelandic version of the Battle of Klontov in Jalsaga,
so the connections with Dublin were very, very powerful to the Norse colonies in the
Atlantic islands, and ultimately with Norway. Now, that had some important consequences for
the future of not only the hiberno-Norse and Dublin, but also for Ireland in general. The
first half of the 10th century were a series of abortive efforts, first by the exiled
king Cyctric, then by Guthrith, then by Guthrith's son known as Olaf, then by Cyctric's son
who is also known as Olaf, gets very complicated, these two first cousins with the same name,
who through the course of the 930s and 940s, attempt to conquer Northern England, the Northern
Dan law, the regions around York. A great deal of effort is expended on this, and in
the end it fails. It fails in part because the Anglo-Danish landed classes in Northern
England see these hiberno-Norse as essentially outsiders, restless adventurers and pagans,
and come to realize that their interests really rest with the Christian English king who will
respect their rights rather than calling in these distant religious from Dublin. It
also fails in part because the hiberno-Norse just don't have the resources and the sophistication
to run the kingdom of York. The Danes who settled in England very quickly come to appreciate
the ecclesiastical institutions, the towns, the institutions in England, which essentially
go back to a Roman origin, where you have the basis of organizing a state, and no such
institutions ever existed in Ireland, and so why would the hiberno-Norse have any sort
of appreciation or understanding of them? They are still operating this society very
much based on kinship, matrimonial alliances. In fact, in many ways, the hiberno-Norse in
their social attitudes and their political structures are very close to their Irish neighbors,
and that probably was something of a shock for some of these hiberno-Norse when they
got to York and came to see these Danes. They probably looked at these Danes with a certain
amount of disdain as they're Christian, they're weak, they look more like English, maybe we
should be treating them more like foes or potential victims, whereas the Irish with whom they'd
been battling for over 125 years, in some ways, they could respect them more and they
could understand them better. And so that 40-year excursion into Northern England in
a way was a sobering experience, and when it failed, Olaf Kavaran, who was actually
the son of a citric, the Norwegian sea king who reconquered Dublin in first occupied York,
he returns to Dublin and rules in Dublin very successfully and loses all interest in ever
trying to regain York, and rules down to 980 AD. Olaf was a very successful king through
most of his reign, and he already begins to show some of the changes that are going on
in Ireland. Olaf becomes aware that once you've turned your back on this project of
building a greater Dublin kingdom on both York and Dublin, that the Norwegians increasingly
are coming to depend on political alliances in Ireland itself. That is, starting in the
940s, in 950s, Olaf must seek matrimonial alliances and allies among the increasingly
better-armed and better-organized Irish kings. These include especially the kings of Mith and
Ulster, and one figure in particular who comes to the throne right after Olaf's dead, shortly
before Olaf's death, is Mayel Shalane, the second, actually the namesake and descendant
of an earlier king who was responsible for drowning Thurgus back in 847 or whatever it
was when he captured that first Norwegian sea king, essentially the first king of Dublin.
In 980, this new king of Mith delivers a really decisive defeat on Olaf in his final years.
One of Olaf's sons is killed in the fighting, it's the so-called Battle of Tara, took place
very close at the ancient legendary capital, and that Battle of Tara essentially marked
the end of the Herberno Norse as a power, as the dominant power in Ireland. It did not
end it, far from it. After 980, the Norse themselves, and then the Irish pick up the
word, start referring to themselves as the Ostmen, the Easterners, and they continue
to reside in Dublin and the other towns. They are the only people in Ireland with any kind
of significant ships, warships or cargo ships, but they really come increasingly depend upon
alliances with the leading Irish kings, and in some instances they pay tribute to the
Irish kings. Or they will nominate the heir apparent of an Irish king as the titular king
of Dublin, or that Irish prince might have some sort of role on the island of man, another
important Norse colony. And so starting from 980, what happens is the Norse settlements
in Ireland begin to become integrated into a wider political and economic order in Ireland.
The Irish probably come to see these Ostmen as distinct. They're still outsiders, but
they're sort of like their own set, their own clan, and they can be accommodated in
the political order. There's enough now matrimonial alliances that the leading families in all
the Norse towns are connected to important Irish families, and above all, all Irish kings
realize those Norse towns are important. They are a source of allies, mercenaries, money,
you can always blackmail them, get them to pay tribute, and above all, they are the ports
with the outside world. And they control the ports that export the slaves and the other
goods that bring in all the neat weapons and luxuries that Ireland would otherwise not
have. And so starting in 980, the Huberno Norse really do begin to take a secondary
position. Well, this gets us to the final part of this lecture, and that is to discuss
this famous Battle of Clontarf, which is usually taken as marking the end of the Viking
Age in Ireland. And that is a bit misleading. It's more than a bit misleading. If one is
looking for an end of the Viking Age in Ireland, it's actually probably 980. That is at least
the political-military domination of the Vikings, and that's at the Battle of Tara.
Well, the Viking raids in Ireland had the impact that they had in England and in the
Carolingian Empire in that it did dictate political developments within Ireland. That
is, certain families were going to lose and other families were going to win in fighting
the Vikings. The High Neals who ruled in Ulster were among the losers. Northern Ireland was
repeatedly sacked. Armaq, the primate of Ireland, was sacked by one reckoning maybe ten times
in the course of the Viking Age. The kings of Meath, who ruled directly to the west of
Dublin and who claimed a descent from the legendary clan so they had a legitimate claim
to the High Kingship, they begin to emerge as some of the leading kings in Ireland. And
Mayel Shalane II, who won the Battle of Tara, is from this family, and he makes Meath the
dominant kingdom in Ireland and takes the title of High King, André, as a result of
defeating the Norse of Dublin. And he holds that title most of the time, he loses it for
a short time, down to his death in 1022. He also is one of those adroit Irish kings who
understands how to use the Norse as convenient allies to provide naval support or mercenaries
to conduct trade relationships. But it's clear his relationship with the Norse in Dublin
and the other towns, he's in the superior position now, unlike his ancestors. However,
another region also did quite well in a sense in the Viking Age, and that was in the remote
southwest. And that was an area that really was essentially, it's the region of Munster,
a region that was really pretty unimportant in earlier Irish history. And this is the
homeland of Brian Baruma, this is his family, Dahlkayas family, that emerged as a power
in the, you know, towards the middle of the 10th century, largely by fighting the Vikings
in Limerick. And you should think of them as sort of second rate marcher lords, they
were petty rulers, they didn't have the genealogical connections, the great descent as the kings
of Meath and Ulster, they were clearly seen as a inferior royal family and newcomers into
the Irish political scene. Nonetheless, they were responsible for defeating the Vikings
in Limerick and for clearing out Viking raids in western Ireland at about the same time
that the kings of Meath were pushing back the Norse in Dublin. And that meant that this
rather minor area all of a sudden emerged as an extremely well armed and important Irish
state. And in 976, he actually is the younger son of the previous king of the king, Brian
Baruma is declared king in Munster. Most of his career, he dies at the Battle of Clontarf
in 1014. Most of his early career was mopping up what was left of Viking resistance, but
really imposing his authority over southern and eastern Ireland. And this was done by
traditional methods. And in these methods, he often recruited Viking allies. It took
the form of levying tribute. And this was often more token tribute than anything else.
It took the form of matrimonial alliances. There were usually battles that were almost
stylized as to their combat, that is two armies would agree to fight a battle. And at the
end of the battle, there would be a recognition sort of given to the victor. The Irish poets
would record the deeds. And so Brian Baruma is not so much a great national king. He's
a very traditional king who follows traditional Irish methods of gaining control. What's significant
was that his background was not particularly distinguished, and he was very, very remarkably
successful. Because in 997, Brian had emerged as such a powerful figure in southern Ireland
that none other than the reigning king, a high king of Ireland, Mayel Shalane, agrees to
divide authority in Ireland. That he recognized Brian as almost an equal. This was a remarkable
achievement for Brian Baruma, who came from this, this, this backwater, this political
backwater in Ireland. And there were several later clashes. And ultimately, three years
later in 1000, Brian was able to assert himself not only as the equal to the king of Meath,
but the superior. And in 1000, Brian takes the title of high king away from Mayel Shalane,
which causes him no end of anger that he must now recognize as interloper as his superior.
Well, that political fact in 1000 is far more important in setting in motion a series of
intrigues and rebellions to bring down Brian Baruma and his upstart dynasty. And the alliance
is one of the most contorted and strange in Irish history, and it's a delightful combination.
It was largely hatched in Dublin by the then ruling Norse king, Siegfried Silkbeer, the
third, I mentioned him earlier, who was the son of King Olaf, the man who was defeated
at the Battle of Tara, and especially his Irish mom, Gormf Leith, who came from a very
prominent family, had actually been married to Mayel Shalane earlier. He divorced her.
She's an extremely imperious woman. She's remembered as the driving force both in the
Irish and Norse accounts. She then gets married to the king of Dublin, the Norse king of Dublin.
He dies, her son gets on the throne, and eventually Brian actually marries her because she's too
dangerous to be allowed to be left alone. But before that marriage, she's done everything
in her power to egg on her ex-husband, her brothers, and her son in Dublin, the Norse
king of Dublin, to forge an alliance to take out Brian. This alliance climaxes in 1014
with an effort to overthrow the power of Brian Baruma. The alliance, however, never really
gets off the ground. Brian has a remarkable reputation as a charismatic king. He's remembered
in the Irish Chronicles as not only a great warrior, but a pious Christian king. Many
activities are tribute to him, for instance, the restoration of monastic life, the endowing
of churches, and undoubtedly these took place. And Brian is able to summon up many allies
from the west and the south. This causes a citric silk beard of Dublin to have second
thoughts, and he bolts out of the alliance before the battle is fought. Mayel Shalane,
who is the ex-high king of Ireland, and really would like to see Brian defeated, he sits
on the sidelines, he detaches himself from his allies, and actually his army is on the
side of Brian at the Battle of Clarenteuf, but it is remarkably inactive until the battle
is decided. Meanwhile, the various Irish warlords in the east who resented Brian's rule summoned
in large numbers of Viking allies, notably from the island of Mann, one of them is Broder,
the Viking king of Mann, the Earl of Orkney, his name is Sigurd the Stout, several prominent
Icelanders show up, and on Good Friday, 1014, the great battle takes place at a very narrow
bridge and plain just west of Dublin. And it's remarkable, really, more for the people
who are not fighting there than for the people who are there. Brian's forces carry the day.
However, in the course of the fighting, according to the Norse sources, the Broder, the Norse
king of Mann, cuts his way through the battle lines and mortally wounds Brian. Brian dies
shortly after the battle. The Viking mercenaries and allies who had been summoned in are brutally
destroyed, they're defeated, some of them brutally executed. Dublin is spared because
Cytric Silpe had the good sense to pull out before the decisive battle. And in the end,
the real victor is Meil Shalang, who reasserts his control as high king of Ireland against
Brian's surviving sons. And so what the battle of Klontov decides is not whether Ireland
will be ruled by the Vikings or not, it's that the high kingship goes back to the kings
of Meith and that the potential political union that could have emerged out of this
will not happen. Meith continues to fight rivals in western and southern Ireland down
to 1170. There is a series of clashes, very traditional, in that the Irish are fighting
for that high kingship. And in the end, it will be an exiled Irish prince who will invite
the Normans and Welsh in to give an advantage so that he can get the high kingship of Ireland.
The Norse continue in Ireland, controlling the ports, acting as the conduits to the wider
world and above all profiting from the slave trade. What is remarkable about Ireland is
in contrast to the Carolingian Empire and England, no political order emerges. And that
comes from the simple fact that there had been no Roman conquest. And that the Norse
who settled in Ireland did not bring with them the types of institutions that could build
a wider unity. So when Norse power collapsed at the end of the 10th century, Irish politics
continued in a traditional way. In some ways the Irish were now better armed, compliments
of the Norse, they had more incentive to wage these wars for the slave trade, but essentially
politics went on the way they had before the Norse attacks. What had been lost are the
great cultural monastic centers and that Irish slave trade which continued right up to 1170
and deplored by the Irish churchmen was seen as a pest on the island and the Irish churchmen
themselves said that the reason God sent us the English was to end the slave trade and
you know that's a pretty damning comment by Irish churchmen to make that conclusion.
And that's the best point to halt with the Viking legacy in Ireland.
