Lecture 19, The Settlement of Iceland.
In this lecture, we're going to deal with the discovery and settlement of Iceland.
In this lecture is the first of a series of four that will deal with the North experience
in the North Atlantic, centering very much on Iceland, but also some of the North Atlantic
islands, notably the Faroes, which are still settled by Scandinavian speakers to this day.
The Shetlands that are now part of the United Kingdom, which were a North colony.
The North settlements out in Greenland, their efforts to get to Vinland, that is North America.
And the reason why we spend essentially four lectures on these related topics is that it
is first one of the most remarkable and exciting adventures in the whole Viking experience.
The great sailing distances of North ships to go across the North Atlantic to establish
colonies in these far flung places.
And in the case of Iceland, to create was often discussed as the first European frontier
society, including some facile analogies to the American Wild West.
And above all, the importance of settling Iceland is in its great literary legacy.
Repeatedly throughout this course, I have made reference to Icelanders, to Icelandic
saga, to the fact that most of the poetry that survives about the Norse gods and heroes
comes from Iceland.
Iceland will become the great repository of Norse literature.
And Iceland's importance in European literature of the Middle Ages is out of all proportion
to its size and its remoteness.
It really is one of the great literatures of the Middle Ages and arguably one of the great
literatures of the world.
And this is one of the great achievements that comes out of the Viking Age.
So it really is worth spending time to look at the settlement, the discovery of Iceland,
the development of this unique frontier society, and the literary legacy that is so important
in informing us about the Viking Age.
Well, as to our first topic, which is essentially discovering Iceland and settling it, the Norwegians
in the ninth century, who were always intrepid sailors by anyone's account, by going to
Iceland really, really were at the remote end of the world for most Europeans.
And furthermore, they were moving into a land which is habitable.
Iceland can put up settlements there, but it's really just at the fringe of human habitation.
Iceland is just below the Arctic Circle.
It is moderated by the mid-Atlantic Drift.
And if one takes a look at the settlement patterns of Iceland, where the pastures are,
the sheltered valleys and fjords, they are overwhelmingly on the western side of the island,
the so-called Breida fjord, the wide fjord, the regions around Reykjavik today in the
southwest, and actually in parts of the northwest, because that's the area that receives the
Gulf Stream or the Mid-Atlantic Drift, which moderates the climate, because Iceland is
essentially just below the Arctic Circle.
Icebergs block the sailing of ships for much of the year.
This is discovered by the first voyagers out there, Gardar, who is credited with the discovery
of Iceland, a Swedish merchant, noted these large icebergs.
And icebergs don't have to be particularly large to sink a Viking ship.
All they have to be is about 25, 20 feet across, and if a large part of it is submerged
in the water, it hits a Viking vessel in which there's only an inch of planking separating
you from the North Atlantic.
You can go down pretty fast.
And for a number of months of the year, the ice flows come down past Iceland and essentially
block all shipping for anywhere from four to five months of the year.
And many of the earlier settlers who didn't take this into account actually got themselves
in difficulty if they ran out of provisions that could easily starve to death because
there could be no supplies brought in.
England is essentially a vast plateau that's built up by glaciers and volcanoes.
Travel across the interior is, in some sections, just absolutely impossible.
Communication is going to be around the sea, and you're dealing with an island which is
larger than Wales and England and part of Scotland combined.
It's close to 40,000 square miles.
It's about 300 miles across, and yet only about 15 percent of it can really be inhabited,
and it's all on the shores, particularly on those western shores that are moderated by
the Gulf Stream.
The interior is broken up by glaciers and snow fields and volcanoes.
And when one reads, for instance, the great Norse poem of creation and destruction, the
Velospa, which speaks of a primeval frozen waste and a final destruction in Ragnarok
with the fires of Nusipelheim from the south coming in, the stars and sun falling down,
and the great ice being released, it sounds like a combination of volcanic eruptions melting
glaciers that are proved so destructive throughout Icelandic history.
In fact, I think the first Norweges to see Iceland, if they saw any of those volcanoes
at all active in the snow fields, thought, indeed, they had a preview of what Ragnarok
was all about.
The greatest glacier is that Nyokul, which covers nearly 3,000 miles across in terms
of 3,000 square miles in terms of snow field and glacier.
These glaciers run hundreds of feet deep.
They're permanent features in the landscape.
There are a number of active volcanoes.
These volcanoes have erupted repeatedly, and volcanic eruptions will lead to large lava
flows that might melt glaciers and cause destruction.
But the real destruction of a volcanic eruption in Iceland is the ash that it deposits over
the landscape.
And for the Icelanders who settle there and are largely engaged in stock raising, what
happens is the animals eat the grass.
The grass has got all sorts of sulfide and other nasty things in it.
This causes the teeth and gums to get infected.
Most of the animals die.
The Icelanders, of course, slaughter the animals and eat well for a year.
And then the next year, there's nothing left to eat.
And what happens?
The human population starts to starve.
And that's demonstrated in 1783 when Mount Laki exploded, the most destructive eruption
on the island.
It destroyed 55% of all cattle, about 80% of all sheep, and about 75% of all horses.
And by the end of three years, when the animals died off and were consumed, perhaps something
on the order of 25% to a third, depending on the figures you use, of the humans starved
in the next two or three years.
It was catastrophic.
Population fell from something like 50,000 down to 40,000 or less.
And so Iceland from the start was a very, very demanding landscape, even for Scandinavians.
Even for Norwegians who came from Trondelag and were used to dealing with Arctic conditions
and trading with the laps.
People who knew how to exploit the fjords and the fishing in the North Atlantic.
From the start, Iceland was a daunting prospect.
There were very few trees.
They were all dwarf trees.
There's plenty of pasture.
And the Icelanders get to raise cattle, sheep, and horses, and these would be the sturdy
Scandinavian ponies very easily.
There's no natural predators.
There's virtually no insects on the island.
It's just so far in the North.
There's lots of neat sea creatures like seals that you can hunt and seagulls.
There's a variety of eggs you can get from the sea creatures, the birds.
There's a fair number of other sea mammals that show up.
But your chance of growing anything like fruits and vegetables and certainly grains is very,
very limited.
So from the start, Iceland was going to have to depend on imported foodstuffs, particularly
grain and other products, back from the home country of Norway.
The sailing distances are also daunting.
And it is probably something on the order of 600 statute miles to go from Bergen, today
the main port of Norway, in southwestern Norway, to the eastern shores of Iceland.
Under the best of circumstances in the Viking age, given the fact that a cargo ship could
do maybe four knots ordinary sailing, you might be able to make the voyage in anywhere
from seven to ten days.
Most Vikings, once the roots were known, most Scandinavians, went from Norway to the Shetland
Islands.
It's about a two-day sail, maybe a three-day sail.
Then from the Shetlands, they would head to the Faroes, which is a set of islands midway
between the Shetlands and Iceland.
And from there, they could make the leap to Iceland.
They were assisted by the fact that they were changing colors in the water, driftwood, the
flight of birds.
That is, they knew that that land was in sight.
And in fact, what they do is a form of island hopping.
Even so, even when these land, or these sea routes have been worked out, it was dangerous
by anyone's standard.
Sets were frequent.
It was easy to get lost in a fog and completely turned around.
There is no evidence that the Scandinavians ever used a compass or what is sometimes called
a sun compass or a sundial.
They reckoned latitude by taking the readings of the midday sun.
If the sun was blocked, they couldn't do any readings that could very easily end up sailing
in the wrong direction.
They also navigated by the stars.
They navigated by instinct.
They knew it was so many sailing days from here to there.
There were no written technical manuals.
They're still dealing largely with an illiterate society.
And to give you some sort of sense of how dangerous it is, there's a favorite anecdote
of mine that comes out of Laxdala saga, one of the great family sagas of Iceland.
And one of the characters in there, Olaf the Peacock, a delightful figure, really.
In 1960, was sailing from Norway back to Iceland on a very well-known route.
I mean, he had sailed it a number of times and they ran into foul weather and sure enough,
they had missed for a number of days and they got all turned around.
Finally, the missed lifts, the sun comes out, they get some sort of read on the latitude
but they don't know what direction they're going and the crew gets confused and sets
into an argument and debates and decides to take a vote on which direction to sail.
Now, you have to realize, out in the middle of the North Atlantic, you left the Shetlands
days ago, you could end up sailing in a very, very wrong direction here.
And Olaf refuses to abide by the idea of a majority vote and instead goes to the skilled
navigator and tells him to decide, noting as he says, I want only the shrewdest one
to decide because in my opinion, the council of fools is all the more dangerous, the more
of them there are, which also gives you a pretty good, savvy, pragmatic sense of Norse
skippers.
There is no accident that Thor is the most favorite god of the Icelanders because he's
the god of skies, of mists, of storms, of rains.
I mentioned, I believe in an earlier lecture, that Helgi the lean, who is a brother of Un
the Deep Mind at this wonderful family that leaves in the early 10th century and establishes
so many important families in Iceland and whose descendants are the subject of so many
family sagas, that Helgi the lean always said that on land I will worship Christ but at sea
I always invoke Thor and again, another part of the very practical aspect of Icelanders
that comes up time and time again in their sagas and in their laws.
In any case, the discovery of Iceland was assisted by the fact that the Norse had already
established bases to get there.
They had settled the Shetland Islands at the end of the 8th, the beginning of the 9th century
and established actually in the Shetland sort of a mini society you would see in Iceland.
It's based on stock raising with similar farmsteads and a farmstead has been excavated in the Shetland
since the 19th century, it's known as Yarlshoff, which actually can be now accessed very easily
on a website maintained by Professor Christopher Fee of the University of Gettysburg, which
gives you a pretty good sense of what a farmstead would have looked like in Iceland or in Norway.
It's a Norwegian colony, they're using the same type of architecture used both in Norway
and Iceland and then shortly afterwards, sometime toward the middle of the 9th century,
they discovered a group of islands known as the Faroes, these are 17 treeless islands
midway between the Shetlands and Iceland and again Norwegians moved in, they're ideal
for stock raising, they're largely treeless, but they're ideal for developing wool, salted
meat and both the Faroes and Shetlands were important waystations for any sailing out
to the North Atlantic as well as sailing to Ireland and to the British Isles and so those
islands were always visited and were in constant touch with Norway and that would make the
trip to Iceland easier. Well, it's sailing to the Shetlands and to the Faroes that lead
to the discovery of Iceland, which was accidental. The first figure that we know who made it
to Iceland among the Norse, there were some Irish monks there apparently who had gotten
up to Iceland around the 7th or 8th century, they're called popper in Norse sources, they're
hermits and they probably got there on those curogs, those skinboats without keels bouncing
along the waves, the idea of sailing in one of those things is really daunting to me,
I could manage a longship, I don't think I could ever do an Irish curog, but in any case
there were just a number of hermits who were there and the Norse sources tell us that they
left when the Scandinavians arrived because these Irish holy men did not want to be among
pagans. Well, the first fellow who found it from the Scandinavian viewpoint was a Swedish
merchant called Garder and Garder was a merchant from Sweden who had property both in Denmark
and the Faroe Islands and he really was aiming for the Faroes and missed it and ended up finding
Iceland, he landed on the east coast of Iceland. He sailed around and proved that it was an
island and he also noted the amount of sea creatures that were there and the fact there
seemed to be no humans, no predators and got back to the Scandinavian world and reported
his findings, this may have occurred somewhere around 870. There are two other figures who
were credited with discovering Iceland, they seem to come after him, one of them was a Viking
name named Nadad who was a famous Viking who raided in Ireland and once again he hit Iceland
by mistake sometime in the early 870s, he made landfall on the eastern shores of Iceland,
he was immediately appalled, as a Viking he was wondering like where are the monasteries,
where are the girls, there's nothing there, he climbs up on a huge mountain and apparently
sees the interior of Iceland and realizes oh my gosh there's nothing here, we are in the wrong
place, names the island Snowland and he says what it is in north, gets back in his ship and
immediately goes back to the Faroes to look for Ireland where he wants to carry out some rates
but he does report the existence of this island. The third discoverer is, well he's kind of a
discoverer and settler in the same vein, is a Norwegian and he's known very often in the sources
as Raven Flocky, or sometimes Flocky the Lucky and he headed up an expedition with cattle and
settlers to establish a colony out in this new area and he sailed to Brightafjord, landed there
and set up a farmstead, unfortunately he didn't put in enough hay, his animals all died over the
winter, he was locked in by the glaciers and the icebergs and he abandoned the project and went
home to Norway and simply said this was a hopeless venture but the members of the crew were not
as pessimistic as Flocky or Raven Flocky, the reason it's called Raven Flocky, he used to release
Ravens at regular intervals to see if they would come back or not, if they didn't come back that
meant Iceland was nearby and common way of determining where the land was in sight and the
other members of the crew however said look there's lots of land, ample opportunity for pasture,
not much timber, it's only dwarf birch and other trees but no Irish, no English to fight and very
very quickly in the eight seventies and eight eighties and the crowded districts of Western
Norway and Trondelog many Norwegians decide to make the trip and somewhere between eight seventy
and nine thirty Iceland fills up with settlers from Norway, the Icelanders are very conscious of
their genealogy and their descent of the original settlers and we have some remarkable works that
were put down based on oral tradition that record the settlers who went there and this was work put
together by Ari Thorgelsson known very often as Ari the learned, he lived from 1067 to 1148, he
composed two books, the most important of his books is the Land Nama book which means in Norse the
land taking book or the book of settlements is how it's usually translated, it is a coherent
narrative, it's a narrative he put together from family sources and traditions, earlier reports
and he names over 430 settlers by name who brought their dependents and families mostly from
Western Norway and Northern Norway to Iceland in this 40 or 50 year period and it is from this
book that we're able to deduce and scholars debate on this whether it's 5,000, 10,000 or 15,000
people crossed the North Atlantic and these cargo vessels, the canard, the ships that have been
reconstructed from the Danish finds to with their families, with their animals to settle in Iceland
and set up farmsteads and take over this free land and very quickly, just over a generation, the
island fills up, they included some very prominent people from Western Norway, I mentioned one of
them, Un the Deep-Minded or sometimes known as Out the Deep-Minded, two versions of the same name,
she's typical, she's the sister of Helgi the Lean, I mentioned earlier, that's one of her
brothers, she was married to a very famous Viking, she claimed descent from a guy called Olaf the
White who may or may not have been the Norse king of Dublin, she left Norway according to what
were told in the various sagas, particularly Laxdala Saga and Jal Saga, two great family sagas
that are some of the finest family sagas that have come down to us, that she left because she
really was dismayed by the unification of Norway under Harald, a fine hare and her departure is
somewhere between 900 and 915 and there's sort of a minor scholarly debate about this but the
Icelanders were convinced that it wasn't not only, it was not only the attraction of free land
and no opposition of taking that free land but that many Norwegians had made the trip across
the Atlantic to escape the tyranny of Harald Fine Hare who somewhere between 880 and 930
imposed his authority over Norway by using the professional Viking companies, the great fleets
of the Viking Age. Now many immigrants may not have been so motivated, Un the Deep-Minded is a
remarkable lady, she sailed from Norway to the Orkneys, married a daughter off, went to the
Shetlands, went to the Faroes, marrying daughters off to leading figures all the way and eventually
landed on eastern Iceland and settled on Breidafjord on the west. Her voyage is very significant,
the voyage to Iceland was probably made about 915 and one of the most impressive side comments made
in that voyage in the sagas is that it was a good voyage that even though the ship was wrecked
when they arrived at Iceland none of the passengers or and none of the cargo was lost
which gives you some sort of sense of the dangers of sailing even when sea routes were well known.
This act of colonization you know from 879 30 even though even though they knew the direction
it was a chance at all times going out into the North Atlantic with these Viking ships.
I think of Eric the Reds effort to colonize Greenland, he set sail with 25 ships to Greenland
only 18 of them made it. In any case she is typical of the leading Norwegians who go to Iceland
and there is a sense among Icelanders and this affects their laws, their saga histories, their
self-image that they were tough and rugged people their ancestors who were not going to buckle under
kings to kings and it is one reason why the Icelanders are so conscious about governing
themselves by the ancient dramatic assembly the thing and eventually Iceland will be divided into
four quarters. Each quarter will have its own things that it's its assemblies and that all of
these assemblies will eventually send representatives after 930 to a national all thing a all thing
is literally it's obviously the north is almost the same as the English that is the national assembly
to adjudicate cases among Icelanders disputes law cases and also to handle what little foreign
policy and national policy was necessary that is the ratification of a treaty maybe with the
Norwegian king the conversion of Iceland to Christianity and 1000 is ratified in the all
thing and so what Icelanders saw themselves were as a group of rugged settlers and who came out to
this distant island and carved out a new society based on ancient dramatic practices of governing
themselves and very very intensely proud of that independence. There are no cities or towns in
Iceland they Iceland they are isolated farmsteads that is a leading figure such as the deep minded
or Helgi the lean built a large farm usually overlooking a fjord and and set up against a
a range of hills that gave them easy access to pasture and to well what forest they had at the
time dwarf trees so that they could move their animals up to the pastures and they also had
easy access to a protected fjord where shifts could come in and beach themselves so that you had
farmsteads which might involve family units of at most several hundred people many of them are 50
people some of them are very small there is constant movement you know riding from farmstead to
farmstead they're sailing along the shores that keep these people together there are the social
meetings of the quarter sessions of the things that it's each quarter of iceland after 9 30 has
has regional things there's the great national thing that meets in southwestern iceland today
at at thing valar where they're they're all able to come together and decide but it is a land
without cities without the need for government there's taxes any of that and it is governed by
a society of independent farmsteads dominated by the really inadequate word for this is a chieftain
a goatee or gothe an old Norse gothar in the plural who acts as the adjudicator and mediator
of these extended families grouped around the farmsteads which we'll discuss in more detail
in upcoming lectures and so what you have in iceland is a society in some ways that brought
political institutions from scandinavia which simplified or even devolved into a much simpler
pattern of government and it is a remarkable experiment in self-government and the icelanders
themselves to this day refer to their viking age from the time of settlement in the eight
seventies and eight eighties down to uh really down to uh 12 64 when the last thing except that
the norwegian king is their lord that uh which is often known as the free republic or the independent
republic of iceland uh that is a society governed by its landed classes uh meeting and assemblies
without the need of kings without the need of governments armies taxes and all of that
um the uh all thing also turned out to be the major social institution that kept the icelanders
together in reading the sagas icelanders would go to these legislative meetings and that's where
they would conduct marriages uh business contracts and to give you some idea of how simple the
society was that emerged in iceland there wasn't any kind of formal structure uh when you go to
the all thing uh and it's now a national park in iceland there's these beautiful falls it's in
a marvelous setting uh there's a place known as the law rock where the law speaker who's elected
for a three-year term stands and recites the law from memory one third each year and he's got other
fellows around there go um um godar that is uh chieftains who make sure he doesn't make any mistakes
uh if you have any kind of major settlement you wish to announce you will announce it at the
law rock if you wish to bring a uh prosecution against your neighbor it would be it would be
announced there the mediation would assume ensue according to customary law and so the social
political even a great deal of the economic life revolved around uh these assemblies for
self-governance and otherwise the society was remarkably self-regulating and this is the society
reflected in the sagas and uh in the poetry that has come down to us well um the um icelanders
therefore saw no real need to ever set up something like an army or a fleet and the irony is the type
of society that was created in iceland uh by 9 30 increasingly comes to depend on trade with
norway and with norwegians doing the trade as in the case and this is where an interesting
analogy can be made to england as in the case of the danes who settled in england the norwegians
who went out to iceland were primarily interested in pasture stock raising setting up their own
farms and property and in so doing they turned themselves from vikings and um a seaman into
farmers they still have a remarkable viking spirit in them in the way they weighed blood feud which
will be the topic of a good deal of an upcoming lecture but nonetheless they lose their skills
in navigation furthermore they have landed on an island in which they cut down the dwarf trees
and proceed to change the island ecologically and by the early uh 12th century have essentially
wiped out the trees and are ruining the island so that they are essentially marooned without the
import of timber and foodstuffs from norway iceland can't survive and that norwegian connection
becomes all important in determining the direction of later icelandic society in the viking age
so
you
