In this lecture, I plan to look at the conditions that gave rise to Scaldic poetry, which is
a later version of the poetry I discussed earlier. And the Icelandic sagas, and those
sagas come in several different guises. One are the famous family sagas that deal with
Icelanders of the Viking age and just after the Viking age, or just after the conversion
to Christianity in 1000. As well as sagas dealing with times past, these would be the
sagas of the Volsungs and Rolf Krocke of which I spoke earlier. And finally, a whole class
of sagas that are essentially translations of general European literature. All of this
literature is produced in Iceland. Much of it comes down on manuscripts of the 13th through
the 15th centuries. And it is a major question, why did Iceland turn out to be the repository
of all this literature and the source of the production of all this literature? Icelandic
literature is often hailed as one of the miracles of the Middle Ages. That is, the
literature that was produced in Iceland is still read today. It has inspired later Scandinavian
authors. There are numerous studies to point to the connections between Icelandic literature
and the production of the modern novel or drama as we know it in Scandinavia today, both
in terms of themes and language and images. And there's this continuous tradition of writing
in the Scandinavian vernacular languages that goes back to Iceland of the Middle Ages. Now
there were some peculiar conditions that allowed Iceland to take this role. And it's important
to stress that the literature that survives outside of Iceland dealing with the Viking age
in the rest of Scandinavia is not nearly of the same size and diversity of what we have in Iceland.
Primarily they are written in Latin. These are Latin chronicles from Denmark or very often
their works that have been written by Icelanders who were resident in Norway particularly. So you're
essentially looking at the production of literature by the colonists out on this remote island whose
population never really attained more than 70,000 according to most estimates in the Viking age.
Well, there were several peculiar conditions for this. And scholars have debated this issue a great
deal. What led to the creation of this Scaldic poetry and these sagas? Why Iceland? Why the
particular literary dialect of Norse which is essentially an Icelandic dialect as it existed
from say 1100 to 1250 or 1350? Why here did we get all this literary production? Well, one reason
is that the Icelanders were colonists. They had fled from Norway under the pressures of
Harold Finehair and in the desire to take land. And in settling the new land, this empty island,
they quickly filled it up with their homesteads which were scattered settlements quite remote
below the Arctic Circle with long winters, ice bound winters where for maybe six or seven
months of the year there was really no shipping leaving Iceland. And furthermore in these conditions
there was a need for both hospitality and entertainment. This is evident in all of the
family sagas that come down to us where poets would be particularly appreciated, people who could
recount stories of the gods, of the heroes or of figures that were well known to the Icelanders
in the early Christian age that is their ancestors in effect. And so the living conditions alone
intensified that need for storytelling, poetry which was already evident in Scandinavia. I
discussed that earlier in several lectures. And the result was a great delight in the
technique of storytelling. Second, as colonists who lived in these extremely harsh conditions,
they were more conscious in some ways of their origins than those who stayed in the Scandinavian
homeland. They proudly pointed to noble ancestors in Norway or in some instances genealogies that
linked them back to with usually Danish kings. Rolf Krocki, for instance, is claimed as the
ancestor of several Icelandic families. Rolf or Rolo, the man who established the Duchy of Normandy,
other legendary kings were all included in this. And it's just one of a number of instances where
the Icelanders are keenly interested about their ancestry, about their connections to Scandinavian
traditions. And so they more than their kinsmen who stayed in the homeland appreciated the myths,
the tales, and the traditions that come down to us in the poetry and saga. The Icelanders also
govern themselves in a peculiar way. We believe that all dramatic societies were based on some
type of assembly or thing. And I've made reference to this going back to at least the Roman age,
where Roman authors notice this assembly of free men, very often armed, who elect kings, decide peace
and war, pass later on what we would call legislation. And we'll encounter this in the
emergence of the Scandinavian kingdoms in the homeland, where kings have to be ratified in the
things and the regional assemblies of free men. Well, the Icelanders took this method of governance
and really applied it on a scale that you did not see in the Scandinavian homeland. I mentioned
they did not have the need for the institutions of government. There was no foreign threat.
Most law or justice was carried out on a very face-to-face basis by the so-called Gotar or
Goethi. Those are the, for lack of a better word, Chieftains, the resident men in the district.
They were men who knew and understood customary law. If you could not work out a settlement
on, for instance, a blood feud or a property arrangement or trespass or any kind of civil suit,
as we would call it, you then would resort to the thing. These were the quarter things or the
national all thing. And there, the importance of those assemblies were far greater than they
were in the Scandinavian homeland. This was the, this is in effect the court of last resort,
the court of last appeal. And in this assembly was a law speaker and it was his job to reconcile
disputing parties. He would be checked by other Gotar or Gotar. I mean, you could
transliterate that symbol either as a D or a Th. And the law speaker was expected to act
as an arbiter and he had no writing. It was all done by memory. It was part of Icelandic law that
the law speaker be able to recite at the Law Rock where you would name your witnesses and bring
your suit. At least one third of the Icelandic customary law each year. The law giver was elected
for a term of three years and could be reelected. And I would stress a significant point between
the establishment of the all thing and 930 and the conversion to Christianity. And with the
conversion of Christianity comes the advent of writing. There is a number of possible law speakers
you can have. But what comes down to us is that there are only five individuals who would be
serving on average a term of 18 years, even though they technically were elected for three year
terms. That is men were reelected as law speaker repeatedly, partially because they were sagacious,
but they also had that ability to memorize and recite. And the advent of writing in the 11th
century results in much shorter terms for law speakers, which is an evidence that no longer
this ability to memorize and recite accurately is all that important to qualification. You now
have writing and you can depend on writing rather than on memory. So the entire society put a great
stress on memory, recitation, the ability to explain, to create ornate and beautiful language,
and also to recite in very strict poetic forms or in legal language or religious language,
which had a certain technique, a certain cadence to it. There is a fair amount of study that would
indicate that Icelandic legal language is essentially religious language simply recast.
That is, you repeat the laws very similarly to the way you repeat prayers to the banner,
to Thor, to Odin. You don't want to upset the gods by in any way deviating from the traditional
invocation. And most gotars or gotars would have been adept both at invoking the gods in
communal prayers as well as reciting law, and in the case of a law, law dispute. So these conditions
absolutely incline the Icelanders to excelling and storytelling both in its poetic form and then
in its prose narrative. There was another important point about Iceland, which again differed from
the Scandinavian homeland and gives us something of a preview of the last third of this course,
and that was the act of conversion itself. I mentioned that the Icelanders voted Christianity
as the religion of all. Essentially, with the all things said in the summer of 1000,
there should be only one religion. This act of conversion is a remarkable event in Iceland
for two reasons. First, it was essentially a compromise, a settlement, a mediation that is
typical of all Icelanders and their day to day dealings. And you can look at this act of the
all things is essentially the same as the type of compromises that are discussed in family sagas.
When two families are disputing and they're going to resort to blood feud, instead you intervene,
you pay compensation for the killed relatives, you work out a settlement, you come to some sort
of agreement to prevent the violence from getting out of hand. And that's essentially what went on
in 1000. That is the pagan majority in part pressured by the fact that the king of Norway would
suspend trade on which all Icelanders depended if they didn't convert, but the pagan majority
agreed to accept the ruling of a Christian minority to accept Christianity as the official
religion of the republic. Now that act meant there was no kind of violence against priests,
burning of temples, the type of zealous actions that are often associated with the conversion of
an area to Christianity in the middle ages, where the ancient gods are condemned as demons,
their statues are overthrown, in some cases the priests might be killed, and you bring in
hardcore monks who are trained in a tradition right out of the Old Testament, just as Elijah
attacking the altars of Baal in the kingdom of Israel. That didn't happen. But there's another
point that's often missed in this story, and that is Icelandic law really had no way of imposing
any kind of general decision. And so the act of conversion in 1000 was an official act. What one
did on his farmstead was his own business. That was private property. If anyone came onto your
farmstead to check up on your religious affiliation, well that was a trespass.
And there is a good reason to believe that during much of the 11th century,
many Icelanders very, very happily would go to the thing, the quarter sessions or to the all thing,
conform to the public Christianity, bet at home, continue to worship the gods,
because that was a private matter, that was something they did with their family,
and there was no one in there to go in and check up on them. There was no ordinary Episcopal structure
that we would think of in Western Europe. There were no kings. There were very, very few monasteries,
and these come much later. And so what happened is that the transition to Christianity was,
to Christianity, was gradual. And in the process, the Icelanders revered the old stories, the old
tales and legends. They also revered their pagan ancestors, and there are a number of instances
reported in the sagas, and now dramatically demonstrated by the excavations headed up by
Jesse Bayox's team in the Mosul Valley, that Mosfell Valley near Reykjavik, that in many instances,
Christian Icelanders dug up the bodies of their pagan ancestors and buried them in church yards.
In effect, there's a ex post facto baptism going on here. So with all of these conditions,
the Icelanders really embraced the ancient traditions and put them down into poetry and saga.
Well, that gets us to the two great literary achievements that come down to us from Iceland,
and as I mentioned, without this literature, we would really be in the dark about the old dramatic
gods, and I discuss those gods in considerable detail in an earlier lecture. In the case of the
poetry that is composed in the 9th and 10th centuries, the Icelanders settled their new
homeland at a very important point in the literary development of Norse. They still did not have
a written, a real alphabet. I mean, they were the runic letters, but they weren't used for
composition. But in the late 9th century and 10th century, when the first wave of settlers arrived
in Iceland, there was an extremely important development in the poetry of Scandinavia.
The Viking Age had given a new search to poetic activity, one that led to the
adapting of the old meters into many more forms. I believe I mentioned that earlier,
that you get all different types of couplets. There's eight basic types of stanzas you've created.
The language was evolving so that Icelandic or Norse in general, but the Icelandic dialect we
have has all of these beautiful monosyllabic or disyllabic words that are ideal for poetry.
There is an incredibly rich vocabulary with lots of synonyms that could be used in poetry,
and the working out of these complicated kennings, these extended metaphors, which could take
several forms. They could be a rather mundane object referred to in an oblique way. That is,
the warrior's helm, meaning a tall warrior who is compared to a tree helm. Or you could talk of a
ship as the sea steed. Or you could get even more elaborate and talk about, I believe a common
example is Granny's burden that is gold carried by Granny the Horse of Seagard. Or the seed of
Friesvillor, that is the field where Rolf Krocky sowed it with gold on his escape from Upsala.
And so you have a combination of these types of kennings to fill out the line.
Well, these developments in Norse poetry occurred at the time when the Icelanders were moving into
their new homeland, and the Icelanders absolutely embraced the recitation of this poetry, and
particularly by poets or scowls who began in effect to sign their work, and actually sign it in a
literary production, but is at the end of the ninth century that we begin to get the names of poets,
which we never had before. The earliest one we know is a Norwegian known as Braggie the Old,
and he composed a poem, Ragnis drapna, that is the shield of Ragnar, Ragnar Lodbrok,
who's thrown into a snake pit in England, and that is a description of the shield's
various mythological designs, and that poem is an extremely important transition from the earlier
heroic poetry. It's seen as the first of the Scaldic poems, and these are poems in a much more
complicated and demanding verse, cluttered with kennings and allusions to earlier myths and legends,
and also poems that are now being associated with individuals. Braggie the Old lived somewhere
between 850 and 900. He was writing immediately after the death of Ragnar, and so to some extent
the Viking Age is spurring on poets to come up with more marvelous poems and ways of reciting
the current heroes, and that poetry is being developed just at the time of the settlement of
Iceland, and the Icelanders become absolutely adept in reciting it. By the 10th century,
Icelanders capture essentially the poet market in Scandinavia. They are within the second or
third generation of the settlement of the island, regarded as the premier scalds in the northern
lands, and starting from the 10th century on, we get the names of various poets, and many of their
poems, they don't survive in Toto, but they're often cited within family sagas and other sagas
of the 13th and 14th century. We get long stanzas, and you read these sagas. One thinks, for
instance, Njál saga, which is the longest of the family sagas, and in some ways the most famous.
There are many instances in that saga where someone who is regarded extremely witty and
or often sharp tongue, men and women both, are just ready to come up with a couplet on the spot
to describe a situation. It might have been an insult, it might be a prophetic utterance,
I'm going to get back at you. And this is a society that literally thinks in poetry all the time,
and is constantly thinking in terms of alliterating, devising new verses, and as a result, we know
the names of numerous scalds that have come down to us, poets. In one manual alone in the 13th
century, 146 different scalds are named, all of them Icelanders, and many of their poems are listed.
We have fragments or parts of these poems embedded in the sagas, and this gives you some idea of the
extent and the diversity of the literary tradition that emerges in Iceland. And this poetry then,
which was everywhere present in Icelandic society, by the time of the act of conversion in 1000,
continued. Once Iceland converted to Christianity in 1000, they received the benefit of writing
of the Latin alphabet. Now there again, it took a little time. As I mentioned, it might have been
two or three generations, that is much of the 11th century, from 1000 to 1100, when Icelanders
really began to understand what conversion meant, that they were now Christians. It is at that same
time that they begin to appreciate the power of writing down poetry and other traditions.
And it is only towards the end of the 11th century, we suspect, that writing becomes widespread among
the wealthier classes in Iceland. And there are several indications of this. One is that Bishop
Gisar Islifson, who was a Bishop of Iceland from 1082 to 1106, made the first census of Iceland,
which is actually the basis of all the very dubious demographic figures that we give you.
And this was a counting of households in order to collect the tithes necessary to
maintain church institutions. Nonetheless, it was an accounting, it was an important document,
it was written down, and that is the first kind of census we know of in Iceland. And it probably
represents an important step in committing information to writing. At the same time, as I noted,
the Icelanders begin to elect law speakers for shorter terms. That is, men only serve for three
years or six years at most. Someone new comes in, quite different from the earlier situation,
where you kept re-electing men who had that ability to recite the memory of the ancient laws,
the traditions, and also the prayers that were invoked to the gods when the assemblies were pagan.
And finally, somewhere around 1115, 1116, the customary laws of Iceland are finally written
down in what are known as the Gragas, that is the gray goose laws. What we believe it is,
at the end of the 11th century, the beginning of the 12th century, that Icelanders start
adapting writing to their literary production and start writing down the poems. And this is a major
step. It allows for the composition of these poems, the most famous collection represented in the
poetic edda, which I've mentioned earlier, and the origin and date of these poems is still
highly disputed. They are in a literary Icelandic. They are probably written at the earliest. They
would not have been committed to writing until somewhere towards the end of the 11th century,
the beginning of the 12th century. Yet they're in extremely archaic language. They show the
oral techniques of recitation, the complicated meters of the scowls, of which we have lots of
comments and scowls who were operating at least since the 9th century, such as Braga the Old and
his successors. And so the sense of it is that the Icelanders, under their peculiar conditions
and the way they received Christianity and learned writing, were able to write down these poems to
give at least a relatively faithful reflection of what poetry was like in the Viking Age. And
those poems were read and recited now in written form and become the basis of the manual of Snorri
Sturlson, written about 1220. And I've mentioned Snorri's prose edda. It was written in three parts,
and the first part is essentially a handbook of mythology. But the second part is an extremely
important instruction on how to use Kennings, how to write metaphorical language, and how to
master those complicated verses, which increasingly are going to require writing, because the verses
and the illusions become more and more ornate, and more and more is being committed to writing.
And what that manual of Snorri shows, and the numerous poems that he cites in part, is that
poetry now evolves to essentially a literary production and is appreciated by the courts of
the kings of Denmark and Norway, and the Icelanders are supplying this market. That's where we get
this document from Norway, mentioning 146 Icelandic scalds, who are known for various types of poems.
And the types of poems become more diverse. You have poems for funerary occasions. You have poems
to honor patrons. The third part of the prose edda, the hatetal, for instance, is Snorri's own
effort at those types of poems. That is, I guess we would call it as a panagyric. It's a poem
honoring the patron of Snorri, who happens to be Jarl Hacken at the
Norwegian court. And what he's in effect saying, look, this is how you do it the right way now,
that we have this type of excellence in poetry. So as a result, not only the myths and the legends
and the traditions of the past are preserved, but a whole new literary type of poetry is created in
Iceland based on these traditions, but celebrating the current kings, various types of events,
and applied, starting in the 13th and 14th century, to other types of poetry, including translations
of general European and Christian works. At the same time of the shift over to writing, where
you're starting to put your poetry down in written form, the Icelanders' techniques in storytelling
is likewise put to writing. And this gives rise to one of the most remarkable forms of literature
that we have in the Middle Ages, and that is the Icelandic prose saga, which still endures today
as perhaps some of the most attractive literature that comes from the Middle Ages. For moderns,
who essentially are, I always think most of us are like Monsieur Jardin in the bourgeois
janteaume of Molière, we're all astonished to learn somewhere in our lives that we speak prose.
For a modern age that essentially speaks prose and doesn't really appreciate poetry, it's not
valued to the same degree, it's not the same type of communal experience, the prose sagas of Iceland
have an immediate attraction because they impress us as the equivalent of the novel, especially the
historical novel in its modern sense. And many an argument can be made that this type of prose narrative
feeds very much into a very rich tradition of novel that still survives in Scandinavia today.
Now prose sagas are quite a different type of genre from poetry. They are a genre that is
premised on writing. The stories might be traditional, they might be of Ralph Krocke,
they might be of the Valsungs, based on the old poems, or they might be dealing with the lives
of ordinary Icelanders, or not maybe ordinary, but you know fairly prominent but certainly
not kings or princes or heroes in the traditional sense, Icelanders of the 10th and 11th century
who are caught up in these webs of family intrigue and clashes and blood feuds that have given rise
to well over 40 very, very brilliantly written family sagas. And this type of composition,
continuous prose narrative is the hallmark of a literate culture. It indicates several aspects
about Iceland and the way it transforms itself into this literate Christian culture. For one,
there is a large readership with an appetite for reading these types of tales, talking about
the immediate ancestors of the Icelandic Republic. And if you read through these sagas, and many
times certain families appear in several sagas and you actually get to piece different perceptions
on these people, these sagas are well known to all the Icelanders because many of them are
related to these figures or at least know about these families because they happen to be the,
you know, one of the leading figures of the goathy of the district or was descended from
someone who carried out the original act of settlement. And so the sagas have very much
the quality of the historical novel. They are accurate in many details. They give the impression
that on the one hand these are, you know, not quite history as we understand it, but certainly
plausible ways of looking into some of the social and legal conditions in the Viking age.
And that the audience demands. They have to have a certain sort of veracity in the social
settings and legal settings. Of course, you're dealing with the actions of exceptional figures,
not necessarily normal life. These are cases of blood feud and other great disputes. On the other
hand, the sagas also represent a work that one could read silently, alone, appreciate the action,
appreciate the very matter of fact way in which these cases are presented to you.
And therefore you're dealing with a literature that's written for a very different social setting
than the culture of the Great Hall, which was the basis for generating all that poetry in the
Viking age. And the sagas represent a very, very important shift in the readership and attitudes
and reflections of expectations of Icelandic society and Scandinavian society in general
that shows them being moved into the mainstream of European literature and European thought.
And yet at the same time, adapting the storytelling technique in a particularly Icelandic way.
And there's a whole class of sagas. I mentioned them briefly at the start of this lecture that
really deserved more study. There is a very good effort on the part of the Penguin Classics people
to put out new modern translations of sagas. In each year, several of them appear. They're usually
family sagas or they're the Saga of Rolf Krocke of the Vulsung Saga. These things are immediate
instant successes to the modern readership. They are the equivalent of reading a really
wonderful historical novel. But there's a whole class of sagas that really have not been translated,
or if they're translated, they're in, you know, very, very old editions and rather archaic language.
And this is a third class of sagas, which include Arthurian legend. They include various
Christian works, some of which we would call Hagiography. For instance, tales of Christian kings
who later became canonized as saints and not necessarily Scandinavian kings. These could
be kings anywhere in Europe. An enormous amount of material on the very rich romances surrounding
Alexander the Great figure from Antiquity was very popular in the Middle Ages. French romance,
especially starting in the 12th and 13th century. And all of these sagas are prose renditions
very often of poetry from a general European context being rendered into Norse prose,
into that elegant lean Norse prose that is the hallmark of family sagas and the sagas of past
time, which is, again, yet another indication of the maturing of the Icelandic readership
and audience and the integration and assimilation of Scandinavia into that wider literary culture
of later medieval Europe. And so, as one scholar has often put it, one of the greatest treasures
to come out of the Viking Age, one of the greatest accomplishments of the Viking Age
was the settlement of Iceland, which provided the conditions for the production of this literature.
