In this lecture, I plan to start a series of three lectures that deal with the Vikings
in Eastern Europe, and these would be primarily Swedes. There are some Finns and Danes that
are recorded in the sources as well, and they're often known by one of two terms. One is the
ruse, a term of obscure origin. There's several explanations for the origin of that term,
and later a term known as Viringian, meaning men of the Pledge or Pledgemen. And that term
often is reserved for Scandinavians of the later 10th century, 11th century, who end
up in the city of Constantinople and serve the Byzantine emperor. But very often ruse and
Viringian are used as synonyms describing Scandinavians and the descendants of Scandinavians
operating in what eventually comes to be Russia, or today a good deal of that is actually the
Republic of Ukraine, sent in on Kiev. Well, the Swedes for centuries had had ties with the
eastern shores of the Baltic, particularly the southern shores of Finland. The Swedes
had settled the islands quite early. There has been a succession of settlements we suspect
along the southwestern and southern shores of Finland, where Swedish immigrants intermixed
with the local populations there. And they were then to be drawn into the river systems
of Russia starting from about 750 AD. And I think what we need to do in this lecture
is to explain what were the areas in which these Swedes would operate, the geography,
which is really quite daunting in some ways, as the western geography we just finished lecturing
about that is the great voyages of discovery to Greenland and to Iceland and Finland. Then
the second point is to deal with the types of people that the Swedes encountered. And
here the Swedes differ from their kinsmen in western Europe, that is the Danes and Norwegians,
because the Swedish Vikings came into contact with a great variety of different people on
different levels of civilization. And the relationships are quite different in some
ways from those in western Europe. And then we can get some appreciation and understand
how these trade routes were exploited by the Swedes in the 8th and 9th centuries and why
the axis of Swedish trade would change in the mid 9th century with major consequences coming
up in future lectures. So we essentially have three issues to deal with here. As I mentioned,
starting around 750, we believe that there is contact already in the Russian forest zones,
as we like to call them. And this is in part based on archaeological excavation from Berka,
that is the great port on Lake Malloran. And you'll note in this lecture that a good deal of
our evidence is coming from archaeology and that our sources are almost exclusively sources written
by non-scanonavians. These are Arab geographers, there are at least four major such accounts.
The most important is by Ibn Fadlan, who was an envoy of the Abbasid caliphate on the Volga
River in the year 921-922. There's a lot of reports from Byzantine accounts, these are written
in Greek, by historians and other authors in the city of Constantinople. And then we will
encounter a document known as the Russian primary chronicle that's put together somewhere around
1115. It's in Slavic, it's written in the Great Cave Monastery near Kiev and records various
legends and traditions about the original settlement of Russia by the Scandinavian
Rus or Swedish Rus. So that the Scandinavians themselves do not provide the sort of documentation
that we have in Western Europe and especially in Iceland and in the great voyages in the
western seas. So sometime in the mid eighth century, based on coin finds and other products arriving
in Berka, it's clear that the Swedes have established trade connections along the Volga. There have
been excavations of several market towns in Russia. One of the most important is the future city of
Novgorod, Holngard as it's known in Norse, which means Hill City. There was apparently an earlier
establishment near Lake Ladoga and it's Algygsyburg, which is ideally stationed for trade coming out
of the Gulf of Finland and for those Vikings who want to take their ships by portage to the upper
Volga and sail down the Volga ultimately to the Caspian Sea. Whereas Novgorod is positioned on a
different set of systems that's on the Volkov River and the Ilmen Lake axis and from Novgorod you
actually go south, directly south and eventually pick up the Nyeper by a series of portages and
you go into the Black Sea. It is this Volga route that will be developed first. That is the earlier
route while the archaeology points that way and the minimal literary sources we have also seem to
confirm this. So from the start the Swedes were attracted out to these areas as a combination
of merchant princes and slavers. The biggest commodity as I noted was going to be the slave trade
and the Swedes will be obtaining slaves largely by raiding the peoples of Eastern Europe,
notably Slavs. They were also engaged in the export of products of the forest and the arctic
products, the furs. These are obtained from laps and fins and other people through trade connections
and all of this material will be traded along the Volga and in return silver and the commodities of
the Islamic world will be then brought back to the Baltic and end up at the Swedish market towns.
Well what were the types of peoples that the Swedes were going to encounter on these two
river systems? That is the great system of the Nyeper and the Volga River system,
both the western and the eastern trade routes. They could be classified in one of several ways.
One is to just deal with them linguistically and maybe that is the best and easiest way to
classify them. The Swedes came into contact with people who spoke a variety of different
mutually unintelligible languages and they fall into different language groups.
None of these languages would be understood by the Swedes. There could be a lot of misunderstanding
that would take time before you'd have bilinguals and undoubtedly in that slave trade what was
important were especially women who could act as translators. That's one of the reasons why
the Swedish roots always have local women around with them. They generally, from my experience,
many of your best translators, simultaneous translators are women and they're able to pick up
on the language and act as translators between their Swedish masters and their native populations.
First and foremost there were people of different, speaking different Finno-Ugurian languages.
This is a gluten of language structure. It's related to the italic Turkish languages rather
remotely. These would include Finns, Laps, other people living in the northern zones.
In the case of the Finns and the Laps, Scandinavians had long contact with them.
Finns, especially along the southern shore, were agriculturalists. They'd been in contact with
Swedes. Some of them actually teamed up with the Swedish Vikings to go east. The Laps and their
kin were settled across the Arctic zones and in the forest. The Kari liens are another group.
All of these people would provide the furs necessary in the great fur trade. It seems that
this was not the source of your slaves. These people were too valuable as Arctic nomads,
people who had domesticated the reindeer, knew how to travel these great distances,
and could get the high-grade pelts that would bring in the great prices, the seal skins, the
walrus ivory, which was in high demand. There are also other members of this Finno-Ugurian
language. These are people known as the Majars or Hungarians, the ancestors of the modern Hungarians.
They spoke a related language, but they lived a very different lifestyle. They were nomads of
the steppes. That is, they had acquired very much the ability to move across the south Russian steppes,
exploiting the landscape, steppes nomads, handling their herds of sheep and horses,
and absolutely similar in their customs to the Turkmen. The Majars were encountered very early
by the Swedes and probably posed something of a problem. They were potential competitors for
the slave trade, but fortunately from the Swedish viewpoint, these guys eventually moved west.
There was actually a Byzantine miscalculation and diplomacy. The Byzantines are always
moving tribes around to attack each other, and somehow the Majars got relocated by a Byzantine
diplomatic mistake for war in Bulgaria from southern Russia to where they are now, where
they plague Western Europe for the next 60 years. That group of related languages that I've just
mentioned, these different people, showed that the language was not so important very often than the
type of life they pursued. That is, were they Arctic nomads, were they steppes nomads, or were
they people of the forest? And the Finno-Ugurian peoples have essentially both. They have Arctic
nomads and steppes nomads. That gets us to the second big language group of people encountered,
and these would be people speaking Turkic languages, and there are three extremely important people
that figure in the Viking experience in Eastern Europe. Two of them are settled communities of
sorts. They're on the Volga, on the middle and lower Volga. One group are known as the Bulgars.
These were Turkmen. That is nomadic steppe people. Turkmen refers to Turkish speakers of the steppe
as opposed to Turk, which means anyone who's speaking a Turkish dialect or language. These
people had established tent cities, and eventually they grew into fortified settlements, including
the town of Bulgar, named after the ethnic tribe. They were remotely related to the kinsmen who
migrated into the Balkans and gave their name to the modern area of Bulgaria,
which is a whole different outfit. These Bulgars were in close association with the Islamic world,
and over the course of the ninth and tenth century, many of them converted to Islam,
almost to a folk Islam, and just south of them on the lower Volga were a related Turkmen people
known as the Khazars. Their great market town city was at Atil at the mouth of the Volga River,
just as it entered the Caspian Sea. Well, the Bulgars and the Khazars, who essentially controlled
the river route of the Volga, were the first serious trading partners that the Swedes came into
contact with. Starting in the early eighth century, Swedes brought their ships, the Qanar and warships,
across to the Volga, and ended up in these market towns swapping various goods, and the Bulgars and
the Khazars both were bringing in goods from the Islamic world, which were shipped over the
Caspian Sea, and goods that originated in Iran or in Baghdad. But excavations and study of these
products have shown that the scale of this trade, as it mounted, starting from about 800 on, that
many of these so-called Islamic products were actually being manufactured in the Volga Valley,
among these these Khanates or Kaganates, the the head of a Turkmen tribe is usually known as a Khan
or a Kagan, that the goods were being created for the export trade to Scandinavia. That is,
the success in the early eighth century and ninth century was so great, and the Scandinavians became
accustomed to demanding Arabic silver coins, different types of furniture, aromatics, ceramics,
textiles, especially silks and tapestries, that it was now worth it for the Turkmen tribes to produce
their own version of Islamic goods, cut out the expense of importing them directly from Baghdad,
and then selling them to the Swedes on the Volga, which is a significant indication of the scale
and importance of this trade, and then these products went to Berka, to Hedibi, and out to
places in Western Europe, they end up in places like York and Dublin. So that trade connection
proved extremely powerful down to about 975, and it is the primary trade access connecting
Scandinavia, particularly Sweden, the cities, the market towns around Lake Malloran and the
island of Gotland with the eastern markets. There were other Turkmen tribes who roamed the
southeastern steppes of Russia today, that is the Great Steppe system that runs from the lower
Danube all the way to the lower Volga, just north of the Black Sea and just west of the Caspian Sea.
These are the traditional zones of the Great Steppe Empires going back into antiquity,
and starting sometime in the late 9th century, a new people emerged known as the Pecheniks.
The Pecheniks actually pushed the Magyars out in part, they were allied to the Byzantine
emperors, they were known by their eight hordes of the Pecheniks, they were reputed to be the most
deadly horsemen on the Russian steppes of the 9th, 10th and 11th centuries. They had perfected
the composite bow, they are your classic warrior horse archer, and these are some of the most
difficult opponents you'll ever encounter. Furthermore, especially for the western routes
going down the Nyeper, at any point where the Norse would have to take a ship to get around a set
of rapids or falls, there's a famous set of them on the Lower Nyeper, or if they're trying to make
a portage. If they're doing this on the steppe zone, they very much run the risk of being attacked
by Pecheniks who could wipe out the group very quickly. The final group of people were Indo-European
speakers, and these were peoples of the forests, and they spoke languages that belonged to the
great Indo-European language family, but again these languages had evolved into quite independent
dialects by the time the Russe appeared in the 8th century. Along the eastern and southern shores
of the Baltic, there were different people who spoke what are today known as Baltic languages,
highly inflected, very, very archaic languages and some of their structure. These are today the
languages of Lithuanian and Latvian, but there were other such peoples, the people known as the
Prussians, who gave their name to Prussia, which was later Germanized, these people get essentially
exterminated in the 13th century. There were Letts, there were Livonians, there were Curlanders,
but all of these people occupying now what would be the shores of Poland and those Baltic
republics that just broke away from the Soviet Union in recent years, these people dwelled along
those river systems at the mouths of the Vistula and the Davina and the Neiman, and in the forest
in bog zones. They had trade connections with Berka going back very early, some of them actually had
communities linked to the Swedes on the shores. The other group were the people of Slavic languages,
of the great Slavic language families. Now the Slavs, their history and origins are really
quite obscure. They are too, speaking a variety of Indo-European languages, in the year around
600, in the 7th century. The Slavic populations located in central Europe had expanded considerably.
Many of them had moved west as far as the Elba River. Others had pushed into the Balkans, where
they ran into the Byzantines. They also spread across Eastern Europe, and at the time that the
Swedish Rus' appear in Eastern Europe, you have to think of different linguistic and cultural
groups more or less conforming with their patterns of life and the geographic landscape there.
In the forest zones, which will become the classic heartland of Russia, were largely Slavic-speaking
peoples. There were some Finns and related people, but that's where the Slavs lived. They lived in
the forest zones. They were in scattered tribal societies. Their mastery of iron technology
was on a lower level. It's in these areas that the Scandinavians raided in great numbers and carried
off large numbers of Slavs destined for the slave markets of the Islamic world. It's in these zones
that the Scandinavians moved in and built fortified towns, a guard, on the river system, and developed
the kind of market town that I mentioned in Ireland in a way. That is, the Scandinavian
merchant princes moved in, set up these fortified settlements, got in touch with the local Slavic
tribes, convinced them to raid against their neighbors to pay tribute. There would be exchange.
They'd bring in some of the products gained in the Eastern trade or products coming in from
Scandinavia to buy the timber and the slaves, which then would be brought across to the Volga
and sold in those Turkish markets. So the forest zones were very much the preserve of the Slavic
peoples, and that's where the Swedes moved in to settle and established their market towns and bases.
Then along the Volga river system, you have these quite impressively organized cognates or conates
ruled by Turkish warlords or cons who had a mixed population under their control,
including many settled people and agriculturalists. And in the towns and the tent cities, the market
towns of the Volga were numerous Muslims. These were people from Iran very often. They were Persians
who knew Arabic as their literary language. There were a number of Arabs, both among the
Bulgarians and the Khazars. These ties to the Islamic world were very strong. And so in these areas
along the Volga, the Norse moved into a region where there was some kind of organized political
structure. And on the Volga, throughout the entire Viking experience, from when they first show up
in the 750s and down to the late 10th century where this trade group flourishes, you have to think
of the Rus' largely being there by permission. They came as merchants, allies, mercenaries,
friends. And the Arab geographers really capture the relationship very well. Ibn Fadlan, who had
an opportunity to observe these Rus' on the lower Volga for some time and wrote a number of descriptions,
explains how this worked. For instance, he at one time apparently attended the ceremony presided
over by a Rus' merchant prince. And this merchant prince is on a great platform. He's attended
with various warriors. He has a number of concubines. These are apparently Slavic girls who have been
picked up in the forest zone, and they're not the ones that have been sold off yet. And the whole
ceremony and the arrangement is very, very similar to the ceremony that we know from Arabic
and Byzantine sources practiced by the Khans of the Turkmen tribes and later by the Mongols.
And so what happens is the Rus' move into an area where they're encountering a more organized
political structure and they're adapting it. They're taking over some of the ritual and forms
in their essentially market settlement next to Atil, the great capital of the Khazar Khagan,
and are therefore basing their political structure on what they find around them. And what they find
around them, the most successful organization are these Turkmen Khans and Khaganates. And that's a
a very significant point. He also tells us, Ibn Fadlan, of the way trade is carried out
and how the Rus' invoke their various divinities. They set up these posts, these totems to ancestors
and gods to invoke good market. And they are extremely eager in acquiring silks and especially silver
in either in the form of jewelry or in Muslim coins. The wives or concubines of the primary wife
of a Rus' merchant, her aim was to get 10,000 Muslim silver coins, which she would string
together as a sign of wealth, and then push her husband out there to get another 10,000.
And he's very, very good on telling us something that we surmise just from the
visual arts I discussed earlier in this course, that these Rus' are very, very conscious about
personal ornamentation, about objects and textiles that denote rank. They are eager to get a hold
of silks. They are eager to get a hold of silver. All of this not only for themselves,
but for that market in Scandinavia. And finally, all four of the Muslim geographic writers
constantly stress that the biggest commodities slays, and these are sloths, being purchased,
being acquired by raid, by exchange, as tribute, coming from the forest zones, moved along the
Volga, and sold off in the Cognates. So that whole river structure, this river system of the
middle and lower Volga, are these organized Turkmen states in which the Rus' move around
very, very much by permission as agents to the Khazar, Khagan, or to the Khan of the Bogars.
That means we have very, very little in the way of reports of the type of Viking activities we
associate in Western Europe. There are reports of some Viking raids on the Caspian Sea,
where certain Muslim towns were attacked. There's a few reported in the 9th century,
and then a couple in the early 10th century. These raids are being launched from the Khazar
capital, Ottil, and are being done with the cooperation of the Khazar Khagan. That is the
ruler of the Khazars. And in one instance, in the raid in 912, 913, the Khazars took the booty
and killed their Viking allies. Now that the raid was over, that was convenient. But on the whole,
they are not able to operate as the type of independent operators that you would see in
Western Europe. They're moving through these very organized structures linked to the Islamic world.
Then there are the Turkmen populations dwelling to the west and south of these great
cognates or Khanates on the Volga, and immediately south of the Varisone. And these are the Pecheniks,
the possible competitors, the foes, the dreaded horse archers who are organized in tribal and
clan structures, and really all allegiance to no one but themselves. And any Viking or
Rus' ship coming down the Nyepir or its tributaries in this area would have to deal with these peoples.
And in this area is where the Swedish Rus' encounter potential problems. They have to
fight with these people. And the development of that other trade route along the Nyepir is later
and requires a whole different set of organization in order to exploit that trade route. And that is
the point I want to develop here, and the final point in this lecture, is in the ninth century
there is a distinct shift from that Volga trade route, where all the trade is going down to the
Caspian Sea ultimately in the Islamic world, to a Western route based on the Nyepir. This shift
in access has only been really noted in the recent scholarship as a result of excavations,
intensive study of settlements in what are now Russia and Ukraine, looking at the trade
goods, sifting through the very contradictory reports we have of Arabic and Byzantine sources.
And these are extremely frustrating at times because the Arabs and the Byzantines both are
very, very unfamiliar with these Norse names, and they tend to stylize them. They often use names
based on earlier barbarians in the area, and especially the Greek sources often called Scythians.
These were the people that appear in Herodotus in the sixth century BC, and the
Norse are simply being called one of these same names. Well, in any case, that shift can be dated
fairly accurately from the literary sources in the archaeological evidence. And there's a debate
going on, why did it take place? The Volga was very convenient. The bases had been set up very early
at around Lake Ladoga. You're able to pick up your furs from the Finns and the Carlians and the
Sami, the Laps, move on to the Volga and trade with the Bulgars or with the Khazars, bring in
all the goodies you want. On the other hand, if you go south, directly south, you follow the
Volkov River in the Ilmen Lake, you set up a base at Novgorod, Holmgaard in Scandinavian.
That requires you then to pick up the headwaters of the Nieper and follow the Nieper, which is over
500 miles to the Black Sea. And until you get to the Black Sea, there isn't any kind of organized
state. There are these nasty Pecheniks riding around. And especially on the lower Nieper,
there are a series of 12 very dangerous falls where you have to take your ships out and you're
exposed to attack. Prince Sietoslav of Kiev gets wiped out there in 972 when his army is returning,
the Pecheniks show up and massacre him. Once you get to the mouth of the Nieper,
then you're in the Black Sea and it's about 350 miles to sail along the shores of the Black Sea
to get to Constantinople, the great city, Miclegard, the center of the Byzantine Empire,
where you do your trading. This is a much longer route. It requires a great deal more
organization. The dangers are much, much greater, especially negotiating those falls and those
points along the Nieper where you have to make portage. And yet this becomes the preferred
route starting in the mid-ninth century. And we get some sense of this from the Byzantine sources
in 838, 839. We have our first reference to ruse or Varyngians in a Byzantine account.
Apparently a group of envoys had been sent by the Khazar Kagan, who's in close alliance with the
Byzantine court. And they remain in close alliance through much of the 9th century until the Khazars
convert to Judaism and then the Byzantines aren't so interested in the court anymore.
But a mission comes from the great Khagan and there's been a marriage alliances and connections.
And in that troupe is a group of ruse who claim they can't get back to their homeland,
that they would like to accompany a Byzantine mission that is leaving at this time for Western
Europe. At the time the Empress Theophilus is ruling in Constantinople. He's very eager to
have an alliance with Louis the Pius in the Frankish Empire. And so these ruse hook up with
the Byzantine envoys and show up at the court of Ingolheim in the Carolingian Empire. And Louis
the Pius is very curious about these guys and they inquire who are you. And eventually it's
reported in the Annals, Berna, Anales, Bertiani that these guys are Northmen, Normani. And Louis
gets extremely excited. I mean the same people who are attacking Frisian, all my cities in France,
and this is just, they immediately put them on the house arrest and try to figure out who these
guys are. Well, those Swedish ruse who showed up that way, and they eventually are released and
get back to their homeland, which is probably Berka, are indicative of several important points.
By the early 9th century some of these ruse are beginning to figure out it's worth the effort
to get to Constantinople. You don't have to go through middlemen. You don't have to deal with
the Turkmen peoples along the Volga who are marking up all of these products which are coming from
a greater distance. You can get to Constantinople and get direct access to the silks, the silver,
the goodies you want. The second interesting point about this mission is that they describe
themselves as representing a Swedish ruler who is known in Latin. It's rendered by the
Frankish author as Chon August, which is the Latin for Kagon. That is, these Swedes are organized
in some way along the Turkmen political organization that's described by the geographic
writers, the Islamic geographic writers. And so that the Swedes are adapting the political
institutions they found there in the Volga to set up their own kind of communities.
The other advantage by shifting over from the Volga to the Nieper, to that route into the Black Sea,
you're no longer operating as allies, mercenaries. That is, you're not on permission. You have free
range to develop that trade route. To be sure you have to fight Petchinex. You're going to have to
establish fortified bases. You're going to have to come to terms with some of the Slavic tribes
in order to acquire the slaves you need. And that's a whole level of organization.
But now you have direct access when you're done with this to the greatest city in the world,
at least to the Scandinavians, Constantinople, Mickelgard, the great city. And that shift that
occurs somewhere between the 840s and 860s is to have decisive impact on the history of not only
the Scandinavians in Russia, but the whole of medieval history.
