Butcher 26, Transformation of Scandinavian Society.
In this lecture, I plan to look at the transformation of society in the Scandinavian homeland
during the Viking Age.
And this lecture will examine four important changes.
These will be in economic life, society, and then political and religious institutions.
Because the influx of all of this money, this booty, very often in the form of silver,
either in coin or in plate, as well as the profits of the slave trade,
clearly changed Scandinavian society on an order that is remarkable in comparison to the earlier ages,
the age of migrations, or the Roman age, that so much wealth poured into Scandinavia.
The obvious question is, well, how did that change life in Scandinavia during the Viking Age,
especially since we've looked at that issue in the overseas areas?
The other important point is how that change in economic and social patterns in Scandinavia
also led to conditions that favored the emergence of Christianity in the territorial kingdoms
that become Denmark, Norway, and Sweden by the end of the Viking Age.
And so this lecture acts as a very important transition from the first portions of this course
to the final set of lectures that are going to concentrate very much on that last question.
Religious change and political change in Scandinavia that turned the Scandinavians into Western Europeans.
And so it's maybe important to think for a moment where we've been and where we're going to end up in this class.
We have stressed in the last 12 or 13 lectures the wide-ranging activities of Scandinavians overseas.
These were cases of conquest and settlement in Western Europe, in the British Isles, the Carolingian Empire.
Also, the transplanting of a Scandinavian colonial culture, or colonial settlement,
to Iceland, the North Atlantic Islands, such as the Shetlands, the Faroes,
those brief excursions into Vinland and Greenland, as well as the Swedish impact in Russia.
And I kept stressing in the course of those lectures that the Scandinavians showed themselves
very, very able to adapt to local institutions, they could intermarry with local populations,
learn from them, that also in some of these overseas areas, notably in Normandy,
but above all in Russia, kingdoms emerged that could be models for organization of kingdoms back in the homeland,
that both in Anglo-Saxon England, where the Danes settled in forest or in Iceland,
legal institutions were developed based on the old traditions of the thing and the jury,
that again were models of local organization for the homeland.
So, we wish to deal with these themes in this lecture, and then with the end of this lecture,
turn our focus on Scandinavia ever more to see how the Viking Age ended in the creation of these Christian European kingdoms.
Well, the first subject of this lecture is, of course, the influx of wealth.
Clearly, the most important for transforming Scandinavia in the Viking Age was the vast amount of wealth
in the form of silver, bullion, plunder, and slaves.
And it's difficult to give any kind of statistical basis for this.
We lack the types of records we would have for, say, the ancient world, the Roman Empire,
or for later statistics we have for European colonies overseas in the Age of Discovery
from the 15th, 16th, 17th century, for instance, the great wealth coming in with the Spanish Empire
that can be actually documented through various types of records.
So, we're really reduced to what I would call qualitative evidence, that is, as opposed to quantitative evidence,
and very often we're dealing with impressions rather than any kind of hard statistics.
And this, of course, has led to a really important debate among scholars,
and that is how important was the Viking Age on its impact in the homeland, not only overseas,
but how much wealth and how many slaves were taken, what did this mean for the people living at home?
Well, our information is able to give us some sense of the scale of change.
And I think the scale of change is geometric compared to the type of trade that went on in the Age of Migrations
or in the Roman and Celtic Age.
For one, we do have some sense of the amount of silver coin taken in dangled payments,
both from the Carolingian Empire and from England.
In the 9th century, I've alluded to the fact that calculations of those payments recorded in Frankish sources
lead us to conclude that somewhere between 40 and 45,000 pounds of silver were paid out,
many scholars would assume that this is only one-half to one-third of the total species that was carried off,
that you can document the degeneration, the deterioration of Carolingian coinage
as a direct result of these payments and losses in plunder to the Scandinavians.
The same can be documented in England, especially from the 11th century
at the time of Sven Forkbeard and Knut, who are coming up in future lectures,
and that is the amount of silver coinage in the form of what is known as a silver penny.
And this was a thin hammered coin of 18 to 20 millimeters across
and weighing anywhere from 1.4 to 1.6 grams.
These were paid out in dangled payments.
King Ethel read the second, paid out perhaps somewhere on the order of 180,000 pounds.
That would be well over 40 million English pennies.
That King Knut, when he took control of England and had to cashier part of his army
and pay him off, raised his own dangled, which was just under half of what had been paid off
by Ethel read the second in the previous 15 years.
That is something like 87 or 88,000 pounds of silver or 20 million silver pennies.
This amount of wealth coming into Scandinavia cannot be documented in any kind of statistical records.
I mean, there are no royal institutions or taxes that tell us about this.
But we can get some sense by the enormous number of coins that have been secreted in hordes.
And whenever you're looking at a coin hoard, it's someone's bad luck.
He put the money aside for some reason, could have been an emergency, insecurity,
wanted to save the money for a future date, and failed to retrieve it.
That means he either was killed or enslaved or, in some cases, forgot where he had buried the money.
There's probably a couple of absent-minded individuals who never recovered their coin hoard.
We also have runestones that were erected in central Sweden between 1100.
That's where most of our runestones come from that section of Sweden and also the island of Gotland.
And it tells us many Swedes were paid money by either Canute or the Yarls,
that is the earls of Sven Forkbeard in the conquest of Denmark.
We even have considerable coin hoards coming from overseas that are clearly to be associated with the Vikings.
These include the vast number of fines of Arabic coins in Russia,
which are obviously a result of the trade connections,
and also a very famous coin hoard found in Northern England, that is the Couradel hoard,
probably deposited about 1905, 1910, which includes, well, almost 7000 coins,
larger numbers of Anglo-Saxon coins as well as Carolingian,
and Viking coins issued in the city of York.
And so, silver was available in great amounts.
And it did change habits in Scandinavia.
Increasingly, Scandinavians came to reckon sums of value transactions in coined money.
And coined money had a number of important advantages over commodities
and trade by exchange of kind, as you often call it.
Or sometimes you use the Naturwissenshaft, or what is it?
Naturwissenshaft, a natural economy is what the German scholars would call it.
And that meant you could make trade.
You could exchange and reckon value of different objects,
which would be very hard to exchange as commodities, you know, goats as opposed to skins.
You could also reckon accounts.
You have your wealth in a portable form.
That could be reckoned anywhere.
Icelandic law is very good at determining the quality of silver in scales
and compensations and legal documents.
The Gragas, that is the earliest codes in Iceland, report fines.
If you kill someone and to forestall a blood feud, you pay it off.
In silver marks, that is a weight that is designated by law,
that it should be of a certain purity and weight.
We know that scales are very common in Scandinavia, especially in Sweden.
The coins are being weighed out.
And this results in monetized markets, the development of market towns,
and changes in both shopping and trading habits throughout Scandinavia.
And this is a steady change that occurs in the Viking Age
and will extend across Scandinavia well after the Viking Age
so that economically, monetarily, Scandinavia becomes incorporated into the wider European economy.
The Scandinavians themselves start striking coins,
particularly in the towns of Berka and Heddaby.
These are very strange coins known as Bractiates.
They essentially only have one die,
and so the reverse die is actually the mirror image of it.
These seem to be experimental pieces,
but they're obviously for reckoning accounts in the slave trade
and the trade in other commodities, luxury goods.
King Canute, who will rule from 1014 to 1035,
will bring English-style coinage into Scandinavia
to really transform the Scandinavian monetary and economic patterns ever after.
So certainly wealth appears in great amounts.
It leads to change in markets and habits of reckoning wealth
and in conducting transactions.
Also, what is another important aspect about all this wealth coming in,
and I've mentioned it in an earlier two lectures,
and that is a good deal of this species, silver and gold,
was put into ornamentation, was put into display.
There's various ways to spend your money,
and not until the 11th century,
when you have the emergence of those Scandinavian kingdoms,
is money put into royal institutions,
building of churches, institutional Christianity,
that is public activities that will transform the society into a European society.
Before that, before 1000, much of the wealth obtained in Viking raids,
the plunder, the profits of trade,
the profits from the slave trade,
were not poured in any kind of public activities or kingship,
but in personal adornment and in the material life of Scandinavians in general.
And this can be, again, documented in several ways.
The most dramatic is the increase of those spectacular ship burials of which I spoke.
The Osberg ship burial, dated to 834.
The Goxtok ship burial from around 900 are shortly thereafter.
The objects placed in there are really quite opulent
and would be, well, the kings of the age of migrations,
the heroic kings would just look in envy with the amount of goods
that could be given to a noble lady or to a regal figure in the Viking age,
as opposed to what could have been done earlier.
It sees the proliferation of the various jewelry styles.
There are some really brilliant studies on Scandinavian jewelry styles.
These are studied from different angles.
One is art historical, that is, the developing styles,
the outside influence.
Another way is to organize them.
There are at least six or seven major styles.
But what is often missed in all of these studies
is the social and economic implications
and how they are part of that wider change going on in Scandinavian society.
At the start of the Viking age,
the most common styles are often known as the Osberg style or the Bore style.
These are named after two important burials, Osberg for the ship.
And this jewelry style or decorative style, to be more accurate,
it's used on runestones, it's used in wooden carvings,
is very similar to the types of styles you would have seen in the age of migrations.
The figures are rather stocky, they're often done in profile.
Those styles become increasingly ostentatious and diverse
over the course of the Viking age.
The next style that is often seen as sort of a successor to that earlier Bore style
is the Yelling style, usually dated to the late 9th century
and running through most of the 10th century.
It gets its name from the site where the great runestone is commissioned by King Gorm the Old
and then another one by his son Harold Bluetooth.
But the style shows elongated and sinuous figures,
all sorts of fantastic animals,
outside influences perhaps coming from the Islamic world in Western Europe.
And what is important is that from this Yelling style you go to a series of other styles,
the Mammon style which brings in floral designs from Carolingian work,
the Climax is going to be in this Ernest style, this very Baroque style
that comes at the end of the Viking age in influences early Christian art.
All of these styles are premised on the fact there is an enormous amount of silver and gold available for jewelry work.
And the proliferation of styles and sub-styles,
the large numbers of objects placed in graves,
the descriptions of spectacular ship burials,
all of this points to a society that has the money, the wealth, the opulence,
not only to turn all of this wealth into objects of display,
but also to bury part of it as also a display for the prominence of the family,
the importance and rank of the individual who is now being honoured going into the grave.
The most spectacular description of a ship burial is that given by Ibn Fadlan
of a ship burial on the Volga where the deceased Bruce Merchant Prince
is not only accompanied by his strangled wife or concubine,
but also is stocked up with all sorts of goods for the afterlife.
And so Scandinavian society and its material wealth, its material culture was vastly enriched.
Life had changed significantly, particularly for the wealthier classes,
but for all classes in Scandinavia.
This took the form in the amount of jewelry available, personal ornamentation, weapons.
I mentioned in earlier lectures how Frankish weapons now could be acquired
in great numbers, particularly swords.
It's seen probably in the proliferation of furniture
and in the market towns such as Kaupang, Berka, Siktuna, Hedibi,
archaeologists have revealed a vast array of imported goods.
Silver objects coming in as trade goods, not as plunder.
This would be tableware.
Glassware coming in from the Rhineland.
Silks, tapestries and clothing both coming in from either the Islamic world,
later from Byzantium.
Wine, which can be documented from the residue in ceramics
that the containers actually had wine at one point.
All of these items are now common fare in Scandinavia.
Furthermore, there's importation of grains and other types of food stuffs
to support the Scandinavian population.
And as I've stressed in earlier lectures,
agriculture is a difficult task in those northern climates,
particularly in Norway and Sweden.
So life had changed significantly.
And all Scandinavian communities in one way or the other
had benefited from the economic change in wealth.
What is frustrating with this information
is we have very little information on the slave trade.
Besides the movable wealth, the plunder, the booty, the silver
and the objects that could easily be turned into cold cash,
the other biggest commodity that is coming into Scandinavia is slaves.
And here we're really at a loss on what happened to this population,
but the best guess is that many of them did not stay in Scandinavia.
Again, our information is anecdotal and indirect.
There's been very clever studies on the slave trade into the Islamic world,
especially by Professor Michael McCormick
and his brilliant monumental work on the origins of the European economy
that has recently been published.
And that is prices would just draw many of the slaves into Muslim Spain
or the Islamic world.
But some of those people stayed in Scandinavia.
They became thralls.
That is the slaves or in some cases sort of indentured servant
to Scandinavian families.
And we get reports of them in Icelandic saga
and our best information is again coming from Iceland
where we have the most documentation.
But there's two types of evidence that indicate to us
that the Icelanders, the Norwegians who went over there
in the first waves of settlement between say 870 and 930
carried with them a number of slaves or thralls.
These were largely people of Celtic origin.
Many of them were from Scotland and from Ireland.
And what is significant about this anecdotal material
is usually these slaves, and they were farm hands.
They were particularly important stock raising if they were men
or if they were women, they are often used in weaving,
which is the major occupation for most women.
What seems to happen with many of them is they eventually get freed,
or at least their children do.
In the case of several of them,
especially those who were thralls from Scotland
of this formidable Dom known as Un the Deep-Minded,
who was a Norwegian noble woman who left Norway around 915
and settled in Iceland, she had a number of important thralls
who did her tasks, and she freed them and endowed them with land
and these people set up their own families
and were assimilated into the Icelandic population.
There is instances of men keeping concubines,
the most significant one is Hostgold and his son in Laxdala Saga,
also in Jalsaga, his illegitimate son Olaf the Peacock,
who becomes a major figure in Icelandic law and proceedings.
Well, his mother is a concubine of Irish origin.
She claims to be an Irish princess, and there's a whole tale about that.
So part of that slave population came into Scandinavia
and apparently was assimilated.
How much of the total volume of slaves we don't know.
My suspicion is you're dealing only with a minority.
That they were used in households, they were used for certain occupations,
such as stock raising in Iceland, that's why they're prominent,
but within two or three generations,
most of these people get assimilated into the general Scandinavian population.
And probably the number of slaves staying in Scandinavia as population,
you know, adding to the population,
was more than offset by the number of Scandinavians
who were going out overseas in raids and in colonizing activities.
And so demographically, this slave population may have added,
you know, more of a component into the population.
You know, in Iceland there's been some very clever DNA analysis
that points to the fact that Icelanders do have DNA connections to Ireland,
particularly that is a Celtic land,
and we've known this from the sagas that,
and it's debated as one in seven or one in fifteen,
but there is this component in the population,
and they were just assimilated culturally into the Norse culture of Iceland.
But the overall effect is while there are slaves coming in,
they do not take over as a major economic class or force.
There's no evidence of a large slave society that has to be liberated
when Scandinavian kingdoms go Christian.
And furthermore, the outgoing population more than offset this influx
so that the Viking age in effect acted as a safety valve for Scandinavia.
My guess is that from 800 to close to 1,100,
the population in Scandinavia was pretty stable,
somewhere between 800,000 and a million total.
Goes up a bit when you add in Iceland,
but it stayed fairly stable,
and that is because of the Viking overseas experience.
Another important change is also being traced now,
again by using Christian laws,
that is laws issued in early Christian Scandinavia,
and the Icelandic sagas,
and that includes social changes.
Among the social changes that are often looked at is the position of women,
which is a topic that is of great interest in current scholarship,
and there we can only discuss really women of a certain rank,
usually the higher ranks of society,
and again, most of our information is coming from Icelandic
and later Norwegian law.
But it seems that the Viking age did have an influence
not only in enriching the communities and the material life of all Scandinavians,
but also in some ways elevating the position of women in Iceland and in Norway,
and probably in all of Scandinavia.
I gave some anecdotal information on this in the Frontier Society of Iceland,
and Iceland, again, is not necessarily all of Scandinavia.
Iceland is an unusual society.
Even so, the grounds by which women can divorce their husbands,
not only in Icelandic law and Norwegian law,
are really quite wide-ranging in comparison to other European law.
Furthermore, the so-called concubines or second wives in North society,
and these arrangements persisted long after the conversion to Christianity,
were expected to receive property for both themselves and for their descendants,
their children, by the free man.
And that is a very, very significant point in Scandinavian society.
These people were important.
Even illegitimate sons are counted and reckoned in sagas
and usually interact with legitimate children.
Very, very well depicted in Jal Saga,
where Jal the hero has three legitimate sons and one illegitimate son,
and those brothers are as close as brothers can be.
Conditions in life in Scandinavia were always difficult
so that women were never pushed into a secluded existence.
They had to prepare the food, they had to take over the homesteads,
and in the Viking Age, the constant movement of men overseas
increased those roles that women had to play.
Very often the leading figure in a household had to take over,
and that was a female.
Un the deep-mind, it is again another good example in this regard.
This great aristocratic lady who emigrated from Hordaland in Norway to Iceland
and set up her own hall.
She didn't have the powers of the later Gothi, that is the chieftain,
but she came close, and the description of her influence in the community
as the matriarch of an extended set of families
is very, very well described in the opening of Laxdala Saga,
particularly her final festival, her feast, where she knows she's dying,
and she summons all of her relatives to probably one of the most important celebrations
held in any farmstead in Iceland in the early 10th century,
and she essentially makes out her will,
she designates one of her grandsons as her primary heirs,
she retires early and they find her the next morning,
she's died in her sleep, seated up noble as ever,
and then she's given a ship burial,
and we have every reason to believe that actually took place.
They actually gave this Icelandic lady a ship burial, which is very expensive,
and her position is not that unusual for many women of rank in Scandinavia,
and this is one of the social changes that comes out of the impact of the Viking Age.
There are several other dramatic examples of this.
We'll encounter Queen Theoret of Denmark,
who turns out to be far better known and far better respected in the Saga's sources
than either her husband, Gorm the Old, or her son, Harold Bluetooth,
and according to one saga, the Saga of the Joms Vikings,
she's credit with the great construction of the Danverka,
and I think the Holy Roman Emperor Otto I actually courted her
to marry her, it's a fable, but her position in the Danish monarchy is very powerful.
That's actually borne out by a runic inscription in which she is hailed as the ornament of Denmark,
or restorer of Denmark, it's hard to know what the language means.
I also think of the example of that Norse Queen of Dublin,
probably who went by the name of Un, or Ota known as Nod in the Arabic accounts,
who not only received the embassy from Cordova,
but we are told performed the functions as a vulva acting as the priestess
for the Viking kingdom that was set up in Dublin.
So there are major social changes that go along with the economic changes,
and again, we can only discern these through anecdotal material and archaeology,
there is a lot more work that needs to be done,
and it will require a whole new generation of scholars to bring to bear
the kind of statistical studies we're able to do in say the ancient world
or early modern world as comparative material to start answering some of these questions.
But some very, very good work is on the way,
and particularly on the social rank and changes for women in Viking age, Iceland and Norway.
The market towns of course increase, these do not turn into cities,
and cities are really a benefit of the organization of the kingdoms as Christian kingdoms.
But there's two other important changes I want to close with that result from the Viking age,
and these are the changes that are going to be the major themes in the last set of lectures,
in the last third of this course, and those are politics and religion.
Two topics that will interest, well, almost anyone who has any sort of interest in history,
these are usually overriding questions.
How did politics and religion change as a result of the Viking age?
Well, in the case of politics, this is going to be very significant.
I've alluded to the emergence of professional companies of Vikings.
These could be the Vringing Garden, Constantinople.
They could be the Sea Kings who maintained these contingents of professional warriors
who could fight in the Carolingian world or England for decades, many of them eventually settling.
There were improvements in shipbuilding.
By the late 10th century, the designs of the warships are perfected into the longships.
The great ocean-going cargo vessels, the Canare, the introduction of the double-headed axe
and the more disciplined infantry formations depicted on the Bayotapestry.
That is military technology changed both in warfare on land and on sea.
More and more professional companies of warriors were available,
and we'll discuss these in the upcoming lectures.
These are the basis of royal armies.
The monetization of markets, the increasing importance of long-distance trade,
the use of coined money.
All of this provides the basis to create the fiscal institutions to pay for those royal armies
and to sustain the institutions of a monarchy that is now territorial in its nature
rather than just a sea king looking for a hall.
And finally, the most important impact on Scandinavia will be the reception of Christianity.
And Christianity is one of the most important forces, if not the most important force
in transforming Scandinavia in the Viking Age.
And in the next lectures, we'll discuss the way Scandinavians converted to Christianity,
what this meant, but the exposure to this Christian faith,
both in its Western European version that they would encounter in the Carolingian world
in the British Isles and in Byzantium, would have profound consequences.
In the way Scandinavians saw the world and also the way they saw the divine.
And above all, in the way they behaved and organized their societies and kingdoms at home.
And it would become very, very clear in the succeeding lectures that the emergence of the Scandinavian kingdoms,
the exploiting of all of these benefits from the Viking Age, the wealth, the advantages in society,
the new market towns, all of this is going to be exploited by kings who are Christians.
And it will be Christians see kings who will become the major agents of change in the centuries
after the Viking Age and turn the Scandinavians into Christian Europeans.
And that is going to be the most important transformation,
the most important change coming out of the Viking Age.
That is the integration of Scandinavia into a wider Christian Europe.
And without the Viking Age, in my opinion, this process would have been far more difficult
and taken far longer to do.
