In this lecture, I plan to look at the reception of Christianity in Scandinavia starting in
the 9th century, and this is a very important change in Scandinavian history that is associated
with a rather courageous missionary known as St. Ongskar, who is the apostle to the north.
And in this lecture, I wish to concentrate on the activities of St. Ongskar.
We have a vita or vita, to use the medieval Latin pronunciation, that is a life that was
penned by his successor and disciple, Rimbert, who succeeded St. Ongskar as Bishop of Hamburg-Gremmen
and succeeded to the whole tradition and missionary effort of the conversion of Scandinavia.
Then I want to look at some of the limitations in that mission, where the early Christian
missionaries encountered difficulties in reaching the northern peoples and winning them over
to the new faith.
And then finally, we're going to look at why the old gods, the traditional religion
of the Scandinavians persisted for so long, what were the strengths of that faith, and
how in some ways the Viking Age very much reinforced belief in the old gods and made
Christianization, conversion and Christianization all the more difficult.
Well, let's first look at St. Ongskar and his achievement.
He was born in the region today that would be known as Picardy, probably around 801,
and he died in 865.
And his life is very, very much tied up with his missionary efforts and the monastic reforms
going on in Western Europe at the time.
He was trained at the great monastery of Corbi in France.
This was a monastery that had pioneered reform within the Carolingian world.
It was associated with monastic reform going back to the reign of Charlemagne and was especially
an important monastery in the time of Louis the Pious.
This is also the outfit, by the way, that's thought to have created that famous doctrine
known as the donation of Constantine.
The document later dredged up by the papacy to support their position as the supreme authority
in Western Europe and was later proved to be a forgery by Lorenzo Valla and the Renaissance.
So it's a monastery of great activity, intellectual inquiry and a great deal of writing, and also
very much associated with monastic reform and the rededication of the Benedictine monks
of Western Europe to those traditions of St. Benedict of Nursia, which included preaching
and missionary work.
In the life that comes down to us from Rimbord, the disciple of St. Ansgar, the bishop saint
is really depicted very much in the tradition of all hagiography, that is of all sacred
writing, as an extremely pious and courageous man who was just unrelenting in his efforts
to reach the Scandinavians.
He's also depicted as a missionary who tries to work much more by persuasion and preaching
rather than destroying cult objects, statues, casting down temples, taking the more zealous
approach that is often associated with missionaries acting in the Old Testament tradition.
In part, this is because St. Ansgar had probably learned some lessons from his predecessors,
the few earlier efforts to convert the Scandinavians, which were not very successful.
In part, it was just the limitations that he faced, that is you can't walk into Hedibi
and start cutting down temples or cult statues when the majority of the population is pagan
and will not tolerate it.
But also St. Ansgar comes across, at least to me, in the vita as a very, very savvy ecclesiastical
politician, a man who understood the importance of royal patronage, that included not only
Louis the Pious and later Louis' son, Louis the German, who came to rule the eastern portions
of the Frankish Empire, but also the importance of patronage from Scandinavian kings.
And he made sure to get that patronage, both in Hedibi and in Burka in Sweden, in order
to build those first churches and make those first efforts to potential converts.
He also understood institutions and the importance of setting up churches and also the importance
of training, clergy who could go to the north and begin to preach to the Scandinavians in
their own language and come equipped with some of the arguments necessary to bring these
northern peoples over to the Christian mission.
This is highlighted if you compare some of St. Oxtar's activities with his predecessor.
The one man who made really the closest to an effort at converting the Danes is St.
Willebrode, operating at the end of the 7th and the beginning of the 8th century.
He was an English missionary who was commissioned to convert the Frisians.
He eventually became Archbishop of Utrecht, which is today in Holland.
And he was successful with the Frisians for several reasons.
One, he had the protection of the Frankish king.
The Frisians were economically tied to the Frankish kingdom.
But also the Anglo-Saxon language was very, very close to Frisians, so he could probably
preach in English and be pretty much understood.
It would be pretty easy to get translators.
He made an excursion into Denmark to attempt to convert the Danes.
He encountered a Danish king who was rendered in his vita, which is also written in Latin,
as Angendus, which may be the old Norse name Angatir, a very common name, a very common
dynastic name in the royal family of Sweden.
And this particular Danish king may have been associated with the expansion of the Danverka.
And St. Willebrode had very little success.
He attempted to buy slaves, boys, to train as potential clerics.
And that little incident reported in that vita, to me, suggests how limited these early
missionaries were in reaching the Scandinavian population.
By this point, the Scandinavian language had evolved into a very, very distinct, dramatic
language, its own sets of conventions and idioms, its own morphology.
And speaking English or Frisian was not going to get you anywhere.
No one could understand you.
And what happened is this English saint simply bought some slave boys, hoping that somehow
he could train them, could teach them English or Latin, and they could communicate to the
Danes.
Well, my suspicion is that the Scandinavian king who sold them on Angendus was simply
doing a smart business trade, and training a bunch of slave boys, who may not have been
Danes anyway, to act as missionaries was just not going to work.
I mean, slaves, converting kings, princes, warriors, these are despised people.
There may actually be neighbors who are destined for the slave markets of Western Europe.
So it always has to be kept in mind that one of the most difficult features of missionary
work was first getting people who could speak the native languages and at least get the
attention of the pagan populations to hear the message.
And St. Oxford is the first to make that effort to go to Scandinavia and begin to disseminate
the message, and his predecessors really had absolutely no influence whatsoever in my opinion.
They were just pointing the way.
There's Scandinavia, there's some pagans up there, it's a good idea if we can convert
them.
Well, St. Oxford was commissioned to be the apostle of the North by Louis the Pius.
As I said, this is probably the best idea, maybe the only original idea that Louis ever
had.
And he did not go to Hedibi, which is the great market town in Denmark, alone.
This is not some lone charismatic preacher who's going in to a pagan town and is just
going to persuade these people over by the reasonableness of the faith.
At the time in 826, the Danish king or prince who had been exiled in a political war in
the U.S.
When Harold Klack had received a thief in Frisia, he and 400 of his followers had submitted
to baptism, had become Christians, and hoped to get military aid to reestablish their position
back in Denmark.
Harold Klack provided translators and interpreters, guides.
Furthermore, St. Oxford was accompanied by other monks.
He had a colleague, Oatbert, who acted as his mentor, but it was a whole retinue that
arrived.
As I said, St. Oxford was a very, very savvy ecclesiastical politician.
When he arrived in Hedibi, he also came with the authority of Louis the Pius, that is the
great Carolingian king.
And in Hedibi were a number of foreigners, Frisians, Saxons, Franks, English, even Slavs,
that is merchants from all over the northern markets of the medieval world.
And so there was also possible hosts, men who were already Christian, at least marginally
Christian.
And so when he arrived at Hedibi and began his preaching, there was a certain amount
of support for his activities, which was quite different from earlier efforts and why earlier
efforts had failed.
And so from 826 to 828, St. Oxford made the first efforts at converting Danes in Hedibi.
He was allowed to build a church, probably a rather modest church with a bell.
It may have been nothing more than a private house that was converted to use.
And there's no way to document it or to verify it in the excavations we have.
He somehow won over the patronage of a king named Horick, which is probably a Frankish
rendition of Eric, who was a part-time rival of Harold Clark, and actually attended some
of the services.
This of course excited a great deal of optimism among St. Angster, the fact that the king
actually could show up at services, allow them to take place.
And here is a common error that's made by many a Christian missionary operating in Scandinavia,
and that is the notion that the allowing of a missionary to preach, to give his message
or even to perform a miracle, was mistaken as a conversion.
In some instances it was just good manners.
I've stressed in earlier lectures that the conditions in Scandinavia put a premium on
hospitality, that you dare not turn guests away, particularly in wintertime.
And anyway, guests could be gods in disguise, or they could be representatives of very,
very powerful political figures.
In the case of St. Angster, it was Louis the Pious, and the Danish king in Hedibi in
Jutland usually had a reason to be nice to this missionary because he represented the
great power to the south.
We think that a number of the people who showed up at this early church in Hedibi were already
Christians or inclined to Christianity, and many of them may not have been Scandinavians
at all.
But nonetheless, there was a church for the first time, planted in Denmark.
In 829, he returns to the Frankish court, and he gets a summons to go out on another
mission to Birka in Sweden.
The activities of St. Angster and Hedibi were carried north by the trade routes to Birka.
That's obvious, merchants always talk.
Anyone who's ever dealt with a tourist knows the problem is not getting them to talk, but
getting them to shut up.
So undoubtedly, Danish merchants showed up in Birka and said this is a rather strange
guy in Hedibi who does all these things with bells, and there's a church in the King Bjorn,
or called King Bjorn in the Latin text, so Rex, well, I'd like to find out about this
holy man who represents the great Frankish king.
And so St. Angster was off with another mission on his way to Sweden.
They actually get waylaid by some Viking pirates along the way, but they eventually make it
there.
Again, it is a similar situation that you have in Hedibi.
It's all important that the missionary has some type of royal support or patronage, or
at least the good manners to build a church.
And again, it shows how much of this really depended on individual interest and individual
patronage.
The king himself, Bjorn, was polite.
He was courteous.
He really had no interest in embracing this new faith, and we'll get into that later in
this little lecture.
He had a subordinate, and his name is Heragar in the Latin rendition of his name, and he's
described as a plifectus, a prefect, which means he was some kind of market town agent,
or governor, or subordinate to the king, and we think that even this King Bjorn was probably
a vassal to the real king, the real Swedish king ruling in Uppsala.
So you're pretty far down on the political chain here.
You're in a market town with a lot of foreigners, but in any case, Heragar is quite interested
in Christianity for whatever reason, and he allows a church to be set up on his property.
That is his private property.
It's probably what we would call a house church, and St. Ongster begins to carry out
the activities of conversion, and there are some conversions.
He eventually departs back to the Carolingian Empire and hands over the running of both
of these churches to his successors, to monks who've been selected for the job.
He is consecrated Archbishop of Hamburg, and at the time, Hamburg is really a pretty far
northern post, outpost, in the Frankish world.
Today, it's of course one of the great ports of northwestern Germany, but Hamburg was established
as a base not only for the power of the Frankish kings, but also as a way of disseminating
Christianity because much of northern Germany at this point is very imperfectly converted.
That appointment proved to be all important because St. Ongster, returning from Scandinavia,
really made an effort to train native clergy, or at least people who would be attuned to
getting translators and understanding who these Scandinavian people were.
He was not going to send out missionaries who knew nothing about the Scandinavians,
and so there seems to have been an effort to bring in some Scandinavians to either convince
converts, acquire some in the slave trade, and train them to send them back to the homeland
so they could preach the message.
This appointment is confirmed by a papal bull.
The Archbishop of Hamburg is turned into the primate of Scandinavia.
That is, usually he's a German, and all of St. Ongster's successors were German speakers.
Usually the Archbishop of Hamburg is going to claim that I'm in charge of all the Scandinavian
churches wherever they are and whenever they're set up, and therefore he is the primate.
This is the position that Hamburg only loses in the 12th century as national churches appear
in the Scandinavian kingdoms, and the cities of Lund, and Niedras, and Uppsala eventually
take over as the primates for their respective kingdoms.
So Ongster actually creates an institutional basis in the Frankish world to train clerics
to commit the monarchy as well as the Western church to the notion of converting the Scandinavians,
and that's probably his most important legacy rather than any numbers he actually converted.
The missions themselves had a very, very chancey existence, especially after St. Ongster left.
He does go back to Burka for a second visit, but so much dependent on the individuals.
For instance, when your patron in Burka died, Hehriger died, and the church closed down
for seven years.
When St. Ongster returns on his second Swedish mission, he encounters an extremely hostile
pagan population.
They don't like the new faith.
They're very skeptical of it.
There are two arguments that are circulated in the town why they shouldn't listen to this
Christian holy man.
One was that during the years that the Christian church was closed in Burka, Burka did really
well in its trade, prosperity, and the honor.
The ancient gods were very, very pleased with the piety of the traditional pagans.
This is an argument that repeatedly appears in all of these conversion stories.
A god is only powerful if he rewards as followers.
The second argument that was circulated in this second mission into Sweden was the fact
that one of the pagan leaders claimed to have a vision.
He was probably involved in what is known as the Sather, this is a way of summoning
up the spirits, and said that he had seen the assembly of gods in Asgard and Valhalla,
and was decided that if anyone should be a god, a new god in the city, shouldn't be
this foreign Frankish god, wherever he is, this Jesus Christ, it should be a previous
king, Eric, who was a great warrior and is in Valhalla.
He should be given honors.
This is actually a very traditional way of honoring kings, we think, in Sweden.
That is, they are seen as potential gods, or avatars, or agents of gods, usually the
god Frey, that is the fertility god, and we believe that some of these kings were actually
worshipped as divinities or minor divinities after their death.
So you're encountering a very, very ancient culture with very, very clear ideas of what
divinity is, and the reception of new gods as opposed to the worship of old gods, and
this is a difficult barrier to overcome.
It also didn't help St. Ongster that in 845, a huge Danish fleet showed up and torched
Hamburg.
Hamburg was burnt to the ground, and the city had to be rebuilt later, and the initial
foundations are essentially gone, and eventually what happened is, and this involves St. Ongster
in something that I think was far more daunting than trying to convince hostile pagan audiences
that they should embrace Christianity and abandon the ancestral gods.
This was dealing with lawyers, because he got himself into an enormous litigation when
Louis the German, who was ruling in the Eastern Frankish Kingdom, said, OK, you've lost Hamburg,
but we're going to give you Bremen, and we're going to unite Bremen and Hamburg into a combined
archbishopric, which violated all canon law, and then ignited a whole series of legal disputes
that kept St. Ongster busy for over a decade dealing with litigation.
As I said, I think any sound missionary would much prefer to face potential death at the
hands of the pagans than to go into a law court over property and the rights of a particular
archbishopric.
In the end, he triumphed, and the combination was approved.
There's a papal bolt to that effect.
It was an exceptional situation, and so he could continue his work until his death in
865 of essentially preparing for the conversion of Scandinavia, not actually converting Scandinavia.
There were two important lessons that his successors drew from his activities.
First was the absolute importance of some kind of royal support, both in the Carolingian
world and in Scandinavia.
As those Scandinavian kingdoms begin to develop, it becomes increasingly important to have
the native king on your side.
The second important point was having clergy who could reach these Scandinavian peoples
who had the skills of convincing them in the native language, or having the interpreters,
or having the sense of miracles and arguments to make the case to go over to the new faith.
This was extremely important.
Those bishops who ended up going to Scandinavia in the 10th century and 11th century, they
come mostly from Germany, some come from England, and I always like to think of them as bishops
without portfolio, that is they don't have any particular diocese.
They attach themselves to a king, they act as an advisor to the king, and they are drawing
on a very long experience of how to argue and negotiate the acceptance of the new faith,
and to take the long view that these conversions are going to take time, that you're dealing
with a very, very ancient culture, and that too can be attributed to the foresight of
St. Oxford and the organization of those schools to train future missionaries.
Well, that gets us to the third part of our discussion here in the initial conversions
of Scandinavia, and that is the barriers that were faced.
Now I mentioned several of the most practical ones.
The first one was language, and by the time of the 9th century, there are very, very
few people in Western Europe who can speak Norse.
There are probably more Norse who can speak at least a pidgin Western European language
because they're engaged in trade, but finding adequate translators to bring a message across
to the Scandinavians, that was going to be difficult, and it was only towards the beginning
of the 10th century that you probably had people who could begin to do a certain amount
of limited preaching.
Of course, you can impress crowds without necessarily them understanding your words.
You can demonstrate great miracles.
You could buy your presence, buy your retinue, buy all sorts of other objects, the service
for instance.
If you could set up a church with a really impressive service, we're told this happens
in Iceland in 997, 1000 when the German bishop sent there by Olaf Triggvissen.
His name is Thrangbrand, and he travels around and holds these masses.
That will attract people.
You'll attract a crowd that'll be interested in the service, the dignity of the service.
However, that just gets attention.
That might convince Scandinavians that, well, this is interesting to follow.
This might be a worthy divinity or not.
Now we want proof, and that proof would have to come in real and hard practical terms.
And so a missionary who's acting in the style of St. Auster might get attention, might get
some actual conversions, a few baptisms, but that's not going to convert into any mass
conversions, and many of those conversions are going to be very tentative.
I mentioned earlier two incidents, one from Ireland and one from the Eastern Baltic, where
in both instances Swedes in the Eastern Baltic and the Danes in Ireland at the Battle of
Carlington, Laos, in 851, they converted, quote, unquote, that is they embraced the
power of St. Patrick or the power of Christ because of victory in battle.
And after that didn't necessarily mean they became Christians in any serious way.
So preaching the difficulty of reaching them through any sort of argument, that inhibited
conversion into the 10th century.
Furthermore, it should be considered, and this is a point that's often neglected, that
in the 9th and 10th century, it was a bold missionary indeed who thought he could go
up to Scandinavia, even if he had the interpreters and the means to impress these people, to
convince them to give up their ancestral worship.
The simple fact is that most of the Scandinavians would have looked at this missionary, they
would have been courteous, they would have been respectful to him because he represented
usually an agent of a great king or a power to the south.
But why should they give this up denying the worship of their ancestors, denying the gods
that had assured prosperity and flying in the face of all the evidence that they had
before them, that Scandinavians could raid and trade and settle at will?
For the first 250 years, I think it is extremely difficult for any missionary to make an argument
that Christ was a successful god when it was obvious that the ancient Scandinavian gods
were succeeding by giving them prosperity and trade and by giving them victory and battle.
There is a very powerful argument made, especially on the development of the cult of Odin.
Odin was originally a god not very important in the Germanic pantheon.
That can be borne out by his rather subordinate role in both Anglo-Saxon England and in Germany,
with little information we have.
Odin would be known as Woden in Anglo-Saxon England or Votan in Germany.
Odin is actually, that is one of those syncopated forms that emerges in the 8th century.
Odin acquires as importance probably late in the Roman age as more and more of these
warrior castes emerge, and it is really the Scandinavians who make Odin their primary war
god.
Before Odin it was Tyr, or he is sometimes known as Twias or Q, from which we get the
name Tuesday in English, honoring that particular god.
This is a god who puts his hand in the mouth of the wolf Fenner in order to bind him and
loses his right hand.
Odin is a god of the Viking age in many ways.
Not only does he represent the Viking age, but he is venerated and gains importance in
the Viking age.
That is because of all the success in battle, the dedications to him, probably the construction
of more elaborate temples, and the celebration in Odin in all of the verse.
A missionary had a very, very tough job in the 9th and 10th century convincing these
people that the ancestral gods were demons, and they should be cast down and that the
new power of the Christian god is what should be accepted.
And that meant you had to have powerful arguments, miracles to convince these Scandinavians
to renounce their ancient gods.
And these came in different forms.
One of the most famous ones is reported around 960-965 when King Harold Bluetooth of Denmark,
who's already inclining to Christianity, gives the final seal of approval.
And that is a German missionary known as St. Poppo, who has been attempting to preach
in Denmark, hoping to go to Sweden and repeat the exploits of St. Ongster, undergoes what
is known as the ordeal of fire.
That is, he carries this heated iron, and then he's given a certain amount of time to
see if the wounds will heal clear, and sure enough they do.
And that type of miracle, that'll convince a king.
And so King Harold Bluetooth embraces Christ as his god, makes him the god of the Danish
monarchy, and begins to set up churches and promote the new faith.
That is the type of attention that is necessary, and the key ingredient in this equation is
you win over a powerful king, a great king who is now devoted to this Christian god as
his personal god, the lord of hosts, a powerful god who can deliver victory, who can protect
his followers, who can perform miracles.
There's other such stories about this.
The conversion of St. Olaf Triggvissen, who becomes the first really serious Christian
king in Norway from 995 to 1000.
That occurs in England, and that is a miracle that's told about the conversion, which associates
the conversion with a case of wisdom.
There's a hermit in England.
This is actually a tale that goes back to the 6th century A.D., and this is a Norse
update of it.
We don't know if it's true or not.
My attitude is it ought to be.
But in any case, Olaf Triggvissen is curious about the Christian god, sends one of his
retainers dressed up as the sea king, as Olaf, to test to see how true this hermit is, this
Christian hermit.
He sees the servant, he says, you're not the king, I'm not going to talk to you.
And eventually Olaf appears after he tries to dupe the hermit in making a false prophecy
or prediction, and as soon as the hermit sees the king, he says, yes, you are the king,
and I predict that should you follow the right path, you will win great victories.
Well, Olaf is impressed.
He embraces Christ, whatever that means, probably means his personal god.
And somewhere in the late early 990s, he converts to Christianity.
When he gets back to Norway, he's convinced that this prophecy is true, and with each
victory he wins, that gives him the throne of Norway, he's more and more convinced.
Now kings who are won over to the new faith in this fashion, they will take the stern
measures necessary to break the power of the pagan cults.
In the case of St. Olaf, he spared no zeal or expense in doing that.
He is the first Norwegian king we really know, went after cult statues, and he cast down
the statues as idols.
He got angry at a whole bunch of sorcerers and bounded them up and drowned them at high
tide on the shores of western Norway.
Actually he had a reason for doing that.
He claimed that they were conjuring up the sea storms that were giving him so much trouble
in defeating his pagan foes, so he's essentially stripping his opponents of their supernatural
gods before he went in and did in the pagan mortal foes.
And there are a number of reports of these types of actions taken out, conducted by kings
such as Harold Bluth who spent Fjord Beard in Denmark, Olaf Triggvissen and later St.
Olaf in Norway.
And it is only when you win these kings over to the message and you have these bishops who
are capable of explaining to these kings the message, are you going to get real conversion.
That is, people are going to look at a powerful king, a king such as Olaf Triggvissen, a king
of St. Olaf, especially the great naval victory of St. Olaf, the Battle of Neysjahr, that
is proof of the power of the Christian god.
But this only comes at the very beginning of the 11th century and is closely tied with
that other important development in the Viking age and that is the emergence of the great
sea kings and professional armies that can lead to the creation of territorial kingdoms.
