Lecture 30, Collapse of Canute's Empire.
In this lecture, I plan to look at the fragmenting of Canute's great North Sea Empire and the
emergence of more compact kingdoms in the form of England, Denmark and Norway.
And this next period of maybe 30 years after the death of Canute saw two major issues at
stake.
First, down to 1042, the question was would one of the surviving sons of Canute manage
to gain control of the thrones of England and Denmark and reassert authority in Norway
and so reconstitute the kingdom of Canute under that royal yelling family.
And that question ultimately would be answered no.
Then from 1042 down to 1066, there's an extremely complicated political struggle played out
at the courts of Rouen in Normandy, Winchester in England, and the courts of Denmark and
Norway as to exactly who would succeed to the legacy of Canute and exactly what portions
of the legacy of Canute would constitute kingdoms.
And the result of this very complicated political history is three major battles in 1066 that
essentially settled the issue.
And what we will do in the second part of the lecture is look at that complicated struggle
that climaxed in the final battle of Hastings on October 14, 1066, which essentially determined
the destinies of Scandinavian England for the rest of the Middle Ages.
Well first let's look at the initial succession crisis following the death of Canute.
Canute died in England, not unexpectedly, that's where he spent most of his reign on
November 12, 1035.
Several months after his oldest son, Sven, died in exile in the Danish court at Roskilde.
This is Sven, the older son who had previously been king of Norway and had been expelled
by his subjects.
Canute was given a burial at Winchester, he was received with all the honors of a West
Saxon king, and from the start there was a succession crisis as well as the question
of what's going to happen to the realm.
In 1035, probably by mid-summer of 1035, the Norwegian Yarls and Lenderman, that is the
local rulers as well as the men of landed property, especially in Trondheim or Trondelag
in the northern sections of the country, had expelled Danish rule and had invited to rule
over them Magnus the Good.
He was the son of St. Olaf, Olaf the Stout, who had seized Norway back in 1015 and had
been Canute's great rival throughout most of Canute's reign.
And then St. Olaf had made a desperate bid in 1030 to retake his throne and had been
defeated in slain at the Battle of Stickelstad by his own subjects in northern Norway on
July 29, 1030, and it was that battle that ensured Canute's position in Norway.
Unfortunately, Canute soon afterwards gave Norway over to his son who immediately alienated
the Norwegians, and so Magnus the Good had been called back in, he was about seven years
old at the time.
Reared at the court of Kiev, that is Yaroslav, the Varyngian Rus' prince of the east, so
that most of the affairs are being directed by the great Yarls of Trondelag who were fighting
in the name of King Magnus.
Although Magnus matured very quickly, by age 14 or 15, he was already had the capacity
to lead men in battle and would turn out to be a very, very energetic and dynamic prince.
So Norway was now independent from Denmark and you have to recall that Canute as well
of his sons carried that ancient tradition, that ancient Danish tradition that any powerful
Norwegian sea king was by definition a rival and that southern Norway was really part of
Denmark and northern Norway, by the way, should be ruled by Yarls, properly subservient to
the Danish crown.
Also in 1035 there were two brothers, half brothers, each of whom had a claim to the
throne.
And it was a rather complicated and bizarre situation.
The brother Harold Harefoot who was the younger son of Alf Javu, that is the first wife, the
English wife of Canute, he was in England at the time when his father died and he was
at Winchester, so he in effect controlled the instruments of government in England or
could.
Unfortunately his mom, Alf Javu, was in Denmark and in Denmark was Harold Harefoot's half
brother and rival, Hartha Canute or Canute the 30s is often called and he was the son
of Queen Emma, the Norman lady, the Norman princess who some saw as the more senior and
important wife.
She after all had been married to Ethra II, her brother was Richard Duke of Normandy,
he clearly had a great deal more status than Alf Javu who was just an English noble lady.
And Queen Emma at the time ironically was in England.
So each mom had the privilege of being in the kingdom of their stepson.
Emma however was the more droid diplomat, she had on her side from the start Earl Godwin.
And Earl Godwin was an old time supportive Canute, very powerful English family, he had
five mature sons all of whom ended up becoming Earl's in their own right and one of them
Harold II has the honor of being the last Anglo-Saxon king of England.
And Godwin also had lots of connections in the Anglo-Danish elitist, his family was popular
in the Midlands and Wessex and he backed Emma.
And Emma and Godwin together were able to arrange a deal whereby Emma's son Hartha Canute then
in Denmark was acclaimed king of Denmark and England together.
Harold Harefoot was compensated with the understanding that he would rule England in the interest
of his brother.
We're not sure exactly what sort of title, Harold held whether it was king, probably
it was a royal title and he was not just a yarrow, but it was clear that Emma and Godwin
were going to call the shots.
Well this was not very satisfying to Harold Harefoot and fortunately for Harold he was
able to vitiate this agreement in 1037 and seized the crown of England for himself.
And this was simply because dear brother or dear half brother back in Denmark, Hartha Canute
was too busy fighting the Norwegian fleet.
The Norwegians were attacking Denmark, Magnus or Magnus's supporters to be more accurate
intended to put Magnus on the throne of Denmark and then probably the Norwegians would happily
sail over to England and take England as well.
That enabled Harold to secure the throne in England.
He did this by winning over those earls who were opposed to Godwin in Emma, including the
great Earl of Mercia, Lea Frick, only known through in popular literature as being the
husband of the future Lady Godiva, but that's another story and a legend.
In any case, Harold was now a sole king in England.
Hartha Canute could not let this stand and he came to an unusual agreement with his
opponent in Scandinavia, Magnus the Good, in 1038.
They agreed to an armistice and a treaty and this treaty was to have wide-ranging consequences.
At the time, both of these, Hartha Canute is a young man, Magnus is somewhere around ten
years of age, both of them expected to have long reigns and lots of children, but they
came to an agreement that should either Magnus or Hartha Canute die without issue, that is
without legitimate children to claim the throne, that the family of the other would inherit.
So in the event that Magnus died without any issue, Norway would go back to Hartha Canute,
the kings of Denmark, and vice versa.
Should Hartha Canute die, then Norway could have the claim to the Danish kingdom and also
the kingdom of England.
So this gave advantages to both sides, Magnus' supporters consolidated control over Norway
in the coming years so that Magnus was uncontested as king of Norway and Hartha Canute immediately
ready to flee to invade England.
And before he invaded England, he did what all good kings do, he consults with mom.
Queen Emma had been kicked out of England, she was at the court of Flanders as an exile,
Hartha Canute sailed there to consult with mom on important issues, especially winning
over supporters like Earl Godwin, and he was geared up and ready to invade England in
early 1040 when unexpectedly Harold Harefoot died apparently of illness at Winchester.
Well, Hartha Canute arrived with the fleet, the party's on, we're going to sail, he's
received in England immediately, there's no civil war, and Hartha Canute is now declared
king of England.
He has England, he has Denmark, and you know what's next in the game plan, he's going
to raise all that money in England, sail back to Denmark and take out Norway.
And so Hartha Canute happily rules as king of England, and unfortunately over-indulged
himself, well the first act as king of England was to dig up the body of his brother, Harold
Harefoot and scatter the bones, and then proceeded to make his own appointments, and Hartha
Canute unfortunately in June of 1042 over-indulges himself at one of these great drinking hall
parties, he's really very excited, he just raised something like, I don't know, 30,000
pounds of dangal, he was ready to go, and promptly went into convulsions and died the
next morning.
And so contrary to everyone's expectation, none of Canute's sons ever reached the age
of 25, none of them had children, the direct line of Canute was now defunct.
Well, now the treaty kicks in from back in 1038, madness, the son of St. Olaf, the king
of Norway, the ex-king of Norway now a saint, he has the right to claim both Denmark and
England under the arrangements of that treaty made back in 1038.
Well he's not in much of a position to take on England, but he's certainly in a position
to assert his rights in Denmark, and that's what they do immediately.
In the spring of 1043, a huge Norwegian fleet shows up, and immediately the Danes at Vborg
in northern Jutland, which is regarded as the most important thing in the entire country,
agreed to accept King Magnus of Norway as their king.
This is the first time that a Norwegian sea king, any kind of Norwegian royal figure was
accepted as king by any group of the Danes.
It marks a great triumph.
Magnus in many ways proved a far more adroit and able king than his father St. Olaf did,
and we'll discuss St. Olaf and his various mistakes in an upcoming lecture.
But at this point St. Olaf is now a canonized royal saint, and by the way St. Olaf is always
more dangerous as a saint than he was ever as alive to Canute and Canute's family.
So Magnus looks like he's ironically going to end up being the successor of King Canute,
that he's going to go on to take Denmark and England.
Now the English nobility, really Godwin, moved quickly on the matter.
They decided that they didn't want a Norwegian king, and immediately came up with the brilliant
idea of inviting back to England Edward, known as Edward the Confessor, the son of
Queen Emma, that is the stepson of Canute, who had been in exile at Rouen, and for all
intents and purposes was a Norman.
In fact Edward the Confessor would have preferred to have been a monk and writing nice manuscripts.
He spoke Norman French, probably couldn't even speak English, really was very reluctant
to assume the throne of England.
He was trotted in by Godwin and the leading families in England for that very purpose.
They hoped to rule England as great regional lords through this week, essentially Norman
trained king.
And the history in England from 1042 to 1066, when Edward the Confessor dies, is really
a power struggle among the great families of earls, these Anglo-English families created
by Canute as to who can control the throne.
And if this situation had continued, if there had been no battle of Hastings or Norman conquest,
England could very easily have broken up into those regional kingdoms that you would
have seen before the reign of Alfred the Great, with Godwin's family getting the greatest
prize which would have been Wessex and Mercia.
Godwin marries Edward to one of his daughters and throughout the reign there's a series
of power struggles, even a brief civil war where Godwin for a short time is out of favor,
and it's clear, certainly by 1062, that Edward is failing, he's going to have no children,
and there's already a maneuver going on among the English aristocracy of who gets the royal
prize.
And Harold II, the oldest surviving son of Godwin, his older brother, Sven, had died
at pre-deceased him, eventually ends up getting acclaimed king in early 1066.
Well as that is being played out in England, what is happening in Scandinavia?
Well it looked like everything was perfect for Magnus.
That he had Denmark in 1043 is elected by the thing in Vborg, England was next on the menu,
he did take time to impress upon his Danish subjects, his ability, for instance he defeats
the Wens, that is the Slavs on the southern shore of the Baltic, he's probably responsible
for torching Jomsborg, the base of the Joms Viking, and bringing that professional company
of Vikings to an end, because they're closely associated with the Danish monarchy.
What Magnus didn't count on was not only the machinations of Godwin in England to put
this bizarre Norman-trained king on the throne of England, but also on a man by the name
of Sven Estresen, I affectionately call him the rubber man of the 11th century, because
he always managed to bounce back no matter how bad the defeat.
And Sven Estresen was the nephew of Knut, in fact no one really paid much attention to
him through most of his reign.
Most of Knut's reign, Sven was known by his mother's patronymic Estresen, son of Estres,
who was the half-sister of Knut.
His father was Ulf, a yarl who had ruled in Denmark and who had been disgraced for treason
by Knut.
Sven had been essentially a hostage at the court of Knut and then Knut's sons and escaped
and made his way to Sweden, that is to the court at Siktuna, where he was given support
by the then reigning Swedish king to make a comeback, a political comeback in Denmark,
and that's what he did.
A year after Magnus had been proclaimed king of Denmark and went back to Norway to arrange
affairs in his kingdom and to prepare for an English invasion, Sven came out of nowhere,
got elected by the Vborg thing as king of the Danes, and immediately a war was on.
And from that point on, down to 1066, for almost 22 years, Sven Estresen fought usually
a losing battle against his Norwegian contender.
Sometimes it was Magnus the good, and then the other candidate who came into complicate
it in 1045, 1046, was the half-brother of St. Olaf, that is Harald Hodgerry, Harald
the Ruthless, Harald Hart as nails, as sometimes his name is translated, and he was, as I said,
he was a Christian Viking in every sense and probably had more in common with Odin than
he ever did with Christ.
Harald Hodgerry, who had also been at the fateful battle of Stickelstad in 1030 when King Olaf
went down and soon to become St. Olaf, had fled east, first to Kiev, had made his way
to Constantinople and had served in the Vringing Guard.
And he is perhaps the greatest example of the types of fortunes that could be made by
serving in the east in Byzantium and learning the techniques of government, acquiring powerful
warriors, and just like his half-brother, St. Olaf, making sure to have lots of good
Icelanders around who can tell you, to tell everyone about your great deeds and poetry.
And he's an absolutely colorful figure.
The Byzantines are impressed by him.
He impressed the then-reigning Empress Zoe, my favorite Byzantine emperor, that silly
niece of Emperor Basel II, who is the all-time high maintenance of the 11th century, and
there's stories that she was ready to marry this great Norwegian king, considering some
of the escapades of Zoe, I believe it.
In any event, Harold had better things in mind than worrying about this 50-year-old
Empress and spoiled brat of niece of Basel II, when he had made his career in Constantinople
and got worried of the complicated situation in Scandinavia, he decided to return to Scandinavia
and he had a legitimate claim to being king of Norway as the half-brother of St. Olaf.
On the way, he married Elizabeth, that is, the daughter of Yaroslav, the prince of Kiev,
made an important alliance.
He showed up at the court of Sweden, immediately got in contact with Sven Estresen, and the
two of them teamed up to take out Magnus.
Harold wasn't particularly impressed by Sven, in fact, most people were impressed by Sven.
He walked with the limp, he was not a charismatic warrior, in fact, he was repeated, he never
won a significant victory in his entire career.
He's very good at rallying men.
He was, however, a consummate diplomat, and one point different from all the other contenders,
he knew that what he wanted was Denmark.
He was not interested in taking on the entire inheritance of Canute, that the territorial
kingdom of Denmark was sufficient, and he very much thought of himself as a Danish noble
man and king.
Denmark was what he wanted, Denmark was what he wanted to consolidate, and he never lost
control, he never lost sight of that objective.
And so Harold decided, with all the wealth of Konstantin Oppel and his veteran warriors,
that he could probably do better if he teamed up with his nephew Magnus and took out Sven.
And so what happened in 1046 was a very, very strange alliance between nephew and uncle
Magnus and Harold agreed to share the kingship of Norway.
This was not a territorial partition, and again, it's an old Teutonic custom to provide
realms for everyone.
Under the deal, Magnus would have his own court and move around Norway, Harold would
have his court.
If the two kings presided together, Magnus would have precedence over Harold.
Well, I think in the long run this wasn't going to work.
Everyone knew that Harold, who was considerably older than his nephew, he was about 13, 14
years older, was the greater warrior, had the greater amounts of money that he'd won
in Konstantin Oppel, made the intelligent move of marrying his second wife, Thora, the
daughter of Yarl Thurberg, who controlled the uplands.
And Harold made sure to have guest ties, friendships, fostering marriage alliances with all the
key nobility around the Oslo area and the uplands, that is the heart of the kingdom.
And it was likely that nephew and uncle might have gone to war with each other, and happily,
for King Harold, Magnus II died unexpectedly of an illness in 1047, and one wonders with
all these young kings dying of illness, you know, is there some mad poisoner out there
if you're into conspiratorial versions of history, but you have to understand, given
the conditions and diet of the Middle Ages is very common for people to contract illnesses
and die, and this just happens frequently, that's part of the attrition of ancient and
medieval populations.
So in 1047, Harold Hoddery is now the sole king in Norway, facing Sven Estresen, and
he had two important claims.
First, he could claim that Danish kingdom.
Second, he could also claim the kingdom of England, because he was the surviving relative
of Magnus, and under that old treaty in 1038, which Arthur Canute had made with Magnus,
which everyone has heirs, inherits the realm of the other, and so Harold Hoddery always
thought in terms of, well, I get Denmark, I get England, and this is a restless, brilliant
sea king who had the best warriors in the Northland, and he intended to recreate the
exploits of Sven Forkbeard and Canute in England.
What he didn't bank on was this rather unimpressive opponent in Denmark, Sven Estresen, who checked
the efforts of Harold to conquer Denmark, and so thwarted the plans to invade England.
And this is despite the fact that Harold could invade Denmark repeatedly each year, sweep
the Danes off the sea, ravage the Danish islands, and 1049 Hedibi is sacked.
There is a major battle at the Nisa River in 1062, where Sven Estresen has to jump ship
in order to escape capture.
It's probably the most humiliating naval battle suffered by any king in the Northlands, and
yet Sven is able to make a comeback.
In part, Harold became increasingly ruthless, hard as nails, as his name gives you, his
nickname, short of funds, and lost popularity with the Danes by ravaging Denmark in order
to pay his Norwegian supporters.
Well, in 1064, Harold and Sven call a timeout, just as we had back in 1038, and what caused
that again was developments in England.
By 1064, the conditions were such that everyone knew Edward the Convessor didn't have long
to go.
That was known in England, that information is immediately transmitted to Scandinavia
because of the close contacts among the kingdoms, and the question is, well, what happens next?
Harold came to the conclusion that Denmark is too tough, an opportunity is developing
in England, maybe we should shift to England, conquer England, and then with the resources
of England come back and take out Denmark.
That's probably what he has in mind, and he's encouraged in this regard by several other
important developments.
One is Harold's brother, Tossack, who had been Earl of Northumbria, that is the northern
regions of England, the old core of the Dan law, had been exiled.
He'd been run out of England because he had been extremely unpopular.
His earldom was given over to a guy named Morker, who was the brother of Edmund of the
Earl of Mercia, and Tossack was really mad, wanted to make a comeback, blamed his brother
for not supporting him, although Tossack had done everything in his power to alienate
the Anglo-Danish classes, and he was willing to raise rebellions in northern England and
welcome Harold into England.
And that was one of the important reasons why Harold decided to switch his interest
to England.
Furthermore, the only other possible candidates for the English throne had pretty weak claims
in themselves.
They were two other men.
One of them was Harold II, who was in effect the brother-in-law of Edward the Confessor,
the leading Earl in England, but he had no royal blood.
He claimed when Edward died early in January 1066, and Edward had a very, very long illness.
He was suffering a fever, he was tuned out half the time.
Some people speculate, most of the time he thought he was heaven rather than earth.
And Harold II claimed that on his deathbed, Edward the Confessor had had a vision and
made him Harold heir to the English throne.
And of course, there was no one to verify it except Harold, but that was a problem in
and of itself.
Certainly he had the supporters, the power and the reputation to become king of England.
He'd beaten up the Welsh in some campaigns earlier, that's always good for English reputation.
And above all, he could command the loyalty of the Anglo-Danish ruling classes in England,
as well as the Housecarls, that professional army of 2,000 Scandinavian warriors.
The third candidate was Duke William of Normandy, William the Bastard as he was known, the illegitimate
son of Richard II, sorry, Robert I of Normandy, and William the Conqueror as he's known in
later English accounts.
He too had a pretty weak claim to the throne.
In fact, his only claim to the throne really was that Harold had gotten shipwrecked in
Normandy sometime back in 1064, and they had paled around together and beaten up the Britons,
that is the Celtic peoples of Brittany, Harold was really good on that, you know, take out
the Welsh in English, now we can beat up the Celts on the continent.
And as a result of staying with King William, King William induced Harold to swear an oath
on bones that he would support William's claim to the throne.
One wonders what that claim was really based on, there really wasn't any basis.
But when Harold took the throne early in 1066, William immediately challenged it and said,
you know, I'm King of England, and Harold knew that he would have to fight for the throne,
and King Harold Hoddery of Norway had a claim, so you had three kings, a choice of three
kings in January of 1066, and really all of them, in some ways the best claim was actually
Harold Hoddery of Norway, if you're looking at legal claim, but the claim was going to
be enforced on the battlefield.
Well this comes down to the climax of what happens to the kingdom, the empire of Canute.
Until the second, two his credit had to face two potential invasions, one from the north,
and you have to remember, in the English mind, the Norwegian threat was probably the greater.
And there was good reason, because of previous invasions by Viking armies.
Most of the spring and summer passed uneventfully, none of the fleet set sail, but in the early
autumn of 1066, Harold had a real problem.
Most of his militia forces, the third, their services expired, they went home, all Harold
had was his royal forces.
He was guarding southern England against the threat of a Norman invasion, and he really
wondered whether the Normans could pull it off and put all those heavy, you know, those
heavy chargers, those horses on ships, and get those damn animals over to England and
mount the Norman cavalry and win a battle.
And then news came that a Norwegian fleet had sailed.
The winds had been adverse all summer and had prevented the Norman ships from sailing
from the French ports.
But those same winds that held up William the Conqueror's army allowed Harold Hoddery
to set sail under ideal conditions with a fleet of 200 ships.
He joined up with Tossick, the exiled brother of Harold.
He also made an excursion over to the Orkney Islands and picked up a lot of great Scandinavian
warriors from the Orkneys and Scotland, and this huge fleet sailed along the shores of
northern England at that point over 300 longships, perhaps 10,000 warriors, and landed south
of York and advanced on the city of York.
On September 20th, 1066, Harold and his allies smashed the northern English army at the Battle
of Fulford.
It was a resounding victory.
The two Earls, Edwin and Morker, escaped.
Those flew south to Harold, who at this point only had his royal army.
Harold immediately advanced north, and within five days of the first battle, Harold's army
arrived from the south, covering 180 miles.
These are men mounted on essentially souped up Shetland ponies across the Roman roads.
The English army actually goes through York and attacks Harold's army, which didn't even
know the English were there.
They were scattered, many of them without arms, and the result is a major battle along
this little river known as the Battle of Stanford Bridge in which Harold Hoddery in the Norwegian
army is annihilated in one of the great battles of the Northlands.
Now if everything had stopped at that point, Harold II would be remembered as the greatest
English king on record because he had won the greatest victory that any English king
had ever won over any Viking army.
We are told that less than 25 ships were necessary to take the survivors back to Norway.
It was a colossal defeat, and yet King Harold II of Harold Godwinstown of England wasn't
going to be so lucky because on September 28, three days later, William's army landed
in England, 6,000 strong, including 2,000 cavalry, and immediately Harold was on the
road south to London and then immediately headed south to confront William at Hastings
On October 14, 1066, the great decisive battle of English history was fought, which pitted
essentially a Viking shield wall.
That is the Anglo-Danish housecarls, 2,000 strong with axes, supported by the English
militia forces against the Norman cavalry.
And it was an all day affair.
The English almost won the battle.
The Normans never forgot how difficult an opponent they were, and as a result Harold
went down, he was killed late in the day, William won the battle and went on to take
the Kingdom of England and established the Normand dynasty of England, which would henceforth
transform England into a Carolingian style feudal state.
It also marked the end of any effort by Scandinavian kings to rule in England.
But above all, it determined that Sven Estresen would rule in Denmark, and that the family
of Harold Hoddery would rule in Norway, and that three kingdoms, not one kingdom, would
follow Knuth the Great.
