In this lecture I plan to deal with the second Scandinavian Kingdom, Norway, and it's arguable
that I should start with Norway and then move to Denmark because in the previous three
lectures it's clear that the political destinies of Norway and Denmark are intertwined.
So what I plan to do in this lecture is to follow that thread of Norwegian history starting
with the early Viking age and ending with the death of St. Olaf and his canonization
actually St. Olaf was canonized just about 18 months after his death.
Norway turns out to be a remarkable achievement in the Viking age.
The development of a kingship in Norway was actually a precocious act and in some ways
the Danish kings never quite got over the fact that King Harold Finehair had imposed
his authority over Norway close to a generation earlier than Gorm the Old did in Denmark.
And throughout the 10th and 11th centuries it's clear that the Danish kings saw that they
had a legitimate claim to at least two of those sections of Norway that is the area of
Vespolt, the Oslo Fjord, the southern coastal areas of the Vicken as well as the hinterland,
the uplands, these regions were seen as potentially integral to the Danish kingdom and they felt
they should have some kind of authority over the rest of Norway including the southwestern
districts, the homes to the various Viking sea kings and the vast northern zones centered
on Trondelag and the regions stretching up to the Arctic Circle and beyond.
Nonetheless it's the Norwegians who first create the beginning of what looks like a
Scandinavian territorial kingdom and there's some remarkable reasons for this, not the least
of which is that Norway perhaps was in the forefront in the Viking expeditions overseas
in the 9th and 10th century and that Viking background was all important in transforming
the isolated Norwegian communities in the fjords, in the almost alpine valleys of central
Norway into the types of communities that could support first yarls, that is local rulers
ruling with the consent of the rest of the landed classes, the lender men in things, assemblies
and they in turn could become the basis for regional kings and from those regional kings
you get great Viking sea kings and ultimately one of those Viking sea kings manages to take
over the whole area as king of Norway by marshaling these fleets and creating a royal
power and it fell to King Harold Finehair to achieve this and Harold Finehair in some
ways was a rather logical choice and in other ways something of a surprise.
As I noted Norway really has to be conceived of as four great regions with many sub regions
that is the core of the kingdom around the viken where any royal authority would have
to make his capital. These would include the important merchant towns or market towns to
be more accurate, Kalpong, this is where the great ship burials have been found, notably
the ship burials at Osberg and Gokstad and I mentioned that the Osberg Fine dated to about
834 might be the tomb of Harold's grandma, his paternal grandma, Queen Aza. In addition
there were the western districts which very often get called the Vestlandet, that's a term
that deals with all the southwestern fjord regions from Agdeir up to Sangne Fjord, these
were homes to the various Viking raiders of the 9th and 10th century and then finally
that northern zone of Trondelag. All of these areas were comparatively late in their settlement
by dramatic speaking peoples, they do not figure in the great legendary traditions of the
heroic age, that is the age of migrations. Archaeology reveals that emigration and settlement
had come from two directions, part of it had been from central Sweden and King Harold Finehair
and his family claim to be descended from the Ynglingar, that is the Swedish royal family
ruling at Uppsala back in that mythical age of the 5th and 6th centuries AD. The tradition
may not be accurate but the tradition does reflect the fact that people of Swedish ancestry
had moved into sections of Norway, particularly the upland regions and from there overland
to Trondelag. There were others who also claimed descent from the various Danish kings, particularly
Rolf Krocki and other legendary figures and that too reflects the fact that Danes continually
crossed the Skaggarat and settled in southwestern Norway in the Viking areas. So Norway in a way
was essentially a marcher zone as you'd call it in the Middle Ages, that it was an outlying district.
Well, the Viking age put Norway in many ways in the forefront of Scandinavia. The Norwegians
excelled as shipbuilders, they also have reputations of being superb sailors and warriors. I've reported
in the sagas and this is not just the fact that Snorri Skrullsen and the Icelanders like to praise
the Norwegians over the Danes and Swedes. There's very, very good evidence that the Norwegians
were absolutely superb warriors. They're credited with catching javelins and throwing them back at their
foes. They are superb bowmen. The excellence in athletics, the excellence in hunting was
stressed in Norway and above all the Norwegians really took to raiding as Vikings. The archaeology
bears us out. Numerous graves appear in the 9th and 10th century and they are filled with
English and Irish objects. This is jewelry, crosses, liturgical objects, items that would not have
arrived in Norway by trade but came in as plunder. Furthermore, we know from the Irish and English
accounts both that the Norwegians were Danish opponents. The Irish refer to great fleets arriving
from Norway. The first one is Thurges who arrived somewhere around 838. He comes from Vestlandat,
he's from one of the western fjords. He's called a king by the Irish. Olaf, who arrives
again with another great fleet shortly after the mid 9th century to defeat the Danes in
Ireland, he too is called a king of Lachlan, which is the Irish name for Norway. He's probably
from Vestlandat. The Viking age transformed many of these petty rulers dynast and yarls
into great sea kings with the wealth and the warriors and the ships to impose their authority
over regions. And that was an important building block in the creation of the eventual Norwegian
kingdom. That is by the mid 9th century, those isolated communities as a result of the Viking
age had evolved into polities that had enough wealth, enough skilled people, warriors, ships
that they could act as the units of a wider Norwegian kingdom. And it would take someone
to put them all together. And that turned out to be Harold Finehair, who himself is very,
very much a Viking king. Now, Harold Finehair has excited the imagination of all Scandinavians.
The only other medieval Norwegian king who's more famous than Harold Finehair is St. Olaf,
who will be the subject of the next lecture. And Harold Finehair in some ways really inspired
two different traditions, almost antithetical traditions about him. And it's first important
to get some of this out of the way because our sources reflect these two traditions. One is
a tradition found in Snorri Struelsen's Heimskrillinga saga and repeated in the various poetry and
quoted in later sagas that Harold Finehair was a brilliant sea king, a man who had a personality
that inspired loyalty and lots of neat stories about him. He was impulsive, he could be moved
to actions of great heroism and at the same time was known for his quips and would not
brook any kind of dissidents at all. In fact, the story that comes down to us from Snorri
is the reason he ended up conquering Norway is that he had been taunted by one of his many wives
actually, would-be wives, who jilted him. And this was a young lady named Gaida who was the
daughter of King Eric of Hordelan, one of the fjords in Vestlandet. And early in Harold's
Finehair's career, he had approached her and offered her as any Norwegian king would that
would you like to become one of my many wives or concubines? And her responses, and I always tell
the ladies in my classes to follow her advice was, no deal. If you want me, you've got to marry me
and by the way, before you marry me, you better make something of yourself. You should be King of
Norway. And Harold Finehair in return swore an oath, I will come back and marry you when I am King
of Norway and I shall not cut my hair until I achieve this great action. And he had this apparently
beautiful fine golden hair, which according to Snorri eventually was on the floor by the time he got
Norway altogether, but it was eventually cut and she did eventually marry Harold Finehair and she did
eventually rule as queen. And she was number one. And Harold had a lot of other wives and that's the
way you cement political relations in Norway. That's the way you win over these different
Yarls and petty dynasts. And Harold pioneers the cardinal principle of Norwegian politics that
lasted down, well even beyond the Christian age, that if you can't beat them, marry them. So that's just
standard policy for any aspiring Norwegian king. Harold is also credited with advancing many of the
same institutions that we know date to later periods in Norwegian history. That is from the 11th, 12th
to 13th century. We believe this is a case of creative anachronism that is later Norwegian writers
thought Harold Finehair is our first great king. He must have ruled in Norway very much like Norway of our
own time, particularly the time of King Hacken IV, the great 13th century king. He ruled from
1217 down to 1263. And therefore a lot of institutions such as the creation of sheriffs, royal
justices, all of this is attributed to Harold Finehair and that's probably not right. He ruled far more
traditionally through marriage alliance, through kinship, the fostering of children that is taking
into his household and rearing the sons of noblemen, the use of his servants and even of his slaves to
carry out his will. Above all he had to rule by some kind of consent. He had to rule by customary law,
ratified in the various things and especially in the northern half of Norway, he depended upon the great
yarls of Trondelag, especially the families that controlled the great pagan sanctuary at Lada, which was
a sanctuary to Thor with two other rather minor goddesses, Thorgerda and Erpta, her sister. And it's a
great cult center comparable to Uppsala in Sweden. So that Harold did not create anything resembling
a centralized kingdom. In some ways he was the chairman of the board of a whole bunch of Viking sea kings
and under Harold Finehair Viking raids actually continued and the king would get his cut. Nonetheless
this tradition of Harold Finehair is very favorable. It's one that is promoted by Norwegian authors,
particularly ecclesiastical authors and many a Norwegian writer of the 13th century would like to think Harold
was a Christian, there's no evidence he was. There is however a second tradition and it's very, very powerful
in the literature and this is the tradition circulated among the Icelanders or a number of the Icelanders.
It goes back to Ari the learned who is the great Icelandic scholar from 1067 to 1148 who wrote those
important books, the book of Icelanders and the book of settlements. And Ari the learned was convinced as
many of his fellow countrymen that Harold Finehair was a tyrannical king, that he had driven many
Norwegians overseas to Iceland and Iceland was essentially founded as a refuge from royal tyranny.
Now this tells us a great deal about Icelandic perceptions of the Norwegian crown. It also explains
a great deal of how in the 13th century the kings of Norway went out of their way, both King Hakim IV
and his son Magnus, to conciliate the Icelanders when Iceland came under their control because there is this
very, very powerful image, political conceit that we are rugged independent Icelanders because we escaped this
first tyrannical king in Scandinavian history. And they had some, there's probably some truth behind this.
It can't be completely discounted as some scholars would say. We are a little vague on the dates of King
Harold Finehair. The best guess is somewhere by 880 he had established his authority. He probably
retired from the throne close to around 930 AD and died several years later. And according to Snorri he died
at the age of 80 and one account says he had a thousand wives and concubines. And this of course means
anyone aspiring to be king of Norway could plausibly claim to be a descendant from Harold Finehair.
I mean who could disprove it given Harold's prodigious activities. He is remembered as winning a major naval battle
at Hofsfjord in western Norway where he crushed many of those sea kings and imposed his authority. That battle
was celebrated in Icelandic poetry. It's the poem of Harold. It goes under several different names but
Hofsmal is the most common designation of that poem. It's quoted extensively in later sagas and it is cast as a
speech between a raven and a valkyrie. A raven is one of the birds of Odin. Odin has two ravens on his shoulders.
They fly out each day to bring back news of the world. And so the raven is always associated with Odin. Odin
is a carrion bird that shows up in obvious association. And the valkyrie is of course one of the princess warriors of Odin.
And they cast this battle as a great heroic event. It's a speech in exchange between the two of them. Very, very common
theme in Norse poetry. And Harold obviously was destined for Valar. The fact that he could achieve this unification
at the end of the 9th century and the beginning of the 10th century is really a testimony to the development of Norwegian
institutions in the early Viking age. Harold, however, as all Scandinavian and Germanic kings had a number of offspring,
all those sons expected to have kingdoms. And we really don't know what Harold's plans were. He died of old age.
And if, you know, we don't know if he was 80 or not, he looked 80 anyway when he died. No one knows when these people were born.
There's no official reckoning. Nonetheless, he had bowed out from ruling and had turned over power to one of his older sons,
favorite sons, fellow named Eric the Blood Axe, appropriately named because he pursued Vendettas very, very ruthlessly.
And he was known to be a restless Viking by temperament. He ends up marrying Goonhild, who is either probably a daughter of Gorm the Old,
the King of Denmark. We know she's a Danish princess. She's either the sister or half-sister of Harold Wartuth.
Well, anyway, that's our best guess on her. But at any event, Eric Blood Axe proved to be too tyrannical a king,
made great demands, apparently for ship service, and he was eventually driven out of Norway by the Yarls and Lendermen,
that is, the regional rulers, the landed classes, who called in another son, a much younger son of Harold Fine here,
who's remembered in the tradition as Hacken the Good. And those events, even though they're highly colored and legendary,
and much of it is told to us in Saga by Snorri, are very telling about the nature of this Norwegian monarchy.
It really did rest on a consent. That's true of all Scandinavian kingdoms.
And one of the efforts of Scandinavian kings when they become Christian kings is to make their monarchy hereditary within their family
and to make sure succession ultimately goes to one man, so as not to have these didastic problems. This is still far in the future.
Hacken was a Christian. He had apparently been sent to King Athelstan of England, where he was reared as a foster son,
and Athelstan, the grandson of Alfred the Great, had supervised the baptism, was actually the godfather of Hacken,
and when Hacken showed up in Norway, he carried along with him an English priest, he celebrated Mass,
he couldn't really convert his subjects. And one wonders exactly how strong was Hacken's Christianity,
we're told in a number of instances, particularly when he was up in Trondelog, reluctantly but nonetheless, quite openly,
he participated in the sacrifices to Thor, to Odin. Sometimes he would make crosses when he was taking one of the drinking horns
and the pagans, wondered what he was doing, and they were assured, well, he's making the sign of the hammer of Thor,
and actually there's a lot of little miniature hammers of Thor that are used as religious symbols,
and it could look like a hammer of Thor, and maybe Hacken himself thought, you know, Christ is sort of like Thor, it's okay,
and when Hacken actually died, somewhere around 960, 961, of mortal wounds sustained in a naval battle,
he was actually accorded a ship burial, and the later Norwegians, especially the pagans, are convinced that so noble and great a king
had to have been accepted by Odin and Valhalla, that Hacken was at least half-pagan, more than half-pagan.
And again, Hacken was an astute man, unlike his half-brother Eric, who ended up for a short time being king of York,
managed to antagonize all the Danes of the Dan Law before they ran him out and he died overseas as an exciting Viking figure,
Hacken knew to rule with the consent of the various landed classes, the Yarls, and to respect local custom,
and local custom in Norway was closely linked to the worship of the ancient gods.
The opening of anything, we know this from Icelandic cases, especially with the all-thing,
was always accompanied with prayers to the gods.
The goth, or the godar, is to use the plural, the gothar, the chieftains were ruled in Icelandic society and exercised authority.
One of their tasks before 1000, before the conversion to Christianity, was always to recite the proper prayers.
We assume the same was true in all the things of Scandinavia, particularly in Norway and Trandallog.
The ancient gods had to be invoked.
The things were usually held at great sanctuaries, such as at Lada, where there's the sanctuary to Thor,
and so Hacken very astutely realized the only way you're going to rule is to co-op and win over the cooperation of these people.
You cannot impose Christianity, and even if you can launch the largest fleet and you're a great warrior,
that is not enough for exercising royal authority.
Hacken, however, faced a great deal of resentment by the sons of his half-brother, Eric the Blood Axe,
and they and mom, Gunnhild, made a beeline to the Danish court and had no difficulty in persuading the Danish court that Hacken was a threat.
He was a threat simply because he was a popular sea king in Norway, and as I mentioned at the start of this lecture,
that the Danish kings always saw southern Norway as part of their realm.
And so Hacken faced three different attempts by the sons of Eric the Blood Axe,
that is the Ericsons, his nephews, who tried to overthrow him and take the Norwegian throne.
The last one climaxed in a naval battle, the battle at Storth,
in which Hacken himself was wounded, even though he won the battle, died of his mortal wounds,
and at his death bequeathed the kingdom to his nephews.
Probably in a hope that it would prevent further fighting, and in that sense,
that probably also ensured Hacken's good memory because Norwegians in later generations remembered that this was not a king
who promoted strife for his personal ambitions.
Well, the Ericsons came into Norway, compliments of the Danish crown,
and they had been long resident in England and Denmark.
They were Christians, at least some type of Christians,
and they began to impose Christianity.
They were also perceived as foreigners, and it wasn't just the case of attacking pagan cults,
it was also a case of violating customary law.
The brothers agreed to essentially, they essentially divided up Norway,
but the eldest of them, a man named Harold, Harold the Grey Cloak after his favorite attire,
was named as King of Norway.
But he really shared royal power with his various brothers,
and they were seen as a really unseemly lot, violating oaths,
even more violent than their father, Eric the Blood Axe.
Their mom, Queen Gunhild, gained a reputation of being one of the most,
well, for lack of a better word, a nymphomaniac queen who wanted to seduce every Icelander
who ever visited the court, and there's stories about here just cluttered through the sagas.
It was not a popular family, and there was very little doubt
that they became too dangerous, even from the viewpoint of the Danish king,
and eventually they were doomed to be overthrown.
Ironically, the overthrow of Harold Grey Cloak and his brothers was masterminded at the court of the Danish king.
This king would have been Harold Bluetooth, and there is another irony in this
because the Ericsons were regarded in the tradition as violators of oaths and hospitality.
One of the critical social institutions of all Scandinavian society,
and that is when you take oaths and you bring in guests,
you're supposed to honor those oaths and protect them,
and repeatedly the Ericsons had violated these oaths to assert their authority throughout Norway.
The leading yar Earl of northern Norway was a man named Haken Sigurdsson,
and he ruled over Trondelag.
He administered the great cult sanctuary to Thor at Lada,
and he had gone into exile in protest to Grey Cloak and his brothers,
and was at the court of Harold Bluetooth reporting what was going on.
Harold didn't need much persuasion of the potential danger of effective Norwegian monarchy,
and he knew the Ericsons very well from their long years at exile.
They lured Harold Grey Cloak to a great celebration at the Danish court of Roskilde,
and Harold was treacherously slain.
And in many ways this is seen as an action that was really fitting for the way the Ericsons had been running Norway.
Several of the brothers had already been killed or overthrown.
One of them by an irate husband just can go into the rather lurid details by reading Snorri.
Haken, supplied with the Danish fleet, returned to Norway,
and ruled thereafter essentially in splendid isolation, as some would like to call it.
He was technically the vassal of the Danish king,
and yet he ruled the northern reaches of Norway as an independent ruler.
And he remained to the end of his days a devotee to the ancient gods,
an ardent pagan, as were all of his sons and even his grandsons.
Meanwhile, the Danish king, Harold Bluetooth,
and then after him his son, Sven Forkbeer, could impose some kind of authority over southern Norway.
Unfortunately from the Danish viewpoint, Haken,
Yarl Haken, Haken the Great, proved to be too great.
He began to ignore directives from the Danish king,
particularly in a war against the Holy Roman Emperor Otto I,
and Sven Forkbeer attempted to overthrow Haken by using the fleet of the Joms Vikings
in that great battle that ended, that great battle known as Jörungavag,
somewhere around 988, where the Danes and Joms Vikings were just absolutely defeated by Haken,
who went on to getting some very nice poems composed for him by various Icelandic poets.
Haken is depicted in his later years as aging into a tyrannical pagan monarch,
eventually overthrown by his subjects and dying ignominiously in a pigsty.
And the Norwegians had grown tired of Haken because of his arbitrary rule
and had turned to another man to rule over them as king.
And this is a figure by the name of Olaf Trigvesund,
who was a successful Viking sea king who had fought in England.
And I had mentioned earlier his conversion to Christianity sometime in the early 990s,
associate with his testing of an English hermit to see if the hermit was really wise.
And Olaf Trigvesund pulled off what Harold Finehair did,
but rather than recruiting the Navies in Norway proper,
Olaf had made his career overseas.
He had put together a great veteran fleet of warriors by fighting in England.
And in 995, realizing the unpopularity of Haken,
as well as the unpopularity of Danish rule in southern Norway,
he audaciously sailed across the sea, landed in Trondelog, celebrated mass as a Christian,
and was received as king, was received as king at the thing in Trondelog.
Initially, the Norwegians saw Olaf as a descendant of Harold Finehair.
We don't know if that's true or not, but there's really no one around to dispute it.
He came with well-equipped warriors with lots of gold and silver,
and he promised to rule according to the laws and customs of Norway.
And that would satisfy most of the Yarls and Lenderman.
Within no time, Olaf was received as king.
Well, Olaf, unlike previous kings,
made a concerted, you know, Haken the Good and the Ericsons,
made a concerted effort to convert Norway.
He began the attacks on cult statues.
That is destroying cult statues as idols in the Old Testament tradition.
He's reputed to have arrested and cast into the sea various sorcerers
who were, you know, bringing up inclement weather that would damage his fleets.
And he is the first king in Norway we know who pushed very hard Christianity.
And this is a Christianity he had learned in England,
where he had seen the potential institutions in power of a king
who ruled over a great Christian church.
Olaf, by his success in advancing Christianity in Norway,
really inevitably made two sets of enemies.
One were the numerous Yarls and Lenderman.
The sons of Haken the Great, their names were Sven and Erick,
fled to the Danish court.
And the other, of course, was the Danish king.
At that time, Sven Forkbeard.
And even the Swedes who were ruling in Siktuna,
the Swedish court, saw Olaf as too powerful.
The Swedes, the Norwegian exiles,
the Danish king arranged to bushwhack Olaf's fleet
when he was on an expedition in the Baltic
at a small island called Skald.
We're not sure where it is.
It's probably near Zeeland or off the Swedish southern shore.
And in the battle, Olaf was just overwhelmed by superior numbers.
He jumped ship and disappeared, presumably drowned.
They captured his great flagship, the long serpent.
And he lived on in legend.
Oh, he survived.
He made his way to Poland.
He died as a monk or a hermit.
Well, Olaf's reputation, he's remembered as
an important Christian king.
Olaf's reputation really depends on the achievements
of his namesake and successor, St. Olaf, Olaf the Stout.
And Olaf Triggvissen could not really make his kingship stick
because he didn't have the institutions, the money and the power
to make institutional Christianity the basis of his monarchy.
But he did take the first important step in that direction.
He was seen as the predecessor of St. Olaf.
And he was remembered in the tradition as a great sea king
and warrior.
And above all, he transmitted that important lesson to his namesake
that it is going to be a veteran fleet and warriors
and lots of money obtained in overseas campaigns
that would make the Norwegian monarchy.
Thank you.
