Lecture 32, St. Olaf of Norway.
In this lecture I plan to complete the creation of the Norwegian Kingdom in the late Viking
Age, and that success is intimately tied to the career of Olaf the Stout, who is canonized
shortly after his death as St. Olaf, often known as the perpetual king of Norway.
And St. Olaf's career is really a turning point in Norwegian history.
In fact, one could argue for all of Viking history.
As a royal saint and the first royal saint in Scandinavia, Olaf has a historical importance
far greater than any action he ever took in his lifetime.
And while the other royal families, that is the Danish royal family and the Swedish royal
family, each received their royal saints, those two saints never matched up at all to
the reputation of St. Olaf.
In Denmark, eventually there is a St. Canute, Canute IV, one of the sons of Sven Estridsson,
therefore the great nephew of the great Canute.
He was canonized around 1102, 1103, and his claim to fame is that he had been murdered
by the mutinous crews who had refused to invade England back in 1086, and the king had sought
refuge in the church and he had been impiously slain, and his half-brothers had every reason
to elevate their brother into sainthood.
He remained essentially a rather localized Danish saint.
The same is true for the Swedish king, Erik IX, who was murdered in 1160 in really one
of the typical sordid battles that went on in the Swedish royal family in the 11th and
12th centuries.
Olaf was hailed not only in Icelandic saga, Scaldic poetry, as a great Viking warrior,
but in time as a great royal saint, and a royal saint who came to have a European-wide
importance.
That can easily be shown by the fact that in the early medieval age in Scandinavia,
not only in Norway, but in all of Scandinavia, by far, St. Olaf is the most popular saint
to whom churches are dedicated.
Well, that historical legacy of St. Olaf has to be placed against the historical record
of who he is, and what I plan to do in this lecture is to look at that historical record
of who was Olaf the Stout, who claimed also to be a king descended from Harold Finehair,
who liked to make the connection, because of the association of names, to that earlier
Christian king, Olaf Triggvissen, who disappeared mysteriously in 1000, who was the historical
figure Olaf the Stout.
How did he end up fighting this remarkable battle on July 29th, 1030, the Battle of Stickelstad,
in which he was defeated by his own subjects?
It was Norwegians who cut him down in the battle, and Olaf's forces were overwhelmingly
Swedes, and embarrassingly enough, many of them were actually Pagans, we suspect, and
yet that battle came to represent the national struggle of Norway, came to represent the
fall of a great king dying for Norway, and even Norway's sins, and the Norwegians who
won the victory over their former king, came to repent, their actions came to embrace Olaf
as their saint, to summon Olaf's son Magnus back from exile, and to see that battle as
the first step in overthrowing the hated Danish tyranny, that is the rule of King Canute, even
though King Canute was nowhere to be seen in this battle.
Well, it's a remarkable transformation, and as often happens in the case of history, very
often the legend, and the later perceptions, are more important than the historical facts,
and this is very, very well true in the case of St. Olaf.
Well, Olaf, as I stated in an earlier lecture, took the precaution that all Norwegian kings
did, and that is they always made sure to be accompanied by expert Icelandic poets,
that is men trained in the Scaldic poetry, with all the elaborate kennings, and the very
technical verse, who could celebrate the deeds on the spot, usually casting the first
efforts at a poem, as the battles in progress.
Stigtar was one of them, he accompanied St. Olaf in his early career in England, and arrived
with Olaf in Norway in 1015, when Olaf made his bid for the Norwegian throne.
Otter the Black, a very well-known poet, who briefly was at the court of King Canute,
also teamed up with Olaf early in his years as king, and a number of poems, or at least
verses of what we think are poems by these poets, are quoted by Snorri Stroulsson and
other authors, who based their reports on Olaf from these contemporary poems, which were
celebrating the battles of the temper of the king, the early life of the king.
Olaf from the start was always linked with the great heroes of the past, Christian as
well as Pagan.
Ecclesiastical authors, too, contributed to this image of St. Olaf.
They saw him in the 13th century, particularly, as the model Christian king, and the Just
King, the Rex Eustis, who would, you can find it in the writings of St. Augustine, and becomes
one of the keystones of Western European intellectual thought in the High Middle Ages.
That is, the Just Christian King, who epitomized not only the Esecular authority, but also
the spiritual authority of God.
And in the 13th century, Olaf was hailed in Ecclesiastical writings, which were usually
in Latin, as the Rex Perpetuous Norwegii, that is the perpetual king of Norway.
He was also seen in many ways as the model king described in this curious work to us,
but a very common work in the Middle Ages, known as the King's Mirror, written somewhere
around 1220, 1225 in the reign of Hack in the Fourth, again, an Ecclesiastical work
in Latin, and typical of Western European monarchies, that is, the King's Mirror was
supposed to be a work of self-reflection in which the king comes to ponder on what are
his responsibilities, hence he's looking into the mirror, the King's Mirror.
And St. Olaf, in many ways, is the model king in this work, in which he follows the
dictates of St. Augustine's Just King.
His images were very, very powerful, both the Christian image, as epitomized in the
13th century works, and the images of the poems.
The best source we have on St. Olaf is Snorri Struelsen.
And Snorri is the heir of far more the Scaldic poetry in the Saga tradition than he is of
the Ecclesiastical, and he is our continuous narrative on the reign of St. Olaf.
Furthermore, Snorri ensured that St. Olaf's reputation would be remembered by all subsequent
historians.
Snorri is without a doubt a brilliant and witty author.
He ensured that the Norse gods would live on as the gods of a really delightful mythology.
He also ensured the reputation of St. Olaf.
In his hymnskrillinga saga, which is the history of the kings of Norway, going back to a legendary
past and ending sometime in the late 1170s, which tells the biographies of all these Norwegian
kings, in that great work, just over a third of it is devoted to St. Olaf alone.
In fact, the first third and the last third are nothing more than the preface and the
conclusion of St. Olaf's career.
And Snorri used the best of saga techniques to tell us about St. Olaf.
The saga is essentially divided into four parts, dealing initially with the early career
of St. Olaf, then on his bid to the throne, the taking of the throne, his reign as king
and the deterioration of the regime, and finally his exile and return and heroic death at the
Battle of Sticklestop.
And each of these four parts, Snorri uses this change of scene very often to study changes
in character or aspects about St. Olaf that had not yet been revealed in the work.
It's a masterpiece of saga storytelling.
Snorri is really at his best in telling stories of Olaf's childhood in which Olaf is already
seemed to be destined for great royal events.
It also highlights the personal qualities of St. Olaf.
And here Snorri had to juggle with the traditional a little.
Olaf was not the physical ideal.
He was known by his contemporaries as Olaf the Stout and what is always very refreshing
about medieval writers and medieval people in general is, in general is, they name people
as they saw them, whereas moderns are too polite to say this.
Olaf the Stout, Snorri went to say, well, Stout meaning he's broad-shouldered, barrel-chested,
really strong, not quite tall enough and slender enough to meet the heroic ideal.
But Snorri stresses his piercing blue eyes, his commanding voice.
And it's clear from some of the conversations that come through in the saga that you're
around St. Olaf, you'd pay attention to him.
I mean, his voice is not only booming, but commanding and many a Norwegian snapped to
attention just by hearing St. Olaf and probably also as a result embrace Christianity.
You wouldn't dare around this man, not obey what he said.
And so the picture that comes through from Snorri's account is a very rich one and a
plausible one, whether it's 100% accurate or not, we have no way of judging.
But it is certainly a plausible image of a great Viking sea king.
Furthermore, Snorri and the Norwegian authors in particular go through great lengths to
disassociate any connection of St. Olaf with the Danes, notably Sjen Forkbeard and Knut.
As far as we can tell, Snorri's account especially where he quotes these early poems, Scaldic
poems, St. Olaf's career started off, he started off as a Viking in the Baltic raiding.
He may have been associated with the Jomsburg Vikings or the Joms Vikings in the Baltic,
that professional military group or some group like that, and eventually transferred
his activities to England.
And the best guess is, starting with Sjen Forkbeard's war with King Ethelrith II, Olaf, like many
Scandinavian sea kings and Vikings, took service with the Danish king because the pickings
were good in England.
We believe that Olaf accompanied Thorkel the Tall, one of the Yarls of Sten Forkbeard,
an invasion of England.
There are certain battles associated with Olaf in England, including a battle that still
disputed whether it actually took place or not on London Bridge.
In any case, Olaf was in England winning fame and fortune, fighting first in the ranks
of the Danish king, a point that later authors really didn't like to stress, later Norwegian
and Icelandic authors, but quickly went over to the other side.
Around 2011, 2012, Ethelrith II bought the services of Thorkel the Tall, and we think
that included Olaf.
Olaf was one of the subordinate commanders in Thorkel's army, and as I always mentioned,
the best forces in the Anglo-Saxon army with the Scandinavians had been purchased to fight
for them.
And Olaf, as a result, ended up in Normandy at the court of the exiled English king Ethelrith
II, and there he apparently converted to Christianity.
A fairly young age, may have been 15 or 16 years of age, if we believe he was born in
995, could have been older.
We're really not quite sure when Olaf was born.
He's roughly a contemporary of Canute.
In any case, that conversion to Christianity was later presented as occurring in the Cathedral
of Rouen with Duke Richard II acting as his godfather, and it was a very, very powerful
event.
It was probably the combination of a long realization by Olaf of the power of the Christian
god, the power of the monarchy, climaxing in this great ceremony, and Olaf became a
convinced Christian king.
He saw Christ as his personal protector, and he had no doubt of the rectitude of his faith,
and the fact that the old gods were not just old gods that had passed away, but they were
demons.
And in this regard, he shared a belief that's common with a lot of kings who converted to
Christianity, that not only were the old gods not to be worshiped, but they were in the
army of Satan.
And this is a quality that becomes clear, an outlook, a policy throughout Olaf's reign
as king of Norway.
Well, Olaf brilliantly exploited the strategic situation at this point by sailing to Norway
in 1015 with his veterans from England arriving in Trondelag and promptly being hailed king,
celebrating mass as a Christian king, and he started winning over Yarls and Lenderman.
Now his timing was impeccable, and in some ways the dash to take Norway is sort of a
rerun of how Olaf Trigveson did it back in 995, yet there were certain improvements
here.
By the time the Danish king, which is Canute, who had just taken over the throne, he returned
to England, was busy trying to bring England under control.
It was anyone's guess how long that would take.
He took Canute far longer than he realized.
Furthermore, Olaf knew that many of the Norwegian Yarls and many of the Norwegian Vikings were
fighting in England in Canute service, so the opposition was fairly minimal in Norway
when St. Olaf arrived, and his timing was extremely good.
The two sons of Yarl Hacken, that is the pagan Yarl who had ruled Norway as a Danish
vassal in the late 10th century, their names are Erik and Sven, they actually had been
ruling Norway largely as allies and vassals of the Danish crown.
One of them was actually fighting in Denmark with large forces from Trondelheim or Trondelag,
that is the northern districts, and so when Olaf was received in Norway, he had not only
minimal opposition, but also a general feeling among the Yarls and Lenderman, that is the
landed classes, the Squires is a good translation form in Norway, that this king promised a
native king that would respect traditions, respect laws, it would end this Danish overlord
ship, and so there was popularity for him at the start, even though many of the Norwegians
were still pagans.
Olaf was also very skilled, just like Harold Finehair, in cementing relationships with
the various Yarls and Dynasts in Norway.
He particularly went over and met his stepfather, his name is Sigurd the Sau, Sigurdsir, who
won over all of the regions of the Vicken and the Oplunds, he presented them to the
various things so that Olaf was elected as king in the winter of 15, 10, 16, and Olaf
did very, very carefully not only associate himself with dynastic connections, that is
Harold Finehair, Olaf Trigvison, but also made very, very sure that he was properly
elected in all the different things and was attempting to win over the various landed
classes and rule by traditional law, by some form of consent, which was the game plan laid
down much earlier by Harold Finehair.
However, his opponents did organize, there was strong pagan resistance, because from
the start, Olaf gave every indication he intended to rule as a Christian king.
He established at Trondelag, a church at Niderås, which is in northern Norway, destined to be
elevated to the Archbishopric of Norway, either in 1153 or 1154.
And that church, the church of St. Clement, where Olaf eventually came to rest, is still
seen as one of the great sacred spots in Norway today.
And so the establishment of the church, the arrival with bishops, the celebrating of mass,
Olaf in comparison to previous kings really had a good understanding of what institutional
Christianity was like, and he was going to bring it in.
He was going to start attempting, at least, to organize something that resembled a Christian
church.
The pagans rallied under the Arles Sven, that is one of the sons of Hacken the Great.
And they were resoundingly beaten in a naval battle at Nacjar early in 1016, reputedly
on Palm Sunday, and the result was resistance collapsed very quickly.
And from 1016 on, St. Olaf was essentially securing Norway rather than conquering Norway.
I mean, it turned from a conquest into a royal progress very, very quickly.
The result is that Olaf found himself controlling this vast realm of Norway, which was a daunting
task under the best of circumstances.
One has to imagine how a Norwegian king had to spend much of his time traveling, usually
by sea, going to the various fjords and isolated communities, convincing these proud Yarls
and Lendermen, many of whom had military experience, and in 1016, 1017, many of whom had relatives
serving with King Knut in England, that they should pay attention to Olaf, that they should
contribute to supporting this monarchy.
And that came in various forms.
The soul called, well, it's called Ledig in Danish, or Ledig in Norwegian Norse.
That is, the ship levy, the willingness to appear for military service in the fleets,
should the king desire it.
The hospitality expected of entertaining Olaf in the court when Olaf showed up there.
All Norwegian kings, most medieval kings, particularly Norwegian kings, sustained their courts by
moving around and making themselves guests of those people who could afford it.
And that was expected of Yarls and great men to entertain the royal court when they were
in town, paid for the food, the maintenance, gave gifts, held ceremonies, all of that.
That's part of your obligation to the king.
And it could become very onerous and, in some cases, ruinous rather quickly.
So Olaf made sure that he was a constant presence in Norway.
He must have seen ubiquitous to most of his opponents.
He also was very shrewd and knew that Knut was not going to allow Olaf to rule in Norway
uncontested.
And this goes back to the early tensions between the two emerging kingdoms.
That is, Knut saw Norway as part of his legacy.
He had had a vague overlord ship back in 1015 before Olaf had shown up.
Olaf had expelled the various Yarls loyal to Knut.
Actually, a number of them went to Denmark and eventually received to states either in
England or Denmark.
They never got back to Norway.
Knut in 1019 was back in Denmark to take the Danish throne when his half-brother died, but
really could do very little to push his claims over Norway.
He took an extended trip down to Rome to visit the papacy.
He settled with the German emperor, but Norway was too distant and he had too many other
pressing matters, including keeping a hold over England and all of its rich resources.
That meant that Olaf could find allies to check the Danish power in Scandinavia and
he found a very willing ally in the kings of Sweden who will be discussed in an upcoming
lecture and it becomes evident that in some ways the Swedish kings were clearly well behind
both their Danish and Norwegian contemporaries.
They're always brought in as the ally of either the Danish or Norwegian king who's attempting
to knock down the opposing rival.
In this case, the king, Anad Jakob, who came to the throne in 1022 and is the second Christian
king of Sweden, really ruled very uneasily over a largely pagan population in Sweden.
His father, Olaf, Scott Konig, and that nickname means essentially rent-paying king, meaning
he probably paid tribute to King Knut and we suspect the first Swedish coins were actually
struck to pay a tribute to King Knut.
So Anad Jakob really saw Knut as a possible threat, Knut had aspirations to rule in Sweden.
They teamed up and began raiding the Danish isles.
This eventually provoked a response from Knut and the result was a great naval battle, the
so-called Battle of the Holy River, probably to be dated to 1026.
And again, not very well represented in the tradition.
It's not celebrated nearly as the battles of Olaf or other leading figures and in that
battle it was a stalemate, both sides backed off, but Olaf had to retreat and he returned
to Norway and abandoned many of his ships in the process, that is, he went overland.
Well the battle proved the turning point for Olaf.
He had been increasingly seen as inimical to local institutions, as arrogant, as high-handed
by his pagan subjects, as he had knocked down cult statues, had imposed Christianity
force baptism.
His demands for ship service were not taken well by many of the Lenderman and Jarls and
quickly Olaf's position in Norway deteriorated between 1026 and 1028 and effectively the
population just refused to cooperate.
And no matter how many veterans Olaf had, he couldn't rule Norway without the cooperation
of those Jarls and Lenderman without the association with the Jarls and customary law and essentially
Olaf was forced to flee.
The Norwegians summoned in Knut, fresh from a second visit to Rome, elected him king of
Norway in 1028 and then Knut gave the Norwegians his son, his oldest son Sien as their king
with that high-strung English mother, Alf Jive, who of Northampton and that turned out
to be a disaster because son and mother very, very quickly alienated all the Norwegians
and that would assist in creating that great legend of Olaf.
Well, Olaf as an exile in 1028 made his way to the court of Kiev.
To Jarls' love of Kiev as most political out to do, he raised forces from the Kiev prince.
He returned to Sweden to his old ally Anabjaka and in the winter of 1029, 1030, he began
to assemble an army.
He undertook what must be described as one of the most desperate efforts to take Norway
and it violated all the military and political principles of the last 125 years.
He maybe had as many, maybe 2,000 warriors, 3,000 warriors, recruited largely among Swedes
from the upland area.
Many of them we suspect were Pagans and as soon as he could in the probably in May or
June of 1030, he made a desperate march across the Kiel mountains into aiming for Trondelog
coming through a major pass at Stickelstadt in an effort to return to Trondelheim to get
ratified as king again to restore himself to the throne of Norway.
Well, in the summer of 1030, most of the Norwegian subjects, the most of the Norwegian farmers
and lendermen who had just elected Knud King really had no desire to take Olaf back.
Olaf was also invading an area notoriously pagan and very, very hostile to the Christian
traditions that the Christian institutions that Olaf had been imposing and so they rallied
to oppose him.
The size of the Norwegians army, the farmers and the lendermen, is difficult to reckon.
The battle that was fought may only have involved at most 5,000 men.
There was a 1.5 or 2 to 1 superiority of the Norwegians over Olaf and his Swedish allies.
And the result was a major land battle, the only significant land battle in all of Viking
history fought in Scandinavia in which Olaf and his men went down fighting.
The battle is associated with an eclipse.
It's traditionally dated to July 29th, 1030.
There's a debate whether the date is correct or not.
We are told that Olaf's warriors went into battle chanting the Bjarkomal.
That is the great poem celebrating the destruction of Rolf Krocki and his heroes at legendary
Danish king, probably well known to many of the Swedish warriors in his ranks, but also
an indication of how Olaf, while a Christian king, was also associated with all the great
traditions of the past.
With the death of Olaf and his body was actually he was beheaded, the head was sent around
to show that they had won.
It looked like Knut had secured Norway, and the mistake Knut made was sending that son
Svén in soon afterwards.
Well, as I said within a year, many of the Norwegians came to repent the fact that they
had opposed this king, Olaf the Stout.
The body was conveyed to Niederrasen and it was buried in the church and immediately miracles
were reported, healing miracles.
The body is exhumed, the bishop sees it, the flesh has not been corrupted.
On the spot he's declared a saint.
And in death St. Olaf turned out to be a far more dangerous opponent to Knut than he ever
was in his lifetime.
And the result is that the Norwegians came to invoke St. Olaf as the king who died for
their sins, the king who died for their independence and traditions.
And there's an irony in all this because Olaf in many ways was a rather repressive and tyrannical
king and I think Harold Finehair would have envied St. Olaf and what Olaf could pull
off.
Nonetheless, the legend was more important.
And in that legend, the Norwegians found strength to invite the son, the young son of St. Olaf
back from exile.
His name is Magnus, which comes from the Latin word, the great, and it's actually Olaf's
effort to name his son after Charlemagne.
Magnus becomes a very common name in Scandinavia.
It's really, it's really their rendition of Charlemagne.
Charles the Great.
And Magnus comes back as a boy and he himself clearly is not coordinating the initial wars
against the Danes.
It's his supporters, but his supporters hold strongly to this image of St. Olaf as the
just king, the king who fought for us, the king who went down fighting and that victory
at Stickelstad turns out to be a Pyrrhic victory for Knut.
The Danish overlordship is ended, but above all, it gives a legitimacy to the family of
St. Olaf.
It gives that monarchy a royal saint and a start so that henceforth the family of St.
Olaf will be the uncontested rulers of Norway and is a very important first step in creating
a hereditary Christian kingship.
Further war, it vastly promotes the cause of Christianity.
Olaf is associated with the early victories in winning the throne, but far more important
was his defeat at Stickelstad, which is seen as a great Christian martyrdom.
And from that point on, there is no way Norway is ever going to go back to the pagan cults
and traditions.
To be sure, many Norwegians continue to worship the old gods, but henceforth Christianity
is the religion of the court.
They have their own royal saint.
It is the legitimate, the only legitimate religion in Norway and associated with this
only legitimate family.
A great achievement indeed by Olaf the Stout.
And it could be seen in later traditions of Norwegian history where Olaf is constantly
invoked as a political figure, and that is a whole story in itself, but you could just
close with the fact that in the 12th century, starting in the 1130s and 1140s, Norway was
rocked with civil wars for nearly two generations.
And eventually two factions emerged, the so-called birch legs and the cruisers, and they both
had different banners, yet both sides invoked St. Olaf as their patron saint.
And that invocation of St. Olaf, and that notion that he was the just king, and that
both sides, while bitter rivals agreed they had a certain conception of what a true Christian
king should be, allowed those sides to come together and to work out a compromise, and
that would be King Haken IV in 1217, and Haken could invoke that image of St. Olaf to create
in Norway in the 13th century one of the great kingdoms of medieval Europe.
