In this lecture, I want to conclude the course on the age of the Vikings.
And there's really two objectives in this particular lecture.
In part, it's something of a postscript.
I want to follow up on the theme of, well, what happens to Scandinavia now that they
are Christian kingdoms, they have been integrated into the wider European world.
And I do believe some thoughts on the directions of future Scandinavian history are in order.
Those directions are very much influenced by the Viking Age and its immediate aftermath.
And we'll act as a way of introducing you to later Scandinavian history, particularly
Scandinavia of the Reformation and the so-called Wars of Religion.
The other important and by far the larger part of this lecture is to sum up the importance
of the Viking Age for Scandinavia and for medieval civilization as a whole.
And there I think it's very important for us to look at a number of changes and themes
in this course and understand how the Vikings came to play such a decisive role in the formation
of Latin Christendom and eventually Western Europe.
Well, let's take a look at our postscript first and just give something of an update
of what the future is for Scandinavia and the aftermath of the Viking Age.
I had closed the last two lectures, which dealt with the development of Christian Scandinavia
up to about 1350.
And I chose that date because that represents the impact of the Black Death, which raged
across Europe and the Near East between 1347 and 1351, affecting areas at different times.
But within a five or six year period, this great epidemic swept across most of the civilized
areas of Western Eurasia and killed between one half and two thirds of the population.
This usually occurred within several months when the plague arrived.
The attrition rates in cities were nothing short of catastrophic.
Figures from the Mediterranean world suggest that a city within a matter of two months
could lose anywhere from 75 to 80 percent of its population.
And it had major repercussions in religious life, in economics, in political life for
both Islamic and Christian civilizations.
And Scandinavia was profoundly affected by it, notably Norway and Denmark.
That the aftermath of the Black Death and its repercussions, along with several themes
that I stressed in the last several lectures, that is the rising prosperity in Scandinavia
as a result of changes after 1100, the common Viking heritage and culture that kept the
Scandinavian peoples together and gave them a sense of identity even after the conversion
to Christianity, and above all, the success of at least turning the three Scandinavian
kingdoms into territorial Christian kingdoms of some sort, could all of these elements,
along with the changes wrought in the late 14th and 15th century, have led to some kind
of unification of Scandinavia into a wider political unit, so that the Scandinavians
would play a more prominent role in the later Middle Ages and early modern period.
Well that seemed to have been the case in 1397 when the three kingdoms were united.
This is very often known in Scandinavian history as the Union of Kalmar, which refers to the
document, and there's really two documents that worked out the unification of the three
crowns, Norway, Denmark and Sweden, in the hands of a man named Erika Pomerania, who
was the great nephew of Queen Margaret of Denmark, the daughter of Valdemir IV of Denmark,
and Valdemir IV and his daughter Margaret had worked assiduously for decades to bring
the three crowns together, and it was assisted by the accidents of death, birth, marriage,
but in 1397 all of the crowns came into the hands of Erika Pomerania.
It seemed to promise a new age for Scandinavia. In some ways it looked like a bit of the revival
of the Empire of Canute, minus England. Furthermore, it promised a unification of royal power to
be sure the provisions as enforced in Sweden had to go through the royal council, but it
did seem to promise that an effective Scandinavian monarchy could curb the power of the Hanseatic
League, which had come to dominate banking and shipping, could also turn Scandinavia
into a great monarchy that could compete with the monarchies emerging in the late medieval
period, notably England, France, the monarchy of Poland, which at this point is quite significant.
The great principalities of Germany, the destinies were more in the principalities rather than
the Holy Roman Empire, but these great principalities such as Saxony or the future Austria, Bavaria,
they were powerful states indeed. Unfortunately, it didn't work out that way, and there were
two reasons for it. One, the Union of Kalmar, as far as I can see, in many ways was more
of a union brought about by weakness and hopes rather than any real strength, and from the
start, Erika Pomerania, who had his own problems, it was hardly diplomatic. From the start,
the Swedes dictated the conditions in Stockholm. The Danish king never really ruled in Sweden,
and through Sweden, the Finnish possessions of Sweden, except with the will of the council,
and through the whole period of this union in the 15th century, in the early 16th century,
leading up to the famous Stockholm massacre and the renunciation of Danish rule, the Swedes
essentially got what they wanted out of this union and really restricted royal rights in Sweden.
They were assisted by the fact that Erika and several of the later Danish kings really played
into their hands by favoring Danish appointments over Swedish appointments. They gave a lot of
cause for the Swedes not to cooperate with the Danish crown, but the union also revealed
several other important aspects of how Scandinavian society had evolved.
But Danes, Norwegians and Swedes had evolved into different people. Their vernaculars were
now distinct enough that they had independent literatures. They were no longer speakers of a
common Danish tongue. In mores and aesthetics, the Danes in many ways resembled their German
neighbors immediately to the south, and it would be very difficult to distinguish a German
burger from a Danish burger in the year 1400. And Denmark was particularly receptive to the
Reformation because it was so closely tied to the north German towns and principalities
where the Reformation took off in the 16th century. Norway ironically came under Danish
control as a province, but was treated as an outland province and not very important. And the
reason for that were really the economic implications of the Black Death. Both Norway and Denmark
were hit very hard demographically by the Black Death in the mid 14th century, but Denmark recovered
rather rapidly. Immigration of Germans helped replenish the population, but furthermore,
the economic consequences of the Black Death favored more, it's difficult to say luxury goods,
but if you dealt in bulk commodities, if you handled grains or basic foodstuffs,
prices crashed immediately in the Black Death because the market collapsed. You didn't have
the same number of people to feed. And if your economy very much depended on that, you were
in trouble. And that was true with Norway. There wasn't the demand for cod the way there had been
before. On the other hand, if you were engaged in prestige items, especially if you're dealing as
Denmark did in dairy and beef and pork products, those were always a small part of the diet. Well,
now the survivors of the Black Death and economics historians generally agree, those few who survived
actually did pretty well. This wasn't really prosperity, but if you kill two thirds of the
population, everyone, you know, just by the laws of arithmetic are wealthier, so they had more money
to spend. And therefore Denmark marked it at the type of commodities that allowed the Danish
economy to bounce back much more readily. And ironically, Norway came to depend on imported
Danish foodstuffs. And essentially Norway was integrated into the Danish kingdom because its
population had been so badly disrupted by the Black Death, the population, there weren't really
sufficient number of bishops and men of property to carry on royal institutions, so that the Danish
crown under the Union of Kalmar could appoint Danish officials, or often German officials,
to run Norway, turn Norway into a Danish province. And furthermore, Norway was increasingly dependent
on Danish foodstuffs and goods. And so Norway passed under Danish control and would remain so
down to 1815 when it was turned over to Sweden at the Congress of Vienna.
To me, there's a certain depressing aspect in all of this. And in reviewing Viking history and the
achievements of Harold Finehair and the splendid isolation of Jarl Hacken the Great, who defied
the Danes and the Jums Vikings, a St. Olaf in his great victory, Magnus the Great, the son of St.
Olaf, and of course, Harold Hoddery, to think that Norway was able to beat back Danish attack
after Danish attack in the Viking age only to succumb to Denmark because of the Black rats that
carry the Black Death is truly an ignominious way for this great monarchy to end, but that's
essentially what happened. Sweden was affected the least by the demographic and economic implications
of the Black Death, and Sweden did quite well in the 14th and 15th centuries, and the Royal
Council was able to assert itself and eventually to shake off Danish rule. And so what happened,
out of the Union of Kalmar, was the reconfiguration of two kingdoms, Norway, Denmark, under the
Oldenburg dynasty, and eventually Sweden, Finland under the Vasa house, both of them hereditary
monarchies that would vastly expand their powers in the Reformation by the confiscation of church
properties, the taking over and establishment of national churches, and those two monarchies
represented quite separate identities, national identities, and the kings of Denmark and the kings
of Sweden would then struggle for mastery of the Baltic, and in the end, Moscow would win.
Well, with that post-crypt, essentially Denmark and Sweden fought themselves to a standstill, and
ultimately it was the Russia of Peter the Great that came to dominate the Baltic. Well, in the
course of looking at Scandinavian history and concluding in this late Middle Ages, I think it's
important to review what we've achieved in this course. The course is more ambitious than the
title implies. We're not looking just at the Viking Age. We've looked at also the evolution
of Scandinavia both before the Viking Age and in the centuries immediately after. And that has
caused us to take a wider perspective on the subject, and I think that's all important in
understanding the decisive role that Scandinavians in the Viking Age played. Even in the Reformation
in the Age of the War of Religions, Scandinavians never played the premier role the way they did
in that period from 790 to about 1100. And this has caused us to start this course looking in
the first third of the lectures at the origins of Scandinavian history. We've shown how there is a
very long tradition of Scandinavia being influenced by western and central Europe, the ability to
assimilate technological and cultural innovations to a Scandinavian landscape. We started off with
that in the Bronze Age, where the adoption of farming, stock raising, bronze tools, metallurgy
led to the birth of the first significant Scandinavian cultural period, the so-called
Northern Bronze Age, extending from 1550 to 1100 BC. An area, a time when the core areas of
Scandinavia were settled, where agriculture begins to be practiced, and as far as we can tell from
the cultural remains, the physical remains, that the earliest definition of the Scandinavian gods
took place. The von Er, the conception of Thor. Certainly the basic cosmology eventually expressed
in the prose Eda. The marvelous bronze gilt horse of the sun chariot, which seems to be
indications that already in the late Bronze Age, we can begin to speak of, if nothing else,
proto-Scanonavians. This pattern is again repeated in the so-called Celtic and Roman ages. Those are
the periods of the Iron Age, where trade, some immigration, but particularly trade, greatly
enriched material life in Scandinavia, and led to important changes. It led to technological changes
in shipbuilding, starting certainly by 300 BC, and that outside influence set in motion the
innovations and improvements in shipbuilding that eventually gave Scandinavians their longships
and canars of the Viking Age. It also enriched material life. It probably had a profound influence
in redefining the gods along certain Celtic patterns. The Norse gods may have acquired some
of their personality we see in later literature. And in the Roman age, and in the succeeding age
of migrations, an argument is often made that Odin emerged as the premier god of the Scandinavians,
associated with the sword. Swords are common import in the Roman age and later. Odin becomes
the quintessential war god who comes to embody the Viking Age. Furthermore, the Scandinavians
gain close contacts with Western Europe, with Britain, with Gaul. There's important trade
connections, and those trade connections continue in the age of migrations. And when those trade
connections are disrupted, when the flow of goods from Western Europe are in any way impeded,
well then the Scandinavians in part are forced to go out and get them themselves.
And that's sometimes argued as one of the motives behind the Viking Age.
We also looked at the age of migrations, that period from 400 to 600, which in my opinion was so
decisive in shaping the civilization of the Viking Age. In fact, the only real point missing in the
age of migrations perhaps are the great ships that allowed the Viking Age. The sagas and legends,
if we can trust in what we're getting from the poem of Beowulf and from the Icelandic sagas,
already in that period of the age of migration, Scandinavians had that martial ethos, that cult
of Odin, the tradition of the Great Halls, associated with legendary figures as Rolf Krocky,
and the Great Halls, which were later the basis of the sea kings of the Viking Age,
and ultimately the Christian territorial kings of the late Viking Age and later.
And it is also in the age of migrations where the Scandinavians
define themselves as distinct from their dramatic kinsmen of Central Europe,
of the Carolingian Empire, and in England. That saw the development of what Scandinavians called
in 1100 the Danish tongue, the distinct North dramatic dialects that eventually would evolve
into Icelandic, Swedish, Norwegian and Danish. It saw the development of Scandinavian poetry.
It intensified the heroic traditions in ethos. I stressed very much how the Scandinavians
took the legends of their West dramatic kinsmen, the legends of their kinsmen, the Goths in Eastern
Europe, recast them as quintessentially Scandinavian figures and made them their own. And that is all
occurring in this period of the age of migrations, which in some ways is one of the very creative,
most creative periods in early Scandinavian history, and broke the Scandinavians off into
the independent civilization of the Viking Age and made them a people very different
from their kinsmen in Western Europe, who were revolving into Christian Europeans,
and who would turn out to be their foes and victims in the Viking Age.
We then expanded the perspective in this course when we got to the Viking Age proper,
and we devoted close to a third of the class, or the course, to the Viking impact overseas.
And this is where Scandinavians made their greatest impact in European history,
and one should reflect upon how wide ranging those influences and that impact was. The Viking
trade, raids, settlements overseas, brought great changes from Ireland to Russia. In many ways,
it also transformed the Scandinavian homeland, but let's put that aside for a moment.
They were clearly feared by Christians and Muslims as the quintessential barbarian,
the worst nightmare, and the stereotypical images that we still have of the Vikings
really goes back to those images of the ninth and tenth century, the prayer that's often raised in
the Carolingian world, oh Lord, deliver us from the fury of the Northmen. We, of course, have added
the horned helmets inappropriately taken from the Bronze Age to fire up that image, but the image
has a historical basis. The Vikings were incredibly destructive. They were warriors who made war
violently on a scale that most of their victims could really not match or even appreciate the
martial ethos behind it. Nonetheless, despite all the suffering, despite all the destruction
wrought by the Vikings, there were important changes. In the case of the Carolingian Empire,
that great synthesis achieved by Charlemagne, which is so promising and so fundamental to
European civilization, it was the Vikings, not the Muslims in Spain, not the Magyars in the east,
not the Byzantines in southern Italy, but the Vikings, the Scandinavians, the least civilized
opponents of the Western Europeans who revealed the fundamental weaknesses in that Carolingian
state. The Carolingian state in the ninth century failed to meet the Viking attacks.
The fiscal and military weaknesses were painfully revealed by the end of the ninth century.
The Carolingian dynasty was essentially bankrupt politically, eventually replaced by the Capatians.
In its place, Europe broke up into smaller states, eventually the Holy Roman Empire,
and what is to become France. But above all, the building blocks for the new European political
order were in the feudal states that made up those kingdoms, notably the great feudal states
of northwestern Europe, which were the very states that would conduct the Crusades and the
expansion of Western Europe in the later Middle Ages. The Vikings themselves had a hand not only
in promoting these changes, but establishing what was to turn out to be the premier feudal
state in the new order, and that was the Duchy of Normandy. It is inconceivable to imagine European
history without Normandy and the Normans. They forged the most effective state in what was to
become France. William the Conqueror conquered England, reintegrated England, and ultimately the
whole British Isles back into the Carolingian political order of Western Europe. And the
Norman kingdom that was established in England is the basis for the English monarchy and English
law. Without the Norman conquest, it's doubtful whether that England would have survived as a
unified state given the political situation in the later years of Edward the Confessor. The
Normans went on to cross to Ireland and to intervene in Scotland and to bring the more
remote areas of the British Isles into closer political and cultural union with Western Europe.
They campaigned in Spain, and above all, they went into the southern sections of Italy and Sicily
and founded a second Norman kingdom, the kingdom of the two Sicilies, destined to be one of the
great four monarchies of the Middle Ages, Norman England, Norman Sicily, France, and the Holy Roman
Empire. Those would end up being the great monarchies of the 13th century. The Vikings
dictated the course of English history, and without the Viking attacks, one wonders what
would have happened in England. They determined that Wessex would emerge as the kingdom unite
England. And it was in response to the Danish attacks that one of the most brilliant kings of
the early Middle Ages, Alfred the Great, forged the institutions that fought back the Vikings and
allowed his descendants to incorporate the Vikings of the Dan Law into that expanded kingdom of
Wessex and achieve a unity, a kingdom of England in the reign of King Ector, clearly one of the
great achievements of the early Middle Ages in a period characterized by political fragmentation
that England was united under these kings. And ironically, that kingdom passed in total to
the Danish conqueror Knut and his successors who used England as the means to establish their
hygienomy in Scandinavia. We also dealt with Viking attacks in Ireland and its impact there.
It destroyed that brilliant monastic culture of the early Middle Ages and in many ways dictated
the future course of Irish history because no Irish high king had sufficient resources and power
to establish his hegemony despite the efforts of a Brian Baruma. And Ireland was really condemned
to political fragmentation until the arrival of the Normans in 1170. And that would wrought
that arrival of the Normans, that invitation that is extended to the Normans. Their intervention
in Ireland will open a whole new chapter with the English domination of Ireland and the changes
thereafter. Scotland, too, is essentially a creation of the Viking Age. At the start of the
Viking Age, no one knew what Scotland was going to be. Viking attacks across that strategic
isthmus disrupted the kingdom of Northumbria. The Vikings defeated the Strathgardt, Britons,
the Picts. It was the Scots, the most unlikely of candidates in Scotland who had come to unite
the northern third of Britain into the kingdom of Scotland under Kenneth I. And that was because
the Scots, Gaelic speaking, Irish immigrants, were able to survive the Viking raids and exploit
the political disorder resulting from Viking raids to unite the various peoples, English,
Britons, Picts, Scots, into a united kingdom in the late 10th century, just at about the time
the kingdom of England is being organized. Foremost, Russia, the development of the
Russian principalities, whoever we want to call these areas the future of what are now the modern
states of the Ukraine, Belarus, and Great Russia, they owe their creation directly to the efforts
of the Rus to develop market towns and trade with Constantinople. It was Valdemir or Vladimir,
the Prince of Kiev, who converted to Orthodox Christianity and in effect brought Roman institutions
from the Mediterranean world to the Russian forest zone and created for the first time
a major political and cultural center in the Russian forest zone. And that civilization,
which was sparked by the trading activities and the Viking activities of Scandinavians, led to the
creation of Russia with profound consequences for European and world history. So across the whole
of Europe, the Vikings had a major impact in determining the destinies, the political,
the religious, and economic futures of both Western and Eastern Europe. There were profound
changes in Scandinavia as well, and we should think upon some of the more positive contributions
made by the Scandinavians. One is the skill in shipbuilding, and I spent considerable time
discussing those achievements and have the evolution of shipbuilding, which climaxed in
the late 10th and 11th century with the great long ships and canars, the ocean-going cargo vessels
that allowed for the colonization of Iceland. The dragon ships, reputedly carrying 200 warriors,
the most famous being the long serpent, the flagship of King Olaf Triggvissen of Norway,
that's the ship from which he leaps into the sea at the Battle of Svold in 1000. These ships were
on a whole other order than anything that had been seen in northern Europe. And while the Scandinavians
will lose their primacy in shipbuilding and trading to the Germans and the Dutch starting in the 12th
and then continuing in the 13th century, nonetheless the Dutch and German shipbuilding, the superior
ships of the later Middle Ages, were based directly on those Scandinavian shipbuilding
traditions. And what the Scandinavians achieve in the early Middle Ages is a shipbuilding tradition
in northern Europe, which is parallel but different to the shipbuilding of southern Europe,
particularly centering in Italy, in the ports of southern France and of eastern Spain, Barcelona,
Marseille, Genoa, and Venice. Europe had the unique situation in the Middle Ages of having two
independent shipbuilding systems, one based on the ancient shell construction, the other on this
skeleton construction of northern Europe. And when those two traditions were swapped and influenced
each other, presto, you had the development of the ocean-going vessels of the 15th and 16th
century in Europe, once mounted with artillery that enabled Europeans to capture the globe.
And so the Scandinavians had a major influence in the development of European
shipbuilding and ultimately European domination worldwide. That northern shipbuilding is clearly
one of the great technical achievements of the Viking Age. And there's really nothing like that
before then. Above all, we've stressed in the changes of Scandinavia during the Viking Age
that the Scandinavians adapted outside influences. Canoe took the institutions of England and adapted
them to creating an effective Danish state. Christianity triumphed in Scandinavia because
it was accommodated to existing social and economic institutions. Best seen in Iceland,
where Christianity is accepted in an almost classic Icelandic reconciliation between two
warring parties in which the Pagans were the majority and the Icelanders agreed to have the
one faith, not to go to a religious war. And as a result of that conversion, the ancient traditions
of the Northmen were preserved. That is the great sagas, the stories of the gods and the heroes of
the past. We've seen how the Scandinavians were receptive also to all the technological advantages
coming with the conversion to Christianity. How rapidly, between 1100 and 1350, they took
on superior techniques in agriculture. They modified their laws and institutions to create
a Christian Scandinavia by 1350. And this is really quite an impressive achievement.
As I mentioned and passing on several occasions, the three Scandinavian kingdoms today and the
Republic of Iceland all can trace their political legacy back to the Viking Age. And that is no
small achievement for an area that was long regarded on the fringe of Rome in Europe and certainly
later Christian Europe and an area that never had had the benefit of Roman conquest and Roman
institutions. So in the end, what was the overall Viking impact on medieval civilization? Well,
maybe it could be summed up really in two big conclusions. First, their prowess and warfare,
their prowess as great seafarers. Despite all the suffering and destruction they brought,
they forced Christian Europe to organize and to arm itself. The Crusades, in some ways,
are the logical result of the Viking Age. And to put it in a short sense, what did the Vikings
give to Christian Europe? It gave them strength. It forced them to organize political and military
institutions they may never have done otherwise. But in another area, too, they made an absolutely
invaluable contribution. And that was done by the intrepid settlers in Iceland just below the
Arctic Circle. There, the Icelanders, because of the nature of their society and their conversion,
recorded the ancient traditions of the Norse past, the gods, the heroes, the sagas and the legends,
and transmitted that literary heritage to later Western Europe. So that Norse component of the
Viking Age, that literary achievement, that mythology, that genius of the Viking Age expressed
in poetry was transmitted to later generations and became part of the greater legacy of Western
Europe and took its place along with Roman Greek literature as well as the Christian and Jewish
traditions that make up Western European civilization. So in the end, perhaps, we should conclude
that the greatest victories of the Vikings were not in England, not in Normandy, not in Russia,
but on the vellums, the manuscripts composed in Iceland.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online. Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH-1-2. That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2. Thank you very much.
