There's this kind of unfortunate hole that a lot of people fall into if they're talking about free and open-source software or
Digital privacy digital security all this kind of stuff a lot of people will get that they will bite that
They'll go down that rabbit hole
Okay, and they'll be interested in oh, how can I do things right online?
How can I be secure? How can I reduce spyware all that kind of stuff?
one issue that I find is that many of those people obsess with the technology oh
My goodness open-source software is so cool all encrypted all Monero
It's so cool all this all this technology is fantastic
Ignoring the context in which it's used and what I mean by that it here. Here's my actual viewpoint
the absolute most secure way to do something is
always
Not using the internet always a hundred percent of the time
You want to have a secure end-to-end encrypted chat? Well talk to someone in real life without cell phones around. Okay, do you want to?
Buy something anonymously well buy in cash all of that exists in real life, and it functions perfectly
Actually, I was talking about this over the weekend. I did an interview with Kevin Wad who's one of those Monero guys
Maybe you guys know about him and initially he disagreed with this point because I he said something like oh my goodness
It's gonna be so great. We're gonna have Monero this private cryptocurrency if it takes over the world
We can all you know transact privately and stuff like that
And you know we won't have cash anymore and all that kind of stuff and I was like no
I don't want that I absolutely don't want that because what that means even if you have a solid technology
That actually really does
You know protect people's privacy. I
Want the option of being able to use something physical some physical currency some paper cash to transact with people now
It can be a cash based on gold or silver or even it could be based off a digital currency
but I always wanted that ability to be able to transact without a cell phone app without
Connection to the internet that is something that we inherently need and most people if they they're really worried about personal privacy
They wouldn't be more
Technological and they wouldn't use more and more fancy equipment
They would be less technological and not use the internet and not use digital technology
What so ever?
Over Christmas. I actually saw this pretty good video. There's this guy on YouTube Eli the computer guy
I've known that he existed for a while, but I watch is what I watched one of this video
These videos he did on tour or maybe it was I2P or something like that
and he made this really good comparison and that is
Tor if you're using tour to be anonymous. Hey, that's great if it works, you know, there are there are problems for there
Potential vulnerabilities and things with it. But hey, if you're trying to be anonymous online, that's great
But what he said is trying to be private online is kind of like trying to encrypt
Yodeling right because when you're making connections on the internet, you are I mean that stuff is all over the place
The the amount of metadata leakage even if you're doing everything perfect is enormous
Okay, so trying to use that digital technology in a privacy-respecting way is like trying to encrypt Yodeling
I absolutely agree with that. That's a perfect analogy of his
and so
Most of the time if you need to talk to someone, right?
Should your first
Option be let me get this encrypted chat application and I'll use that. No your first
Reflect should be let's see. Can I talk to this person in real life?
Right, can I can I wait until I see this person in real life when I talk to him, right?
That should be reaction number one and I absolutely don't want what I don't want and what I'm worried about
Especially when I see free and open-source technology becoming this enforced standard
Even if it's an open standard actually if it's free and open source as as an enforced
enforced standard that's
Arguably even worse because you know more people can build stuff on top of it easier than you know proprietary programs
And I'm very worried about living in a digital police state that's built on free and open-source software, right?
technology can easily be designed to
Cause people problems even if you know it could be worse worse if it's proprietary or something else like that, right?
I mean we saw a bunch of governments
Try to develop contact tracing apps and there are even a lot of free and open-source people even I think the Linux Foundation and
Those groups of people would fund projects for contact tracing apps that were open source. I don't give a crap if the
dystopia we're gonna live in is proprietary or open source
It doesn't make a lick of difference for me because I don't want to live in one of those dystopias
I do not want to have to be relying on that kind of technology and yes when you're using digital technology
100% of the time use
Free and open-source software use cryptocurrency in crypto encrypted, you know private cryptocurrency like Monero
Use always use the best technology if you have to use technology
But 90% of the time I'm gonna go ahead and guess you don't really need to use technology, right?
You're just you're doing things as a replacement for real life that you shouldn't really be doing anyway
I mean this is this is half self-help half privacy advice
But a lot of people just use the internet for things for social things
they shouldn't be using them for anyway and it is a privacy liability and the solution is not necessarily not even
Necessarily to move to some super private social media site that is free and open source
I mean that in some use cases you could you know make a
You know use that to an end and that might be helpful
But I think in most cases people just shouldn't be using digital technology for most of this stuff
You are trying to encrypt yodeling. That's it. That's a great analogy and that's what you're doing. So
That's just a reminder if you need to touch grass
relax
Just try not to use computers that that's I don't know that that's basically what all of my videos are about, right?
