The stage is yours.
Thank you, Zlatko.
Well, in this talk, what I want to do
is to ask the following question.
What does quantum mechanics mean?
Well, without further ado,
let me just skip to my conclusions.
Nobody knows.
Thanks for coming to my talk, I'll take questions.
Well, okay, actually, I do have a few other things to add.
The first is that if you read a book or an article
that asks this question
and it doesn't, at some stage, acknowledge this basic fact
that we really don't know what quantum mechanics means,
then I advise you to read it
as you might say a book review.
That's to say, don't imagine that the position it is giving
is one that will necessarily be either right or wrong.
Judge it instead by whether it seems to offer
a stimulating and productive way to think about its subject.
I think this at the moment is the best approach we can take
to trying to answer this question
of what quantum mechanics means.
Now, you don't need to take my word for it
that this ignorance about quantum mechanics exists
because I'm sure that many of you will know
this popular quote from Richard Feynman,
who said, I think I can safely say
that nobody understands quantum mechanics.
And let me remind you that he actually said this in 1965.
And that was the year that Feynman shared the Nobel Prize
in physics for his work on quantum mechanics.
So at that point, there was probably no one alive
who knew more than Feynman did about quantum mechanics.
And if this is the conclusion that he reached,
you might well ask what hope is there for the rest of us.
But I think today there's another way
to answer the question of what quantum mechanics means.
You see, one would be justified in giving an answer
to that question like this.
This, of course, is IBM's quantum computer.
And in other words, quantum mechanics must surely tell us
something about the world because we can now use it.
We can use its principles to build machines like this one,
which in fact Feynman himself first envisaged
in the early 1980s, in which quantum objects are manipulated
so as to let us do something real and useful.
If quantum mechanics was not in some sense
a valid description of the world,
then quantum computers would not do what they're supposed to do.
But as you'll see, I think that today's quantum information
technologies like this, tell us something else
about the possible answer to the question I started by asking.
Because what they embody and in fact illustrate
is an emerging sense among many, perhaps not all,
but many of the people who ponder the meaning of quantum mechanics
that it has something to say about the fundamental rules
of what information is and how it can be encoded,
moved and transformed in the world.
Now, quantum mechanics has, of course, a reputation
among laypeople, in fact, among many scientists,
particularly those who don't make use of it,
for being impossibly hard.
So here's some quantum maths for you,
but it's not the mathematics that's the problem,
or at least it wasn't the problem for Feynman.
He could do the maths just fine.
The problem was that's all he could do.
What he couldn't understand is what the maths meant,
what it tells us about the nature of the world.
Now, Feynman himself didn't seem too troubled by that.
He said, you know, we've got a theory that works.
It gives amazingly accurate predictions
about how stuff will behave.
In fact, it's potentially the most accurate theory
in science at all.
So what more can you want than that,
an accurate theory that works?
Well, some scientists feel the same way today,
but usually we do want more because we want to know
what our scientific theories tell us
about what the world is like.
And it wasn't clear to Feynman
that quantum mechanics lets us do that,
and it's still not clear today.
But I want to suggest to you that we can do better
than Feynman's admission of bafflement,
or defeats, I might say.
We don't have all the answers to what quantum mechanics means,
but we do have better questions.
We have a clearer sense than we did in the 1960s,
or even in the 1980s, of what's important and what is not.
And I want to try to give you a sense
of what those things might be.
So let me start with some things
that everyone knows about quantum mechanics.
And when I say everyone, I believe that this audience
is a diverse mixture of experts
who know much more about quantum mechanics than I do,
and non-experts, perhaps non-scientists,
who are nevertheless interested in the subject
and everything in between.
So if you didn't know any of these things yourself,
don't worry, all I mean is that these are notions
that you'll encounter pretty quickly
the moment you start looking at what at least
has been popularly written about quantum mechanics.
First of all, we're told that quantum mechanics is weird.
Things don't behave in the quantum world
in ways that we're familiar with,
and they don't quite make sense.
And here are some of the ways in which they're weird.
So quantum mechanics can be both waves and particles.
This is called wave particle duality.
Quantum objects can be in more than one state at once,
and they can be both here and there, say,
this is called superposition.
You can't simultaneously know exactly
two properties of a quantum object.
This is Heisenberg's uncertainty principle.
Quantum objects can affect one another
instantly over huge distances,
and this is often called spooky action at a distance,
and it arises from a phenomenon called entanglement.
You can't exactly measure anything without disturbing it,
and so the human observer can't be excluded from the theory.
It becomes unavoidably subjective.
Everything that can happen, or that can possibly happen,
does happen, and there are two separate reasons
why this claim is made.
One is rooted in Feynman's work itself,
which says that quantum objects
take all possible paths through space.
The other comes from the controversial
many-words interpretation of quantum mechanics,
which says that every time a quantum system
faces a choice, it takes both choices,
splitting into separate worlds.
Okay, now here's the thing.
Quantum mechanics itself doesn't say any of these things.
They are all attempts to say
what quantum mechanics might mean.
Some of them are misleading.
Some of them, I think, are plain wrong.
Others are just unproven interpretations.
So I'm saying that we need to change the record
when we talk about quantum mechanics.
We need to stop falling back
on these tired old cliches and metaphors
and to look more closely and more carefully
at what quantum mechanics does and doesn't permit us to say.
And the first point to realize
is that there's a big difference between quantum theory,
the maths and the mechanics that scientists use daily
to predict stuff and to make devices like laptops and phones
and indeed quantum computers.
There's a difference between that
and the interpretation of that theory.
And this is what's so hard to grasp
because normally the interpretation of a scientific theory
seems obvious from the theory itself.
Newtonian mechanics, the old classical mechanics
that works for everyday objects
like tennis balls and spaceships.
This tells us what paths objects take
as forces act on them.
And we don't have to ask, what do you mean by object?
What do you mean by path?
It's obvious.
That's not so for quantum mechanics.
And let me give you a glimpse of why.
To predict what a quantum object will do,
in place of Newton's equations of motion,
scientists generally use an equation
devised by Erwin Schrodinger in 1924
to describe the idea that quantum particles
might act like waves.
The Schrodinger equation doesn't give us
a trajectory for the particle,
but instead something called a wave function.
And the wave function can be used to figure out
where we might find the object in space.
So the shape of a typical wave function in space
might look something like this.
So what does this mean?
Well, it's often said that it means
the particle is smeared out over space.
And it does look that way, doesn't it, from this.
But this isn't showing the density
of the particle over space.
This is the wave function,
and it's a purely mathematical thing.
And what the wave function lets us deduce
is all the possible outcomes of measurements
of the particle's properties,
along with their relative probabilities.
So to find the position where we'll observe the particle,
then we simply calculate some number
from the wave function at that point in space,
and that gives us the probability
that we will see the particle at that point.
So the wave function doesn't tell us
where we'll find the particle.
It tells us the chance that we might find it
at any particular position if we look.
And this is what's so odd about quantum mechanics
because it seems to point in the wrong direction
compared to other scientific theories,
not down towards the system we're studying,
but up towards our experience of it.
It says nothing, or perhaps I should say,
it says nothing obvious
about what the quantum system itself is like.
In other words, the wave function
is not a description of the quantum object.
It is a prescription for what to expect
when we make measurements on that object.
But it's even more peculiar than this
because the wave function doesn't tell us
where the particle is likely to be at any instant,
which we can then verify by making measurements on it.
Rather, what the wave function,
well, the wave function tells us nothing
about where the particle is until we make a measurement.
Strictly speaking, we shouldn't talk
about the particle at all,
except in terms of measurements we might make on it.
And this account of quantum mechanics
is more or less the one that was given
by the Danish physicist Niels Bohr
and his collaborators, such as Heisenberg.
And it's known today as the Copenhagen interpretation.
And I'm not saying that the Copenhagen interpretation
is right, but what's valuable, I think, about it
is that it tells us where our confidence
about the meaning of the theory has to stop.
As it stands, quantum mechanics doesn't permit us
to say anything with confidence about reality
beyond what we can measure of it.
And here's what I mean by that.
One way of speaking about this measurement
of a quantum particle goes like this.
We say that before the measurement,
a wave function is typically this broad spread out thing.
But when we make a measurement
and find the particle to be in a particular place,
then the wave function switches suddenly
to being a sharp spike at that single place.
And this is generally called collapse of the wave function.
And let me just mention that,
contrary to popular belief,
wave function collapse was never actually a part
of the Copenhagen interpretation,
at least as far as Bohr expressed it.
Now, the problem here is that there's absolutely
no mathematical prescription in the theory itself
for how this collapse happens.
You just have to assume it.
You have to put it in by hand.
That doesn't seem very satisfactory.
But wave function collapse doesn't mean
that the particle goes from being smeared out
to being sharply defined once we make a measurement on it.
All we can say is that before the measurement was made,
there were different probabilities
that a measurement would reveal it,
in particular in different places.
Whereas after the measurement,
we can say for sure that it is here and not there.
It's our knowledge that has changed.
And some researchers think that this, in fact,
is really what quantum mechanics is.
It's a theory that describes how our knowledge
about the world changes when we intervene in it.
And we can't deduce from that anything
about what the world was really like
before we had that knowledge of it.
So you see, it's misleading to talk about this situation
as the particle being in many places at once.
The situation tells us only what the possible outcomes
of a measurement will be.
And it's the same with quantum superpositions.
Now, it's often said of superpositions
that the odd thing about quantum objects
is that they can be not only in two places at once,
but in two states at once.
For example, quantum objects have a property called spin.
And all you need to know about it for now
is that for some particles,
it's a property that can have two possible orientations
when you measure it.
The spin, you could find that the spin of the particle
points up or it points down.
And so this is a property that could be used
to encode bits of binary information.
Up could represent a one, down could represent a zero,
and that's the basis of all quantum information technologies
such as quantum computers,
because it means that spins or other quantum states
can act as quantum bits or qubits.
But you see spins at these quantum objects
could be not just up or down,
that's to say a qubit of encoding a one or a zero,
they can be in a superposition of up and down states.
And this is a property that somehow expands
the space of possible states for quantum bits
and allows quantum computers to do some calculations
much more quickly than classical machines.
Now, I've written it like this
with these odd looking brackets
to stress that this is just a formal way
of writing a superposition.
It's not a picture of reality.
You see, although a spin qubit placed
in a quantum superposition is often said
to be into the two states at once,
simultaneously a one and a zero, let's say,
that's not really right.
Because remember that the wave function
tells us only what we can expect when we make a measurement.
And so in this case,
it says that a measurement on the qubit
could yield a one or a zero.
Both, in this case, are possible outcomes.
And in fact, they're the only possible outcomes.
But what's the qubit like before we make the measurement?
Well, quantum mechanics doesn't really tell us that.
Well, now you see, I'm talking not about smeared out particles
or collapsing waves,
but about how information can be encoded in quantum systems
and how it can be read out.
And this is the basis offered
by quantum information technology,
which isn't just a basis,
which isn't just the basis of these amazing new technologies
like quantum computing or quantum cryptography.
It's also a new way of talking about quantum mechanics itself
and potentially talking about quantum information
might allow us to see past
all this old style paraphernalia of wave functions
and Schrodinger equations and quantum jumps
and to get to the core
of what the theory really seems to be telling us.
And there's an example of what I mean by that
in one of the most perplexing features of quantum mechanics,
which is that the outcomes of measurements
or observations seem to depend
on how much information we gather about the system.
And this is something that's commonly illustrated
by the quantum double slit experiment.
So if we send water waves or light waves
through two closely spaced slits,
then the waves emerging from each will spread out
and interfere with one another
and create a pattern where they alternately reinforce
or cancel each other.
So for light, if you do this,
you find a series of bright and dark bands
on a screen that's placed behind the slits.
If you do it for electrons,
which according to quantum mechanics
can also show these wave-like properties,
then you'll find the same thing.
You don't just get two images of the slits as you would
if you were firing sand grains through a mask
from a sand blaster.
So, you know, as you would in the top case here,
you get wavy interference.
You get this interference pattern,
these many bands of more or less electrons hitting the screen.
And this interference persists,
even if the intensity of the beam is so low
that you know that the electrons
will be going through the slits one at a time.
It's as if each electron goes through both slits at once
and interferes with itself.
But now, if you put a detector close to one slit,
which can detect the electron
and see which slit it went through,
then you'll find indeed that the detector
will tell you it goes through one and not the other.
The detector might click or it might not.
But then, if you find out that information,
what you find is that the electron,
this interference pattern goes away
and the electron behaves like a regular particle.
And crucially, it's not that the detection itself
is somehow disturbing the electron's motion
and getting rid of this wavy behavior.
It seems to be the very fact of knowing
which slit it goes through
that destroys the quantum-like waviness.
And you can see that that's so
in what's called a delayed choice experiment
where you set up a detection scheme in a clever way.
So you only detect the particle's path
sometime after you're sure it has passed through the slits.
So then, you can be sure that the detection itself
isn't physically influencing the passage through the slits.
Nevertheless, finding out that information
will again destroy the interference pattern.
The particle will behave like a particle.
But if you leave the detector there and just turn it off
so that you don't know which slit it went through,
then the interference returns.
It's as if the particles spookily know
whether or not your eavesdropping on which path they took.
It's behavior like this that led Niels Bohr
to assert that there's something special
about measurement of quantum systems
that compels a quantum object
to make a choice about the properties that it has.
And until we do that, or unless we do that,
the property that the object has is undefined
and we simply can't talk meaningfully about it.
Now, famously, that idea was at the core of the dispute
that grew up between Bohr and Einstein.
For Einstein, this notion that the world is somehow
indeterminate until we looked seemed absurd.
It seemed like the antithesis of science itself.
And in 1935, Einstein and two younger colleagues,
Boris Podolski and Nathan Rosen,
came up with a thought experiment
which they believed showed why Bohr's view had to be wrong.
Now, this experiment was later put in a slightly clearer form
by the physicist David Bowman.
That's how I'll describe it here.
So this is how it goes.
You have a box that spits out two quantum particles
that are in an entangled state.
And this means that their properties are interdependent.
So let's say that they have spins
which can only have two values when measured,
like I said, spin up or spin down.
Okay, so if they're entangled,
this means that the measurement outcomes
must be correlated between the two particles.
Typically, if one has a spin that points up,
then the other one has to point down.
We can't specify which is which,
but we know for sure that they must be correlated
because of the way we produce them.
So then if we measure the spin on one particle
and we find that it's a spin up particle,
then we know that the other particle must have spin down.
Okay, now this correlation in itself
might seem unremarkable
because you could say the same thing about two gloves,
let's say if someone sent them separately,
one glove to me, one glove to you through the mail.
If I open my package and I see I've got the right hand glove,
then I know instantly without even having to ask you
that you have got the left hand one.
But here's the crucial thing
because according to Bohr's interpretation
of quantum mechanics, the direction of the spins,
unlike the handedness of those two gloves,
isn't determined in advance.
It isn't determined until we, one of us,
actually observes what they've got.
Now, if that's so,
then this so-called EPR experiment
seemed to be saying that making a measurement
on one particle instantaneously
fixes the direction of the arrow or the spin for the other.
It's as if there's some spooky communication
passing between them.
And this is what Einstein called spooky action at a distance.
It was Erwin Schrödinger
who shared Einstein's skepticism
about the Copenhagen view of quantum mechanics.
It was Schrödinger who named it instead entanglement.
This kind of instantaneous communication or action
between two objects separating in space
was known to be impossible.
It was forbidden by Einstein's own
special theory of relativity.
So Einstein argued that quantum mechanics
couldn't be the whole story here.
There must be some missing ingredient,
which he said was some property,
which we now call a hidden variable,
that we couldn't measure,
but that somehow gives definite values
to these properties, the spins say,
to the particles all along.
The problem is that simply measuring particles
like in an experiment like this,
measuring two entangled particles
isn't gonna tell you who's right,
or Einstein, because that won't reveal anything
about what the particles were like
before you measured them.
So no one knew how to deal with this apparent EPR paradox,
as it was called.
And for decades, it was just brushed under the rug.
But all that changed in 1964
when the Irish physicist John Bell,
whose day job was as a particle physicist at CERN in Geneva,
reformulated the EPR experiment
in a way that suggested that it could be conducted for real.
So in short, Bell's experiment
involved a clever way of combining measurements
made by two observers on pairs of entangled particles,
where the observers themselves
decided how they'd make the measurement.
And the setup is actually what's sketched
behind the blackboard here with Bell,
but here's maybe a clearer depiction of it.
So what you do is you look at how strong the correlations
between pairs of entangled particles are
for different choices of how you make the measurement.
And Bell showed that if the particles were either classical
or were governed by Einstein's hidden variables,
so that either way their properties
were actually fixed all along,
then the strength of the correlations
that you get in many repeated experiments here
added up in a certain way couldn't exceed a certain value.
But if they were governed by quantum mechanics,
as Bohr put it, and Bohr was right to say
that we couldn't see anything about the properties
before we measured them,
then this correlation would be larger than that threshold.
So these experiments were first done in the 1970s
by John Clouser and Stuart Friedman
at the University of California at Berkeley
using laser photons as the entangled object.
And they've been repeated many, many times since,
then made ever more rigorous
and ever more able to rule out possible loop holes
in Bell's argument.
Every single time they've given the same very clear result,
which is that quantum mechanics alone is right.
Bohr's argument seems to be right
and there's no need, no argument for Einstein's hidden variables.
So how can this be?
What was wrong with the EPR argument?
Well, Einstein and his colleagues
made the perfectly reasonable assumption of locality,
which is really saying that the properties of a particle
are localized on that particle itself
and that what happens to this particle here
can't affect what happens to another particle there
in some different part of space
without some way of transmitting an effect
across the intervening space between them.
But it seems that nature doesn't work that way
at the quantum level.
We can't regard the two particles in the EPR experiment
as separate entities, even though they're separated in space.
When they are quantum entangled,
they can be both,
they have to be both considered in some sense
a single non-local entity.
And in fact, it's only if we accept Einstein's assumption
of locality that we need to tell the story
in terms of particle one,
somehow influencing the spin of particle two
when we make the measurement,
this spooky action at a distance.
The alternative view is that we have to invoke
quantum non-locality,
this idea that somehow quantum properties
can be delocalized between two or more objects.
So here again, we seem to find this issue
of how measurement and information
and the re-information we get from it
seem to affect the outcomes itself.
As with the double slit experiment,
you can show in a belt test
that it's not the physical act of making the measurement
on one particle that somehow seems to fix
the property of the other.
It's the matter of whether that measurement
unambiguously tells you what the state of your particle is.
So it's the knowledge that matters.
Measurement has become something of a dirty word
in quantum mechanics because it seems to bring up
all these peculiarities.
In fact, John Bell placed it on a list of bad words
which incidentally also included information
that he thought should be banned
from talking about quantum mechanics.
But these days, measurement isn't quite the mystery
that it once was.
Even though it's not fully understood yet either.
I see in Boar's view, a measurement was necessarily
something governed by classical physics
because ultimately it needed classical scale stuff,
you know, a piece of apparatus and us to look at it.
And so for him, that was the end of the mystery
because he said that quantum and classical
were just distinct regimes.
And we shouldn't expect to be able to pronounce
about what went on in the quantum world
from the perspective of the classical one.
In effect, he declared that there was a fundamental divide
between them.
Now, it's not surprising that that seemed
a deeply unsatisfactory answer to some researchers,
including Einstein.
But today we can do somewhat better than that.
We know, for example, that a measurement involving,
any measurement involving the interaction of a quantum system
with some classical environment like a measuring device
that aims to extract information about it.
Any measurement like that involves entanglement.
Entanglement happens whenever one particle encounters another.
In fact, quantum mechanics says if they interact,
that's the only thing that can happen.
They have to become entangled.
And if you make a measurement so that more and more
of these interactions with the environment accumulate,
the quantum system itself becomes more and more entangled
with its environment.
You might say that what this means is that the process
spreads out the quantumness of the original object
into its surroundings.
And in that process, the quantumness
kind of gets diluted into the environment.
And here's what I mean by that.
Let's say you have a quantum bit, a qubit, in a superposition,
and then you make a measurement on it,
and it becomes entangled with its environment.
So the superposition then spreads into those particles, too.
And if you want to demonstrate that you still
have a superposition there at all,
then you have to look for it in all those entangled particles.
And that quickly becomes impossible.
It will be a bit like trying to keep track
of every single gas molecule that you just breathed out
as it collides with and mixes with all of those
in the air around it.
So this process is a real physical process.
It's called decoherence, and it leads
to the apparent disappearance of quantum properties
like superposition in the original quantum object
when it's observed and when its properties are measured.
And it's possible to calculate how fast decoherence should
happen when a quantum system interacts with its environment.
And we find that generally, it's so fast,
it's almost instantaneous.
So for example, if you could somehow
put a dust grain in the air in a quantum superposition
of states, you can calculate that it
would decoher in this room in about 10 to the minus 31
seconds, faster than anything we can measure.
And what you're left with when that happens
is classical behavior, definite properties
with fixed values, such as a well-defined position
in space.
In fact, according to one theory that
describes how this decoherence changes quantum to classical,
it's a theory called quantum Darwinism.
This process not only gives objects fixed definite values
of their properties, but it actually picks out
from all the quantum features precisely those properties
that are meaningful in the classical world,
properties like position and speed and charge.
So only certain quantum features, the theory says,
have the right characteristics to survive the filtering
process of decoherence.
And they do that.
They have those properties because they are particularly
good at making many imprints or copies of themselves
in their environment.
That's where the Darwinism part of the theory comes in.
You see, when we make an observation of an object,
what we're really doing is detecting the traces
that it imprints on its environment.
You can only see me now because of the photons that
have scattered from my particles and made their way
into the camera.
This all gets a bit more complicated
when we're talking about virtual talks,
but it sort of works.
And you can only hear me because of the imprint
that my particles have made on the air molecules,
the movements of the air molecules.
In fact, you could reconstruct everything
you can say about an object, like a dust grain,
say, from those imprints, like the photons of light
that are bouncing off it here.
And you could reconstruct all of that,
even if just after those photons have bounced off,
the object itself was somehow to magically vanish from space.
You could still see it from the imprint
that it's left for a short time.
And you can all agree on my properties, my position,
the color of my shirt, what I'm saying,
classical properties like this.
You can agree on them because there
are lots of the imprints that I'm making on the environment.
They're highly redundant imprints.
There are loads of scattered photons from me,
enough for all of you to share.
If one of you was somehow able to harvest every photon I scatter,
no one else could see me and make any observation of me.
And it's this creation of many copies or imprints
via interactions and entanglement with the environment
that is described by quantum Darwinism,
and that in this theory, at least, that
is how quantum becomes classical.
Now, there seems to be no avoiding decoherent for objects
the size of a dust grain, even in a vacuum.
Interactions with thermal radiation, infrared photons
from the warmth of the room, would still
cause it to decoher in about 10 to the minus 18 seconds.
Even if you put that grain of dust
in the cold emptiness of interstellar space,
it would still decoher in about a second
because of the microwave photons out there
from the cosmic background radiation.
So in other words, the reason we can't generally
observe quantum effects like superposition in objects
of everyday scale is not because there's
some law of nature that forbids quantumness at those scales,
but because decoherence will destroy it almost instantly.
And it does so because of quantum entanglement itself.
If we could figure out how to put a tennis ball in some
well-defined superposition of states
and to isolate it completely from sources of decoherence,
and yet this is a tricky bit, somehow,
still monitor its state accurately enough,
quantum mechanics says there's no reason
why such a superposition should be impossible.
Now some physicists think that there might be other factors
in that situation that will come into play
that will destroy quantum coherence anyway,
some think that gravity will do it.
But it's not clear that anything extra is needed
to effectively banish quantum phenomena at everyday scales.
In other words, the world is quantum all the way up,
and classical physics is pretty much just what
quantum physics looks like when you're six feet tall.
And that's really what I mean by the title of my talk.
And I should just add for this audience that decoherence
is the enemy of quantum computing.
Computing with qubits relies on keeping them
in a collective state of superposition
while the computation proceeds.
Decoherence will mess that up.
And that's why quantum circuits have to be cooled
to such extremely low temperatures
within a whisker of absolute zero,
because this suppresses all the thermal jiggling
that would otherwise disrupt the qubits.
And it's the difficulty of maintaining this coherence
and suppressing decoherence in ever greater numbers
of entangled qubits that explains why quantum computers
so far don't have more than around 70 qubits or so
to play with.
But it's a testament to how much power quantum rules give you
that already quantum computers can do in seconds
with just that number of qubits,
some calculations that would take today's
classical supercomputers a billion years or so.
Now, there's a curious thing about Bell's experiments
that's often not remarked upon.
I remember I said that the quantum mechanics allows
correlations between entangled particles
to be stronger than they would be in classical physics
or for hidden variables.
But quantum mechanics too sets a limit
on how strong those correlations can be.
And it's not obvious why they couldn't be stronger.
We don't know why that is, why the world isn't,
if you like, even more quantum than it is.
But one useful way to think about what's going on there
is that there seems to be a limit
on how much sharing of information quantum mechanics
permits between entangled particles.
So here again, what makes quantum mechanics what it is,
seems at root to have nothing to do
with mathematical notions.
And this is precisely where some scientists
think we should start in trying to reconstruct
quantum mechanics from scratch,
not from these ad hoc guesses,
as they really were to begin with,
about waves and particles and Schrodinger equations,
but from some simple axioms, some simple assumptions
about what is permitted with information,
how it can be encoded, how it can be transferred,
how it can be read out.
And I want to give you just a flavor
of what this sort of reconstruction would look like.
There are many of them that have been suggested.
They all are somewhat similar.
And I've taken one at random
that was suggested in 2009 by Borovoye Dakic
and Chaslav Bruckner at the University of Vienna in Austria.
They proposed what they said were three reasonable axioms
about how the world might be.
And this is what the axioms were,
that first of all, the most elementary components
of the world, whatever those are,
can carry no more than one bit of information within them.
They assumed secondly, that the state of,
what they called locality.
So the way they expressed it was a state of a composite system
made of many subsystems is completely determined
by measurements made on its subsystems.
What that really means is that there are no secret mechanisms
like hidden variables manipulating what's going on.
Thirdly, they assumed that this property of reversibility,
that you can convert any pure states
from one to the other and back again,
like a coin toss flipping heads and tails.
So Dakic and Bruckner showed that with these assumptions alone
about information really,
that they will lead you inevitably
to only two sets of possible rules
about how things can happen.
And those are the rules that are described
by classical mechanics and by quantum mechanics.
And what's more, if you modify this third axiom
to assume that states can be interconverted gradually,
little by little, rather than in one big jump,
then you only get rules that conform to quantum mechanics.
So for a classical coin toss, for example,
a head and a tail interconvert sort of abruptly
in one big jump, it's either heads or it's tails.
In a quantum system, you could have a situation
where you've got your hand down on the coin
and it can gradually, as you hold it down,
interconvert from the heads or tails
without having to pick it up and flip it over.
Okay, so the point is that these axioms about information
can by themselves lead to quantum behavior
that we're familiar with,
like superpositions and entanglement.
And some researchers think that these efforts,
quantum reconstruction,
might lead to a completely different perspective
on quantum theory, one in which the physical meaning
of all the seemingly strange behaviors
at last becomes clear.
Now, it remains to be seen whether that will happen,
but I think it's already illuminating
that they all focus on information,
on how answers or measurement outcomes
are contingent on the questions we ask and how we ask them.
And I think this is the most productive way to think
about what quantum mechanics seems to be telling us.
And it's a perspective that I think is illustrated
really nicely by a metaphor
that the American physicist John Wheeler,
who studied under Bohr and who had Feynman
as one of his students, incidentally,
he suggests that maybe we should think about quantum mechanics
as like this.
Let's think of it as being a bit like the game of 20 questions.
So I'm sure you know this game.
So it's the one where one player leaves the room
and everyone else in the room agrees on a certain person,
a historical figure, a well-known person.
And then the person outside has to come back in
and they start to ask each person in turn a question
to try to find out who it is that they've chosen.
And they have to be questions
that can only be answered yes or no.
So you see, they're really quantum questions.
Now, imagine you're the questioner here.
So you come back in, you start to ask questions
and you get your answers.
You start off, is the person male?
And the first person says, yes.
And then you go to the second person, is he alive?
No. OK. And you carry on.
But you start to find an odd thing
that as you go on asking more and more people,
it takes them longer and longer to answer your question.
You know, they're having to think about it.
Well, that's odd because if they've agreed on a person,
it's either the answer is either yes or no.
What is there to think about?
Anyway, you carry on playing this game
and eventually you think you're zeroing in on who it is.
And finally you think, I've got it.
And you say, it's Richard Feynman.
And everyone laughs and tells you that you're right.
It's Richard Feynman.
And then you say, well, what was going on?
Why were you taking so long to think about the answer?
And they explain how they decided to play this.
So instead of deciding on a particular person
when you were out of the room,
what they decided to do was to say that the answer
that anyone gave to the question you asked
had to be consistent with all of the answers
that had been given before.
They didn't decide on anyone,
but the answer that they gave had to correspond
to all the answers that have been given so far,
had to correspond to a famous person of some sort or another.
And so of course, you know, as the answers went on,
it became harder and harder to think,
well, who does that apply to then?
The male, they're dead and so on.
They're a physicist and so on.
You have to think harder and harder.
And what happens is that as the questions are asked,
the possible answers get narrowed down.
And in the end, there's only one person it can be.
It has to be Richard Feynman.
But everyone was forced by the nature
of the questions themselves to converge
on that same person.
If you had asked different questions,
you'd have ended up with a different person,
a different answer.
So the answer you got depended on the context.
There never was a preordained answer.
You brought that answer into being
in a way that is fully consistent
with the questions you asked.
And what's more, the very notion of an answer at all
only makes sense when you play the game.
You know, if you'd come back in and said,
oh, I can't be bothered to go through this,
just tell me who you chose.
There would be no answer to that question.
You have to do the inquiring before an answer
will be forthcoming.
So quantum mechanics is like this.
It seems to be a theory of what is and isn't knowable
and how those knowns are related.
And I like to think of this in terms of a distinction
between a theory of is-ness and a theory of if-ness.
Quantum mechanics doesn't tell us how a thing is
or how a quantum thing is.
It tells us what and with what calculable probability
it could be, along with a logic of the relationships
between the various coulds.
If this, then that.
And what this means is that to truly describe
the features of quantum mechanics
as far as we currently can,
we should replace all the conventional isms with ifms.
So for example, we shouldn't say here it is a particle,
there it is a wave.
We should say, if we measure things like this,
the quantum object behaves in a manner
that we associate with particles.
But if we measure it like that,
it behaves as if it's a wave.
We shouldn't say the particle is in two states at once.
We should say, if we measure it,
we will detect this state with probability x
and that state with probability y.
This if-ness is perplexing
because it's not what we've come to associate with science.
We used to tell it to the science telling us how things are.
And if there are ifs at all,
it's because we're partially ignorant about that.
But in quantum mechanics,
as far as we can tell at the moment,
the ifs seem to be fundamental.
Well, okay, you might say,
but what's the stuff that this if-ness is referring to?
Quantum mechanics doesn't obviously tell us much about that.
And all we have right now are hints and guesses.
And to try to bring them into sharper focus
is a tricky business.
It seems to demand an almost poetic level of expression,
which will send some physicists scurrying for cover.
So here, for example, is an attempt to do that,
that the physicist Chris Fuchs suggested.
He said, maybe quantum mechanics is telling us
that the world is sensitive to our touch.
It has a kind of zing that makes it fly off
in ways that were not imaginable classically.
The whole structure of quantum mechanics
may be nothing more than the optimal method
of reasoning and processing information
in the light of such a fundamental, wonderful sensitivity.
And what Fuchs means here is not the mundane truism
that the human observer disturbs the world.
That's true in classical physics.
Rather, quantum mechanics may be the machinery
that we humans need,
we humans pitched at a scale midway
between the subatomic and the galactic
to try to compile and quantify information about a world
that has this incredibly sensitive character.
It embodies what we've learnt
about how to navigate in such a world.
And I think it's vital at any rate
that we understand that this if-ness
doesn't imply that the world, our world, our home,
is holding anything back from us.
It's just that classical physics
has primed us to expect too much from it.
We've become accustomed to asking questions
and getting definite answers.
What colour is it?
How heavy is it? How fast is it moving?
Forgetting the almost ludicrous amount about
that we don't know about everyday objects,
we figured that we could go on forever,
asking questions and being answered at ever finer scales.
When we discovered that we can't,
we felt shortchanged by nature and we pronounced it weird.
I don't think that will do anymore.
Nature does its best and we need to adjust our expectations.
So we need to go beyond weird.
Thanks very much.
Thank you, Phillip.
Thank you, Phillip, for the wonderful talk
and I can relay to you a few comments
before I get to questions from the audience
and folks in the audience.
Please feel free to post questions again in the chat.
The chat is very active right now,
so I'll try to pull them out of the stream here.
We have, by the way, a few folks I would just like
to relay to you since you can't see the chat yourself,
you know, said this is, you know, nice stuff,
enlightening and mesmerizing,
so I thought I should relay that.
We had quite a few discussions and questions,
I think, that spawned off of the discussion as to,
let's see, hopefully you can see me now, there we go,
as to why is quantum weird
in the sense of deterministic?
Is it, you know, is it because we're used
to deterministic theories?
And I think you touched on this throughout the talk
and this is one of the essential points.
But maybe if we kind of come back to that,
there was the locality that deterministic
versus maybe non-causal potential,
maybe if we could sort of get your thoughts again
in a bit of a summary here of the discussion
that is going on in the chat.
Yeah, okay, well, I mean, certainly, you know,
it seems to me that as far as we can say at the moment,
quantum mechanics isn't deterministic.
There are ways of interpreting quantum theory
that are deterministic, that in fact do return us
to some sort of picture of there being real particles
that have real properties and real places out there.
There are interpretations that suggest that.
And if you like all the quantumness
or what we've conventionally called the weirdness
is kind of put onto another aspect of the theory,
but we recover the particles.
So that's possible, but it's, you know, it's unproven
and it's just one interpretation.
And at the moment, it seems to me it's safe us to say
that, you know, that there does seem to be
this fundamental indeterminacy in quantum mechanics
so that if we make a measurement on a system,
all we can meaningfully say is what the probabilities
of the outcomes will be.
We could, that perhaps we can never say more than that.
So we can ever exactly predict what we're going to find.
That's very interesting.
And I think, folks, I'm sorry,
we were going to have to leave the videos off,
but hopefully you can still hear us just fine.
We're having some bandwidth issues today.
Yes, so, interesting.
And maybe a follow up question from the audience here.
In the classical world, you know, are we perhaps too used
to trying to write down deterministic laws?
Could the classical world be modeled under any probability
or a probabilistic theory, perhaps,
to rephrase the question here?
And should that really be the comparison
between the quantum world and the classical?
Well, I'm certainly not an expert on this,
but what I can say in response to that is that
these efforts at quantum reconstruction
that I talked about, one way of looking at that
is that really, quantum mechanics is simply
a kind of probability theory.
It's just a different sort of probability.
You know, probabilities work a bit differently
from how we used to them in the classical world.
And that, you know, one way of looking at it is that,
is that, you know, we should be thinking probabilistically,
you know, more generally.
And, you know, there are a whole set
of possible probabilistic theories
or theories of probability,
and one of them corresponds to quantum type rules.
So, you know, here again, we sort of come back
to quantum mechanics being a theory about noability
and how much the world is really knowable.
I mean, the way that I think about it,
that makes sense to me, is to suggest
that quantum mechanics seems to be telling us
that we are, it's possible for us to ask more questions
that nature can have answers, can have definite answers for.
That seems to me to be really the point.
And that doesn't seem to be such an unreasonable thing
to propose.
Why should every question that we compose
that we could pose necessarily have a definite answer?
Quantum mechanics seems to be saying it doesn't.
And so you have a choice.
If you choose to ask these questions,
you'll get this set of responses.
If you can choose to ask this set of questions,
you'll get a different one.
And they may not be compatible with each other
because you ask different questions.
So it depends on the context of the questions
that you're asking.
I think that's enlightening, yeah.
And maybe that reminds me a bit of this game
you brought up earlier, which was very nice.
And I think you concluded by something along the lines
of you brought that answer into being of,
oh, it's Feynman by asking that particular set of questions.
And I think it was Sash Kurodkov
as a physicist who also says, in quantum mechanics,
you don't see what you get, you get what you see.
And that brings me to maybe your perspective
or thoughts or opinion on no ability, right?
So in these more recent experiments,
the quantum trajectory type of experiments,
those experiments can't always,
they usually can't tell you the future,
they can't predict the future,
but they can always tell you exactly what,
in a way the state is, the quantum description,
the quantum state is doing,
as you are subjecting the system
to an ongoing interrogation, a measurement.
And there seems to be this very close
one-to-one direct correspondence.
In a sense, the randomness only comes
if you now suddenly change your measurement
to something else, but you have a knowledge
about the system that is conditioned
on what you're measuring and you can update that.
And there's always, in the case
that you can do that update perfectly,
which you can get close to these days for some experiments,
there are always not a complete set of questions
you can answer perfectly.
Like you said, there are always more questions in quantum
than perhaps you can always get a deterministic answer for.
But there is a subset of those questions
that you can always know that if you ask the question,
is the qubit along the x direction?
Let's say you always get a perfect one,
even though you've been injecting randomness
into the system throughout with your measurement.
Maybe that was a bit long of a question,
so I apologize for that, Phil.
But perhaps if we can get your thoughts on QTT
and a bit of that, that would be great.
Well, I mean, of course, Lako,
you're the one who knows about this rather than me.
I was absolutely fascinated by those experiments
for various reasons, but I think that perhaps
the main one was that it seemed to me
that you were really starting to zero in
on what is happening when we make a measurement.
And in particular, to dispel this idea
that measurement is this mysterious black box
that suddenly turns all the quantum vagueness
into something concrete.
What really excited me about them
was that you can see that process happening
and that there are laws to it.
That it's not just magical and unpredictable
and everything else, that as you say,
if you are able to follow it with sufficient time resolution
in sufficient detail,
knowing almost everything about what is happening
in the system, then you can see something
that does look like a trajectory
that is taking the system from one state to another.
And this is why, I mean, it certainly convinced me
that this notion of wave function collapse
as a mysterious thing that suddenly snaps
a wave into a particle, that we really,
it's never really been needed in quantum mechanics.
I understand why it got there,
but it's time to get it back out again
because we don't need it.
And it seems to me that that is getting much closer
to having a proper understanding
of what it is that happens when we make a measurement.
Perhaps the one thing, and I'd be interested
in whether you have thoughts about this,
because the one thing that it doesn't seem to explain,
and this is really the sort of fundamental mystery
of quantum mechanics, why do you only ever get one thing?
And of course, there are some interpretations
that say, well, you don't,
you just get both in different universes.
But as far as we can ever see, quantum measurements are unique.
So where does that uniqueness come from,
given that we know in principle,
more than one outcome is possible?
That's a really deep question.
I think, in fact, I got asked a similar question
at my dissertation defense in the private dissertation part
where they take you aside to a room and quiz you
for until you come to a point of, anyway.
So I don't know that I have a great answer,
but maybe a few thoughts that are probably something
you've written about quite a bit,
as well as this notion you brought up earlier,
and I think you said Bell maybe had introduced it,
or of two different disconnected worlds,
the world of the quantum and the world of the classical.
And there's this notion of Heisenberg's cut,
the boundary between these two.
And there's no prescription in any textbook
or in any paper that I know of that you can find
that really pins down where does this difference occur
between what you call a measurement apparatus
and where you get classical results out of the system?
And what is the quantum system?
So for example, coming back to this,
to the quantum jumps nature paper you brought up earlier,
you could model, you could take that Heisenberg cut
at different stages of the experiment
and pretend like, for instance,
just the qubit itself is quantum,
and it's being subjected to a particular
classical measurement apparatus
that has this particular type of question
it's interrogating the system with,
kind of like the game that you mentioned earlier.
But it turns out that in what we had to do
for the experiment is we moved the cut one step further,
that apparatus was a particular type
of superconducting cavity.
And we model all of the quantum behavior of it as well.
Now that particular cavity is then followed
by another quantum amplifier.
And we could actually include the quantum amplifier itself
and also make this very large now quantum system.
You have three different quantum systems
that are all coupled together.
And you have this kind of matroshka doll
of nested larger systems that are increasingly
becoming more classical in a sense,
because at each stage you're amplifying
and in a sense the signal there's more quantum excitation
that are getting involved.
And perhaps with that, once you have,
like you said, the grain of dust that's floating in the air,
when you have so many quanta, so many excitations,
then you tend to couple more strongly
to this, well, decoherence, right?
Whatever that is precisely in itself.
And you tend to move already in the limit of where
a lot of the quantum nature tends to seem to get erased
or washed out in a sense.
At that stage though, it's still purely quantum system.
You could reverse and undo the measurement
in the sense of taking that information
because you're keeping track of it
and sort of feed it back into the system.
You still have all those degrees of freedom.
And then after that following amplifier
that comes after the cavity,
then we kind of don't know where to draw that Heisenberg cut.
In terms of the empirical experimental world,
that's roughly as far as our models are able to get us.
After that, we don't really have an equation or model
we could write down that we're currently able to say,
oh, now it's quantum.
So empirically we see that, okay, it occurs somewhere there,
is that a limitation of our ability to express it or not?
So-
Is this, I mean, it sounds to me as though
this is again really about information,
but in this notion of a cut,
it sounds as though what that really means
is where do you decide the point comes
where you're not going to any longer
or you can't any longer,
gather pretty much comprehensive information
about everything in the system.
And once you relinquish that attempt,
that's where the cut happens
because you have imperfect information.
Is that the right way to look at it?
I think that is definitely a practical way
to look at it that seems to work in practice.
Is it the ultimate solution?
I couldn't say.
And sorry, I'm gonna go on.
No, no, no, that's fine.
That's just what occurred to me
as you were describing the experiment.
It seemed to be a matter of,
well, how far out can you keep going in your apparatus
and still retain the ability to monitor
more or less everything that is happening
at the sort of quantum level?
Exactly.
And we've been able to now push that further and further out
and see that as you kind of climb up
the matresca dollar, the chain of nestedness here,
that you can move that Heisenberg cut quite far out
and still model things.
But at the end of the day,
we've simply moved the cut further away,
but we still have the cut.
So is it a fundamental cut or not?
I think that's an open question as far as it could tell.
But another way that people think about,
and I think we'd mentioned this,
is that you could say that to the contrary,
I think of what Bell had said.
John Bell, I think you said had band measurement
is a bad word.
I think to more experimentally-minded people like myself,
measurement is actually probably the essence
of the whole theory.
It's what we do, it's what we model,
it's what we describe.
That should actually be the core of it.
So perhaps we should start,
not with Schrodinger's equation,
which describes what the state of the system
if that even exists in of itself out there is,
but maybe we should start with a description
of the measurement.
So I could say closer along the lines of Q2T.
You could take that interaction between
what you call a system and the actual measurement,
because the problem is that in Schrodinger's equation,
a measurement is completely absent.
So Schrodinger's equation is linear, deterministic.
There's nothing really weird in Schrodinger's equation,
in a sense, the randomness,
if you want the weirdness of the quantum randomness
that comes into play,
only occurs at the stage of the actual measurement
when you have von Neumann's postulate and so on.
So it's that process that I think you so nicely pointed out
is what, now the field of physics is being able
to kind of open the hood on and describe.
But I think we've maybe said a lot on this.
Perhaps if you'd like to share this question
from the audience here on,
and you'd let me know if you'd like to take this one,
if you could, could you share your thoughts
on Maxwell's demon and perhaps how that relates
to all of quantum mechanics in the sense that you have,
I'm kind of reading into the question here,
when it comes to know ability and trying to kind of sift
or parse and sort of beat the laws of thermodynamics
in a way, but now at the level of quantum.
So perhaps if you'd like to offer some thoughts on that.
Yeah, yeah, well, very timely.
I've just been writing about Maxwell's demon today
and have done previously.
And everything that is discussed within the context
of Maxwell's demon is classical,
although there is a quantum Maxwell's demon as well,
there is a quantum version.
But, you know, classically, again,
it illustrates how so much seems to come down
to information, the quest of information.
So, and in essence, what Maxwell's demon tells us
is that information itself is a kind of resource
that we can use to do stuff with,
which I just find extraordinary.
I mean, it may be that not everyone knows
what Maxwell's demon is, so that, you know,
very, very briefly, it's a way,
it was a way that James Clark Maxwell in 1867
suggested of subverting the second law of thermodynamics.
The second law says, you can express it in many ways.
I mean, the simplest is just that heat always flows
from hot to cold and never the other way around.
But what it also implies is that there's no,
you can never get energy for free.
You can't, there's no perpetual motion.
That any system that does work,
it's always, some energy is always going to be wasted
and lost as sort of random motions to the system
as entropy, in fact.
So the entropy of the universe always increases.
And Maxwell didn't like this partly for religious reasons.
And so he came up with this idea of a little demon
that could actually reverse this
by having a trapdoor between two compartments
with gas in them, both with gas in them.
Gas starts at the same temperature in both.
But the hotter molecules are the ones
that are moving faster in the gas.
So the molecule, the demon looks at the molecules
and sees if a fast molecule is approaching
from one direction, he opens a trapdoor and lets it through.
If a cold molecule is approaching
from the other direction, he opens it and lets it through.
And so all the hot ones go one way
or the cold ones go the other.
And he ends up with hot gas on one side,
cold gas on the other, which is basically then
there's a thermal gradient that you can tap
in as some sort of power source to do some useful work.
So you've got energy essentially from nothing,
from just an ordinary gas.
So for a long time, people figured,
there must be something wrong with this.
How can it subvert the second law?
And it turns out that the answer is it can't
because of information.
And in this case, it's the information
that is recorded in the demon's mind,
that every, you know, it has to be gathering information
about those gas particles in order to do what it does.
And eventually that information, its mind is finite
and it has to erase that information.
Otherwise it's just too full and it can't do anymore.
And erasing that information costs energy.
And in effect, you get back all the energy
that you thought you'd got from the operation of a demon.
So there's, you know, you still don't get anything for free,
any energy for free.
So this is about information.
And people have realized that actually what this means
is that what looks to be sort of randomness,
statistical randomness, you know, at one level,
if you can zero in and get detailed information
about what is going on, then you can use that information
to mine the sort of random fluctuations in there
and get energy out.
And there have been experiments recently
that have shown this, that have actually shown
that you can do work on an object.
In this case, it was sort of raising up
a tiny little particle that was sort of floating about
in a liquid, if I remember rightly,
by making observations on it,
gathering information about its movements
and using that in some clever way,
you can actually do work and raise it up against gravity.
So information becomes a resource.
So, you know, again, there's this fundamental idea
and then the quantum version of it,
which I won't go into, you know,
is just sort of enacting that same idea
in terms of quantum information.
So it's really interesting how, you know, yet again,
so many ideas, fundamental ideas in physics,
but we also see it happening, of course, in biology,
are coming down to this question of what information is,
how it is embodied, how it can be used and manipulated,
and how it can become a resource that we can exploit.
Thank you, Phil.
That's wonderful.
I see that we are, we have a few more questions.
I won't be able to get to all of them
since I see we're about 15 minutes over,
but perhaps let's take one more final question
from Pranav here.
If, of course, Phil, you would be happy to share with us
on, you know, how did you decide to go into physics?
And then if you could tell us a little bit about your transition
into becoming a science writer and editor,
I think it seems like there's interest from the audience
if you'd like to share with us.
Well, talk about random walks.
I mean, this was certainly one of them
because I began my first degree was in chemistry
and it was at Oxford where the final year
you have to do a research year, which was fantastic.
It was by far my favorite part of the course.
And I did it on, in physical chemistry,
on the, actually the quantum mechanical behavior
of molecules absorbed on surfaces,
which is right at the sort of borderline, really,
of physics and chemistry.
And so when I came to do a PhD,
I just so happened that I ended up in a physics department
looking at similar stuff, condensed matter
and behavior of objects and fluids at surfaces.
And so that brought me into physics,
but I figured at the end of that,
this was going back a long way, I can tell you,
that unlike most people, I'd actually enjoyed writing up
my thesis and I enjoyed writing the papers
that came out of this, out of the PhD.
And so I thought, well, you know,
I'd never thought about this before.
I'd always enjoyed writing,
but I'd never thought about combining my enjoyment
of writing with science, but you can.
And I decided I'd see if I could do that in science editing.
And I was very lucky that just at the right moment,
a place came up at nature, which in those days,
this was the late 1980s, was just a journal.
It wasn't this big publishing empire.
It was just a single journal in a little office,
a crammed office, you know, piled with paper.
And I got a job there as an editor of physical sciences
and had stayed there for a long time.
It was a fantastic place to work.
It meant I got exposed to all areas of science.
It was a very, very steep learning curve.
And it also opened up other opportunities
to do writing for newspapers and so on.
And eventually I decided, maybe I'll write a book.
And I did.
And it was an awful experience in the sense
that I was working full-time at nature,
which was already, you know, working,
it was already an intense job.
So I figured I don't want to do that again,
but I want to write more.
And I gradually became more and more part-time at nature
until I finally stepped down.
I forget when it was,
but it was probably about 20 years ago now.
I stepped away from nature
and I'd still write for them regularly as a freelancer,
but I became completely freelance.
And now I split my time writing,
I guess pretty much 50-50 between writing books,
generally on scientific subjects,
often about how science interacts with the wider culture
and writing scientific journalism.
Thank you, Phil.
That's an inspiring story.
I think with that, I'll take maybe any final words
you'd like to share with us
before we thank the audience and yourself
for joining us here today.
Well, well, just to thank you again,
Zlacko, for inviting me to give this talk.
It was a great fun.
It's always been a lot of fun having any interactions
with IBM generally
and with the IBM quantum computing efforts in particular.
So it's very nice to be able to sustain that relationship.
And I'm always fascinated to see where quantum computing
and IBM and quantum technologies at IBM
have advanced to next.
So keep me in the loop about that.
Wonderful.
And I think we all look forward to
rereading many more books and articles from you, Phil.
This was an absolute delight.
Thank you everyone for tuning in today.
I still see we have over 130 folks tuned in,
20 minutes over time.
So I appreciate your time.
Thank you very much.
This talk will stay recorded and live
on the Kisken YouTube channel.
So feel free to subscribe to hear about future updates.
Thank you, Phil, for taking our invitation.
It has been a real privilege and pleasure
to have you here today.
And thank you, everyone.
We will see you next Friday at noon Eastern time.
Thank you.
