And I don't know what we're talking about today, actually that's a lie because they
have told me, but this was one of the rare episodes where I just sat back and said, okay,
you guys do everything because I'm really busy this week. And you guys did. So thank you very
much. Oh, anytime. At least Steven did. That's true. Well, you know, I have no idea. I'm gonna,
I'm just gonna say you guys because thanks, Steven. Well, I mean, I was gonna say that to the end
and be like, Hey, did this feel more or less organized than usual? Because usually,
Inyosh kind of puts together, you know, note doc and stuff. But oh, do I? Yeah, I mean, usually.
I tell you what, some notes appear every two weeks.
All right. Maybe you do it in your sleep or something. I don't consider myself that organized.
But I do sometimes, I guess, but to get the notes. But before we do all that, we're going to talk
about the sequences like we always do. Usually, except last week, like we almost always do.
Almost always. Very, very usually. Yeah. Is that is very usually a thing? Sure. Okay. It is now.
All right. And our first post is self anchoring. So in a sentence, this is the tendency for people to
when modeling another mind, basically use your mind and put yourself in their shoes.
Right? Yes. As best you can. Yeah. Which I, you know, Eleizer's day job is making minds from
scratch. So that's not a good base spot for him. But for most of us, almost all of our interactions,
it's not a bad place to be. Yeah. It's kind of the best. It's also the best we have.
There's not really any other way. I think you know what your own mind is like. You don't know what
other people's minds are like. You can guess. I've often wondered though, if there was some way to
telepathically just link yourself to some other mind, would it be just wildly different from the
way your mind works and thinks? Or would it be like pretty comfortable? I have two predictions.
One, we will be able to do that in the next 50 years. Can we? And two, we will not be like
bowled over by how different other people's brains are. I think that they will be
similar enough to ours to at least be recognizable. I think it's going to be a
matter of culture. Like the more similarly you were raised to other people in the same
general like area and milieu, they're going to be very similar, even if you have wildly
different opinions. But like people on the other side of the globe raised in a totally
different culture in different circumstances, I think might be like radically different.
My prediction would be that like, I think just sort of the average person will probably
feel pretty similar to the average person, but I bet there's going to be crazy outliers there.
Just based on some people I know who I like, like most people, once I talk to them for a bit,
I can start to model them and predict sort of the kinds of things that they might want to talk
about, what they might say next, you know, there's some people I've met though that like
was talking about a sort of that there's a ex-boyfriend of a friend of mine in Phoenix's
who I was just like, we spent like a week hanging out with these two and I could not
predict what this guy was going to do or say next. And it actually kind of bothered me like.
Yeah, that's scary. You don't want humans that you can't predict unpredictable people.
Yeah, I think I would have a hard time. Like I've met some super hippy people, like the kind
that you think about only show up in movies and stuff, right? And I just have a hard time
really rocking what they're, what being them must be like, like it almost feels like a different
neuro architecture. Okay, then I will refine my prediction to say that it'll be easier to relate
to those people than it will be to your pet dog. Well, sure. Yeah. Okay. I mean, and I, so that's
a way broader, maybe less refined prediction, but like, I think that for the most part, our
modeling of other people based on our own selves is going to be close enough most of the time,
right? And it's, because we all do basically have the same neural architecture. Like I said,
it might be interesting seeing the order of which thoughts appear from people in different cultures,
right? Like the first thing might be like, oh, wait, what about my culture? What about my family?
What about my community? Whereas other people might be like, wait, what about me? What about
my personal safety? Americans? What about my freedom? Well, I wasn't even elevating one over
the other. I was just, yeah, but yeah, totally. Some people be, but my freedoms and other people
would be, but my rep, my family's reputation or something, right? But that's just differences
in what you, what you value, I guess, what's, what's important to you. Yeah. So like those thoughts,
I think we'll, you know, then cascade to like the rest of the decision, you know, of how to go about
the rest of the conversation or solve the problem. But maybe the real fun thing will be, like Jay
said, people are the tips of the, of the, at the tips of the distributions, right? Like if I'm
mind melding with a, with an M, with an emulation of like Elon Musk's brain, right?
See, I don't think Elon Musk's brain would be that hard to figure out. I think he's mostly someone
who's very curious, very energetic and very healthy. And like, that's not that hard for me to model.
I think he's also neuro atypical, which would be interesting to engage with as well.
As he said, during his SNL monologue, he's the first person with Asperger's to host,
or at least the first person with Asperger's to admit it.
He was actually really funny. Did I tell, did I already rave about that?
You did, but not on Mike. Oh yeah, it was awesome. Like they,
SNL does this thing where they can bring on really great people and then like the show kind of sucks.
I think the week before him was Keegan-Michael Key. Oh, that episode sucked.
Really? They just, they didn't put him in any good sketches.
Well, that sucks. And so like that, that's really what makes or breaks it.
One of the first episodes that had Jim Carrey on it was fucking amazing because you could tell,
like, he jumped into every episode and was just putting his comedic genius to work.
And it was great. I would have thought that he would have done the same thing.
I would have thought so too. It was one of the worst episodes of the season.
Damn. It might, I don't know, be like sort of a matter of how outgoing the actual comic is.
Like a lot of comedians are actually pretty introverted.
But even Keegan, you know, he's got a long background in sketch comedy.
And then the last, the season finale was, I don't remember her name,
the Queen's Gambit actress. Hers was amazing. And I wouldn't think of her as a comedic,
like mastermind, but it was hilarious. It was a great, great episode. Anyway,
modeling of their minds is tight. And this is, this is basically that talks about
between ages and three and four people, human people.
I think we talked about this last episode, right? The, the whole theory of mind developing
about, yeah, at it like between age three and four, where kids are able to kind of
put themselves in the shoes of another kid that they're watching on TV, like.
The, yeah, this is what does Sally think is in the box? Pencils or candy?
Yeah.
It's like, you know, you saw, you saw her see candy be put in the box,
and then she left and someone came and replaced it with pencils. And then Sally comes back.
And then they asked the kid, what does she think is in there? Before they get a good
theory of mind, they'll say, well, obviously pencils, because that's what's in the box.
But it's like, once you realize no way she wasn't in the room and they switched it out,
that's kind of that self-reflective bit that, that, that aware bit that more Sabian.
That most people learn at age three or four, but some people I think never seem to quite get.
It's a really short post. I think the most, the main, the key thing from this post is that
two people are see, I'd see basically the same layout, but one of them can see three candles.
And the other one has the smallest candle blocked so they can't see it.
And the person who can't see the smallest candle tells the other subject to move the small candle
from one place to another. And the person who can see all three candles and sees there's one
even smaller, their eyes always go first to the smallest candle before they quickly adjust to
the medium sized candle, which they know is the smallest one the other person can see.
And that's not the test. Like the test is obviously if you aren't a four-year-old,
you know, the other person can't see the smallest candle, so you're going to move the medium one.
But the, what Eleister says is the interesting thing is reflexively, they always go to the
smallest candle first and then adjust, which means that everyone has a bit of anchoring.
We spoke about anchoring before like several months ago at this point, where if you're given
a high number just at random, you will anchor on that higher number and give higher estimates for
things that you have absolutely no idea about just because you already primed with a higher number.
And so he says this is an example of like all people anchor on themselves first and then adjust
afterwards. And due to the nature of anchoring, oh, it's very rare for people to adjust enough.
It makes sense because we don't, again, like we literally don't know what other people's brains
are like. So we do kind of have to start with you need some model. Here's the one that I'm familiar
with. And then okay, then I'll add like a sort of simulation of the other person's brain state
based on the facts that I've known about them, the ways that I've seen them interact, et cetera.
Yeah. Yeah. I think anchoring has some of their application issues, but this doesn't strike me
as the same kind of anchoring. And if anything, this might just also just think that's actually
priming. And that's like in the social sciences, the whole like, if you give a group of men and women
a math test and prime it by like men do better on this test than supposedly women do worse,
I think that did not replicate. Oh, the, this is actually one of the things I did
of a small version of when I was doing boring psych studies in college,
stereotype threat. Right. Was that example? I mean, the other like some weird priming is like,
hey, my screensaver is money. And you see like a dollar bill, you're less inclined to give money
or something. Like all those, those sound, the sound, the eye roll is appropriate. These were
like, Oh, look, it's really easy to prime people on certain things and get certain reactions. But
that turned out to not really be the case. It sounds like just an overly simplistic way of
thinking about humans. Like we actually are pretty sophisticated at doing this for the
most part. Did we mention what the, one of the easiest ways to predict if something's going
to replicate or not is? If it just smells like bullshit. Yeah. Yeah. It was basically, if you
ask a random subset of people, does this smell like bullshit? And the majority of them say,
yes, it probably won't replicate. It was a very high correlation.
Oh, wisdom accrued. Yeah. I think that for social science, that definitely sounds true,
right? Yeah. The average person, if they didn't teach evolution, you know, if you ask them,
are you, you know, are you related to bananas? They would say, what the fuck are you talking
about? Right, right. But with social science, we all have some intuition in social science.
We all have a lot of experience with other humans. I think it's part of the thing that
helps with that. Whereas there are very few people have experienced with evolution.
Right. That's not to say that like, you can't get a surprising finding that no,
actually, it turns out, you know, forget what you thought you knew. This is actually the way
people's brains work. But it's less common, I think, than people trying to generate sensationalist
articles. Right. I was wondering, too, with this one, I mean, so my eyes, I'm told, move with the
smallest candle to the next to the truck in this little experiment, right? There's pictures in the
article. I don't know how much it is that I'm modeling might. So I look at the smallest candle
first, that's the finding, right? And then I adjust, I'm like, oh, wait, no, the smallest candle the
director can see. But I don't know how much that is of like me anchoring or me just like,
he said smallest candle and just look for the smallest candle, right? Right. And then, you
know, so I would want other ways to test this. I think that's arguably just anchoring on your own
perception there. Like, it's kind of the same thing. Like you could say, I'm first jumping
to I, Steven, believe that this is the smallest or you could just like hear them say the word
smallest candle and then start scanning for it. Yeah. Yeah. But still, that's your brain.
Yeah, I think that the key thing here is how it interacts with anchoring from before, whereas
once you're anchored to something, you're going to be always systematically slightly biased towards
the thing you were anchored. So everyone's going to have a little bit of bias towards everyone
else thinking that they're more like them than the more like themselves than they really are.
Yeah, an edge of the nice quote that I like, we can put our feet, we can put our feet and other
minds shoes, but we keep our own socks on. This actually ties well into the next post,
expecting short inferential distances, which is almost like he laid them out in this order
on purpose. I know. This is one of the ones that I never forgot. Yeah, this is a fantastic one. Yeah.
And there is an audio version of this, I believe it was why we heard that paid me to
make an audio version of it. So delightful. Everyone can hear that. Yeah, if you want to hear
any ashes voice, who doesn't? Yeah, I mean, on a meta note, this is like one of my favorites.
And I think it comes up for me like basically daily. Really? I mean, at least a few times a week.
I mean, I'm assuming largely in the workplace? Largely in the workplace, but even outside of
that, any conversation with somebody who, you know, like my wife isn't super into all this
rationalist stuff. And so when I come home from doing these, she's like, oh, so what did you guys
talk about? And I have to think of where to start. And it's fun. It's great. And I think that if
people pay attention to their own attraction to the people when they're explaining stuff,
I think they'll find themselves noticing this more often, I'm guessing.
But actually, like, they're so autistic people that are super bad at this. And it's really
cute. I like was hanging out with Gary yesterday. And there are a bunch of times where Gray would
just start talking about rifles and like, bullet calibers and things like excitedly. Oh, yeah,
well, there's this thing. And I was just like, I have no idea what you're talking about, man.
Go back to explaining guns 101. And then we'll go from
So first, you get a metal tube, right? Yeah. Honestly, that's not a bad place to start. I
still don't know. I mean, I know that higher caliber means either bigger bullet or faster
bullet. I think those two things probably correlate. But I don't, I don't know. I mean,
like I said, I'm getting at is, it's the kind of thing that if you're, well, that's so the
point of the post is when you're entrenched with knowledge on something, and you're explaining
it to somebody else, it's not impossible. But you have to be very, very careful and work hard to
actually convey what you're talking about successfully. Because you're talking about it
on terms you understand, but they don't understand the terms.
Can we give the hunter gather background? Because I find it's super interesting.
He points out that, yes, that in the evolutionary environment, we lived in bands of at most 200
people with no writing. And so all knowledge was passed down by speech and memory. And so any
knowledge that wasn't explicitly private knowledge that you were not sharing for whatever reasons you
have was just public knowledge, period. There were no like domains of specialization or wherever.
And so at most anyone was ever one inferential step away from, from you. Like, if you had knowledge
of where an oasis was, you could just tell someone that you wouldn't have to explain the concept of
an oasis to them first, or the concept of standing water or something. Whereas now we have vast
differences between, between what people know that often take, I don't want to say many years
of research, because that seems like an exaggeration sometimes.
No, I think it's not. I mean, if you're, if you have a degree in, I don't know, if you're, if you
have a doctorate, and you're trying to explain, I don't know.
I agree, but I don't think I just forgot the word of autophagy, for example.
Bless you. Yeah, I don't think there's any doctorate in the world where you literally
need multiple years to get it. You need, I think, the, maybe not the like eight,
or 10 or a million years that we require in the US per se, but like, there's definitely
some things are really hard and take a lot of time to learn.
Yeah, I know, I agree. But I think that if someone actually really cared about conveying
knowledge well and quickly, they could teach one other person in less than 24 months,
anything that we know, as long as that the subject was, you know, intellectually capable
of grasping it. I don't think you need eight years to learn this shit. And it's convenient.
And we, we teach a lot of other things as well, which is why it can take so long. But
if you really wanted to teach someone one specific domain of knowledge, you could
cover everything quickly. Maybe a specific fact. I wonder, I mean, if I had Richard Feynman's
undivided time for two years, could he teach me everything he knew?
About physics? Yeah. I think so. I don't know. I think he could give me a good introduction.
I don't know if I can grasp some of the high level math, honestly.
Right. If you can't grasp a math, then that's an issue.
Well, but I presumably could with enough time. I'd need two more years for that, right?
I think that's where the multiple, like, I mean, I see the point you're making that some stuff
might not take literal, you know, 4,000 hours of dedicated time to, to learn, but it might take,
you know, a couple thousand. I mean, you can, you can put in 10 hours a day
in any reasonable person could six days a week. That's 60 hours a week that you can put into
learning something. Easy, Elon. Most of us are way lazier than that.
If you're motivated, you could totally do 60 hours a week.
There in lies the rug. I think this is the difference here between, like,
you're out getting drinks with your friends and you're like, oh, I just did this cool paper on
Myelination with my, you know, right? Yeah. Mentor at work. And then, like, if you're,
your audience probably doesn't want 24 months of knowledge about this, they're like, well,
okay, so what's like the basic version of this? And then it's actually kind of hard to figure out,
like, where to start and how much to simplify it and also sort of gauge how much they care.
Like that's, I get another fun, autistic thing is like, I love how you get with other rationalists
because I almost never run into somebody who's just like, oh, I don't care. Just give me the
short version. Like that's fun. I mean, it's certainly not something you can do in a few
hours or even a few weeks. So there can be great leaps of inferential distance that just make things
impossible to explain to any reasonable audience. Like I got way off on a tangent where like someone
really dedicated and interested in something and learn something. Whereas what we're talking about
right here is just general conveying information to other people that you know casually.
If I'm writing a book or a paper or giving a talk, and I only have an hour for the talk or
something, how much do I need to cover before I can get to my point? That's where this comes in,
right? It's, I don't, I don't have the audience's attention for 4000 hours. I only have them for
one. So how much, how many steps do I need to cover before I can get there? There's a good
actually example of this. And Sam Harris's latest episode, he had Neil deGrasse Tyson on,
and Tyson wrote a co-authored a new book called Cosmic Queries, which for long time listeners
of StarTalk Radio, his podcast, they'll recognize that that's a section of the show. And they just,
it's kind of like XKCD, what if questions. Cool. Harris remarked that this book felt amazing. It
was like, it was geared for somebody without a science background. Yeah, Tyson's really good at,
I mean, I guess that's why they picked him to be the new Carl Sagan, but like conveying complicated
topics to a lay audience in a way that's not just like going over your head, but also like not
intimidating or like some people, I don't know, like also just don't want to hear about stuff
because they don't want to feel like they're being talked down to. I think they actually address that
in the expecting short inferential distances. Yeah. Where at the end, I think like Eleazar was like,
you definitely better not tell people how many inferential steps you're going back in order to
explain a thing to them because then look, I'm mad. You know, both you think of stupid, I can't
understand this. They like, well, no, you don't understand it. Both Tyson and Sagan were famously
into the marijuana. Maybe they both think, how do I explain this to me after I've had a few joints?
Could be. I didn't know Tyson was famously into it.
Isn't he? I think he's talked about it a few times on talk shows.
I don't follow him too closely, but I wouldn't be surprised.
Okay. I mean, maybe I'm mixing him up with someone else, but I wouldn't think I am because it's
Tyson.
Marijuana makes me better at empathy. Like it makes me less stuck in my own head. So I think that
it's easier to both like listen to other people with your full attention and then also kind of
think about their perspective while you're trying to talk to them. Maybe that's just me,
or maybe that's a more common experience.
I think that's basically it. And that's basically what you get on MDMA.
I mean, that's an empathic, isn't it?
Yeah. I almost never use marijuana recreationally. I use it mostly to sleep. But what's fun is take
it like a couple hours before bed, and then you go take a shower. And I've got a shower speaker
to like listen to music because being left alone with my own thoughts, forget that even for 10
minute showers.
Oh, shit.
Oh, I use aqua notes. They're like, you know, the waterproof little notepads. And I have just
bunch of them stuck around of my shower to record shower thoughts.
I actually just come up with a lot of my best ideas in the shower, which is common.
But like,
I usually rush through showers now. I'm like, I ain't got time for this. And so I don't have a lot of
brain power to devote to thinking about things.
It's like, it's weird because it's not even brain power. It's sort of like, I think it engages the
diffuse mode. That's inferential distance thing. Let's see, the brain has the active mode and the
diffuse mode. When you're consciously thinking about a thing, you're, you get your best results
generally by like crunching on it for a bit and then like going to sleep or playing a video game
or taking a shower. And you redirect your conscious thoughts to something else while in the
background, diffuse mode keeps crunching on the problem. And then like, it's, it feels like magic
sometimes where like, maybe you'll be stuck on a math problem, you take a nap and you wake up and
you're just like, Oh, I know what that is. That's so obvious.
I love that. I at least twice in the last year have woken up with like a solution to a problem
that's working on at work. Oh, awesome. And once, one time was like a week late. And I was like,
Oh, that's why this didn't work. But it just feels like this flash of insight, right? And then it's
just, it's kind of creepy, but it's actually just the fact that you don't see your brain doing like
this mech, the mechanisms in the background, but I just appreciate that. Yeah, I just appreciate
that it's doing it. But I brought up the Tyson thing real quick because he remarked when Sam
said that he says, I'm glad you said that because that's interesting. My first book that I wrote,
I'm quoting Tyson, I wrote for adults. And, or maybe I forget what audience wrote it for. The
point is, is that adults felt like they weren't adult science books, if they could understand
the whole thing. Oh, they were like, no, they're, if this is an adult book, there should be some
stuff that goes over my head. And so since I can understand this, this must be for kids.
Wow, that's fucked up. Well, not necessarily a bad, I don't know if it was like to say,
this is a kid's book, forget this is not for me, but it must be geared towards a lower audience
because I understood it all. Which yes, that is fucked up in the sense that you shouldn't feel
that way about science stuff. But it was just a, I, you know, I knew we were doing this post as
listening to this podcast yesterday and I'm like, Hey, this ties in perfectly. They're not using
the word inferential distance, but they're talking about it. Yeah. Yeah. I like this
trilemma that he brings up about in the ancestral environment, if someone said something with no
obvious support, they're either a liar or an idiot. And conversely, if someone says something
to you and they don't have, or rather, if you say something to someone that to you is blatantly
obvious, but the other person see it, then they're the other, then they're the idiot, or they're
being obstinate just to annoy you. And then to top it all off, if someone says something with no
obvious support and expects you to believe it, then they must be crazy. Yeah, you're unlikely to
think this person has well supported background knowledge that no one in my band has even heard
of, right? Yeah. Yeah. I feel like this is maybe giving, I mean, like, I get,
this is a good intuition pump for maybe the way people have experienced this in their own lives,
but like, this is sort of not giving, I think, hunter-gatherers enough credit, for example,
things like creating arrowheads or building fires are actually kind of hard. And often, like,
there would be like the one or two, or I don't know how many people like that are the experts
at that thing. People had specialization and things early on, making like the best balanced
spears or spear throwers, things like which plants are edible, how to identify them.
Tanning leathers, making them to close. This shit's actually pretty hard. And then like,
it's not even getting into agriculture, which is insanely hard.
But like, he softens it for himself by talking pre-agriculture, but what your point stands.
Yeah, maybe he just put it that way, like, oh, yeah, there's stupid cavemen, you know, like,
well, those cavemen would not straight up call out his audience or whatever,
or his specific group of friends. Yeah, but those cavemen with simpler
lifestyles, right? It might be possible as a cave dweller, whatever, 30,000 years ago,
to, by the time you're an adult, or middle-aged or whatever, to know enough to get by, you know,
everything that everyone knows, you know, how to tan leather, you know, which fruits are safe,
you know, all that stuff. And even if you don't know everything,
you're no more than one step away. Like, the guy that can nap out arrowheads can be like,
you know how some rocks are sharp? And you know how sometimes when you hit two rocks together,
one of them will break? Well, if you do it just right, you can make it break so it's sharp in
the way you want it to be. Yeah, you could like, maybe not in one sitting, but like, you could
apprentice somebody in making arrowheads. And I think most people probably could pick it up.
So yeah, anyway. But yeah, he like, he points out a biologist talking to a physicist can justify
evolution by saying it's the simplest explanation. And anyone, you know, well-versed in science knows
that that is a word of power, and it means a lot. Whereas to a layperson saying, but it's the simplest
explanation may sound like an interesting factoid, but it's not a knockdown argument because they
don't know how powerful of a tool that is. Well, and I think even one step beyond that,
it's not if you have no back, you know, take it to somebody who doesn't know what genes are,
who doesn't know what cells are. And it's like, oh, yeah, no, this is the simplest explanation.
It's like, what the hell are you talking about? The simplest explanation is that someone made us.
Yeah, that is a very intuitive and simple sounding explanation.
That's true. Yeah. I've seen people make things before I can imagine a very big, powerful person
making a very complicated thing like a human. Yeah. Hey, just scoop up some clay.
Then you blow into its nostrils. You pull a rib out and you make a female version.
Because you ran out of clay, so I guess you needed to use a rib instead.
There was a quote that I liked here. A clear argument has to, or excuse me, a clear argument
has to lay out an inferential pathway starting from what the audience already knows or accepts.
If you don't recurse far enough, you're just talking to yourself. And that's why I liked
the greatest show on earth, Richard Dawkins Evolution tutorial book so much. I don't think it
goes to like chapter four or five where he starts actually talking about evolution.
He even says, this is getting us close to it, but we're not there yet. We're going to keep
daisy training on the way to understanding this. And I think there must be some discussion of cells
and genes, but then there's a whole chapter on domestication. This is something everyone knows
because everyone has seen dogs. And so like that, but we're not domesticating. We do the
domestication of dogs, but just imagine nature domesticating them for another purpose.
Actually, dogs domesticated themselves. Yeah. Little column A, little column B, probably.
Pugs domesticated themselves. Being pedantic. Yeah. No, no, but yeah, fair point.
Seen the comic strip of the dog that the early wolf dog ancestor?
I have not. It runs up to a human or doesn't run up to a human. It cautiously approaches a human.
I think this is probably an SMBC. And the human like has some leftover scraps. And the dog says,
okay, I can eat these scraps and I'll hang out with the humans. It'll be all right.
And the other wolves are like, don't do it. You don't know what will happen. This is a bad,
bad idea. And the dog is like, what's the worst that can happen? I'll eat some of
the scraps. I'll help them a little bit with stuff they need. If we can be a good symbiotic
relationship. Please tell me the last panel is a pug. Fast for 10,000 years. It's a pug in like
one of those bonnets and shit looking up balefully at its owner. What have you done to me?
Man, I was at a bar and I was at like a sports bar, but they had like, I appreciate this about
Denver. I don't know if this is just a thing that like bars are starting to do more of,
but they don't just have the footballs on. They had like, hockey, golf, some MMA, and then just
like a dog show. So of course, me and my friends were all watching the dog show and commenting on
the dogs. And I was, I just started laughing my ass off when there was like the pug that was the
best in breed, because it was like the saddest like ping pong ball head and like potato body
and like little curly tail and I was just like most deformed by the human breeders.
They've made it non-functional as an animal. It can't walk. Its spine gets messed up because of
the curly tail. It can't like its little ears get your infections. It can't close its eyes all the
way. So it's like, it can't breathe because its face is smashed in to make it look like a little
prison vase. Wait, they can't close their eyes all the way? Some dogs that have that they bred
them specifically for having the big eyes because that's cute. Get like blindness or eye injuries
and just like issues by yeah, not being able to close their eyes all the way.
I didn't realize that was a thing too. I'd heard of all the others, but man,
this little pug just did the best at being a little pug and doing his little puggy best.
Well, it was the best in breed and it was the most puggy pug that I'd ever seen. I was like,
we did that to a dog. We did that to a wolf. I know. There's some things that like once we're
done with the factory farms and the nightmare farms they are, maybe we should start working on
not intentionally making these genetic monstrosities.
There's good people that are, for example, with pugs, like there's the retro pug project where
people are trying to breed the pug back to a healthier form that still looks pug-like, but
like it has a nose. I can dig it. Yeah, I like seeing, I don't know, I mean, some, some of your
bred dogs are fun, but like, you know, this is a common thing. The more purebred you get,
the more problems, genetic problems they tend to have, right?
It depends also on what you're breeding it for. That was kind of like,
actually like me and my bunch of nerds were talking about this, but like they have the
different categories of like sporting breeds, herding breeds, and the ones with jobs are usually
pretty functional. The ones that win the like, you know, best in the herding category have to be
functional because like the whole point is you're counting on them to guard your sheep or whatever,
and, but then you got into the toy category, and it's just like, I guess their function is to be
delightful to humans. Dogs with jobs are usually psychologically healthy or two, because you know,
they have something to do. I find it really funny that like, for example, even though they like,
look like little breads with a tail, or no, they don't even have a tail, like they're just,
they do have a tail. The tail is cut off, usually when they're puppies.
Oh, do they, they don't have tails?
It depends on the corgis. Some are bred, some don't have tails.
I've, yeah, I heard that can happen, but it's extremely rare. Almost all the corgis that you
see have had their tails cut. I don't know what percentage almost all means, because I know that
less than 10% I will double check that. Okay. Because I know that congenital non-tailed ones are,
I didn't think a one in 10 occurrence, but I also know this because I like corgis.
Corgis are an example of like a pretty dog that I think is fun when they're pure bred.
But they also look fun crosses, literally anything, because you just get that dog.
Oh my God, I love it. Yeah. If any dog mixed with a corgi just looks like a dirtier version
of that dog. Yeah. Like, especially like, I don't know, if you want to, I don't know,
if you're having a bad day, listeners, just look up like corgi mixed with like a chow,
or corgi mixed with like a mastiff, and it's just like.
Mixed with corgi.
Yeah. Doperman corgi is just like, it has the like, you know, very stern German looking,
like sort of military, but then like it's just got a little bit of a dopey smile going on.
It's a little floppy. But anyway, corgis are breeding, are breeding, they're herding dogs,
and they're really intelligent. And so if you just have one as a pet and you don't give it
things to do, it'll just try to herd things like children or you, or the other pets in your house.
Speaking of, if you need to pick me up, you guys said dogs with jobs. It's also a great subreddit.
Dogs with jobs. Cool. It's also cats with jobs. Oh, yeah.
Cats with jobs is mainly just like a cat sitting on a keyboard, and it's like,
look, our new IT manager, which is really cute. The cat's natural job is to eat rodents and other
pests. That is the occasional post on there. You'll be like, you know, there's, you know,
it's works for a museum, and it's actually got a little badge that says like headmouser of the
museum, which is really, really cute. Yeah. I'm glad that like the cat, I don't know,
I've definitely met some cats that are just terrible at their job. Like, I was hanging out
with a friend's cat one day and just like an insect fell from the ceiling and then just fell on
its back on the couch between us and was waving its legs around like stuck and the cat just looked
at it and then looked at me and I was like, well, you're not doing the cat thing. Are you gonna,
no, it just like rated itself and then slowly walked away and the cat sort of yawned and looked
away. I was just like, hmm, you would not have been kept around in the early agricultural days,
but my cat is great because she catches flies. Oh, that's awesome. And she will leap in the air
and bat them like out of the sky, which is insane because flies are very fast. Yeah. And I wouldn't
normally suspect her being capable of these things because she also does some really derpy
things. But like, she can snap into predator mode when necessary. Anyway, though,
are we done with, I guess, inferential distances?
Except for two corgi facts. One, a lot of corgis do have tails and they're big and bushy and adorable.
Okay. And I found a two thirds number. Two thirds?
I will know that are born without tails. Born without. When I was looking, I just saw that it's
rare for them to be without, but they didn't have any numbers. Two thirds born without though.
Pembroke corgis were also bred with a gene that affects about two thirds of all Pembrokes. Those
are the queen ones, the tan and white ones. Oh, maybe the thing I was looking at was looking at
all corgis rather than just Pembroke corgis. The cardigan ones are like the black and gray and white
ones. Those tend to usually have tails. Okay, okay. I'm kind of a corgi expert. I'm a corgi
enthusiast. But yeah, anyway, I don't endorse that tail business, fuck all that. If anyone's
going to go lopping things off of anything. I think it makes sense for, I mean, like,
Dobermans that are working dogs, they crop the ears and tails because they're like police dogs
and they don't want them to get injured. But like, then people also just do it for looks.
How would not have a tail make you more dangerous? It's so, I guess, like another dog or a person
who can't grab it. For all of a second until the Doberman rips his hands off. If anything,
I think they make the Doberman more dangerous, which is kind of what you want, a guard animal.
Well, you don't want it to get injured. No. You want it to injure the other guy.
I'm going to breed it Doberman. That's just all teeth and claws someday.
And what is the other corgi fact?
Might have been about cardigans and hembroke. Okay. But the other thing was that, according to
poodlemixclub.com slash corgi poo, most are born with no tails. Oh, okay. Well, never mind then.
I need to see a picture of a corgi poo. I was, I was just happy to, to share that because I,
I would thank you for correcting the record. I wouldn't just be, I wouldn't be so enthusiastic
about them if I knew that most of them are mutilated at birth. So. Oh my God, corgi poos
are like what you'd expect. It's a corgi, but it's just like real curly.
Google this now too. Extra boof.
I do want to end this just by focusing on Eleazar's last sentence where he says,
and if you think you can explain the concept of systematically underestimated inferential differences
briefly in just a few words, I've got some sad news for you. And in part, that's, you know,
a joke about how long this post is, but also it's not just this post, like almost at least
several dozen of the last few posts have been leading up to this, if not most of the sequences
up until now, like. I mean, sequences are sort of a effort to go, go several inferences back
to get these like complicated. It's in large part an attempt to get the lay person to understand
just from their regular background knowledge to why general AI is a big deal and could be a human
existential threat and we should work on it. Yeah. And, you know, he's gotten this far so far.
And we've been going at this for a number of years. Admittedly, we've only done two per
one per week on average, and he posted, you know, like two, three per week.
I think it was every day for two years. Every day. Okay. Yeah. So, you know, he, he,
it wouldn't have taken him nearly as long as it's taking us. But yeah, it was a lot of time
just to get to this point to lead up to here. Yeah, I wanted to pull that out as well, because
I was curious if either of you have ever successfully conveyed the idea of inferential
distance to somebody outside the rationalist sphere, double reason of transparency, not withstanding.
Huh. Not successfully. I have had unsuccessful attempts. And I do tend to run into the whole
like person just sort of being like, Oh, you just think you're smarter than me because you've got
your fancy degree or you're on the internet all the time or whatever you're like. Yeah, the whole
being condescending is a big failure mode. I keep thinking of my dad. Kind of, I don't know.
I feel like I bust off my dad on the show a lot. If he doesn't listen to it at some point,
he's not a dumb person. It's just like a stubborn person, but like, you know, anti like
global warming. I'm also anti global warming. We shouldn't do that. I mean, like, I know, I know.
I've tried to explain to him one time that like the current temperature men like women with large
breasts because of obvious evolutionary things. And he just laughed and was like,
I was like, nobody's looking at breasts and thinking, Oh, like that person would be good
at feeding babies. And I was like, no, they're not thinking it. You don't need to be thinking.
And then like also money where like my dad is against the stock market and he found out that
I was investing. He's like, Oh man, like you can't be doing that fake money shit. And I was like,
all money. Do you understand that? Yeah, like all money, like this is a piece of cotton that's
reinforced with like, I don't know what money's made of anymore. You could just like, yeah, it's
a piece of paper with like a president's face on it that we've all sort of just like mass hallucinated
ourselves into believing has value. I mean, most money nowadays is just a number in some
bank's computer. Yeah, it's like, you cannot eat this though. Because like that was my dad's thing
is that there's real money and fake money and money that is in the stock market is fake money
because value can change. And I was just like, but I actually want like inflation dad.
If we're gonna say real money and fake money, real money is stuff. And it's stuff that people
need. But that's not money. That's just, that's, that's wealth. But yeah, I suppose so. But I'm
just thinking like, if that's about as real as money can get, right? Like look,
you need these things that people need to survive, right? Now I can partner with you.
Money specifically is like super fungible. It's the whole point of money is that it's,
it's abstract. It's not an actual thing. Totally. Well, and like the other just main virtue of money
is that I can transfer like, what do you need to live, you know, food, water, electricity? Well,
you have all that stuff, but I need skill of yours. Well, how about I give you, instead of
shit, you don't need like stuff, maybe stuff that you can go get stuff that you want with it,
right? And we call that stuff money. Yeah. How about I give you 10 electricity,
which you can later barter for food. Actually, I think that it's hilarious is my dad is a carpenter
and he does actually barter system stuff a lot. One time he like remodeled like a dude's kitchen
in exchange for getting dental work. Oh, that's cool. So like, maybe he's actually just sort of
coming from a even further place of inferential distance. And then neither of them is tax on that
too. Even though technically they're supposed to declare it to the government and be like,
here's your money for the thing you did. But yeah, no one does that. There was one last thing on this
post. I don't usually read the comments, but I had time this weekend. And the top comment was
really good by user constant to the explanation from ancestral environment seems likely. However,
there's also a rational argument for refusing to accept a claim unless all steps have been laid out
from your own knowledge to the claim. While there are genuine truth seekers who have genuinely
who have genuinely found truth and who were therefore who we therefore ideally sorry,
while there are people who are genuine truth seekers who have genuinely found truth and
who we therefore should ideally believe. Nevertheless, a blanket policy of simply
taking steps at taking people at their word. Thank you. Go ahead and someone else finish
that has the side effect of also rendering us vulnerable to humbug. Great word. Because we're
not equipped to tell apart humbug from the true statements, many steps removed from our knowledge,
which yeah, it was kind of what I was saying about how like, I feel like we're kind of like
being mean to each other's because they're actually, you know, yeah, they had the yeah,
they knew complex stuff that would take a long time for me to learn and they yeah,
they weren't just sitting there sitting in their hands and, you know, painting on walls, right?
Like they were doing stuff. They weren't just doing that. Yeah. In addition to doing that,
they were doing other things. But I brought I pulled this one out because, you know, say you're
looking for a treatment for something and someone's like, Oh, you know what you really need is my
really expensive crystal therapy or something. You're like, No, I'm pretty sure that's bullshit.
They could try to if they were somehow also first and rationalist lingo, they'd be like,
look, I just we haven't crossed all the inferential steps that you need to understand this, which
is, you know, if that could be true for real stuff too, right? Yes. So it's, it's interesting that
I think the I think constant two makes a valid point that like rejecting stuff you don't understand.
Yeah. Like if you didn't have any knowledge of, I don't know, you have like gallstones and you're
somebody that has just never looked this up, you're fucking busy. And like, you get three people
saying, Okay, well, you could take this medicine, or you could do like this therapy or this diet,
or you could use these crystals, you'd want the people to each explain, Okay, well, why should
I do this instead of this other thing? Right. And I think that I wish that there was like, more
respect for that, you know, Neil deGrasse Tyson's of the world, the type of person who
is actually really good at laying something out and sort of being able to gauge where you are
inferentially, what things they need to explain to you, and then catching sort of whether you're
confused or not and filling those gaps in. I've definitely seen this, again, I'm like the medical
professions on my mind, but there's some doctors that will just talk completely over their patient's
heads, or we'll just do argument for authority, like, Oh, no, this is what all the papers say is
the best treatment or whatever, versus like, I have a great psychiatrist who's a nerd like me. So
the last call I did with my psych just to like, discuss how my meds were working, we ended up
not even talking about that, we're just like, talking about different like neurotransmitters
and new papers that are out novel therapies and how excited we were about that. But like,
my, my psych is the type of person who if I had questions, I would like,
trust that she either is going to tell me like what she knows for the best of her knowledge,
or she'll be like, huh, you know what, I actually don't know, I'm going to look that up and I'll
send you some articles and then my, my sort of professional evaluation of it, which is great.
Yeah, I was going to mention the opposite of this, which was many people in school had a teacher
had been teaching the same subject for 30 years. And they just, they're just reading the textbook
to you, or, or they're like, I get, you know, half my class usually gets Cs because or Ds,
you know, because this stuff is hard. And it's like, no, you just suck at teaching it. And you
don't remember what it's like to not know this stuff. It's easy for you to think, Oh, no, this
is actually easy. You also don't understand it because you've been understanding it for, you
know, decades. And they don't remember what it was like to come from that position of ignorance.
Yeah. So before we end this, can I take it real quick to culture war land to get a little spicy,
but only just for a second? Okay. So that's where we're going. So okay, I see, I'd like to
occasionally maybe once every couple months or so watch videos from partisans on either side that
are that are popular with the peoples, I guess, either side of what the culture war, both people
on far left and far right. Oh, so just like far, but strong or politics things. Yeah, politics
things. I'm specifically I'm thinking on the right side, the Hodgman twins. They have a cool
YouTube thing. And they're very charismatic. They're fun to watch. And there's two of them.
And one of them is like more extreme than the other. So you can like see this interplay,
it's really interesting. But anyways, I see this on both sides where someone will say,
I don't even understand how the people on the right thing, they ought, they just must be greedy
bastards who believe I got mine. The rest of you can all fuck off and die. They're literally evil.
There's no point negotiating with them. And I see the same thing with one of the Hodgman twins.
He sometimes says things like lefty, you must be brain damaged, either that or you're just
evil. And like, like he honestly doesn't understand how someone on the left could think and come to
the conclusions that they've come to that brings them so, so far from where he is. And his brother
like tries to random and he's like, no, no, they're not evil. There's like ways you can come to
this conclusion. He's like, no, no, there's no way it's not possible. And obviously it is. But
like people on both sides do it all the time. And I think it's just because there's such a huge
inferential distance of if you started out in a certain culture, and your culture keeps going
in a certain way over many decades and seeing the same kind of evidence. It really leads up to a
vast difference in the end that you have to go way, way back to bridge that gap.
This will tie really well into basically point three that comes up in our main segment here. But
yeah, in general, if you're explaining away something that or somebody or some group of people
that disagree with you as saying, they're just evil or whatever, stupid or evil, you don't
understand where they're coming from. And it's not that you can't because you're not a bad person,
and only bad people can understand where they're coming from, it's that they don't think they're
bad people. And it's not because they're woefully misguided, they might be, but they're not so
misguided that you can't at least understand where they're coming from.
Oh yeah, that's also a thing that I've run into where people, and I've experienced this myself
like much earlier on, I think before this became an explicit value of mine where people don't even
want to try to understand where they're coming from because they're worried that they'll get tainted.
That is related also to the main segment. All right, well then let's finish this up.
For next time. All right, next time we're doing three because one of them is crazy short and
basically covered in this one. Explainers shoot high aim low, double illusion of transparency,
and no one knows what science doesn't know. Excellent. Alrighty, let's before we get into
our main topic have a quick feedback from last episode. We haven't had one of these in a long
time, and this one is special because the person giving the feedback is local to Colorado,
and so local that she lives with me.
Yes, so we can actually have her on for the feedback segment. Hey, Ms. Charlie, would you
like to say hello? Hello, hi, y'all. You had some feedback for us. Yeah, so the last episode,
I enjoyed it a lot, but it was also frustrating. That's what I like to hear.
Because I think a lot of points were lost because of no set vocabulary. And you guys got
off track a lot because you didn't have a set vocabulary as you kept talking about children
when we were the discussion was supposed to be about young adults. And you kept mentioning
using the word children when you're talking about young adults and teens,
using the word teens when you're talking about children and young adults, and just switching
terms, and then you kept getting pulled into talking about children. And that's an entirely
different discussion because we're not talking about pre-adolescence and possibly tweens,
but definitely not pre-adolescence. So that would have been helpful. And if you guys...
Stephen, stop calling 24-year-olds children. Well, to be fair, I think this just demonstrates
the fuzziness of the concepts, right? And that's part of what the article was getting at.
It's kind of where we're struggling with you, I think. Yeah. Well, we struggled with that,
I think, because the concepts are fuzzy. Well, I think children should absolutely not be used
for anyone who's gotten through puberty. I understand that the concepts as a standard
fuzzy, but there's no reason you guys can't make it better. We totally could have laid it out better,
but yeah. Children is pre-teen, and anybody who's hit 13 or older is now 18 rather than a child,
because it's in part of the name of their age. Teens are teens. And you could use young adults
for people that are in an age range of teen, but not voting yet. So according to our current
laws, officially an adult at 18 magically. And interestingly, the young adult book classification
is for people generally around 13, 14 and up. Like the Hunger Games series is probably the
most well-known young adult series. I'm not sure if that's still true. But yeah, that same for
people around the 13, 14 age range. It's like Hunger Games, Twilight, Harry Potter books, which...
The later Harry Potter books. I don't think the earlier ones were quite YA. They were probably
more like... Yeah, they were early reader. Yeah. But yeah. Charlie, are you familiar with tabooing
terms? I feel like, because I feel like that's something we could probably do more. Yeah.
It helps me get on track. When you say, can we taboo the word children, it forces people to
say what they really mean. Because we might have different mental handles that attach to the word
child, like you and I might, right? So if we're like, all right, look, we're talking past each other,
would we keep using the word child? Let's say anyone under 12. Or creep you best. Sure. And then
that way, like, because I might, I might mean child, it being anybody who's... His childish behavior.
Or yeah, or anyone who I wouldn't trust to operate a motor vehicle or something. You know,
I could have some Donald Trump as a tariff definition. Sure. I don't know what Donald Trump is.
Fair point. But yeah, so tabooing is saying, all right, let's have this conversation again,
or at least continue this conversation without using the word that keeps confusing us, right?
Yeah, that's all I'm saying. Yeah, no, that's a, that would have been valuable. Like I said,
I think, I think there's some self-awareness of that during the episode. But yeah, it might have been,
I don't listen to our podcasts. It may have come off way more annoying than it was to talk about.
So I appreciate that. Yeah, I think I hope I can be helpful in the future. Totally. Because there's
nothing you guys can't do when you take a coffee break, kind of recalibrate.
There's nothing we can't do when we've got the power of coffee. That's the subtext.
Charlie, you would be a really good moderator. Like everybody shut up. Okay, what are we talking
about? Wait, go back. We have had some requests to have more Charlie on the show already.
Ah, shucks and thanks. And I wanted to clarify a couple things about
young adults and sex. Because, you know, it was pointed out that, oh, I'm an exception,
because I'm incredibly, I was incredibly mature for my age. And also, like, I turned out okay,
despite the stuff that I went through. And I just felt like, when I was listening to that,
I got a little uncomfortable. Because if someone didn't hear that episode, they might not understand
the context of the discussion properly. So I just wanted to make it clear, like, there's no point
in our last discussion that I denied that sexual events can be traumatic, regardless of age.
And that's an important distinction. I think I also said that, but like,
I also just want to keep reiterating that so people don't get the wrong idea that, like,
yes, PTSD can happen. And it can be really, like, debilitating not everyone that has stuff happen
to them. I guess, you know, does come out of it, okay? Or even like the sort of, well, you're an
exception because you came out fine. Like, it's like, maybe like I'm functional now as an adult,
but like, it doesn't mean I came out fine. Like, I still have traumatic flashbacks to stuff that
I can function. But like, I've gone through therapy and shit too, and not everybody has the
same access to resources or whatever the same supportive friendships that I've had. So like,
yeah, I hope that I guess both of us weren't like downplaying the seriousness of the topic.
Thank you, Jace. Yeah, I just want to, you know, the fact that I am a functioning adult now,
I just want to let people know that that is harder than it looks. And it's a recent development in
my mental health. I don't, I'm much higher functioning than I was just a year ago versus
two years ago. And if you were to meet me a decade ago, well, I don't think we'd be having this
productive discussion. And it's, I'm not smarter. I'm mentally healthier. So there's definitely
damage. The damage of mental health issues is real, and it's ongoing, and it's so contextual and
unique to each individual. So I want to acknowledge that. And I also want that to give power to my
argument that young adults should be recognized as young adults and treated as such. I don't think
that putting people in global rap because they might be traumatized or make a mistake that they
regret is worth the damage that it does, preventing them from being capable. You do have to,
you have to experience mistakes to learn from them, and you have to experience responsibility
in ever changing amounts to grow. Preferably like in a supportive environment to like,
not just like, yeah, let kids go make mistakes, but like, let's not put any support structure in
place to like help them out when they get traumatized. But just complete infantilization,
retards your growth. It doesn't make you safer. It makes you a worse human. That's actually the
entire subject of today's episode, which is why this is a good, this is why I chose this one for
a good continuation of the last two. Cool. Now, I mean, you make a good point. I, you know, I
read back through this week of our skim through Inyasha's notes on that book. And like, I'm still
mainly convinced that 90% of that problem can be solved with just not having shitty parents
and schools, schools as own subject. No, I mean it. No, no, I understand that you're saying that,
but like 90% of the problem of falling off the cliff and dying is gravity. Like,
not having shitty parents is an extremely hard problem to solve. Right. You can't just say,
stop having shitty parents, kid. No, no, I agree that this is like an avenue for people with
shitty parents to find a way to get out of that situation a little easier than they have it now.
It's still one of those things where like, you know, if you're 14 and want to emancipate and
you can't drive, well, someone still needs to get you the nine miles from here to the testing
center where you take that test, right? And you still need some amount of, or what am I trying
to say? Like, I think if a 14 year old is emancipated in there, like, it's like, okay, kid,
we'll give you your own apartment and here's like your bus pass. Like that's still, I think,
not great because you need, you need role models, like mentor figures. It doesn't have to be a parent.
In fact, it's probably worse if it's a shitty parent, but like. And I think much of the point
is that the current system encourages parents to be what we call shitty parents, because that is
viewed as the correct and proper way to raise children. You do send them to school like this.
You do have control over their lives. You put on curfews. You don't allow them privileges. If
they do things you consider irresponsible, like that is what being a good parent is. And that's
bad. I've seen some real extreme versions. Like you've probably seen these YouTube videos of a
parent like smashing a child's PlayStation in front of them because the kid didn't listen to
the parent. And then like, you're supposed to cheer for that parent, like, oh, that dad's a hero.
And it's just like, that is just straight up abuse. I feel like you guys are making things up.
Sorry. I don't usually disagree with that vehemently. But I do not think that the role,
and maybe, maybe different ideals of parenting have different standards. But I've never seen
those YouTube videos, but I've heard about them. I feel like those are shown to showcase horrible
people. In an office, I used to work at somebody, like a bunch of my coworkers had kids and somebody
like posted that I think on our like off topic Slack is like, look at this. This is hilarious.
And then the like sort of the general idea was people laughing like, oh yeah, like look at that
dumb kid. Yeah, I mean, maybe you work with stupid people. Maybe I've just got high standards of
people or something. But like, at the very least, that's a really stupid thing to do as a parent
because PlayStation costs money. And you can make the same point by unplugging it and taking it away.
But you shouldn't take it away either. No, but but but if if your if your goal is to prevent
the child from doing it, which again, shouldn't be whatever. But like that's like, that is just
stupid hitting it with a hammer. That was public humiliation. Right. But also that's that's the
point. If your child doesn't go to school, you have to discipline them, you take away their
property. If your child wants to go downtown, and like, I don't know, hang out with friends or
learn something in their off time instead of going to school, then you're supposed to do these things,
take away their freedoms, make them more like an infant, or at least according to some like schools
have thought about parenting. I mean, not only are you supposed to, but like you can get fined or
go to jail if you don't. Well, that's new. Yeah, I think that's not that new, like that there's
definitely been like, that's like, I think 15 years ago was so that's new to me. Because
control your kids, like, no, no, like the idea that there's might have been in 2003 or five,
this is in Jonathan Heights essay. Parents are, you know, the first case of a parent being arrested
for their child going to a park unattended. Oh, no, no, no, I'm not even talking about well,
I mean, yes, that's just stupid. And I'm glad they're starting to put laws to make that kind of law
illegal or that kind of thing illegal. But like even when I was 14, which was C laws. Yeah, well,
truancy laws have been along for a long time. Yeah, that you have to be in school or the parent
gets a fine or jail time. But even when I was 14, I knew that their children take it away. Yeah, if
I were to cause some sort of property damage to someone else, if I were to smash their car up or
something, it'd be my parents that would have to pay for that. You don't have money. Well, right.
But that it means that I am not an adult, I am a child, they are still liable for what I do.
And so now they have to act like jailers to keep me in line.
And I don't want to have the last episode again, but I'm kind of curious, what would you have
instead? You're 12, you think it'd be a lot of fun to go down the street on your bike
with a sharp stick on the end of a or the yeah, with a sharp rock in the end of a stick and just
key every car on the road. And so what maybe let's say you're 13, so you're past that magic
number that instead of 18 is now 13. So now you're a young adult. What should the state do? Make
you get a job and pay for it? But how many or do community service like make you pay for it? Or
even put you in jail for vandalism, if that is a lie, if that is a thing that adults could go to
jail for. So we're talking about keeping kids still within a realm of protection against young
adults. Sorry. Again, concepts are fuzzy. But let's throw this 13 year old who's a fucking idiot
because they're 13 in jail and have them really enjoy the benefits of prison against the penal
system. That's not rehabilitative. And it serves no one to throw anyone in jail, except in extreme
cases. I basically agree that we should get rid of the jail, but treat them like any other adult
that has committed a crime. And hopefully that crime does not. Yeah, hopefully the punishment
does not include jail because the system is fucked up if it does, but treat them like an adult.
I think I disagree with treating them exactly the same as a 30 year old. But there could be tears
of responsibility that you unlock that are more nuanced than the ones that we have now,
these like sharp categories, or these fuzzy categories, honestly. Maybe you would go to,
you'd have to go to like after school rehabilitation things, do community service and like.
Just basically jail white. I mean, if they're too, if they're literally mentally incompetent
to realize what they were doing would get them in trouble and is a bad thing to do,
then you treat them like a child. That's literally what a child is, someone who is
mentally incompetent to understand that. But if they have the mental competency to understand it,
you treat them like a person who has the mental competency to know that this is a bad thing and
they shouldn't do it. I don't think the competency is binary. I think it's gradual.
Right. But I think it's also not just competency. Like if a 14 year old is vandalizing a bunch of
property, like there's probably some other shit going on that's causing them to behave that way
because I worked at a library with a bunch of teens. And I think if you asked most of them,
like, is that a cooler, funny thing to do? Like most of them actually are like, well,
no, I wouldn't do that. I wouldn't want someone to do that to my property. And it's just like,
obviously, bad and dumb and you'll get in trouble. And then there's like other kids who
if they're acting out, maybe they would act out and I could, I could generally always tell why it
was usually because their parents or shit. Or because, you know, like, there was a elementary
school across the street from the library and a lot of parents both worked and they would tell
their kids, okay, go to school after school, you walk to the library and then you wait there until
we pick you up at eight or nine PM, sometimes without giving them food. And it's like, if you've
been locked in school for eight hours already, like you got up at six AM, which is ridiculous for an
adolescent dish brain. That treating like an adult, like adults aren't forced to go to someplace
unless they're in jail. You have to go to work. But you have to go to work. You decide if you
want a job. Sure. You decide you decided you wanted to eat and stay one. Yeah, you literally don't
have to go to work. Whereas you have to go to work for a living. They're culpable for their
children. If anything happens, they're roaming around. It's very different. Like it was like,
there would be some instances of parents that were just negligent. And then there were some
instances of parents that were working their asses off at multiple jobs and just couldn't afford,
like, yeah, they weren't doing the best they could. But like, actually, you could see the
difference in those kids too, the kids whose parents were doing the best they could, like the
kids were smart enough to kind of recognize that they tended not to be the ones that acted out.
It was the ones whose parents would like, I don't know, just be those weird jerky sort of parents
that sort of commanded their kids around like it was a dog they owned, who would end up throwing
a football around in the library and breaking stuff. Rebellion and attention seeking behavior.
Just like lashing out against a system that like, honestly is being pretty bad to them. And I think
that kid shouldn't necessarily be punished like criminal. Like, probably they could use some
counseling, maybe somebody could actually look at their parent situation and be like,
I don't know what they could do. But
Well, and in a world where the system isn't designed to make the parents be the jailers
of their kids, this wouldn't be a problem much less often. The kids wouldn't be treated like
dogs because they would have other options. Yeah, well, one of the issues actually like
kids that, you know, for example, the kids that were throwing a football around, it's because
they were locked. They're locked up indoors all day and they have tons of energy. But like,
they sometimes would try to go play in the parking lot. And we as like the library staff would have
to tell them you're not allowed to do that because a car could hit you and then we'd be liable.
Because we have to infantilize you because that I'm kidding. I'm pretending to use the language
of the infuriated treating kids like kids. Yeah, no, it was like actually like really,
it was a hard decision to make it was hard to discipline some of these kids because I felt
like very sympathetic. I was like, I wish I could tell you like, Hey, why don't you go down to the
park? It's only like a short bike ride away. But like, the parents were entrusting the library
to be free daycare for these kids. And then like, yeah, maybe we could be liable if we told them
hey, go to the park and then they got kidnapped or whatever. Not that that would be likely to
happen. But I also felt gaslit by part of the conversation because you guys like kids can't
have jobs, kids can't have money. And I'm like, young adults, right? Okay, young adults. Sorry.
But like, I distinctly remember having a job at before I was old enough to drive.
Yeah, I had 14, it was under the table though. And I think my dad hooked me up with that.
Like, I think that not every kid has the option to do that.
I just I had a job at 14, only because the manager was a dope and wasn't paying attention
to local laws. I worked there for eight months. And then two months before my 15th birthday was
fired. So they could rehire me when it was legal to hire. I just I remember having a job when I
was in junior high, what did you do call center? Okay. Yeah, I mean, it was so like it was a job
with, you know, a paycheck, it wasn't cash. And so this talk of like kids, young adults aren't
allowed to have jobs. I, I guess I just need to Google what were the laws in Colorado 15,
20 years ago, because I remember being able to do this. There's a lot of logistics involved,
like, there were jobs I couldn't get just because I didn't have a car, my parents didn't
like want to drive me to some of the jobs that I got. There was a job I had to quit because my dad
like drove me to it a few times. And then was just like, Yeah, this isn't convenient for me.
You'll have to find something else. Could you have gone to your call center job or
any other job that you were qualified for instead of going to school?
No. Oh, well, I think that's a problem. Well, you can't really hold down a full-time job if you
have to be in school for seven hours. I didn't want to. I feel like dropping out of junior high
school probably would ruin my future. I mean, yeah, probably would have been a bad idea.
I have great prospects in the call center industry. But that's what I wanted to do.
Yeah, it would have been a bad idea for you, especially in this economy.
I feel like compulsory education isn't like the necessary evil that people
paint it out to be. Yes, school often sucks, but it doesn't have to suck.
School traumatized me. I think I would have done a lot better if I'd gotten out of it earlier and
just totally skip the whole college thing. All the jobs I ended up getting after I was self-taught
in anyway. I think a lot of people after going working at the call center for a couple of years
would want to go back to school. I mean, I don't want to use you as an example, but like,
you had a whole bunch of shit jobs that you hated, like the bank teller and the PI stuff and
everything. And eventually you were like, fuck this shit. And you went and got trained as a
software engineer. And now you have a fucking amazing job. Yeah.
But that was a choice that wasn't compulsory. What if kids had that choice?
To work shit jobs around and be like, fuck this, I want to get a better job and go get
trained in something. I found school to be so incredibly damaging to myself that by my senior
year, I was skipping three, four days a week, showing up to take tests only. And that was because
I had logically proposed to my parents like, hey, emancipate me. I'm going to get my GED
and travel for a while because school is dumb and pointless and torture. And they said, no,
we'll call the police. You're not allowed to do any of that. And I was like, God, two more years,
two more years. I'm going to either like end up setting the place on fire or stabbing somebody
in self-defense. That's someone stealing two years of your life at the prime of your life.
That's not like two years at the shit tail end when you're sickly and can't do much.
That happened to me when I was 16 specifically. I remember that I just
mentally checked out because school itself wasn't that bad. It was just the social
stuff that was... I had really bad social anxiety and being forced to be around people that basically
wanted to bully or marginalize me and being forced into social situations that gave me panic attacks.
I remember that I was just like, I'm going to try to just maintain a C average and get through it,
but I was checked out. I was dissociated. There's big chunks of my memory of parts of high school
and almost all of college that I'm just missing. It's creepy. I forgot most of my childhood,
but I feel like it was pretty good. I don't know what to make of that.
Yeah. I think there's a difference in... Well, maybe there's not. I don't know.
This was straight up depressive dissociation. I'm not sure if that describes what your childhood
thing is. No. My childhood was basically fine. That describes my first couple years or my last
couple years of college. I see what you guys are saying. I think I had one more thing to say about
was it jobs or was it... I don't know. When I did not drop out of school, even when I had a roommate
and rent and had to work to pay rent, thankfully, I had a vehicle and it was a small place. Gas
prices weren't that high and I was able to commute and get things done. What age was this? 15.
Did you legally have a vehicle? Yeah. Was it like a scooter or something? I grew up in a rural area
so you could get your driver's license at 14 and I'd been driving since I was a kid.
I remember what I was going to say about the property thing about... That's the thing too.
I mowed lawns and shit when I was a kid and I bought video games and whatever.
Could your parents take them away if you did something bad?
Not really, no. I didn't really do that much bad stuff and they're pretty chill.
Because they're physically bigger than me, sure. But I guess I'm drawing
contention with that because let's say they bought my PlayStation as they probably did in
this YouTube video. If you've got a shitty roommate and they're not paying rent, they're
leaving heroin needles all over the carpet and you keep stepping on them and it's really annoying,
you don't think you might say, all right, you know what? Fuck it. I'm taking my TV in my bedroom.
It's no longer in the living room. You're on fucking TV. Yeah, sure. But it's your TV?
Well, it's kind of your TV if you're the parent and you bought it for them, right?
Destroying it in front of them? I'm not defending that. And then putting it on YouTube.
I vehemently said that's obviously insane and stupid on every dimension,
including destroying your own property. So I got two things to say about that. I bought most of my
own video game stuff. The big difference is the computer. My parents bought the computer for me
because they thought I was important for school, which it was. But most of the things that I used
for entertainment, I had bought myself and my parents still could and did take them away as
punishments. And even more to the point, it's hard to have the ability to own any property when,
first of all, you have very little ability to make money. And second, even if you do have your own
property, it's not legally yours. Your parents are allowed to take away things that you have bought
even with your own money because they're your parents. Yeah, I couldn't take away your roommate
stuff to be clean up the heroin needles or I'm taking away your PlayStation until you do.
I think the other thing is that your roommate, you don't have any application to them.
If you give birth to a child, I think that there should be a different standard in your
relationship there. I totally agree. No, no, I brought up the roommate example because if there's
shared property and it's yours and you paid for it, in this example, if your parent got you a TV
or something and you're behaving in a way that is bringing down their quality of life for whatever
reason and they're like, look, I'm taking away the TV until you get your shit together. I feel
like that's exactly how you treat an adult under the same circumstances. If you move the goalposts
and say, well, no, it's not their TV or they couldn't buy it because they aren't allowed to work
or something, leaving all that aside, this is how I treat an adult. If my roommate and I shared a
car and they wouldn't stop drinking and driving, I'm like, all right, you're not using my car
anymore. But then I'm taking away their stuff and I'm doing exactly what I'd be doing to a kid,
but I'm treating them like an adult. I disagree that you're taking away their stuff. That is
your stuff and there's an agreement between you and the roommate as to why you're both allowed to
use it. I'm taking away their privilege to use my stuff, which is kind of what you're doing
with a child or their PlayStation. I'm not saying you smash out the hammer. I'm saying that it might
make sense to like, all right, look, you're ruining my life. What if, okay, what if you bought the
TV as a gift and then you took it back? So that does add to the wrinkle and that's more like what
it's like to buy stuff for your kids, right? I guess what I'm just saying is that it doesn't
strike me as necessarily like abusive or insane behavior to discipline your kid that way. That
said, I was like never disciplined that way. I think honestly, my parents are just, I mean,
I like to joke that my brother and I were each half of an accident because we were identical
twins and just playing on that. I don't think they planned on three kids. I think they planned on two
and three wore them out. And so they let me have a small TV in our room because I would quietly
sit in there and watch it. And if they tried to take it away, I would be annoying. And they're
like, you know what, I would rather sleep and have them not be disciplined than let them just watch
TV instead, right? This is kind of a segue, but I just think that once you give someone something,
it's theirs. And abusive and insane is like, it's a tricky word because like in this system where
parents are held liable for what their adult children do, it's not that insane to be like,
I don't want to go to jail for something you're doing. So I'm putting these limits on you. And
especially when society tells them they should, it's just in the broader picture, if society wasn't
like this, you wouldn't structure it like this, you would say that is an insane thing to do.
Don't do that. And it's kind of stuck that way right now. I'd like to not be stuck there.
So what I'm hearing is that we need to nudge down the parents culpability and nudge up the
community. Yes, responsibility, rights and freedoms always come with responsibilities at
the same time. Yeah, that's what makes you more of an adult having more responsibility and learning
how to use that. Yeah, I wish there were more gradients there to sort of like, not just the oh,
you're 18. Now everything flips. Yeah, actually, a series of tests that measure you on various
things. Maybe something that I sort of also object to, we should probably start to get
to the main topic. But just the whole idea of if your kids acting out that you should punish them
in this like default to sort of this authoritarian punitive response instead of sitting the kid
down and sort of like, hey, why are you doing this? And then trying to maybe negotiate like,
all right, well, because you have, I've told you not to do this and you have like broken your word.
So I'm going to limit your TV access. If you do it again, I'm going to limit it further. But if
you show me that you can take a week and not do this thing, then you can get your TV privilege
back. Like I'd rather there be more, you know. That seems what Harry James Potter Evans Varys
would say is that no parent would ever reduce themselves to the level of negotiating with
someone they view as a child, which I think is true in this world and is bad. Like that's sort of
when Stephen was talking about the roommate, I've had like shitty roommate situations or even just
where maybe even the roommate wasn't necessarily a bad person. I've had roommates that just like
one of my roommates was like being abused by a parent and I gave them a space to live. And they
just had never learned how to be an adult. So like, they were eating food that belonged to other
people or like, you know, taking like all the Advil or just like grabbing all the toilet paper
after I went grocery. And I like, I had to sort of teach this person like, okay, if you're going
to like, you know, be an adult, you've got to like, but it was like, I understand where you're
coming from and you're a friend of mine. So it was like this gradual like, okay, like you, I
would like you to get a job and start paying rent after this amount of time. I would like you to
like pay for your own stuff. But like, there's like within reason, I can also help you out
while you're learning this stuff and also recovering from just the trauma of that situation.
Yeah. And yeah, their parents, they're very lucky to have you.
So before we get to the main topic, did you have more feedback?
Yeah, I just wanted to say that I was specifically talking about consensual and healthy relationships.
Yeah, also have problems and tend to end at some point. And when I say relationships, that
does not mean sex. It can. It doesn't not mean sex. Yeah. And but they're not abusive. And it's
really important to differentiate between a healthy relationship and an abusive relationship when,
especially when you're talking about basing civil rights off of those circumstances.
And I know a lot of people who would say that it is impossible for a 30 year old to have a
non abusive relationship with a 15 year old. I totally disagree with that. I think it's bullshit.
But that is a line of thinking in our society that is pushed strongly by a lot of people.
When I had the thing with the college professor, though, I was 20 or 21 and they were like 36
or 37. It could have been fine. It just that was a coercive relationship.
And you were 21 and an abusive relationship. Yeah, like you had made it past the magic age.
Yeah. But like just the power differential between, you know, teacher-student relationship and then
like also the fact that he made more money and like had a house and I didn't.
And he had one and a half more decades of manipulating people than you did.
Yeah. Well, like that gives him more just skill with which to fuck you over.
Hopefully. Whereas if you were met, whereas you're with your peers, you have about equal
experience fucking each other over and being fucked over by them, right?
Why are we hanging around with people that have experienced fucking people over anyway?
Like I wouldn't want to have peers that have a lot of experience fucking people over because I just
don't like people that fuck other people over. We're talking about a bad relationships.
Oh, well, okay. Yeah. So in that context, you won't be as ill-equipped to combat your peers in
a bad relationship than you would be somebody who's got a decade and a half seniority.
In this case also, like I was sort of groomed sort of the same way, you know, like a child
predator would groom a kid online or whatever. But like this was after my best friends died
and I didn't have any friends in college. So this person slowly befriended me and took a long time
building up the relationship before it started becoming abusive and coercive.
At which point, like you're kind of already invested and then it was also like, well,
this is kind of sucks, but also I don't really have anybody else to hang out with. So like
if he wants me to suck his dick occasionally, maybe that's just something that I'll just put up with.
And that is something that can happen to any vulnerable person at any age.
Yeah, I could have been older than him to take an advantage of by someone who's manipulating you.
So at some point, we all deal with that. And sometimes the person is your age,
and sometimes they're not. But it's never an equal playing field when one of you is at an
emotional disadvantage. Yeah, there's different kinds of power differentials that aren't just age
or, you know, there's there's sadness, there's a vulnerable someone being your boss or whatever
moments in your life. We all go through that. I mean, who hasn't looked back at like a friendship
job or situation, a relationship, we have another human being going, Oh, I wasn't in a good place,
or that never would have flown in retrospect. That was a terrible decision.
So I think overall, that was a really, I think you guys have done a great job
discussing difficult topics. And I want to encourage you all to continue. And thank you.
I hope I can contribute next time. I want I'm glad also that you're doing a good job at pointing
out like where we could improve because that is important to me too. I don't want to like get
butt heard about, you know, or I don't want you to like feel like we're going to get butt heard
about you like criticizing stuff like us not defining terms because actually that's important
feedback. I really like just jamming with Steven and any of I know some people have said that they
actually like, just enjoy hearing that and they don't care as much about like a staying on topic
because it just feels like hanging out with friends. But then there's other people that like
like Phoenix, for example, doesn't listen to very many of these episodes because it's just like
too off topic and that bugs them. I came up with the term digress-a-thon.
Not a bad word for it. Yeah, no, I appreciate that. I can't say it better than Jay said it.
I was going to make last remarks on the last thing, but I already spent enough time talking
about last episode. I don't want to go back with another episode. So no, that was good.
It's fun to talk about and it's engaging and more important to revisit and get things articulate.
And as a final point, I think this kind of live listener feedback thing is kind of fun. So if
anyone does have something to say about an episode that we have recently put out and would like to
come on the show for live listener feedback, I think we could accommodate them. Yeah. I mean,
usually we record at the same time every other week. So we're more like them accommodating us.
Right, right. If you're willing to come on, you know, around the early afternoon on a Sunday
and we can get you an on Zencaster and maybe have a little 10, 15 minute live feedback thing.
Ultimately, if that doesn't work for you too, you can always send in like an audio question.
I was just going to say that, yeah, I actually like the format
in other podcasts that I listen to where people sort of just call in like, I guess,
almost like an advice show sort of like, hey, I have a question about such and such. And
we could also sort of cut up the audio clip if there's multiple things. And then it sounds
better than us just sort of reading a text comment and replying to it. Although that's also a thing.
It's just we get a lot more of those. And it's harder to sort of like skimp through all of this.
Yeah, talk to us more and more stuff. Well, thank you for joining us, Charlie,
and kicking off the first live listener feedback. Yay. Bye. Bye, Charlie. I have one last thing,
actually, because David Spearman added me on Discord and was like, what are you talking about
that young people can make an impact in the world or something? That was their first point. We
hammered on that for a minute where it's like, young adults can't make an impact or something.
And I pushed back on that because I didn't know what you meant by can't or impact. So it might
have been just a game of taboo that we should have played earlier. But I think the common
understanding of that was not what I was using. It's there was some miscommunication.
Like, I don't think you're ever until you're once you're able to mentally model other people. So
three or four. But at some point, and well, and then once you're old enough to care, which
might take you until you're 40, or maybe take you to your 10, who knows, you're able to make your
corner of the world a little brighter place. That's what I meant by make have an impact. And
like, sure, you can have more if you have more money, maybe, but not if you're not helping people
primarily through money. You can be a supportive friend without having to give them $10,000, right?
So I guess that's the kind of thing I was talking about. What I meant by making an impact is do
something that is important to people that you care about. That's kind of what I mean. Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. I mean, I don't think that it takes a driver's license or, you know, a bank account
to do that. Those might help. But it does take being respected. Like, if your efforts are ignored,
sidelined, what do I want to say, brain vocabulary glitch, access file, I think I see what you're
saying, though. That's a good point that helps me understand that because it might be important to
you at eight years old, like you want to help contribute to your parents, you know, maybe help
with dinner or whatever, right? But they're like, Oh, no, you go over here and pretend to chop onions
and we'll do it without you. Is that kind of like a scaled down version of what you're talking about?
Yeah. So I think everyone can relate to this because it'll happen to you at some point in your life.
You want to contribute. You're in a, you're with a group that you, that you want to belong with,
you know, you want to be a part of and fit in, and you want to contribute, but you're not as good
at what everyone's doing as they are because your input, they literally take it out of your hands
and push you aside. And so you're robbed of the opportunity to contribute or they give you busy
work, like something that basically doesn't matter. But basically it's about not being,
not being respected. Being an adult is a lot like that too. Being a legal adult in the United States.
That's why I said we can all, we've all had this done to us. So I think we can relate. But when
you're, when you're, when you're in an ageist world, this will apply to anyone at any age,
you're going to experience being pushed aside because you don't belong to that group,
because you're not the right age. And it's always dehumanizing and hurtful. And I think
it's complete bullshit. The age segregation thing bugs me, honestly, like I bring a lot of library
examples up, but like there were some really smart little kids. And I remember just watching a few
times there would be like a kid teaching an older person how to use email. And then like at one
point, somebody got scared about adult predators. And so they're like, oh, we have to have the
kids section of the library and keep the kids in the kids section. And the adults aren't allowed to
go in there unless they like have a child or, you know, able to prove that they're looking for a book
for the, I don't know, whatever the heck. And the kids aren't allowed to come out. Yeah, well,
that was that they were, they were confined to the kids section. Like, unless they had an adult
like supervising them, or like they were doing some kind of club where, yeah, again, they would have
an adult supervising them or they would be in their own little like meeting room, had to keep
them all separate. Part of that sounds like really well intentioned, but misguided coddling.
And wouldn't we know it? Yeah, the name of the essay that we were going to be talking about,
slash book, I don't read the book, because this is one of those examples where the essay,
thanks again, Charlie Rock. There's another example where the essay is the book, but just
more succinct. So the subject was The Coddling of the American Mind by Jonathan Haidt and Luke,
or excuse me, Greg Lukyanov. I'll put a link to the 2015 article in The Atlantic in the show notes.
Or you can buy the 2018 book, but I haven't read it, but I'm convinced it just makes this point
but longer. Some books are like that. In my limited experience of reading, like,
compelling essays and then subsequent books, that's always been the case. So I'm always reluctant.
And, you know, if you want a bit better expansion of it or something, maybe that helps. Like, I
liked the Scout mindset, even though I knew the point of it before I started reading it,
and I didn't like learn much, except for maybe some extra lingo. It was just more examples and
more fleshed out. I didn't learn a thing from Animal Liberation that I didn't learn in the 1975
essay All Animals Are Equal, unless I wanted to learn a lot about 1970s factory farming, which I
didn't. So. But books also often have a lot of citations and references, which is very handy
if you want to, you know, if you're talking to someone who's like, well, I don't believe this,
and you're like, okay, here's where the numbers came from. Yeah, I've definitely seen examples of
both books that could have been like essays and probably should have been, but just like a book
is a marketable format. Some books are the real life definition of like, this could have been,
you know, this meeting could have been an email. Yeah, like, it's clearly like there's,
there's info in there, but then they've like padded it out with enough filler to make it
book sized so they could then sell it as a book. But then I've seen books that will take a topic
and really tackle it from a bunch of different angles. So you form a much more comprehensive
model of the whole thing. And that's also really valuable. That's a good point. And I take back
what I said about all the time of my reading that with my reading with books, because I haven't
read The Calling of the American Mind to the book, maybe it's great, maybe it's way better than the
essay, and it's three years newer, which means lots of new data on the subject, because a lot of
the stuff was like newer in 2015 than it is. Yeah, and a lot of stuff was changing in that time
period too. Like you were talking about a, what was it, truancy? Not truancy was older than that,
but just like the like kids with the park thing, the greater incidents of parents being scared
to just let their kids play outside unsupervised. Yeah, totally. Even though like the world has
actually been getting a lot safer. Absolutely. And last thing, just before we dive in another
good example of a book that definitely deserves to be a book and not an essay was The Elephant in
the Brain. Like I knew signaling, I knew what that was, but having 15 or 20 chapters of specific
examples was awesome. That book was epic. So plug with that again. Anyway, it's worth pointing out
that Lukyanov and Haidt are probably to say Haidt for shorthand for later, because most of my
context on this is like reading specifically what Haidt, Jonathan Haidt had to say about it and
listening to him on podcasts. So I haven't heard anything straight out of Greg Lukyanov's mouth.
But mainly they're talking about college campuses. They talk a bit about earlier stuff,
which is why I tied into like our stuff about children and teens and tweens and young adults
and all that. Because I think that plays into a lot of the same stuff. Some of the mismanagement of
children and young adults has been carried through into college in some places. And their main
point is that that really fucks them up and fucks us up while it fucks society because they're
fucked up. They don't use the word fuck that much, but that's basically their point.
So treating adults like children has bad consequences of the fucked variety?
Yes. But then it's not clear because now you've got adults in their 20s who behave like who think
this is all virtuous and awesome. And it's not clear. I think you've got to jump into examples
or tell us what's going on. Yeah. But I was going to say, I don't think you can make the case that
how did you put it? That treating kids like... Treating adults like kids.
Messes them up. Yeah. Because I don't think it can be parsed that neatly because now you have
adults treating adults like what they think adults should be treated like.
Essay title, the coddling of the American mind. So we could just say Americans are minds,
honestly. Sure. Yeah. Because this is being imposed upon society. They targeted college campuses,
but you do see it in other realms as well. Yeah. We can start with the college stuff because that's
where the essay starts. So they basically talk about... And I'll get this at the top because
it's a lot of the beats fall back on these three great untruths as they call them, which are like,
these are things that are perpetuated as either virtuous or just the way you should think,
which fly in the face of all of modern and ancient wisdom and modern psychology.
So those three things are, what doesn't kill you makes you weaker, always trust your feelings,
and life is about always being good and evil, or good people and evil people.
I like that you brought up that this is sort of the exact opposite of what CBT teaches because
I'm already sort of gearing up to be angry about it. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I think I said this before
when we started recording that I was going to lean on Jayce for their expertise on cognitive
behavioral therapy, CBT for syllable saving. Because Lukyanov had, I think, severe depression
and maybe PTSD as an adult, and maybe as a youth as well. But the point is that as he's observing
these things on campuses, he's like, they're putting on a pedestal exactly what my therapist
has been teaching me not to do. And there's no way this is good for them. And the more you look,
turns out it's not. PTSD is actually way more common than I think most people know.
There's people that actually have the acronym HSP, highly sensitive people, which is funny,
but that's actually just a psychological phenomenon where some people are more resilient
and some people are more easily traumatized. I wonder how much of that is culturally imbued?
Some probably is. It's probably like a lot of things, like nature, part nature, but
there's definitely a biological component. I think if you get a lot of rewards for being
highly sensitive, it pushes you towards that direction. Yeah. And I mean, that could be in
the form of peer recognition or validation or even just like time off of school. Right.
It's just basic incentives, right? If you get rewarded for something, you get more of that thing.
But it could also just well be the case that like, yeah, look, I drew the short stick,
turns out things fuck me a lot harder than they fuck you. And that's also just going to be part
of reality. I remember learning about this and it was like a long debate in the history of
psychology and social science of like, is X trade or is everything like nurture or nature?
And the obvious answer has always been both, right? It doesn't matter how well
what great genes you have. If I mess you up enough as a kid, you're going to be a messed up adult,
right? Especially if I work sufficiently hard to the task, doesn't matter, right?
Alternately, you could be somebody with highly sensitive person disorder. I don't think it's a
disorder personality type and have great parents and a great sport system and grow up to be way
healthier than like a lot of your peers. Yeah. Let's see. Like I said, so they, because they're
both professors, like most of their examples start from that. And then they move back to
where this come from and why did it start in the 90s, etc. But the article starts off mainly
focusing on examples of higher education institutions, mostly expensive, expensive liberal
schools. This isn't a thing in like conservative dominated areas as it turns out, at least not
as much. But isn't it the case that most institutions of higher learning tend to skew really liberal?
Yeah, but like in, I mean, in liberal areas as well. And I, then this is a, I think a trend is
not like a golden rule. So if you find an example from a university in Georgia, you know, I don't
think that invalidates where they're coming from, but it does turn out to just be a more common
university phenomena among like liberal populations. So am I wrong about this? Or
my stereotype is that generally people who are more conservative come from a more rural and or
working class background. Is that, is that fair? That's probably a, like not unfair
sweeping generalization. Because it also seems to me that people who are more of the rural and or
working class background, their children are more likely to be put to some productive ends
earlier in their life and treated more like people that can contribute. And this can help you like
get an insight into the conservative mindset where you're like, why do they think that,
you know, handouts are such such a bad thing? It's like, well, because since they were kids,
they've been working for things and getting rewarded, you know, getting compensation for it,
right? So like, they've been like, I've been doing this since I was 10, why can't you do it when
you're 35? So like, it's, it doesn't make one person like, it might be factually right or wrong,
but it's not obviously right or wrong, right? Right. Anyway, so like some of the insane examples
they point out just to kind of kick off like the university stuff and keep in mind, this was six
years ago, like things have gotten weirder since then. Apparently, Genie Souk wrote an article
in an online, in an online article for the New Yorker about law students asking her fellow
professors at Harvard not to teach rape law, or in one case, even use the word violate, as in
that violates the law, lest it cause student distress. Oh, so just censoring the word rape
and violate. Well, censor the word violate, but then like stop teaching rape law entirely.
Apparently, in in Harvard, that's going to make it harder to be a criminal lawyer. Imagine. And
so that, that's where the weird part of this is coming up. And so in 2015, this was kind of like
an emerging thing. It wasn't like brand new, but now we're six years out of that. A lot of people
have graduated Harvard, Harvard Law, and they're so traumatized by the word rape that they can't
represent you in a case like that. I mean, how weird would that be, right? Like you go to your
lawyer and they're like, I'm sorry, can you not use the R word? I don't think that's, that's actually
a thing that happens for with real lawyers though, right? Like this is just something that they were
doing in school to exercise power over their professors. This is something they proposed.
Did it actually, did they actually stop teaching rape law? I didn't follow with it. I doubt it.
I feel like that's an important part of criminal law. But, but I, and while it's probably not true
in lawyer, in lawyering, it is true in other avenues of life. Some of the things, some of the,
the weird virtues that are coming out of this have perpetuated into the adult workforce,
where, or the graduate, college graduate workforce, where 20-somethings are employed next to,
you know, are, are, are gainfully employed in, in the world, right?
I, so I agree with you that this is something that absolutely happens. I don't know if hate
makes this point or if this is just commonly thought to be the, height, height. Sorry. If,
if he claims this or if this is just a thing that's commonly thought, but it seems to be implied that
these people are actually harmed by these things. And, and thus, that is why they're, you know,
I don't want to say screaming. That is why they are strongly requesting these, these protections.
But it has been my impression that these are ways to exercise power, that these are things
that people have found they can use to exercise power over their professors or to get more senior
people in their organization kicked out and open up space for them to move up. Like, I don't know
if maybe secretly on the inside they really do feel hurt by this, but in all practical purposes,
it looks much more like a way to exercise power over others or to eliminate opposition with these
weapons that you have at your disposal, because society does accept like, oh no, he was so triggered
by that word that now we have to make special exceptions. Yeah. I, I don't know how to dive
into that because I don't like, I mean, it's not always trying my hand at mind reading,
trying to understand these things, but it is often like, I don't know the motives, you know, like,
if somebody, you know, like there was that, that famous video that went around a few years ago
of all those students screaming at the Dean at Yale because Halloween costumes and like,
were they really so hurt and, and affronted that they were acting like a 1960s civil rights
protest? It really just strikes me as signaling. Yeah, I think is what any ash is getting at.
But I doubt that there's like, individual professors sort of sitting in their offices,
like, petting their cat and like, easily cackling as like, I will, you know, take over the, I don't
know, like, push out all the like, conservative professors. So liberal professors could take
over the whole, but like, that's become sort of the effect. And I think that it's sort of
the way signaling works, you know, because it's like, Oh, I, I think my tribe is the more moral
one and that we're correct. So we should fight these fights. But are you like, it gets to the
point where it's like, do you actually care about these issues? Like, is this your real
objection? Or are you just tricking yourself into like, making yourself feel good about just
doing signaling games? Well, it's not just about kicking out conservative professorship,
either. Like there was a, at the same at the top of the article was someone who wrote under
pseudonym. And their, the title was, I'm a liberal professor and my liberal students terrify me.
You know, height talks about how in every bathroom at shoot, where does he teach?
I don't see it in the article. It doesn't say where they were teaching.
Like, I don't think any of the students that were yelling at the Dean felt hurt by those
costumes necessarily, maybe like a little bit of offense, offended that other people might get
offended. I mean, I think more than anything, like the Dean is super liberal too. It's not
like they were trying to chase out a conservative faculty member, but it felt good to be part of
a self righteous mob that can hurt this person in a position of power. And so that's, I jumped on
that. That's the whole point of being a mob, right? It feels good to be on the righteous side
and beat up the evil people. And, and that was a tool that they could do, you could use to beat
someone up. I've like talked about this a bunch of other episodes, but I was really
concerned about how witch hunts became really popular and continue to be really popular on
like websites like tumblr. I guess just like a lot of social media, but for some reason,
tumblr in particular became really polarized with like the start of the anti movement, which
ostensibly is anti pedophilia, but actually it is just a way of, you know, yeah, inciting a mob
in witch hunting. For example, like if somebody drew a aged up Steven Universe and Connie from
the show Steven Universe, like maybe not even like doing anything sexual, but like,
I'm trying to think of better examples here. Or in a case where they drew, where they drew
fan art and the kid wasn't drawn fat enough and they bullied the kid into, you know, either
into a suicidal depression or literal death. It's funny that actually I've seen that go both ways
too, where like there's artists that will draw characters in different body types or of different
races, because they're just, I guess, experimenting with diversity or like sometimes, you know, the
best example I can think of is when there's like sprite characters in video games, so you don't
actually know what their canon appearance is. So sometimes people will like, oh, what if it was
like a black trans woman, and then like people will attack that person for no, that's not canon.
But then there's the other case of like, yeah, Steven's canonically fat and you drew him like
thin, so that's fat phobia. It's like a real bad situation for artists, if you're trying to draw
anything, because somebody's going to take some kind of offense to it. And it seems like it's
literally just people who feel disenfranchised want to gang up and attack people because it makes
them feel powerful. It's a form of bullying. It's absolutely a kind of bullying. And I think,
you know, it's in the case of, you know, watching or, you know, going to someone's website,
their Tumblr and seeing a Steven Universe art that you don't like, and then you act like you've
been attacked or assaulted or had violence done against you, whatever insane words they want to
attribute to this, I'll try to be more charitable and not just call it insane. But there's a lot of
misuse of the words like violence and aggression and attacked. Well, I mean, I've seen artists get
death threats, or even like some people will get like swatted or doxxed.
Oh, the artists are getting literally attacked and having violence done to them. I meant the person
who goes to Steven Universe fanarttumblr.com and they see an art that they don't like. The person
who visits that site says, I've been attacked because this is fat phobic. And it's like, no,
I just didn't draw it the way you thought I would draw it. How about you go fuck yourself or draw
your own? Which is how people usually would handle a disagreement like that, right? Maybe more politely.
If you go to a club and they're playing music you don't like, you don't get to demand that you
change the music because I don't like this genre or I don't like this artist, right? That's sort of
how I view online spaces, which isn't really talked about in the article, at least not much.
The extra level of anonymity makes it extra insidious and also the connectedness because
you could go see that art and not like it and then go cross post it somewhere that has thousands of
followers and say, look at what this asshole did. Let's attack them. And then suddenly that artist
is getting like mobbed with death threats. I've seen like, I'm pissed off. Some of my favorite
artists have been just been chased off of social media entirely. Some of them have quit art or
quit posting it and that makes me really mad. One of my favorite artists actually was a professional
artist and also had like a fan art blog and they were so harassed by people and this was somebody
who did have mental health issues and some PTSD and they were just like, all right, you know,
it's been a few years where I've tried to fight for like against this insanity. I'm quitting
art and I'm going to go like learn to be a welder and they went into welding school and they got
like a good paying job in welding and they're like, you know what, like nobody gives me shit about
like that I've welded this thing wrong unless it's like, you know, structurally unsound unless
it's actually wrong. They're like, this is the most relaxed that I've felt like in years. I don't
know why I put myself through trying to be an artist for that long. And it's just so
disappointing for me because I was like, I love this person's art and I'm mad that they're not
creating like cool shit anymore. I guess they're creating cool welding shit, but it's mostly
industrial. It's not art. It's like, yeah, okay, whatever, not to discraft skills, just no, no,
you're good. And that's the thing is, you know, it's, I'm getting myself a little out of order
on this, but it's fine because this is a, a sort of was a topic, but you know, it, I have this
weird, well, not weird, I have this, this knee jerk, not understanding and frank dismissal of
anybody who comes into an online space and demands that they be accommodated. Yeah, you know, this
isn't the acts like any tumbler they come across or any discord server they're on needs to comply
with their version of the American to the Disabilities Act where it's like, if I want to
go to the bank and I'm in a wheelchair, you better let, find a way to let me in. I kind of,
I'm on board with that, right? That was a good move with the United States.
But there's taking things too far where it's like, I'm offended by your art. So therefore,
I'm going to demand you like take it down or like right up public a pot. I don't even know
actually if there's a way that you can save yourself in that case. There's not as it turns out.
There were like, you know, like movie directors that if they find a off color tweet out of context
years before that they've since apologized for, but like, yeah, I don't know, your name's smeared
now. And even if you like write a public apology, people are just going to like be, I don't know,
still mad about it and find other things to be upset about. Well, I mean, I'll touch the apology
thing. And just a second, I was just my analogy with the with the ADA was like, my, my website
doesn't need to comply with, you know, this, this, this bad analogy of like your version of the ADA,
right? If you don't like looking at pictures of corgis, don't come to my website, right? You
don't get to come to my website and be like, I demand that you only show pictures of non pure
bred dogs because pure breeding is bad for dogs. Like, no, do you start your own website and post
pictures of non pure bred dogs? Like, so that never made any sense to me. And I've seen that happen
on multiple occasions online. And I barely get out online. That's the thing. Yeah, the thing that
really the worst example of this is a lot of universities were putting up their lectures for
free on YouTube, because I don't know, you can just learn things for free, you don't get the
credential, but whatever, who cares, it costs them nothing to take the video that they're recording
anyway, and put it on YouTube for people too. And then there were a bunch of ADA requests that
said, if you don't close caption this, we will sue you. And they don't have the money to go and get
everything, you know, transcripted in close caption, they were just throwing out there on
YouTube as a free service. So they took it down instead. And now a lot of free educational material
has been taken down. Because of these people getting all upset, I guess that that it wasn't
closed captioned for the hearing impaired. If this was if this was able to get you credentialed
and like that sort of thing, and it was part of institutions, education curriculum, you have
absolutely comply, right? Make it so everyone can learn because you've you've come to do that.
If you come across a video online, and it's like, I'm sorry, this doesn't work for you.
But also, this seems like it must be a few years old because YouTube auto does close
caption. They're not super accurate all the time. But like, yeah.
But they're about as good as you can get for free right now. So yeah.
Yeah, I definitely like, you know, I think that there are reasonable requests and like,
context for them. Yeah, a great example is the like, Hey, I'm deaf. And I would like to, you
know, like also access this material. And they and it's also reasonable of them to say, Sorry,
we don't have like, this is a free thing that we're offering, but we just don't have the bandwidth
to be able to do that. And maybe here's some resources or whatever. But like, one of the
things that really gets me about this is how often the people that are inciting the mobs
aren't even a meme. Like, usually it would be someone who's not even a deaf person just saying
there could be a deaf person. Like, or I see so much social justice that is actually like,
I find this offensive, because this is often people who do not belong to that group speaking
for that group. For example, like, a bunch of white people saying that sounds racist. And then
like, I've asked black friends before, like, is this offensive to you? And they would laugh and
be like, Oh, no, that's like the shit that I would say to my friends all the time, like, or
you can't bring that up, though, because then you have your token black friend.
I guess, but like, you're using as a shield. This is a this is a lose, lose,
yeah, engagement, as it turns out. So what what does this why why is this a bring us back to
the article? So it's, it's trying to explain where some of these behaviors came from, and
other ramifications that it has among including like new norms at workplaces, some beneficial,
some probably not so beneficial, and increasing political polarization, which has gone way up
in the last couple of decades, as opposed to the previous decades. There used to be a lot more
cross aisle communication than there is now, because now there's just this, again, you build up
untruth three, it's a battle of good people versus evil people. And if they disagree with you,
they're evil people, right? Or they or they offend you. But yeah, Jason's point of the,
and it's just easy to get sidetracked. But I just I got to raise my hackles on that for a second.
I've never understood getting offended on behalf of somebody else. I can, I can understand that.
Let me phrase that. Because I can understand that I went to a movie once with half a dozen
coworkers some years ago. And the one black person among us, they, because we all had a
backpack, we're all coming from work, the person wanted to see inside his backpack. And I stopped
and I was like, why do you want to see in just inside his raw carrying backpacks? And she's like,
oh, just safety thing. And if I had been more ballsy, I would have made a I mean, what would I
have done? Right? Like, so I could have at least said, that's horseshit, you're being racist, fuck
you, and just kept, you know, gone to the movie. I think that might have been the nice silver lining.
Just told her that was shitty of you and called it at that. You know, the, you know,
the person who had to show their backpack didn't mind, I'm assuming this happens all the time,
because people suck. And I've actually often seen people that are like, can you just not make a big
deal about it? Like, I actually hate when I know that some people have different opinions about this.
But if somebody misgenders me, and then like somebody on my behalf is like, hey, like, Jay's
uses he him pronouns. And that was very, and I was just like, you know what, I actually like,
can you can you just not make a big deal about it? Especially if they like, catch themselves and
corrected themselves. And then someone continues yelling at that. But like, even like, I don't,
most of the time, I actually like, don't want you to like, fight for my representation. I'm trying
to have a nice time right now. And you're just like, eh, people again, people have different,
like, you know, sort of opinions about this, I know people that would be really happy if someone
spoke up for them. But for me, I'm just sort of like, I don't know, I'm not like actually that
easily offended by stuff like that. And it's often not the time or place to talk about that.
If the person does want to like, want me to explain trans stuff, I'd be happy to, but I don't want
to just like be talking about elephants or whatever. And then so it suddenly turns into a
social justice argument on my behalf that I, that I didn't even like want to bring up.
Yeah, you know, it can feel better about my very tepid reaction to this ticket taker at the movies,
because he was already ahead, you know, I think he was one or two people ahead of me getting
into the queue. And you know, he didn't, I talked with her at this volume, you know,
the one you would, when you're saying, here's my ticket. And I, you know, I kind of just asked her
what was up with that. I didn't make a big stink. I didn't drag him over and, you know,
look at how he made him feel. I have no idea how she made him feel, right? I'm assuming not great,
but, but like that, that would have just maybe made him feel worse if he was just like, okay,
whatever, like, and he deals with this all the time. But like, if you drag him out there and
then like, or like, look at like, that's like the whole idea of the coddling thing, right? It's
the sort of like, you hurt my friend's feelings. It was very fragile and you should get like, you
know, it's, it's embarrassing. That's definitely one avenue of it. Yeah. I don't even, I didn't
really put his feelings into account when I was a 15 second exchange with this person. It was more
just like, I mean, it could have been me pointing out that I'm offended by you having done that,
because I think that was a shitty thing to do. Like, and then you're not making it about the
other person. I basically just said, why did you choose just him when we all had bags and kind
of had to make her, oh, oh, I was just doing routine security. And I'm like, on the one person. And,
you know, it was, it was just those basically two lines. It was a few years ago. But yeah, I,
I didn't try to presume how he felt about it, because it wasn't about necessarily his feelings
on the subject. It's more about like, Hey, you're not doing this to every fucking black person who
comes in here. That's kind of shitty of you. Anyway, that's a bit aside. I mean, the, the,
I guess I wasn't even offended on his behalf as, as offended on behalf of decent society.
But that's exactly what every person who, you know, if they're not fat and they see a fat
Steven Universe or thin Steven Universe picture, they're offended on behalf of decent society as
well. Yeah, it could be like one of those people who is just incredibly empathetic and is able to
put themselves in the shoes of somebody who might see this and get hurt, like, you know,
not all of these people are just doing this to sort of cyber bully people. Definitely some people
are definitely doing it for that reason. But I don't even know if they are aware that they're
doing it for that reason. I think that they genuinely like nobody believes that they're the
bad guy. They probably have convinced themselves that they're like a social justice warrior.
When I first heard that term, I thought it sounded awesome before like people started
doing this stuff. But like my, I used to be like, yeah, you know, I'm all about social justice.
That sounds great. I would love to have a society that's more like equal and aware of
diversity and determine as well. Yeah. Until it started turning into this weird like just sort
of political signaling bullying thing that's defeating the purpose sort of, I think there's
definitely people who are good natured about it. And I want to talk about that explicitly
at some detail before we, you know, before too long, because I don't want to say like this is
all terrible and everybody does it is the worst. But there is a a faction of it that is explicitly
malicious. You know, there are parts of what do you call your political team when you're running
for office, your campaign, your campaign staff. There are campaign staffers whose job it is,
and it's not every politician everywhere, but it goes at least as far as like South Africa,
including and so, you know, and parts of the United States, but it's not like just local to
the US, where it's their job to comb through the opposition's social media presence,
thoroughly and as far back as possible and try and find something to misconstrue so that then
you can drag that out in front of the crowd and say, look, in 2015, they said this terrible thing
about bathrooms and who can use them or something. And so like, there is a part of it that is
explicitly there to just try and rile people up so you can win. And it's not about caring about
the subject of what's over it, it's about caring about you.
Wasn't that one of Donald Trump's strengths, though, that he said like, yeah, I don't care
what you say about me, bring it on. I give no fucks about what you're going to find in my
backstory and my social media. I'll say something even worse, bring it.
Yeah, that people, you know, I can kind of see why people admired that about him. I sort of wish
the, because like, I think the, you know, accepted correct response up till that point had been to,
oh, well, you know, I want to deeply apologize for that thing that I said that I already
apologized for. But I just want to like remind everybody that this no longer represents my views
and I am going to gravel before you. So I, you know, I'm not going to lose you as my voting crew.
Or if somebody accused a real human politician of like sexual misconduct, they would say,
they would find some polite way to engage with it, not say, you're way too ugly for that have
been, that have been realistic, right? Which is another Trumpian response to a sexual assault
allegation. I really think that a lot of businesses and society in general would be
better off taking the Trump approach, these sort of things, like when Apple hired that one guy,
and he wrote some pretty from what, from the few clips pieces I saw, some like pretty bad
shit like 10 years ago, as part of like, I don't know, some kind of shock reporting kind of like
Howard Stern sort of level stuff, you know, which yeah, that's, that's not great,
what he wrote. It's pretty bad, actually. But you know, Apple looked through it,
they hired him anyway, he's got skills that they want. And then like the launch of social media
campaign, at some point, Apple's just got to say, I'm not letting the rest of the, I'm not letting
the, the most offended people on Twitter make my decisions for me. And I think most companies
would be much better served doing that as well as most humans in general.
Are you talking about Antonio Garcia Martinez?
I don't know. The guy who wrote something about Silicon Valley. Yeah, yeah, that guy.
He, what you said about him writing something that was actually fairly contemptible and
Howard Sterni, it was the exact opposite. It was extremely tepid.
I know what you're thinking of.
They drew one sentence out of context, which is another tactic of this whole mindset.
Because you're thinking about the Sam Harris podcast, right?
Yeah.
They literally stopped reading his quote right before he got to the bad stuff, which kind of
made me, they summarized the part that he said the bad stuff didn't they?
No, no, that kind of made me like, trust Sam Harris a little bit less because like,
and he stopped right there and was like, and the rest of it was basically like this too.
But like, if you actually read it, the rest of it is where it really got spicy.
And I really think that Sam Harris was being intellectually dishonest by stopping there and,
and not reading that and being like, but this does sound pretty shitty, dude.
Well, then I walked with the wrong impression. I will give Sam the benefit of the doubt there
only because they were doing it with Antonio leading the conversation and reading as much
of it as he was comfortable with doing.
Yeah, but he should have pressed him on that.
He should have pressed him. Yeah, but I can see why he didn't say, well,
hold on, let me finish reading this and kind of like,
Let's read the next two sentences, sir.
Yeah. But yeah, that's interesting. I walked away with thinking that all he had said that,
his wife was way more interesting than the average Silicon Valley girl because she was
like actually cool or something, which again, dismissive and rude, but like fairly lukewarm,
right? Right. But if it was worse than that, then yeah,
Paris did the world of disservice by not being forthcoming about it.
Anyway, the reason I wanted to talk about the calling of American mind,
because basically, you know, I said, hey, I'm busy this week. Who wants to think of a topic?
And I was thinking about the subject anyway, and it tied into the youth thing.
And so part of how we're fucking up kids is doing...
Young adults?
No kids.
Okay. So part of how we're fucking up people below the age of 13?
This is, yeah. Okay, okay.
So this ties into the kid stuff, not the young adult stuff, the children thing about...
So apparently this started in the early 90s, but it must not have got to my neck of the woods
till the, you know, 2000s because I did have a free-range childhood.
In like the early 2010s, coming to my attention.
The child, sorry, which part?
Oh, I thought you were saying just like sort of the beginning of terms like microaggressions
and trigger warnings and wokeness.
No, I was thinking younger.
Yeah, something below pre-pubescent.
Yeah, so as pre-pubescent stuff, but yeah, we will talk about the terms too if we get a chance,
because I didn't come very organized. I guess now you can tell, you know, I shouldn't organize this episode.
I think you're doing pretty good, actually.
Yeah, the youth aspect of it came from like the overprotectiveness,
in a word, I guess you can call it that.
He calls it safetyism, which is kind of fun, because safety is a good thing.
More safety sounds like a better thing, right?
It turns out, as one might expect, too much of a good thing can lead to a bad thing.
So... Middle way, always.
Yeah, you know, the idea of like wanting to know where your kids are,
so that you know if they haven't been home in X number of hours,
versus microchipping them.
Right, versus microchipping them.
Or like actually just not letting them play outside out like, you know,
you were in the middle of that, actually.
Oh, no, you're fine. But yeah, like, well, if my kids outside and I don't know where they are,
this was again, too, some of the satanic panic from the 80s,
and abductions being like headline news all the time in the 90s,
even though they almost never happened, and if it did, it was almost always family.
The world was actually getting safer, but like it was just the fact that,
first of all, you had news at all of this stuff made people more aware that it happened,
because like, you know, stuff's happening in New York City, or like, I don't know, Minnesota,
or whatever. But like, maybe there's never been a child abduction in your neighborhood,
but now you're aware that they happen.
Right.
But then the other thing was that they started focus testing the news and figuring out that like,
outrage porn gets lots of views.
I'm convinced that's what started this.
Yeah.
Was that, hey, if we make people scared and mad, they'll watch our show more.
And then that turned into how they monetized the internet as well.
Not just watch our show more. 24 hour news was not a thing until the first Gulf War, which was
91, I think. Yeah. That is when CNN, I mean, they'd already been kind of trying to do stuff
and sort of struggling before, but then the Gulf War happened, and suddenly having a 24 hour news
thing was really interesting, because you could at any time click over to CNN and see what was
going on in the war. And that was the era where 24 hour news really took off and all the other
stations started becoming big then too. And I mean, that's fine while there is a war and there's
action going, but like,
But there's always a war somewhere in the world and there's always a hurricane that's happened
somewhere and some child has been abducted and some horrible like serial killers on the loose.
And that's all the stuff that they were focusing on, because it's the most sensational.
Yeah.
If you ever like, hey, this community got together to like save a beef
well, isn't that cool?
Well, not just that, but like when you have 30 minutes to an hour, usually the newscasts were
30 minutes long, where they covered all the important stuff that happened in the day in about,
I guess, 22 and a half minutes with commercial breaks. And then once a week, there would be one
or two one hour news shows that like really dive deep into a subject, like an SSC blog post in TV
format. But like once you have 24 fucking hours that you got to fill with news. And like you said,
the outrage, bad stuff is what really draws into the eyeballs. You start looking for all
the things you can find that might be newsworthy slash scary and throwing them up on the air for
24 hours a day. And yeah, that that fuck up people slightly a bit. Well, and it turns out it just
fucked up parents. Yeah. So like boomers were way more protective of their kids on average than
their parents were of them. And honestly, their parents probably could have been safer with them
and things that have been a little safer for them, right? For the boomers themselves.
I remember my dad talking about he and his friends playing a game where they would throw a knife
at each other to like, what was it? Like you'd stand with your legs apart and and then you get
like further and further apart and each person takes turns throwing a knife and trying to get
it to land in the dirt between their feet. Man, I'm glad I was never quite that dumb. Like my
brother and I had like a weak ass plastic bow and arrow that we put a cork on the end of it,
and we would shoot each other and try and catch it. But like, but between that and airsoft wars
were at least we almost always wore sunglasses. I don't think you could put an eye even with airsoft
No, but it turns out if you could hit in the eyeball, it does burst blood vessels and really
hurts the eye. My brother had a cool red circle on his eyeball for a while.
He gets some like kind of gnarly bruises from it too, but like
And it probably could have blinded him at just the right angle and close enough. I mean, those
those guns can break skin. If it can break your skin, it can break your eye. It's true.
They're still probably safer than just throwing knives at each other.
Totally. That's what I'm saying is I thought we were dumb. But so, you know,
this is this is where the well intentioned part of it needs to be emphasized, right? Because
if if we want to pass a log and kids throwing knives at each other, I think that's probably
not a bad idea to do, right? Kids, not young adults, right? Right, right, right.
Probably shouldn't let adults throw knives at each other either. But if you're too
consenting adults in the privacy of your own home, you know, maybe that's fine, but not not in
the parking lot of Walmart or something, right? I actually wish that just waivers were more common.
Like throwing knives at each other actually happens quite a lot in like juggling shows or
various other performance, non professionals shouldn't be allowed to throw knives at each other.
You're really qualifying a lot of things. Do they need a license to prove their professional
life through? As Jay said, they probably need a waiver. Okay. If I if they fuck up and hit me,
I can't sue them or the circus, right? Yeah. But and I'm qualifying as a joke. Yeah. I mean,
it's it's one of those. Anyway, the idea of let's keep our kids safe, partly because the
news is making me think that every third kid is getting, you know, abducted and raped. And
I also just care about my kid, right? And there's also the actual real factor of some kids are
in danger, right? And this is a bit of an aside, but it was I was listening, I mentioned to Sam
Harris is up sort of Neil deGrasse Tyson. And Harris always tries to rope him into talking
about culture war stuff. And last time he was on, he kind of neatly sidestepped it. And this time
he he did a nice pirouette around it. He didn't engage with it directly, but he gave some good
insight. And he did talk about how when he was eight, his mom gave him the talk of like,
when you get stopped by the police, do this, because she didn't want to come home and learn
that her kids were dead. So like, you know, for anyone who doesn't know Neil deGrasse Tyson is
black. So like that makes a that makes that talk from his mom have some serious fucking gravity.
You know, when I got the talk about a deal with police, there was never a threat of or they'll
kill you. It was basically like, here's how you lower your chances of getting a ticket,
which is when they come to the car, have the window down, engine off, have your license
registration ready. Like that, that is how I handle every time I get pulled over. And anyway,
like that, but my talk of how to deal with the police was never involved, like, or they might
kill you. That wasn't even implied, as far as I know. If it wasn't implied, they didn't imply it
successfully. Anyway, so that this this level of kid protecting extends especially to places
where kids go like schools, zero tolerance policies became really popular. No, if stands
are butts, you fuck up, you're out, we're not dealing with it. Because if we have to have
tolerance, that means we have to have discretion, which means we can be held liable, right? So
I don't know if height makes that point, but that's been my hobby horse for a long time. Whereas
like, you're expelled because he hit that kid, it's like, yeah, I hit him because he kept hitting
me. And you'll notice I'm missing two teeth. And it's like, yeah, well, we don't have we don't
have a zero tolerance policy for violence, engaged in violence, you're out. I think that
that's mainly to protect the school from anyone saying, well, look, you know, you made a bad
judgment call, like, actually, we didn't make a judgment call. So he can't hold us accountable.
But so this ties into one thing that I've observed in real life with, I think,
legal adults, it's hard to say with online anonymity, but the idea of always having a
responsible adult around, that wasn't a thing when I was a kid. And I'm glad I get to say that
because it makes me sound old. But I guess my my childhood was just 10 years behind some other
parts of the country. Because when I was a kid, I left the house, and my parents wouldn't know
where I was for hours. I would say, I'm going to go out literally, you know, we're going to run
around with this guy, we're gonna go have fun. And like, all right, well, they would kind of know
you were with that guy, you were in the neighborhood, somewhere, probably. Yeah, I mean, we could,
within 45 minutes, drug to downtown for Collins, we could be miles up that way. I mean, if I did
fall and break my legs, they would never find me. You know, I wasn't like at his house or at my
house, we would be somewhere. And we found every little niche, every gap between fences to jump
and run across every ditch, every drainage pipe that you could crawl into and light fires. And
I was always scared to go in drainage pipes. We had one that we go into a lot, and it got harder
when we got taller. But I mean, that says something, the fact that we're still growing,
we're going into this thing, right? There's going to start fires.
It's on the side, there's a whole community of people who do urban exploration, and then one
of them, I forget if it's called draining, but like, that's like a subculture of the
sort of urban exploration community where people share information about where cool pipes are,
how to get in, like, I don't know. This just didn't even have a gain on it, etc.
That's probably great on it now, I should go look next time I'm in the area. But
Well, I always figured, I mean, I didn't go very far. But once you go inside past a turn or two,
everything looks identical. And maybe you'll get stuck in there for days and starve to death
because you can't find your way out again. Luckily from the surface, it was from about here
to like the visitor spots across the parking lot. And it had one turn, and there was no
branches. So I could see from like above both parts of it. It was just big enough to go in
and have fun. Cool. But like the kind of childhood we had, we'd go in there with a can of axe body
spray and a lighter and shoot spiders with it so that we could clear the place out for us, right?
I also used to set perfume on fire with friends because some of the chemicals were maybe just
the fragrances or dyes in there will make it burn really cool colors. And it probably wasn't
great to breathe in, in retrospect. It's a very expensive flamethrower.
Yeah, and not that effective. But it did get the spiders, and I don't like spiders.
And axe was the continuous spray. And so you could get them nice with that.
You could probably kill them without setting it on fire with a fire spray. That stuff is noxious.
So this is actually just this is nice kind of flashback to the discussion we were just
having with Charlie about like kids being traumatized and stuff is like, I think it
does make sense to protect kids from things that are overtly likely to harm them in very serious
ways. Like we were just lucky that none of these cans ever blew up on us without us meaning for
it too. Like it is actually not uncommon when you turn like you're when you're doing don't
don't do this at home. Don't do this period. But if you do, which you shouldn't,
you have the lighter a few inches ahead of the flame, and you want to you want to shoot the
excuse me a few inches ahead of the the projectant spray. And you want to you want to shoot the spray
about an inch or two above the flame, you don't want to shoot at the flame less to get on your
thumb. And then the flame cuts that. And then when you're done, you turn the lighter off and move
the can away at the same time. Because like as the as the flame goes out, and it just the
and if you stop pressing the diffuser, it doesn't it stops pushing out and it kind of comes back
this way. If it goes to the can it can explode and blow your fingers off. Okay. So like, it's
things like that where I do think it makes sense to like try to protect kids because kids don't
like I knew abstractly when I was 13 kids how to safely flamethrower spiders. Don't tell
them on but my dad told me how to do it. I think there's lots of dangerous things I learned from
other kids and have always done and like most of the time they're fine or you get minor injuries.
Sometimes it's sad kids do die but like also I think you can't really prevent that as a parent
by just you can't predict everything that your kid might do and sometimes they're just freak
accidents, you know, you could be walking in a forest path that you've been in all the time and
there's a bear one time and that's why you always have one more kid than you actually want to have.
So there's a backup. Yes, I was drawing a bad analogy to like saying where it kind of makes
sense maybe to protect 14 year olds from 35 year old people who want to fuck them because
that seems like a circumstance where yes, you could have a bad outcome that merely results
in having regrettable sex but it is like possible that that kind of trauma can hit a lot deeper
than if you merely got slapped by a 35 year old. But the analogy here is like, you know,
while I was told yes, you can blow your hand up if you do it wrong. Maybe my dad shouldn't have
taught me how to do it in the first place because I wouldn't have learned that all these cool things
are on the house are flammable. You would have found out. But he maybe showed me a couple years
too early. Okay. And maybe he didn't. Maybe he did at the right time. My memory's fuzzy. I just
do distinctly remember him showing me it was with like brake fluid or something or brake parts cleaner
that kind of like a hose that shoots like 11 feet. Like it was like, I mean, I learned from
other kids in school how to make basically a kind of homemade napalm thing. Got a styrofoam and
gasoline. Yeah, yeah, super easy. And apparently, I don't know where this came from, but also crush
up one Advil or Ibuprofen and put it in. That was just a thing that was like an urban legend,
magical ingredient in my area. I don't know where the hell that came from doesn't do anything.
But it was a thing we all did because that that gave it the little extra spice.
That's fun. Yeah, a couple of Halloween's in a row, we went around with like a two liter and we'd,
you know, you just spend the year collecting styrofoam. And then you shove it all into the
container full of gasoline. And then you go out in Halloween and draw a shape on a wall inside
on fire or draw a line across a back road and set it on fire. Yeah, I was pretty good on only
doing it like on asphalt or other things that wouldn't catch fire. You put it on walls, a brick.
Oh, okay. Yeah, yeah, yeah, we weren't totally dumb. All right, yeah, we were stupid, but not
not doesn't know what catches on fire is stupid. Yeah, I brought up this drainage tunnel thing
though, because there was one time, like my dad knew we'd fuck around in there. And it was like,
kind of on his drive, it's a common way to get to and from like Safeway and stuff,
you could see one side of it. And we had gone in there. And I remember which kid it was through a
bunch of like pine bramble onto our little fire. That son of a bitch. Well, as you apparently know,
that that is very, very smoky. Yeah. And so we all vacated quickly at the other end,
because we couldn't breathe. And apparently the fire department showed up and they and they
were at the other end of it. And they I'm assuming they're spraying water down or making sure there
are no kids in there or something, something, some sort of big deal. And my dad saw that,
but then he came home, like after he finished driving past it, we were at my place and he was
like, Oh, that was you guys, right? You guys okay? Yeah, we're fine. And he's like, Well,
the fire department's there. Don't, you know, go around. I'm paraphrasing from bad memories,
but that's basically what went down and go back to the scene of the crime for a while.
Exactly. So, you know, but anyway, little mistakes like I bring all this up, it's not,
it's an aggression, but it drives the point home that, you know, goofing around and being
unmonitored as a kid gives you a lot of this, this agency and responsibility that you know,
I should love so much for, for young adults. I'm teasing. But I, but in the good way,
I do like those things. Yeah. But the dismissive quote unquote,
stuff was teasing. What Charlie was saying earlier, I mean, like, it applies to relationships,
but also just things like screwing around with homemade napalm or whatever you, you do your
dumb shit, and then you learn from it. I learned, for example, that you should not use a car battery
to try to make an electromagnet. Oh damn, what happened? It might have been a wave runner battery,
which would have been slightly smaller, but I was in my dad's workshop and I connected it for
just a second until it like shorted out or just terrified me and I disconnected it, but everything
metal jumped toward me a bit. I was in a like workshop full of like saws and hammers. So I was
just like, oh shit. That's amazing. That's cool. I had made one with like a nine volt and then like,
or not even the nine volt, one of the like ones that's a big brick that you can kind of hold in
your hand. I forget what the kind of battery is called. Is it C or D? Yeah, C or D, those big ones.
Something like the big, and then I was just like, Oh, this, you know, what'd be cool is if I used a
bigger battery, like I wonder how much, you know, magnetism I could generate. It turns out a lot.
But I'll say he like knocked everything out of all the cabinets and I just see the Walter White
van going to the wall. I'm glad you weren't hurt, but wouldn't have been interesting for you know,
the newspaper, like you're just ripped apart by every sharp thing in the office. And like,
like it's not even clear what really happened. Like it looks like a ghost just ripped you to pieces
and everything and shattered the whole workshop. Anyway, it's fun to humor about because nothing
happened. So yeah, but those little experiences, they, and I said it as a joke, but I mean it very
seriously, it gives you a sense of responsibility and accountability for your own stuff. And it's
valuable. Anyway, there are great reasons to try and rein that in. And then it turns out it's not
that hard to overcorrect. You're like, I came home once and I thought I'd cleaned up well enough,
but I hadn't. And my mom was like, immediately, what happened to you? Like what happened? And I
was like, he named the kid through a fireball at me. And because we'd set a ball in the newspaper
on fire and threw it at me. And as I dodged like the wind just blew it and it just like basically
gave me a haircut. And I thought I'd kind of, I don't know, combed over enough. But no, it was
obvious that like from across the room the second I came home. And so, you know, it is the kind of
thing if we've been goofing around a little more differently that day, and I was, you know, covered
in some residual axe body spray from one of our extermination missions or something, he could have
set me on fire, right? So I get where parents are coming from. And I think it's hard not to
understand why they're, they have this protection. No one wants their kid to be burnt to a crisp
because they're playing around with fire, right? So, but this gets stupid real fast, like when
you pass a law and parents can get arrested. And again, I think you said that they're making this
illegal, it's illegal to pass laws like this. I'm not sure what that means in the terms of
legalities, legalities, but basically they're making it so you can't pass laws such as your
10 year old is at the park down the street unattended, and you're going to jail for child
neglect. Specifically, I think the Texas law was you can't call the cops on a kid being left in a
park. That I mean, I guess they still could, but the cops aren't supposed to respond. And
the parent that the person who tried to do that would be the one that gets in trouble.
I wonder how young the kid's supposed to be. Because if I saw a baby in a park, I'd call the
police. If it's just sitting there under a tree, clearly just I don't know what the police do.
The police would do the same thing as you stand there until the parents showed up, right? Or
at the very least, I guess, what am I going to take it home? Like, or just walk away from the
park and leave it there while it's getting dark out? I feel like, yeah. So it's probably
I should be allowed to call the cops without getting in trouble. Put something up on Facebook,
you know, baby found, perhaps approximately yay, wait, I call it. It's at the park, if anyone
belongs to anybody. Staple ends, it's hella fun polls, like found baby. Yeah. Yeah. A lot of that
makes sense. No more digressions. We are going deep. All right. So yeah, sorry to fill this
with digressions. I brought up a lot of anecdotes and childhood and tried to
coke some out of you guys because height makes the case. And I think I agree with him that
having unstructured time as a child, and specifically unsupervised time is very valuable
for self development, self actualization and accruing a sense of responsibility.
You know, like I got hurt when I was off doing shit as a kid.
That's literally how you learn things. It's how you learn not to touch the stove by poking
the stove one point and being like, Oh, fuck, that burned my finger. I'm not going to do that
again. Yeah, I did that as a young scientist on my very first birthday. I touched the candle.
I'm told I don't remember this course, but in the pictures, there's there's a picture of me
eating the candle flame and then a picture of me crying. And so anyway, the idea of not never
having like, so we're going to go with more examples. I mean, everyone's aware of them
because height goes on about the met at some length of, you know, Oh, this college campus,
this professor in 2010 was caught reading Huck Finn, and now she's fired. Can I read one like
please paragraph that was really funny. Some recent campus actions border on the surreal.
In April at Brande University, the Asian American Student Association sought to raise
awareness of microaggressions against Asians through an installment on the steps of the
academic hall. The installation gave examples of microaggressions such as, aren't you supposed
to be good at math? And I'm colorblind. I don't see race. But a backlash rose among other Asian
American students who felt the display itself was a microaggression. The association removed the
installation and its president wrote an email to the entire student body apologizing to anyone
who was triggered or hurt by the content of the microaggressions. And you know, I think was an
actual quote triggered or hurt by the content of the microaggression. It's, it's, it was a good
example because like, it's obviously very well intentioned. And they did maybe, you know, they
could have not picked on a particular race for it or something. If they picked on one of everybody,
except for white people, because we can't be microaggressed, American Association doing it.
So wait, they made, they made the thing and then other Asian Americans at the school. Oh,
I got you. Oh, I have a quick, just as long as I'm we're toeing the line of annoying people with
race talk and all this stuff. The guy who I can't remember his name because it's not that popular
of a show called Kim's Convenience Store, the older brother, Charlie loves that show. She grew
up in a very Asian community season, whatever just came out five. I've been watching it. It's
so far my least favorite. Okay. Mainly because all of their problems are caused by them lying
or trying to cover something up and lying and then frustrating to watch and stacking lies
on top of lies. And like, it'd be great if like by five years in, you guys have learned that like,
stop doing that and your lives get way easier. Okay. But it's that sort of manufactured
conflict, right? Right, right. But anyway, the older brother, he's going to be,
there's a trailer for it. He's going to be not an Avenger, but he's going to be a Marvel hero.
Oh, cool. And apparently, like after they did, I think after they did Thor, maybe after they
did Black Panther, maybe both times he tweeted at Marvel Studios, because maybe he thought he
was a big enough person to get a response from Marvel Studios. He's like, great, now you got a
you got an African American hero. How about an Asian American one? I feel like it's a weird way
to ask, but it got it got him to gig. And then people are like, finally an Asian American hero.
He's Asian Canadian. That lying son of a bitch. I mean, Kim's Convenience Store takes place in
Canada. He's Canadian. He lives there. Okay. So he's not even representing the true Asian Americans.
Yeah. And I, my only thing that I realized when I was thinking about this was like,
I've never heard the term Asian Canadian before. And so like, I also wondered,
do they, do they call Black Canadians, like African Canadian? I've never heard that either.
You know, Canada is basically just America's hat. So they, they can all count as Americans too.
I mean, I get some angry emails from Canadians. I only bring that up because I,
I was morbidly curious and I didn't know how to Google. I guess I could just Google,
but I don't want to. Canadians are pretty chill, right?
Canadians or what? We're talking about stereotypes.
Yeah, they're super nice. They won't get mad at us. There will be some strongly
apologetic and courteous emails from our Canadian listeners.
I'm sorry you got the wrong impression about Canadians.
But I remember seeing something years and years ago about African American actor,
British, or African, African American British actor, Idris Elba being considered for James Bond.
And I'm like, hold up a minute. This doesn't scan.
In Britain, they call them mixed race.
Well, now I know. Yeah, but I just, I'm more accurate, honestly, like I actually sort of feel
like when we're trying to be all politically correct, be like Asian American or like African
American, like sometimes people are like multiple races.
Well, and this is the thing that was calling them the one that they look like the most, maybe.
That's usually, yeah. Yeah. I know we're going to be on digressing,
but this actually does sort of relate so I can tie it back in. But anyway, I knew that was,
that was, couldn't have been the way that they actually called them in Britain because
they wouldn't say African American British actor. Like that makes no sense.
Anyway, so, but this does tie in because, well, I got to start from the childhood thing. So
self actualization through alone time and responsibility. And now that we're all super
old, we remember having childhoods probably with many unsupervised hours, maybe per day,
maybe just in the summers, but like being left alone a lot. And maybe not, maybe not all three
of us, but I spent a lot of my childhood outside because I didn't have my parents didn't want to
pay for the good cable. And I wasn't allowed to play video games until I figured I was 14 or 16.
But like, honestly, I think that I turned out better because of that.
I liked being outside. I was out doing stuff a lot. And I guess what I'm getting at is some,
I would be curious. I was a low maintenance kid for my parents. I mainly like to read.
And then once computers and video games became a thing, I did that a lot. I just, I went out
sometimes and I was unsupervised during those times, but a lot of my time was spent doing
things that would be considered very safe anyway, like sitting in my room and reading.
How safe is reading though? What were you reading? Was it Satanic?
I mean, look at how I'd ended up. My parents made the wrong decision trusting books to be around me.
I don't know how, just as long as we're like saying, all of your stories are really dark,
which is hilarious. Like if you, if you meet Elias, like he's just super like nice, happy,
positive person. And then like, it's like, you just like channel it all out and you're writing.
I remember like the first time you sent me the short story version of,
What lies dreaming?
Yeah. And I actually had to stop reading it. Like, I think the rape scene or like shortly
after where I was just like, Oh man, like, I was actually kind of in a depressed period at that
point. I was like, I'm sorry. Did you know that it was, it was a great story. Actually, I went back
and like read it later when I was in a better headspace and loved it and recommended it to
people. But I was just like, hidden depths. All right.
Totally. I, I'm trying to drive home my point quickly because we spent a good useful amount
of time on other stuff, but we're going on too long. So the unsupervised or excuse me,
the super supervised childhoods of today's 20s on things led them always to have responsible
adults around. And like, it lets not, I won't bog us down with examples, but all of us experience
some form of bullying, all three of us anyway, many of our listeners, most bullying can be handled
yourself. And especially if you handle bullying yourself, you feel like a badass. If you have to,
or at least you feel like you took like, you know, your life into your own hands or you took
charge of your own life, you know, the, you know, the broadening of what's encompassed under the
umbrella term of bullying is, is things like exclusion, like we're going to go play tag,
you're not, that seems like different than this kid's hitting me. Now bullying is still a problem
if you're like afraid to go to school, or if you're, you know, stressed out about they did go into
school, then that's a problem. It's just a really unpleasant environment all the time. Even though I
like didn't let people bully me because I was a weird little ender child. I still was stressed
by the fact that people could try to bully me at any point. And I was kind of hyper aware of the
I was bullied, like, consistently, but moderately, you know, like I never lost any teeth or broke
any bones, but I was hit, you know, like, so, but it was, it was pervasive. So it would be,
it would be kind of like what you'd call like a hostile work environment, right? Although it's
more hostile, you know, I can't, you can't even lightly beat up your coworkers. But that was
basically school for me. But there's less you can do about psychological bullying to like,
if you resort to violence, then you're the one that gets in trouble. Exactly. Not always. Not,
not always. Like in my case, I was always the shortest kid in class. And I was like,
girl with blonde hair, blue eyes, and was known to be like a good student, etc. Teachers didn't
get to see this out of me that would just kick a kid in the nuts. But the kid had a fucking coming.
Probably not actually. In retrospect, I way overreacted. Like that's why I said ender, because
like, when I was a kid, I felt like the stakes were way higher than they probably actually were. But
if you are the shortest kid in class, and it feels really threatening, especially because a lot of
my experiences in recess, for example, was if I, they would like say tell the teacher,
someone's bullying you, and I'd go tell a teacher like, Hey, this kid keeps hitting me. And they'd
be like, just ignore it, or just avoid them. And I was like, he's chasing me and hitting me. Like,
well, just, just, you know, I'm not going to do anything about it. Figure it out. So it's like,
I'll figure it out. I covered my, I covered my arms and poison ivy, because I used to be
immune to it. And then gave like, I could have given a kid anaphylactic shock. I didn't fucking
know. Or like, if some kid was like, starting to bully me and giving me mouth, I would just go
right for the nuts. Like I said, to the point where like, Oh, God, I'm going too much in a
digression. I just thought this was funny. A male teacher at one point pulled me aside and said,
you should never kick boys in the nuts because you can make them infertile or something. And I
was like, I don't give a shit if they're bullying me that they're asking for it. Anyway, no, you're
good. Take, take control again. I think you are helping teach those young men the responsibility
of their life that there are actually, there are consequences. Yeah, the other actions that if
you, if you, if you antagonized a young Jace enough, then you might never get to have kids.
Exactly. Lesson learned in your, your lineages ended. I also convinced probably a shitty lineage
that I was being psychologically bullied by a bunch of girls and I convinced them that I was a witch.
You got to sacrifice just one of them and the rest of you alone.
No, actually, they just would talk and they seemed to think that like,
people couldn't overhear them. So I would just overhear them, like saying shit. And then later,
I would be like, Hey, I know what you said about me and repeat it back and be all creepy. And they
were like, Oh, nice. I'll power through some of this. So like, there was the, so I brought the
cuddling childhood because it carries on into adulthood. And so, you know, if you're, if you're
a kid and you can always go to a safe, a responsible adult for all of your problems,
you never learn to handle anything yourself. And then you move on to what we colloquially
consider adult life like college, and you think things should be the same way. I should never
be scared. I should never be stressed out. And you're at the same time told, these things should
scare and stress you out more than they probably do the normal, the, the healthy average person.
And so that's where the, the untruth of what doesn't kill you makes you weaker comes in a lot.
Like, essentially the belief that people are fragile, like so remarkably fragile,
that reading the wrong word in a book at college can send you into like a spiraling madness and
depression. Or the kids just aren't like smart enough, or I don't know if smart's the right word,
but like Huck Finn, for example, like there was a historical context.
Are we using the term kids to refer to, I don't know, like it is kind of,
I think I was thinking of like elementary or maybe probably middle school is when people
would have tended to read Huck Finn. There is literally a common term called college kids,
which you know, I think is sort of telling on its own that we're calling people in their 20s
the same word we could use for children still. Because they basically are children. They're
they're dumb. And especially because they're, they're inebriated all the time, but we don't have
time to bog down on that. We'll call them college adults. Well, I mean, I think part of it is also
that this is a problem with how the adults are treating them. Like the adults are the ones that
are thinking, oh my god, they're going to be so hurt and coddling them. Or we're going to get
sued. Well, we're fine. I think the adults are coming around to that. You know, like if if this
was six years ago in 2015, the adults were flabbergasted. They had no idea where this was
coming from. But these were the first generation of kids raised with the super careful upbringing
and raised online to reinforce all these ideas of like, oh no, you're you're crazy fragile. Yeah,
safe spaces was the term that took off in 2015. And again, like so much of this actually, like
you keep saying Steven, that was well intentioned. I think that like safe spaces became, I think
that started it with the feminist movement, where it was women who had maybe been raped or
been in abusive relationships wanted safe spaces. We have some more listener feedback.
Happy dog. Yeah. Yeah, so I think you're right that safe spaces started and they just sort of
make sense. And I don't want to get us too far. In fact, I want to just mention that like, it makes
the discussion of like, who gets to use which bathroom, not an insane one to have, or which
changing room at the store or something. There is a not stupid way to have that conversation.
I think like there's contexts where like, if it is a group of, what is it like, women's studies,
people that want women, women only space to talk about like, ways that they were abused,
or like if it is somebody who is scared of men, because yeah, maybe like they did have like,
a stepdad rape them, and then like a bunch of abusive experiences, and they're just scared of
men, like, it's kind of reasonable to maybe like, give that phrase to the safe space to talk about
that. But like, then I saw safe, like, one of the actual like, pushbacks I've seen on social media
are people saying like, hey, tumbler is not your safe space. For example, the person complaining
about, oh, a minor might see the sexy like, pan up of Connie from Steven Universe. And it's like,
well, actually, you're supposed, I forget if it's 16 or 18, but you're supposed to be 16 or 18.
When you make a tumbler account, you have to click a thing that says I've like, you know,
I confirm that I am above 16 or 18, in order to make an account. So like, kids shouldn't be on
there. And I've seen other people say, hey, like, tumbler is not your safe space. And also,
control your content. If you want to, like, if you're 14, and you've clicked yes, I am 18,
and you're on here, you have sort of decided for yourself, I am, I am going to possibly see some
content that might disturb me. And then also, maybe you can like, there's filters, there's,
you can filter out tags, you can, you know, decide which things you do and do not want to look at,
not telling other people, hey, you need to make this space safe for me or other potential minors.
It's like, first of all, you're not supposed to be here. Secondly, like, if you don't like it,
go somewhere else. And that's why I'm not, that's why I don't follow any spider subreddits.
So like, but the idea of, again, always being raised with a responsible adult in the room,
somebody can go to and say, they made me feel unsafe. They had a spider picture on their phone
that I saw when I was looking at their phone. Like, I mean, I don't know if anyone's gotten
in trouble for that specific thing, but that's the kind of thing too, or somebody's like, I'm
really triggered by, I'm a vegan, I'm triggered by me and somebody's like, posting pictures of
like their Thanksgiving dinner or something, and they're like, take that down. Yeah, I mean,
I haven't seen a case like this. But I also don't follow this that closely, because I don't
do a lot of outrage stuff. But, you know, imagine a college campus where sorry,
if you eat meat, you have to eat it in your dorm rather than the cafeteria because it offends
and scares the vegans and triggers them. Like, that's not unreasonable jump from where things
are in some places, right? But I think you can also politely ask for that without demanding it.
I've seen examples on Facebook of a bunch of friends who are like in social justice stuff. And
I've seen different like ways of people, for example, posting like, Hey, I get really upset
by pictures of like animal death or animal abuse. So like, if you're posting graphic things of animal
abuse, like even if you're trying to raise money for something, like, I would really prefer if you
hid those under a read more or put like, you know, trigger warning, there are pictures of animal
abuse in this scroll past, if that's not your thing, versus I've seen all caps screaming,
like, you were a bad, evil, terrible person. If you were doing this, and I will unfriend you,
and you should also be arrested. Like,
I mean, I think part of it is just, since this is a culture war, a war over what the norms of
society are supposed to be. Like one of our norms is that we don't walk around in a grocery store
or whatever in sexy lingerie or other, you know, clothes that are meant to titillate our partners.
Not that there's necessarily anything wrong with those, but it's just like a norm that
you're going to cover up a little more when you go to the store. And some people want to change
the norms to be people are more covered up or less covered up. And this is one of those things
where like, some people want to change the norms that you can't eat meat in public. And
like, I don't know if there could be, you know, a norm if there's Indian, some, maybe there's a
Hindu around. And so nobody should be able to eat beef in public because it would offend them or
maybe there's a Muslim around. So nobody should be able to pork in public because that would offend
them. And, and at some point it is just a war about the norms, like, you know what, we want our
norms to be that you can't eat any meat in public, or we want our norms to be that like,
fuck your veganism or your religion, people are allowed to eat meat, this should be a normal thing.
And at that point, I think it's just, it's justified over, over preferences, right? Like,
there is no objectively right or wrong in this case. Well, I mean, I think for me, if I had to,
I don't, I couldn't say as objective, but I think the best outcome would just be like,
sorry, your offense doesn't get to control how other people behave. Right. So like, if you're
offended by two people kissing, that doesn't mean that they shouldn't be allowed to kiss
in front of you or at our campus or whatever. So like, that's where this whole
What if you're offended by two people like fingering each other in public?
I mean, maybe they're, so you're right, that's a, that's a good example, because a lot of call,
I'm not aware of any campus that, you know, wants their students to be fucking each other in public,
right? So maybe within certain guidelines, you know, I don't know.
That's why I went with fingering, because it's less unhygienic, it still crosses norms.
But yeah, I, as long as you wash your hands.
Yeah, I guess what's tough for me is if people fall back on like, no, this is offensive. Like,
this is the same kind of bullshit reason people have been using to oppress people forever. And so
you can't elevate that to like, you know, 20 years ago, we were all around for the new atheism
movement. And they were like, Oh, that your talk of, you know, unreligion is offensive to me.
The answer was like, so what? And that was the fine comeback. Like, you're offended. Okay.
Well, sorry, but they don't jump on my book, right? This for everybody else.
Maybe part of it just has to do with whether or not you're forced to be there or not. Like, I could
see. I don't think that has much to do with it. Like, in Muslim countries, you can't put up pictures
of Muhammad because that's offensive. And I think it's more than offensive.
I'm talking about like, sort of what my preferences would be if I were dictator of the world and the
one that had to choose these things. Like, I would say that like, I think it like is polite to do
the thing of, Hey, I want to raise awareness for like, this animal abuse charity. Trigger warning,
there are some disturbing pictures under the cut here. And some like graphic descriptions of the
kinds of abuse that we're trying to fight against. So like, keep that in mind. And that's cool,
because it gives somebody the choice to see it or not. But then there's, for example, like, if you
are in school, you are kind of like there's compulsory education. And there's also just
like, people want to be in their college class, I guess, like, not being shown graphic like Holocaust
murders or something. And I think they sort of have the right to maybe, again, like politely,
not like, let's kick down the Dean's door and, you know, put them up on a flagpole or something.
In a class on World War Two history, as long as the professor says we're about to see some
graphic images, I think that's just the way it should be. Like, you can turn your eyes away if
you need to. Yeah, I remember in middle school, there was like, yeah, that they were going to
dissect frogs and worms and stuff at different points. But they gave other students the option
to opt out. And I chose to opt out at the time, because I did not want to dissect a frog, I probably
would now. But at the time, I was like, oh, the poor, you know, animal, I don't want to do that.
And I like that they gave it, it's like, you could either participate in the dissection,
or you could like read the chapter about it and look at some of the pictures, which were
drawings, and then like write an essay about it, where you still sort of maybe you miss out on
like the hands on experience, but like, it's still sort of, I guess it's the respect thing,
again, sort of giving giving people the right to control their own content.
And yeah, I think, but that's the, that's where there's this like creeping frailty among
some young adults and not so young adults, where you're in your 20s, there's somebody on campus
reading a book with, there was an example in the essay about somebody reading a book about
this, this march against the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s. And there was a KKK rally on the cover of
the book, and this offended a student slash employee. And I think that student got in trouble,
I forget what the, what the fallout was, but like, that shouldn't be enough. Plus the book
wasn't even pro KKK, it was about an awesome anti KKK movement. But I mean, so this, this kind of
falls into, I want to spend more time on each of the three untruths, but I'll power through real,
sorry, go ahead. Before we jump to the next untruth, I kind of, so there is a risk of, you
know, when you find a new thing that seems to explain a lot, suddenly everything in the world
is explained by that new thing. So I might be doing that right here. Everything is a clue.
But I think that it's entirely possible, and even likely in my opinion, that this is not something
where people are actually hurt by it. This is more an effect of people are being treated like
infants, adult people are being treated like infants, they have been for a decade plus by this
point. And this is one of the ways of fighting back and rebelling against that. This is one of the
few ways they can exercise power and, and strike back against the people who are basically their
prisoners who are treating them like infants. And I mean, it was brought up in the, in the book,
team 2.0 that I read that joining a gang is actually a very adult activity. We think of
it as a mature, but you're basically joining a military structure. You have duties that are
required of you when you join, you get benefits for it. And if you try to leave this organization
without their blessing, there's major consequences. And like, this is the same sort of thing where
people are trying to assert their lives by saying, we can hurt you too. Like this, you've been treating
us like children all this time, but we can do something to make your life terrible. Stop,
stop doing this. And who are they responding to, like the Dean at Yale? Yeah, any authority figure
in their life, because that's, I mean, it's the authority figures that are treating you like
children, like you don't have the same rights, you don't have the same ability to be an adult
human as anyone else. And this is one of the things you do. Like he said, the three things you
can do to get adult rights immediately in, in our world is to get pregnant, get married, or commit
a serious enough crime. And suddenly the system treats you like an adult in a lot of not what
completely, but in a lot more ways than they did before, because like, oh, you just murdered someone
at 16, you're going to adult court now. Unfortunately, the people are pushed to the extreme too,
because like joining a gang, you know, I don't encourage people to join gangs, I think that
they're usually pretty bad. But like, I could understand why someone would do it if that is
the only way that they could have any feeling of control over their own life, or what is it,
power autonomy, etc. Yeah, so I mean, I agree, it's because of the infantilization thing,
but I think it's less that people are actually children and more like that they're trying to
strike back, I think they're their power. Yeah, like, I can also understand some of the, I don't
agree with it, but I can understand where people are coming from with the extreme social justice
stuff. For example, like, there's the college I went to, or university now, Richard Stockton
University. Richard Stockton was one of the founding fathers who's like, less well known, but
he kept slaves. And there was a, I think, bronze bust of him, like displayed prominently that
some coalition of students like demanded they take down. And I think they did because they're
like, I'm offended by you glorifying this slave holder. And it's like, there's an argument that
like, okay, well, there's a historical, like he also did a bunch of good things. And maybe we
could have that nuanced view, but like from the perspective of black people who keep having to
see slaveholders, like glorified and talked about as though like these were, you know,
these awesome superheroes of the past, that's a way that you can sort of fight back for like,
no, actually, I'm sick of having like the shit shoved to my face.
I think those are some good steelman arguments. I don't know if they account for some of the
behaviors, you know, like yelling at the Dean, because you find Halloween costume is offensive,
you know, you go to Yale, Yale doesn't go to you, right? Like, it.
Yeah, although like going to Yale is a way that you can get a job. I mean, like,
I guess you could go to another university, but it's like considered one of the,
it is one of the Ivy League schools. It's prestigious and so forth and so on.
Maybe I'm modeling college is wrong, but I kind of picture it like a curated online space where
it's like, you know, if you come to a discord or you're following a Tumblr or something,
you don't get to tell them how to do stuff because you now you're here.
Well, don't get me wrong. I think it's egregious bullshit. It's just in expressing your power is
not necessarily a good thing. There's a lot of blatant abuses of power that people, I mean,
that's bullying, right? Is just using your power because you can and it makes you feel good. I
think this is the same thing. Yeah, unfortunate results of radicalization, like the reason you
might join a gang because the system's broken. So like, it's a reasonable or like, it's an
understandable thing for someone to do. But if young adults weren't treated like children,
this probably would happen less, I guess, is my thesis because everything goes back to that for
me right now. Yeah, I mean, there could be a lot more distress tolerance actually taught in school
too. Like, I still am annoyed by how little like social skills and just mental health skills are
not taught in school because people don't think that that's something you should learn in school.
You should learn it, I guess through osmosis or something. I think the only thing you should
learn in school is like very basic skills like reading and arithmetic. And like, like if this
was taught in school, it would be probably taught as badly as most things in school are taught. And
just spend less time in school and let people pick up the resilience outside of that.
There's really useful things to like learn though, you know, the example of CBT is actually like,
I think that's a skill that would benefit everybody to learn because
Yeah, but if you force them to learn it, they're going to learn it shittily.
If people want to go and learn it, then they actually pick it up.
I think a case could be made that like, I don't know, there's things I am glad to have learned
in school. For example, I'm glad that my school was one of the few that still had a semi functional
home X class, where they had already gotten rid of a lot of those, because it's like,
the whole, oh, well, school should be, you know, for training people to work in basically like an
office job. So they were getting rid of a bunch of, you know, things that were like, oh, life
skills that like maybe you should be learning these from your parents or something. But a lot
of kids parents don't teach them how to cut a check, cook food, repair clothing. I don't know.
Home X was such a waste of time for me. It was it was another recess like, oh, you teach me how
to follow the instructions on a box to bake a cake. I already knew how to do that because I can read.
So many of my adult friends didn't know how to microwave a bag of popcorn without burning it
or fry an egg. They'd probably learn after two or three attempts of trying to microwave a bag of
popcorn. I have friends and like past romantic partners who never learned it, because they felt
so embarrassed about being bad at it. I guess that's like sort of another topic where maybe you
ingrain the skill in people on how to read instructions and how to, no, I mean, not rudely,
but also how to Google things that you don't know about. Like I, all I didn't Google it, I watched
the inductive reasoning type classes would be pretty sweet. Yeah. Like I watched a great,
there's a great YouTube series, Nets, what I reckon, as in short for Nathaniel. He's an Australian
guy, he swears a lot and he teaches you how to cook. And it's all, it's all like apocalypse
based because we're all at home. So welcome back to your own fucking kitchen champions. We're going
to make chicken parmageddon. He's Australian, so I assume he drops the C word a lot.
Oh, yes. Okay. But anyway, this isn't the three hour podcast. This is the two and a half hour
podcast and we're past our three hours. So I tell you what, I'll wrap up with a couple of sentences.
If anyone thought this was interesting, wants us to do more on this, let us know. Or if you
want us to go back to doing like interesting stuff and talking about like cool science shit or
something. I do think this is interesting and relevant. I'm sorry, I got so off-tracked by
everything. I had a good time. Like I think maybe we could come back next week or something.
Because we only touched on one of your three things, right? One of Height's three things. I
didn't make a shit up. But yeah. I mean, we'll maybe come back to this in a couple of weeks,
maybe not. But I do want to just emphasize because I want to rail on this a lot harder than I got a
chance to. But there are a couple of good virtues coming out of this. A lot of like the terrible
toxic shit that everyone hates, call out, cancel culture, all that stuff. There are virtuous
mindsets from which that behavior can arise and good outcomes. Like even though it is a weapon
that is wielded incorrectly and like over broadly, I think way too often, I think the goal is like
accountability for being shit. If you're out there harassing people and you're actually doing that,
someone should know and you should get some turbulence going on until that stops, right?
I think the Me Too movement was a kind of fallout of this sort of mentality. And that's
just awesome to the extent that people weren't insane about it and saying Terry Cruz wasn't
allowed to participate. The initial Me Too movement was really good. I had Harvey Weinstein out of
there. Yeah. And so there was pervasive horrible shit going on. I don't know if anyone else loves
Kesha as much as I do, but was it her most recent or second most recent rainbow, I think?
It was basically all about her manager was one of these Weinstein characters. And it was about
overcoming all that stuff. It's great. And she's one of the few artists I can understand when she
sings. And don't get me wrong, Me Too was great. The one gripe I had with it was the thing I read
about people saying, it was specifically Terry Cruz because he was like, oh yeah, Me Too and
they're like, no, fuck you, sit down because you're a guy. I didn't like that.
It went off the rails. It started out great, but almost everything else in the culture war,
it went badly eventually. But that said, it was one of the positive aspects to come out of this
kind of mentality. So I'm actually glad about a lot of the raised awareness of things too.
I think that attacking the dean for Halloween costumes or something is taking things way too
far. But I also do remember being a kid and being in a Halloween store and like every other
costume was some like racist stereotype. Like there would be like geisha girl. And it was
like, first of all, I'm like, that's a chunk. So I'm not a kimono. And like, okay, I was a little
married kid, but like, you know, you'd see like a like a thug costume where it's like blackface.
And like, yeah, like there's some like pretty offensive Halloween costumes that used to and
still exist. There's also the thing of the like sexy female version of everything.
I love the sexy banana. I like the way that people just started subverting it. Like, I never
actually did this, but I thought it was funny. I really wanted to be sexy Emperor Palpatine.
Nice. Sexy job. The like emaciated scary face thing, but then maybe just have like the robe
be like a mini skirt and have like high heels and like fucking fishnets or something. I don't know.
See, I think that's the appropriate way to respond to a bad costume is to, you know,
challenge it and make it your own. Not attack the Dean about it. Well, and, you know, that was
that was a weird case. And one that I don't want to like make the whole platform of my gripe with
this stuff. But it's like, just there's there's there's a way to handle disagreements and conflicts
and and life stresses that doesn't involve running to your parents or running to the,
you know, the staff at wherever you work or running to Twitter to get a professor you don't
like fired or something. Like you can you can resolve a problem yourself. Like there was this
quick example of somebody works an office job and this all sounds made up because I have none of
the details. Handy isn't writing this down for this episode. But anyone who's worn a tucked-in
shirt before knows that when you sit down, it becomes untucked when you stand up. So unless
you do the military took this guy apparently wasn't. Or he didn't have that cool thing where
it's like a garter around your leg that you strap to your shirt. I left my wedding so I could do
all the dancing and stuff. My shirt didn't my untuck it to levels were perfect. But
stand up at his desk, tuck his shirt in, go off, go to the Xerox, go to the bathroom, whatever.
Well, rather than his I mean, so first off, you might reasonably suggest that his female co-worker
who reported him to HR might have been a little oversensitive. It's it, but maybe there's some
good reason for it, etc. But rather than say, Hey, man, you're making me uncomfortable. Again,
whether the uncomfortable, the reasonableness of the uncomfortable aside, or the the yeah.
They go to HR and say this guy is sexually harassing us. And he's like, What are you guys
talking about? Well, you're reaching into your pants every time you get up. It's like, I'm tucking
my shirt in. I'm not I'm not fondling my dick. Like this is this is a behavior that I need to do
to comply with the dress code for the place. I've got tucked in shirt, you know. So like,
I guess what I'm getting at is there are ways to like resolve. So like, again, owning the Palpatine,
the sexy everything costume, there are ways to resolve these things that don't involve running
to the authorities or or censorship. That's like, one of the things that I wanted to
do and the or before we move on, actually two things. I think that the really bad outcome
is that like, for example, like banning Huck Finn or whatever, you can as like a learning
institution, I don't know, for example, the the what is his name, Richard Stockton bust,
instead of just taking it down. Maybe they could have negotiated something where there's a plaque
that they they they could change the wording of the plaque to be like, Hey, Richard Stockton was a
complicated historical figure who did a lot of good things, but he was also a slave owner. And
we're putting this bust here because he was the founder of this school. But like, if you want to
learn more, here's a website that, you know, it seems really weasley to me. I like the idea of
not venerating the guy like he was perfect by just if you just have a statue with the guy's name
and age or date or something on it, right? If you do say, hey, this was a complicated figure, but
we found that his contributions to the founding of the country that you're living in and attending
school in was valuable. You know, check out the our web, you know, our yell.com slash or whatever
Stockton ed.edu slash statue for some details on our complicated thoughts on the matter.
I think that's not a that bad middle of the road option. I think if you got a bust of someone up,
you're venerating them. And I mean, I there can be an argument made that that along the lines of,
you know, what he deserves to be venerated for the good things he did. And in his time, this slavery
thing was whatever, I don't know, whatever kind of argument you would want to make. But like,
if you have a bust up of Stalin or Dick Cheney or something and being like, you know, this was a
complicated guy with a lot of good and bad things in his past, go to this website link to check out
the controversy, like, you still got a bust up of those people. Sure. But I don't know having the
fact that they existed, or just saying that they only did good things. Yeah. And I do think that
you're right. Having a statue up venerates a person, but especially to there's something to
be said about like, old art. You know, I'm not a very art minded person. But if something is 200
years old, and you're like, Yeah, sure, the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia is problematic for reasons
X, Y, and Z. But it's someone could I'm just making this up. But like, some some artifacts like
that, you know, it's like, Yeah, but we're not going to we're not going to throw it in the incinerator
because it's 300 years old and we like it, right? The thing I would worry about is that like, extreme
censorship of like, let's just get rid of books that offend people, let's not teach classes that
might hurt people's feelings actually has the opposite of the intended effect where you're
just not teaching people about the like, complexity of historical events. And that like,
you're actually sort of covering up bad things that happened. That's different from having a
statue of someone up though. That's why I was saying maybe that wasn't the best example. I was
just trying to think of something to use as like a concrete example. I mean, pick somebody awesome
that you know, again, all the founding the found all the founders had slaves, right? So like, it's
I mean, basically, if not all of them, the super majority of them. Yeah, I mean, like, it was
very common for white men of the upper class at the time to have slaves, and they were all white
men. So like, you know, they're the problematic history of the United States, by today's standards,
it's good that we don't operate that way anymore. Like, that's valuable. But you can't say they were
shit people, because they lived 250 years ago when everybody was shit people. Like, you know,
I don't know if this is true, but hypothetically, it could be true. Let's say Gandhi hated black
people. Like,
Gandhi had problematic views about the Holocaust.
Sure. So, you know, whatever, whatever legit issue there is with Gandhi, you can take the good,
acknowledge the bad, but not throw the baby out with the bathwater, right? Like,
to throw out Gandhi and all the good he did throw up Martin Luther King, Jr. All the good he did.
Like, if you if you are holding everybody to the perfection standards of 2021,
you're not going to find anybody from history that is perfect, right?
Also, like, what things are we going to be doing and saying that, like, people 50 years from now
are going to think we're a part?
Hopefully some stuff, right? I want to, I want to say, oh, no, I'm serious. I want society to
keep moving forward. Oh, I think that there, there, there will be things that I hope that they,
they are more wise in how they judge their descendants or their ancestors than we are.
But anyway, we are wrapping up just because I think we're over time, but we're never out of time
to thank this week's patron. And this week's patron is Alex Weik, who is a total badass for
helping support the show. So thank you, Alex. We couldn't do this without you. And I hope you
enjoyed today's episode. And Alex, if you have a comment about whether we should talk about this
more or move on to a different topic, we will triple the weight of your opinion on this one.
That's right. Yeah. Ping us on Discord or write us at Bayesian Conspiracy Podcast at gmail.com.
Or maybe submit a audio clip if you want us to air that. Yeah. Or even call in somehow.
All of those are great options. Cool. So thanks again to Alex and everybody for hanging out
listening. And we'll see you back here. Same rat place, same rat channel in two weeks. Bye. Bye,
everybody.
