So it's a great pleasure for me to welcome Kunya from my class at Florida State University.
Kun is PhD from Indiana and then he did post-op at Princeton and Caltech, I believe, and then
he became a faculty at Florida, and he has worked on really interesting problems in current
physics including quantum whole effects, superconductivity, magnetism, and many other things.
But today he's going to tell us about entanglement and thermalization in interacting for me on the system.
Thanks a lot, Son, for the kind invitation. It's great honor for me to be here to deliver this.
Okay, so I need to do the slideshow. This Karanoff way, what it's not doing.
Okay, if you're coding, you need to slide show. Yeah, we'll try clicking the thing at the bottom.
Yeah, it was fine until I clicked I got it because I guess it started recording, so...
Ah, well it's showing... Yeah, okay, good, yeah. Yeah, it's great honor to be here to actually give
this Karanoff seminar, who of course is a great hero of mine. In some sense the topic of the talk is
kind of fitting because it touches upon some foundational issues of statistical mechanics as
we're going to see. So the main results I'm going to report are mainly obtained by two excellent
postdocs, Xinhua Lai, who was with us for a few years but left for other endeavors many years ago
now, and Ken Ma is actually a current postdoc. I'll also report some earlier work done in collaboration
with a former student of mine, Wenxin Ding, who is on the faculty now at Anhui University in China.
So the question that I will try to address a little bit is can you actually do statistical
mechanics or can statistical mechanics emerge from a single state instead of an ensemble, which of
course is the usual starting point of a Sted Mac, if you for example read the Karanoff's book,
Textwork on Statistical Physics, and I'm going to further actually simplify the problem by focusing
on a single eigenstate to take a time evolution out of the picture, and the answer is believed to
be yes if ETH holds. ETH stands for eigenstate summarization hypothesis, which actually has a
variety of closely related but not identical definitions in the literature. So the definition
that I'm going to use for this talk is if you have a subsystem of a whole system that is in
eigenstate, and if the subsystem has a reduced density matrix that is thermal, then I would say
that ETH holds. So I'll try to give partial answers to this question. So the first set of results
which addresses this is we're going to show that actually if you start from a highly trivial,
totally trivial, seemingly trivial system of free fermions, already the vast majority of eigenstates
satisfies this property. In particular, a consequence of that is the entropy of the
subsystem is exactly the same as the entanglement entropy. So entanglement plays a huge role
in eigenstate summarization. Of course, being a trivial and totally integrable system,
that's not the whole thing, and we do have, even though rare, but well-defined and highly
classifiable, so the so-called atypical states that actually do not satisfy this property.
And then we will try to make this situation more realistic by turning on some weak interactions,
and without integrability, we're going to argue that in this case, you actually do eliminate
these outliers or atypical states, also known as scar states, and the probability of finding
such a state actually vanishes very, very fast as you go to a large system size. I'm going to
quantify that statement. So to begin though, I will actually give a very quick review of entanglement
including the area law satisfied by the ground states and some of its important corrections,
but of course, all the laws are designed to be violated, and there are actually also well-understood
violations of this ground state area law in systems with the Fermi or perhaps the less familiar
so-called both surfaces, and we actually find some useful applications of this area law violation,
and then I'm going to get on to the main results that I outlined in the previous slide,
first to show that actually for the highly excited free Fermi states, you actually have volume law,
and the volume law is actually related to the area law by a novel duality,
and at least for typical states, and we came up with a term, eigenstate typicality to describe
the situation, and finally get to the second main result, which is these atypical states are
actually eliminated by weak interactions, and this realizes the so-called strong version of
VKH, namely there aren't any outliers. So that's a start from the very beginning, this EPR paper,
which of course started the business of entanglement, of course after this year's Nobel Prize,
it doesn't need any introduction anymore, but I did learn something quite useful for me
by getting up early to watch the announcement, which is Schrodinger actually later in that
year gave an affirmative answer to the question posted in the title of the EPR paper, in which he
said that entanglement is not one but the characteristic of quantum mechanics. So I guess
the term entanglement was introduced by Schrodinger in that paper, and I heard in a separate paper on
the same year he also introduced the most famous cat in the entire world. Okay, so how do you actually
Yeah, was there a question? No, okay. Wasn't meant to be a joke, but
so this is the thing I like, the real audience talk instead of Zoom talk, because I'm very nervous
to give jokes. Zoom talk, because you feel totally embarrassed when there's no
response from the audience. Anyway, but I wasn't expecting that. So the way to actually
detect the presence of entanglement is to start from the simplest example, a bell state
with two spins. In a pure, it's a two spin system in a pure state, but Alice and Bob only
individually has access to one degree of freedom, but not the other. And for Alice, if he actually
looked at the left spin, it is actually in the mixed state, and you can quantify the amount of
entanglement between the two spins by calculating the entanglement entropy, which in this case
happens to be log two. Now, of course, in contrast to that, we are not particularly interested in
entanglement between finite number of degrees of freedom. We are interested in entanglement
in systems with many degrees of freedom. So here, the most important result is aerial law,
satisfied by ground states, and that can be even proved a rigorous way in some settings,
which says that if you have an extensive system, and if you look at the entanglement
relationship between A and B, then the entanglement entropy scales as the area separating these
two systems. Now, of course, the aerial law has a coefficient that's non-universal, and in particular,
in the field theory where you have infinitely many degrees of freedom, this aerial coefficient
usually actually diverges. So as a result, to use this aerial law like behavior to characterize
phases in condensed matter, we actually look for corrections, subliminal corrections to the
aerial law. Here, the most important result is that from Kitaya Frisco and Levin and Wen, which
showed that in the topological phase, this subliminal correction is actually universal. It
actually measures the total quantum dimension of the topological phase. So I first heard about this
result when Mike gave a talk in the fall of 2005 at Harvard. I think that was your junior
fellow interview talk. I was in the audience because I happened to be on sabbatical there.
It was super impressive talk, but the thing that impressed me most was a remark that Mike
gave at the very beginning, which I don't know if you still remember. He said that usually,
he beats Kitaya in publishing an important result, but that's a rare exception.
So that was super, super impressive for me. We're going to actually hear a lot about
rare exceptions in this talk, but not quite as interesting as that one. Anyway, so this actually
inspired me, as a matter of fact, to look for subliminal corrections in some other system like
those with conventional orders. So I think we were among the first to point out that if you have,
let's say, a spontaneous assembly breaking, excuse me, like a neo-order, you actually get a subleading
correction that could be logarithmic divergent. Now, it's still subleading to the aerial law,
but it's actually not a number, but it's actually a growing correction. And stronger results were
obtained by these authors who actually found that there is a universal coefficient of that log
associated with the number of ghost-stone modes associated with the symmetry breaking.
But these are still subleading corrections. What about violations? Well, it turns out the violation
of this aerial law is very common in one dimension, usually in a logarithmic fashion. And here,
the strongest result is we have a conformal critical point. The coefficient of this log
violation is universal related to the central charge. Well, it turns out similar logarithmic
violations were also present in non-conformal critical points, including, for example, random
singlet-like critical points in disorder systems. On the other hand, beyond one dimension, such
violations are actually much rarer until, well, probably not known to most of you, until a result
beyond that. I'm going to flash later on. The only known result was actually for free fermions
with Fermi surfaces. So this was actually also something I learned also during the same
sabbatical, actually, from other people. So it turns out when you have a Fermi surface,
you also have a logarithmic violation to the aerial. Now, of course, if you apply this to one
d, d is equal to one, so that actually reduces to the same log. So in particular, you can even
calculate while using some mathematical conjecture, which might have been proven, actually, since then,
for this aerial coefficient. So this is the result of Geoff and Klitsch, who showed that
the aerial coefficient can be written as a convolution of the Fermi surface, which is a
surface in momentum space, and the area in the real space where you divide the system into two.
So my first attempt to actually learn something about entanglement is trying to understand the
connection between this higher-dimensional log violation and one-dimensional log. So to understand
that, the easiest thing to do is to actually first set up a fake high-dimensional system,
which is just a collection of parallel wires. So these are really one-dimensional systems,
but then you artificially divide them up, for example, in a two-dimensional way,
and you ask, what would be the coefficient of the log violation? Well, it's very simple. It's just
a need to, let's say, look at the convex case, which is a bit simpler. How many intersections
your subsystem A has with these wires, and that will give you the log coefficient. Now,
because this is really a decoupled 1D system, for free fermions, you actually have a flat Fermi
surface, and the size of the Fermi surface along, let's say, the y-direction is actually inversely
proportional to the separation between the wires. So in terms of this simple counting,
it can actually precisely be written in this form that's written down by Geoff and Critch.
So it actually works, but this actually turns out to be a starting point, at least to give a
heuristic understanding of the genuine, let's say, two- or high-dimensional system. So in a
general two- or high-dimensional system, you have, for example, a circular. It doesn't have to be,
but let's assume that we have a circular Fermi surface. So what you can do is you try to relate
that to a collection of 1D systems by dividing the Fermi surface into many, many small patches,
and neglect with each patch its curvature. So then you flatten each patch, so it has a flat
Fermi surface, kind of like this thick high-dimensional system. But then you treat the degrees of
freedom associated with each patch, or maybe each pair of patches, as a set of one-dimensional
systems, and then you add up their separate contributions to entanglement. This is heuristic,
of course, and then you actually recover the Geoff and Critch's formula. So it gives you a,
well, as I said, heuristic way to understand the GK formula. But the advantage of this understanding
is that now you can ask if you turn on some interactions, whether this will remain robust
enough. So it turns out this patching and dividing the degree of freedom into individual patches
is the starting point of the, I guess, old-fashioned way now of both an addition of Fermi surface.
So basically, you both analyze the degree of freedom associated with each patches because
they are modeled as a decoupled wires, and you introduce both on fields associated with them.
Now, you can turn on Fermi-liquid interactions, which are actually quadratic in these both on fields,
that actually is between different patches. So this, of course, is the old-fashioned way of
doing both an addition. I read recently that Son's group has a new way to do that, which I'm very
eager to learn about actually through this visit. So the advantage of this is that you have a quadratic
both on theory, which you can diagonalize. And once you diagonalize it, well, it looks very much
like the free fermions. But the problem, of course, is that the diagonal degrees of freedom and the
original degrees of freedom are actually not related to each other locally. So if you want to
actually ask how the entanglement entropy changes, it's actually quite a bit of a challenge.
So because this is not so closely related to the main results I'm going to report, I'm just going
to flash this, that we actually found a way to do that, and through a sequence of procedures,
we came to the conclusion that, well, there are immediate corrections because of this
non-local relation between the diagonal fields and the original fields, which, of course, we understand
is satisfied as a GP formula. But that correction is only at the area of our level. But the coefficient
of the logarithm is actually not affected. So that's the main conclusion of this work.
Yeah.
I'm wondering if this really comes from the artifact that you assume the patch theory is valid.
Say the picture that the radial direction is still from 1D, 1D, 1D, CFT, and we though that's
central charge. Yeah. So that's why I said that it's it's it's curious. But at least if you push
this, you would say that, well, fermi-liquid interaction does not change this result. I mean,
if you go one step further from that. And as I said, there are now better ways to do polarization,
and I want to learn whether this can be improved using the new methods. And I'm not disagreeing with
you. Yeah. Okay, so, well, is there any, well, okay, so this is the violation of the law. So that
sounds like a bad thing, but can we actually find some usage of it? But the answer turned out to be
yes. So turns out, there are, I guess, in particular, holographic ways to construct exotic phases of
matter. But the microscopic description of those phases or states that you actually construct,
are not so easy to not so easily accessible. So one of the easiest, if not the easiest way to
detect where the state that you that you have constructed has a fermi surface or not is to
actually look at its entanglement property and ask if there's a lock. So so that's at least
qualitatively is a diagnostic of fermi surfaces. So again, here we took one step further. So turns
out, you can actually even determine the shape of the fermi surface by systematically change the way
that you actually do the cut. So basically, you can set up a 1D system along a particular direction
and do a 1D cut. And the 1D cut will give you a log coefficient that is proportional to the projection
of your fermi surface, in this case, a three-dimensional fermi surface, onto that direction.
So this is very, very similar to the experimental way of determining fermi surface, shape of fermi
surface through quantum oscillation. There, of course, you apply the direction of magnetic field,
which plays a role very similar to the direction of the entanglement that I'm setting up,
and that measures the extrema fermi surface area along that direction. So basically,
this is like an entanglement way of doing quantum oscillation. So you can actually
determine the fermi surface shape. So very recently, Charlie Quinn's group actually used,
I would say, a related idea to actually determine the fermi surface topology using this log. I mean,
it's not exactly the same thing, but as far as I can tell, closely related. So basically, you have
to divide your system very judiciously, and I think this is a procedure that Mike is very,
very familiar with. And if you do the division correctly and measure the mutual information,
which of course is very closely related to entanglement, in these, among these divisions,
of course, most of the log violation will actually cancel, but there will be a residual log
whose coefficient is actually determined by the Euler characteristics of the fermi surface.
So the main message here is these logs are actually useful in determining both the fermi
surface geometry and even topology. Okay, so obviously, the existence of the extended fermi
surfaces is crucial for the area of law violation beyond one dimension. But what about bosonic
systems? Well, bosons actually normally do very different things. They can go critical,
but when they go critical, they don't actually go critical along a fermi surface
or extended surface in momentum space. Usually, they actually are soft only around individual
points in the momentum space. And in those cases, you actually don't get a violation
beyond one dimension. Now, there are, of course, bosonic systems that actually
supports emergent fermi surfaces. One example, this is just as a representative,
would be some specific fermi liquid states that has spin-down fermi surfaces.
There, you, people have actually shown in stringing measures that you also have,
you also have logarithmic violation of area law, but I would come up as the same origin
as the violation due to the existence of fermi surface. On the other hand, people, myself included,
have actually proposed systems or models that actually has extended surfaces along which
gapless bosonic excitations exist. And these are, well, I guess due to a lack of imagination called
both surfaces. And there are concrete models that actually can be written down, which are basically
free boson or free harmonic oscillator models. And we showed that actually in the presence of such
both surfaces, you also have this area law violation, which is actually logarithmic.
I have actually several slides to actually demonstrate that, but due to lack of time,
I'm not going to go through them, but if people are interested and ask about it, I can actually pull
them up. Okay, so a quick summary, so as far, so entanglement entropy area law is widely obeyed
by ground states of local Hamiltonians. Violations of this area law is actually
quite rare about 1D. Well, for the examples, which are the only known examples, certainly only known to
me, that I have presented, it requires either the presence of a fermi surface or both surfaces.
And we have a reasonable understanding of them because they can be related to the 1D
logarithmic violation. So now the question or the challenge is what about highly excited states,
which are the ones that are more related or more relevant to this question that I posed at the very
beginning of whether ETH holds or not. So there, the expectation is that, well, they should have
volume law. And one obvious reason is that, well, if ETH were to hold, the entanglement entropy
should be the same as the thermal entropy, which obviously is extensive. And the reason people
they should, people believe they should have volume law entrapies because, well, for highly excited
states, there's really nothing special about them. You should view them just as some random state in
here of the space. Now, to me, that's not so convincing because after all, these are still
identity states of local Hamiltonians. So, okay, so I wasn't convinced, well, until
what we did that I'm going to report. And before what we did, there was almost no explicit results
other than limited numerics. So to address the origin of this volume law, entanglement entropy
for highly excited states, we are going to actually go back to free fermions, where I'm going to show
that actually there is a duality, there are two related dualities. One is duality between momentum
and real space, and also there's a duality between ground state and excited states. So let's actually
start from the momentum and position duality. So to actually formulate an entanglement property,
entanglement problem for free fermions, you need to specify two boundaries. You first
have to specify a state, which of course is an occupation pattern in a momentum space,
and then you have to do a cut or bipartisan in real space. So that's my subsystem A and the white
area is, white region is a supplement. Well, this duality between momentum and position space is
if you actually interchange these two systems or these two partitions, you actually get exactly the
same entanglement spectrum. So let me explain why that is true. So the nice thing about free
fermions is that whether it's ground state or excited state, you always have the weak theory,
which means the two-point function or the two-point correlation matrix determines everything,
including the reduced density matrix. You can actually relate the reduced density matrix
to the two-point function this way, but the specific expression doesn't really matter.
So once you can actually set up some relation between the two-point functions, between the
exchanged systems, you can actually find some specific relation between the reduced density
matrix and entanglement. So the key point is that the state that you are actually working with,
as I said, is a set of occupation patterns. So that's a projection operator into the occupied
states. Now when you calculate the two-point function, when you calculate the two-point function
of a particular subsystem, all what you need to do is to project this occupation pattern into
the real space. So if I copy the occupation pattern in momentum space or the projection
into the subsystem that you are interested in, the two-point function matrix is just RPR.
Now when you do this position and momentum exchange, the corresponding two-point function
matrix is PRP. Now the key point here is that P and R are both projection operators,
meaning that when you square it, you get the same state. So therefore you can start from a
particular eigenstate of M, the original two-point correlation matrix, you can construct actually
an eigenvector of the dual system by simply projecting it to, let me see,
right. So because this is already projected to the subsystem already, you can actually show
that this actually is also an eigenstate of the PRP with exactly the same eigenvalue. So all
what you need to do is to actually use the take advantage of the fact that these are projection
operators. Are there some assumptions on what the topology of the real space in the momentum
space looks like? All that's needed here is the fact that these are projection operators.
I see. So this is immediately telling you that actually the two correlation matrices
will have the same spectrum. So this was the result obtained by Juan and Arobo's 10 years ago now.
So this actually allows us to actually establish a dual, yeah, okay.
Could you clarify what A is? A is the subsystem. A is this area, this subsystem where you are
actually calculating the entanglement entropy. So you have the first thing on the next slide
is a projector onto the lattice sites in A? No. So R is a projection in real space that projects
into the region A. P is the projection operator projecting into your Fermi surface, your Fermi
C if you wish. Yeah, yeah. So they are both projection operators, even though they are
projection operators in different spaces. So this allows us to actually establish a duality
between ground states and excited states. So let's start from a very regular looking
occupation pattern with a nice looking Fermi C, which probably can be written as the ground
state of some nice local free Fermi and Hamiltonian. But now I do a highly, highly unusual division. So
my subsystem A is actually a collection of these origin dots, which of course can be
arbitrary shaped. Here I made them looking more regular than it needs to be. Okay, so they are
very fragmented. So now you ask, when I do this kind of division, what kind of entanglement
should I get? Well, this is a ground state, so I should get aerial. But because my division
is highly fragmented, the area actually scales with volume. So it turns out the aerial law
gives you a volume law, entanglement entropy scale. Okay, so now I apply this duality of
switching exchange between momentum and real space. Now I have a very good, nice looking
subsystem in real space, which is what people normally would do when they study entanglement.
But now look at the corresponding occupation pattern in momentum space. That's highly, highly
irregular. And that corresponds to a highly excited state. So you find that I can actually now,
using the result I've turned here to tell how the entanglement entropy would scale for a regular
way of doing this division, but for highly excited state. And I, as I very argued, that should scale
at the bottom. So this actually tells you that the aerial law of the ground state and the volume
law of highly excited states are really two sides of the same coin, at least for these
free-formant systems. Okay. So, yeah. Was there a question? Yeah. So you also have to swap who
is who, right? So it's the, in the top picture, it's the area scales like the volume and position
space. Yeah. In the second one, it's the area scales like the volume and momentum space.
Okay. So we're asking about how it depends on the area and position space. That's a different
question. That's how things scale with the area bounding your Fermi surface in momentum space.
Okay. So they are actually the same. So it turns out the density of the states that you have in
momentum space also scales with the volume of real space, right? Because if you have a finite
system size, your momentum is actually related to the next slide. But the point is that the density
of the momentum points that's actually consistent with our system size scales with the volume.
I mean, fundamentally, the number of degrees of freedom is the same in momentum space and real
space. So they must have the same scaling behavior. But I think that point will be made
clearer when we actually go through the next set of slides, which actually we're going to
try to establish even stronger without them. So this, of course, is an argument that for typical
highly excited states, the entanglement should scale as volume. But it does not yet tell you
whether this volume law scaling is the same as thermal entropy or not. Okay. So the thermal
entropy, of course, has to scale as a volume. But having a volume law scaling, that's a necessary
but not sufficient condition to establish the entanglement entropy being the same as thermal
entropy. And actually, strictly speaking, if you want to establish ETH, you need to actually
prove that not only the entanglement entropy, but the entire reduce of density matrix should
take the same form as the thermal density matrix. And that's exactly what we are trying to establish
for typical highly excited states. So again, the key point is that because of the presence of
weak theorem, all you need to prove is the two point function or two point matrix is thermal.
So let's see how can we actually do that. So let's actually calculate the two point
collision matrix, but restricting very importantly to your subsystem F. So how would you do that?
Well, if you open up Cardanoff's Statenac textbook, you will find that okay, well, it's good to go to
momentum space because occupation number is well defined in momentum space. So the usual next
step when you actually assign a homework problem to a Statenac students is you turn this summation
to an integral. But of course, there is a condition. In order to actually turn this summation into an
integral, the term that's being summed over has to be a smooth function of momentum. But that's not
the case because here the occupation is jumping between zero and one random. It's not a smooth
function of k. So you're stuck. You cannot turn the summation to integral and I don't know how to
actually do any calculation without doing that. So now let's actually try to divide and conquer.
Let's not try to do the summation in one shot, but let me divide that into two steps.
So let's actually first divide the momentum space into some cells. Let's try to do the cell
summation first and then sum over from cell to another. So the hope is that, well, if you have
enough points in one cell, when you do the cell summation, it will give you some average of this
n and hopefully this average will become smooth, even though the individual occupation number is
not smooth. Okay, so that's the hope. Okay, so we sort of blur our vision so that cell looks like
one big chunk and then something smooth. But there's a problem. The problem is that this
occupation is not the only thing that should have been summed over because you still have this face
back. And if you actually treat all the points within each cell equally, you're messing up the face
back, which is very, so here that's why restricting to a small subsystem matters. Because if you
restrict this J and L to be within the same sufficiently small subsystem, you can hope to find
in your cell size that this face factor varies very little within each cell. So basically,
you need to actually choose your cell size so that you can do this average within each cell
without messing up this factor. And this is always possible in the limits that I'm considering,
which is that the small subsystem size is much, much smaller than the overall system size.
Of course, this of course works for the typical excited states with this kind of occupation
pattern. But there won't be, in refer me on some atypical patterns where the occupied
and occupied states somehow segregate. And no matter how you do this cost-braining,
you're still not going to get anything smooth. So the basic idea is already here. So to give a
little bit more quantitative, you need to choose a cell size that is big associated with the system
size, which as I mentioned, gives the density of the allowed k-points in momentum space,
but it has to be small compared to that associated with the subsystem size,
so that you don't mess up the surface factor. And with that choice, which as I argued is that
is always possible in the limits I'm considering, I can do the cell summation first to get something
that is smooth, and then do the summation over the cells, which I can do my usual, the way that I
usually do with my Steadmark homework, which is to turn the summation into an integral.
So now the expectation is that once you have done this cost-braining and you have done this
summation within each cell, as long as you have enough points within each cell, what you get out
of that all average should approach the most probable average. And what is that most probable
average? Well, that obviously depends on which state that I'm working with, so you need to tell me
something about the state. Well, usually you specify the conservation, conserved quantities, one is
the particle number, and the other is total energy. So this gives you two Lagrangian multipliers
when you optimize the probability, and not surprisingly, what you find is the Fermi direct
distribution. So the claim is that once you have done the cell average, you actually recover the
Fermi direct distribution, even though you really only started with a single eigenstate, where the
distribution is either 0 or 1, and then you can actually use your usual exercise and find that
the two-point function for such typical state is nothing but the free Fermion thermal two-point
function. And again, because two-point function determines everything, you can claim victory,
namely the entire reduced density measures. On the other hand, on the other hand, there are
such eight critical states, which does not fall into this category. This cost-braining trick does
not get you out of this separated pattern, and this does not work. So we have a weak version
of eigenstate summarization, meaning that the overwhelming majority of the eigenstates indeed
have a reduced density matrix that is thermal, but they are highly quantifiable and visible,
actually, visually at least, outliers that actually do not fall into this category, and we
gave a name to this kind of behavior, eigenstate typicality, I guess borrowing a term that people
used for canonical typicality. Okay, so just to mention in passing, so it turns out this behavior
is related to a pretty old math problem that apparently got solved relatively recently.
So basically, this is an integer partitioning problem, so using a one-day example, so you fix
the particle number, and you fix the total energy, you need to divide, you need to put these particles
at different energy levels so that it comes up with the right total energy, and you can view
each occupied state as a skyscraper. Okay, so mathematics for reasons that I don't fully
understand is interested in the so-called limiting shape of these skyscrapers, and I'm sure in the
math context it's a more general problem, which apparently was solved only 20-some years ago,
and turns out one of my collaborators found that this so-called worship limiting curve
is precisely the Fermi Dirac distribution when you interpret that in this context. Okay, so
but still we only sort of at this point only have a visual understanding of the distinction between
the typical high excited states and the atypical ones. We expect, I guess essentially from the
central limit theorem, that when you go to sufficient large system size, the overwhelming
majority of the high excited states should be typical, but can you actually qualify how typical
is typical, or perhaps more importantly, how many atypical states you have? So it turns out
there is another mathematical tool which I think is most familiar to computer scientists known as
a chromograph complexity, which is very very useful to us, and actually there is another
thing that's nice about this, which is as I said we start with a pure state, which of course has
no entropy, but to reveal its entropy somehow we have to divide the system and look at the reduced
density matrix of the system, and then we find there is entropy. On the other hand, the entropy
should be an intrinsic property of the of the system. So we argue that actually at least for
free fermions, this chromograph complexity can be viewed as an intrinsic entropy, and our argument
for that is we are going to show that it has the same scaling property as the integral matrix.
Okay, so what is it? So let's oh yeah. Just a question. So in a field theory, I would say that
the ground state has a lot of entanglement. Yes. Not little entanglement. Yes. But you would say
that the ground state's... So it's an order of limit issue, right? So if you take a cutoff to zero
first, obviously your entanglement entropy diverges. But what I do is in condensed matter,
we have a natural cutoff, we are fixing the cutoff, but we take the thermodynamic limit.
So in my way of doing this, what matters is the scaling with respect for volume.
You are scaling with respect to color. Yeah. Okay, so coming back to the simplest possible case,
which is the one-dimensional case. So the trivial, complete trivial observation is that
the fermion occupation pattern is nothing but a binary string, right? So it's zero or one.
So the ground state occupation pattern is a simple string, right? You have a bunch of zeros.
You hit your first fermi points and a bunch of ones, then you end and they get zeros.
That's all what there is. So they are simple, but typical excited states are actually a more
random pattern. So the ground state occupation pattern is very easy to describe in words,
but most typical strings are randomly more complex. So how about complexity is actually a
qualitative way to quantify this complexity. So basically that is a measure of how compressible
or how incompressible your binary string is. So when you have, let's say, a very complicated
file like your thesis, well, you find that's very compressible. Okay, you like that, right? What
that means is that your thesis contains very little information, right? The compressible strings
contains less information, but if you actually, I don't know, use your cat to type something,
that's totally random, and you find that it's incompressible, right? So this paragraph complexity
is precisely a measure of the incompressible amount of information that's contained. So
ground state configuration is highly compressible because all what you need to do is to specify
two locations, and then you only need two logs that add up, okay? But for typical highly excited
states, it's incompressible and it scales with the system size. So that already is the same
scaling behavior in 1D that we discussed in the very beginning, okay? So they have the same
scaling. On the other hand, we do as we already sort of knew and expect that you have these
highly excited states whose pattern are still simple, but they are real. So now you can ask,
now you can ask how many such strings you have. Well, all what you need to do is ask how big your
string is after compression because that's the total, that's the minimum amount of bits you
have to have to characterize these states, and of course, number of states is just two to the
power of the compressed version. Okay, so you find that if you define your atypical states to be those
that have subvolume entanglement entropy or subvolume comagraph complexity, you can see
then that's that. So obviously, it's exponentially suppressed compared to typical states.
So, well, you can easily generalize this to higher dimensions. Again, for a grand state
configuration, while in this case, I have a square shaped Fermi surface, you can do it in
the poor man's way. Of course, this is still 0101, but because it's in higher dimension in 2D,
in this particular case, it's not a one-dimensional array anymore. So what you can do is you manually
turn this into a one-dimensional array, so go through the rows, let's say one by one, and then
you find that you actually have a log from each, let's say, a row that has an intersection with
Fermi surface. So that immediately already gives you this log enhancement, but there is actually
a more elegant way to do this, which is you don't try to convert this to a 1D array, but you view
this as a graph. It turns out there is a well-defined object called the complexity of a graph,
and it turns out there are some very recent results which are immediately useful to us,
which says that, well, for this kind of graph, like this one, there is a log enhancement to the
area, but again, as usual, for the typical highly excited states, it's essentially irreducible and
Kc scales as a number of points, which is a volume of scale.
Okay, so, well, finally, I guess timing seems to be pretty good. That's actually
turn-on interaction. So we have these outliers, we know what they look like, we can even quantify
their abundance, we have a Kc, etc., etc., but finally, let's actually turn on interaction and
ask what happens. Well, the intuition is that when you turn on less weak interaction, which turns
out to be the limit where things can be down more in a more controlled way, you are going to mix up
the free-former states that are very close in energy, and when you do the mixing, you are going
to mix up the most abundant typical states with those rare states, and hopefully, well,
things very likely, and we are going to show it is indeed the case, that will actually eliminate
these atypical states because they will be mixed with the typical ones, which are the dominant ones.
So, quantitatively, what you can do is the following. So you start with a free-former
Hamiltonian, and of course, you have a many body dance field states with, let's say,
this bell-like shape. Now, you turn on some interaction, and once you turn on some interaction,
these original free-former states are no longer exact atypical states,
and they have an energy variation that, not surprisingly, is proportional to the strength
of the interaction. So, it has a spreading in energy, which steels as the ratio between the
interaction strands and the bandwidth. Now, a lot of ETH-related literature
results to the random matrix theory kind of argument, but obviously, the Hamiltonian is not
a random matrix. However, in the nuclear physics literature, it's actually pretty well established
that there is a variation of the random matrix theory known as embedded random matrix theory,
which states the following. That is, well, if you turn on interaction, and you mix up states
within an energy window, you can apply the random matrix theory to states within that
energy window, which is the variation of your basis states. And the main ingredient of that is
the interacting eigenstates can be viewed as a random superposition of states, not in the
entire cube space, but within this energy window. So what we are trying to do now is to actually
take this result and ask for such a random superposition, which the interacting eigenstates
should look like, what is the probability of finding an atypical state or a scar state,
which we define as a state that has a subvolume law entanglement. So, well, okay, so it turns out
there are, again, some existing mathematical results that we can basically just combine and
actually, at the end of the day, obtain a pretty strong final result. So let's start from a micro
canonical ensemble, which is a density matrix that is just an equal probability superposition of
all the states in this energy window. Okay, so the number of states in this energy window is a
small fraction of the entire cube space, but they have the same skin in here. So it's a huge number
of states, okay, it scales exponentially with the total system size. So Levis-Nemma provides a bond
to the trace distance between the reduced density matrix of a random, let me finish the sentence,
and it provides a bond of the trace distance between the reduced density matrix of a random state
that's constructed in the hybrid subspace and this micro canonical ensemble, yeah.
So your definition of a typical state, yeah, the whole gamar complexity that includes both area law
and log? So, yeah, yeah, yeah, so anything that scales less than the volume law, I would call a
typical state or scar state. So that's a definition, I mean, again, it's not universal, but I think it's
the most used definition of a scar state, but our result can be modified very easily if you
want to change that definition, and maybe you can tell me how you want to change the definition,
and I'm going to tell you how I'm going to change my bond, okay. So this provides a
provides a bond to the trace distance. So turns out this last term is actually totally negligible,
because as I said, m prime grows as the size of total cube space, but ma is the size of the
sub-cube space, so I can actually neglect that. So then you can use another inequality that my post
doc camera found to use the trace distance to bomb the entropy difference between that of the
reduced, that of the micro canonical ensemble and random state in the in the in the in the hybrid
subspace. And again, using the convexity of the entropy, this this this entropy from the
micro canonical ensemble can be bound to the typical entropy of the of the of these
basis states, which are these free formula states, which we understand very well. So by combining
all of these, you find that you can find the deviation of a random state in this hubris hubris
subspace from that of the thermal entropy. So the the the conclusion that this deviation
probability of finding a deviation that actually goes as that actually has a
coefficient for the for the volume law term grows actually is suppressed super super exponentially
with the difference. So the using the the definition that I just just alluded to,
you find that the probability of finding using our definition of the scar state or atypical state
goes to zero super exponentially. And the expectation value of a scar state goes to zero
extremely fast. So if you want to modify the definition, all what I need to do is to modify
this coefficient. But if we're here, the coefficient is that of the thermal entropy. Yeah, can you
say again what Kevin and then primer. So kappa is volume law entropy coefficient that corresponds
to the thermal entropy. Yeah. And what was the other way is m prime? m prime is m prime is
is the Hilbert space size of this energy window, where I'm applying the random measure theory to.
But the key point is that it has the same scaling as a total total Hilbert space size. So when you
say that the probability of finding a scar state goes exponentially to zero, you mean as you increase
the size of your energy window? No. So when I say I go to zero, I mean it as I increase the system
size. So the energy window is fixed in energy space, but the number of states I see grows
exponentially with the system size. Okay, well, it looks like I'm right on time.
So the conclusion is that for generic interacting Hamiltonian, which allows you to use the random
measure theory in the way that I did, the probability of finding a scar state goes to zero
extremely fast with the system size. So obviously, I mean, everything that I talked about has a lot
to do with entanglement. And entanglement is a diagnostic with a lot of things. So let me end
with a quote. Yeah, so okay, so I have this one. Okay, yeah. So let me end with a quote by Charles
Bennett, who didn't get this year's Nobel Prize, but he shared this year's fundamental prize,
breakthrough prize, fundamental physics, which describes entanglement in an extreme positive
way. He said that a classical house is at least as dirty as its dirtiest room. Okay,
talking about entanglement entropy, obviously referring to that, but a quantum house can be
dirty in every room, yet still perfectly clean overall. Okay, so the quantum world is much cleaner
and nicer. I'm not a particularly positive person. So I'm going to actually say something to that
effect, but from a negative aspect, especially in this election season, I guess. So if your
life is a mess and has high entropy, don't blame the society, okay, which may well be in the pure
and steady state. Of course, the dagger state is a steady state. Instead, it's probably because
you're entangled with someone who is having an equally messy life.
I think this applies, especially after tomorrow's election results.
Can you use this sort of core screening and momentum space picture to
quantify what energy scale ETH kicks in? Like when do you go from
aerial or logarithmic to volume law? Right, so the excitation energy has to be extensive,
meaning that you have to have a finite excitation energy density. So that's sort of the hard
boundary between long state-like behavior and excitable thermal state behavior.
Is that something in this case that would be specific to free fermions or would that generalize?
Well, I mean, the only concrete results are, of course, about free fermions, and we know exactly
what to do with them. And you start to see that, right? I mean, if you have an excited
long state-like configuration, it's either zero, one with a fixed boundary, and cross-graining
doesn't get you anywhere. And you start to increase energy, then the Fermi surface becomes blur, and
then there's the energy range where you go from almost exactly one, almost exactly zero,
so that's the range you have to do cross-graining. But with the interaction, I mean, we made some
very limited progress, but I would love to see this kind of tricks, if you wish, extended to
interacting states. One thing I'm wondering is, is there some kind of, because this course-graining
picture sounds a lot like block spin, which of course kind of started, yeah. Is there some
analog of, like, some critical state where this sort of transition happens from?
Yeah, you're thinking about some RG-like picture. Yeah, I'm not sure. So, obviously, here, the
how much cross-graining you can do is actually not constrained by criticality or landscape,
but actually by the size of the subsystem. Oh, and that you want to be done?
Yeah. So, the smaller the subsystem you have, the more cross-graining you are allowed.
Right. Now, people have argued that actually this kind of behavior should apply even when you do a
half-half division, as long as one is slightly smaller than the other, some behavior should
kick in, but I can't do cross-graining that way. Right. Yeah. Yeah.
So, I guess you were saying, I'm trying to understand, so I think my free fermion system
is very integrable, maybe a prototypical integrable system. Yes. And you say that
it looks like it displays ETH for most states. For most states. So, is there any, yeah, so what,
if I just look at our typical state, there's no way I would see, I'd see no violation of ETH.
Well, how would I distinguish this from a true, I don't know, interacting non-integrable system
if I just look at a single state? So, I guess I would actually, I can actually answer a question
from the opposite side, which is, well, if you look at this kind of state, you would say, well,
it's a similar state, just like any generic system, but I know how to construct the outlier
state, which is right here. They're simpler to construct, but apparently, well, assuming ETH
actually holds generically, well, non-integrable system, the equivalence of this doesn't exist.
And the last part of the talk is sort of trying to answer how this, how these states disappear.
That's because they get mixed with those states by interaction. So, that's how they disappear.
So, the way that I look at this, this is basically the right picture for your similar states,
but you have to kill these guys. And the interaction seems to do that for you.
In a well-defined way.
Is there a way to understand how these kind of arguments can be used to study like
SCARs and interacting systems? So, yeah. So, again, I'll give you a slightly wrong-about way
to answer this. So, our argument, of course, is founded on this. So, we assume, for good reasons,
of course, we can use random matrix theory in this energy window. And that's how you actually model
or describe a generic interacting ground state, a generic interacting eigenstate.
But the models that people have found that we've been discussing that support these SCAR states
obviously has a subspace of excited states that don't have this kind of description.
So, okay, so the literature is growing very fast. This is a fast-moving object. There are actually
multiple papers since ours was posted that I haven't really followed closely. So, apparently one,
actually, essentially, all of the examples have this so-called pile of subalgebra that actually
spans a human subspace that seems to be decoupled from the rest of these states. So, this kind of
description seems to be inapplicable for that subspace of states. Now, of course, I mean,
the problem with this is that, well, once you have found it, you say, ah, these are special. But
before you find it, you don't know whether this description actually works for all of the excited
states or that's not really the case. By that description, you mean, like, adding the interaction
would make that energy region described by random equation? No, no, no, no. So, it's just
sort of a different thing. So, you start with the interacting Hamiltonian, and this Hamiltonian
has some kind of special algebra which spans a cube subspace that's decoupled on the rest. So,
then there's no mixture between that subspace and the rest of those states. So, this assumes that
everything is mixed essentially equally within the energy window, and the eigenstates can be written
in this way, which is a random superposition. But in the models that I'm aware of, I'm not
particularly well informed as a matter of fact, there seems to be cases, well, there seems to be
a case always true that to have scar states, there must be some states that actually escape this kind
of description. Yeah, but this understanding of scar states is actually growing with time and
probably still far from complete. But what we have done here is basically saying, okay, assuming the
random matrix theory applies, which should be the generic case, you shouldn't have scar states.
So, therefore, the existence of scar states tells you that there's something special
about your model that has those states. That's my interpretation, if you wish.
Sorry, just one more. So, isn't there, I don't remember the details of ETH, but isn't there
sort of a stronger version of ETH that also describes matrix elements between different
states of the same energy? And if you look at the stronger version of ETH, which we see violations
that have nothing to do with your, even if you look at your so-called typical states, maybe you
would see. Yeah, so this is related to my disclaimer at the very beginning. There are different versions
of ETH or different definitions of ETH. So, my definition of ETH that I use in this talk is
exclusively about the reduced density matrix of a small subsystem. So, what you are referring to,
which focuses on observables. Yeah, so my sort of difficulty, if you wish, with that is
you need to define what an observable is in that version of definition of ETH. So, yeah, I'm not,
I don't have much to say about that. Now, as I said at the very beginning, if the version of
definition of ETH that I use is valid, one prerequisite is that the reduced, the entanglement
entropy has to be, well, first of all, has to satisfy volume law. And secondly, a stronger
requirement has to be the same as the thermal entropy. So, I'm looking for violation of that
quadruple. Any other questions? No, let's thank you again. Thank you.
Yeah, I guess where my question is coming from is like clearly it's a free thermal
system, so it doesn't thermalize, it doesn't filibrate, right? So, some version of ETH that's
probably strong enough is you can guarantee that it reaches... Exactly, exactly. So, of course...
