Hello and welcome and in this video I'm going to be explaining why Auto Hockey is just the
greatest program ever.
It's great for customization and accessibility because it allows you to make your own scripts
that do lots of stuff.
So I'll be showcasing a few of my scripts here like this one.
This says when I press Alt, Ctrl Alt and X it will type out all of those texts and
press Enter.
So I drag over Discord here and go on to a private server where I can just test this.
I've pressed Ctrl Alt X and it is typing out stuff for a giveaway I've been doing
on a few servers.
So I can make macros and automatic typing and auto clickers, stuff like that.
So that's very useful for that kind of things.
This is an auto correct for text language.
So whatever I type, whenever I type the stuff between the colons it will expand into the
full version or get smaller if you so wanted it to.
So I've got this to add in the apostrophes for me, capitalise the eyes, expand text language.
This will be very good for school because it means I can type in text language at school
and it will auto correct into proper English.
So I will run this now and test it out.
Now I've got U expands into that, 4 expands into that and this is completely customisable.
So you can do this for whatever you want.
I think somewhere on the internet a guy has made a complete auto correct for this that
can be used in any application and that's quite cool.
So I'll close the auto correct for now.
This one works like the last one did.
When I press some certain buttons it will input the text into a game.
So I use this for role playing in Freelancer which I will open up now to show you how it
works.
So here for a demonstration when I press shift enter it will open chat and type in Genre Toric
which is one of my role play characters on the Discovery Freelancer role play server and
I can type my message after that and fit in with the role play.
Control enter and type in Tee Samburgh which is another one of my characters and alt enter
types in Andrew which is another character Andrew Sanderson.
Another use for it is when you are stuck in a game and it's crashed but you can't get
your mouse out of the window even if you hit the windows key and stuff.
So when the windows menu opens up you can search for what run chrome and it will run
this simple thing which runs the website google.com.
That's useful because when you press the windows key even if you can't use your mouse you can
write run chrome and I'll give you the script press enter and chrome will open up taking
your mouse out of the window it's stuck in.
This in theory toggles hidden files on your system.
I didn't write this code and I don't really know how it works.
Now on startup I have this setup when the computer boots up startupprograms.ahk opens
and that will wait 30 seconds for the computer to orientate itself and start to wake up properly
and it will run steam it will wait another 30 seconds and run discord and then wait one
second and it will run the first code here lock keys it will wait half a second run remap
hide and it will wait another second and write multi clipboard and then it will run dropbox
in the background.
It cuts back on a lot of the computer's stress at the start because it waits before opening
all the programs rather than trying to open them all at once the moment you log in.
So now I'll show you the code to these and then how that ties into these shortcuts and
startup programs properly.
The lock keys script is very useful what this does is it disables the caps lock the number
lock and the scroll lock permanently setting their positions so if I press the caps lock
and unlock the scroll lock buttons now it won't toggle the function and that's very
useful in games and stuff because that means I can assign the keys to do other stuff and
always have it set in the right state for what I want.
This one is two different programs that were combined this top bit I didn't write myself
I downloaded it but I understand most of how it works basically what it does is when I
press the left control and the now disabled caps lock button it will hide Google Chrome
now that doesn't mean that it's minimized that means it's completely hidden it doesn't
even appear on your taskbar taskbar sorry and when I press the left shift and caps lock
it will appear again so I think it is active right now so I will demonstrate Google Chrome
is open control caps lock completely gone not even there but then we'll shift caps lock
I can bring it straight back and to prove that that wasn't me opening and reopening it
let's go on to a random website I visited recently close open very simple now the other
thing that this code does is it remaps some of my buttons I have a button that launches
the calculator app on my keyboard which is launch app 2 and I've this remaps the key
to F13 you can have up to 24 function keys so I thought why not just have some more function
keys I can use for whatever I want so now my calculator button acts as F13 my scroll
lock button is F14 my media play pause button that plays and pauses media although only works
with Windows media player and the like so I never use it that acts as F15 caps lock is
F16 so I can assign caps lock to functions and games the menu button which is that weird
one between the right alt and right control I've remand that F17 and the divide and times
buttons on the numpad so I've set them to run the symbols so the divided by button will
do that and the times button will do that pretty simple this script I don't entirely
understand but it gives me three different clipboards so I can copy and paste three different
things at the same time not quite sure how this works but it does so I have a clipboard
for control C and control V I have one for Windows C and Windows V and I have one for
alt C and alt V so here if I get the word clipboard copied under control C and get the
word until copied under Windows C and get the word old under alt C now if I press all
of the pace that was control V Windows V alt V very useful indeed now all of those have
to be ran as admin to work in any app which is where these shortcuts come in so start
up programs.hk is running these shortcuts here not the exe file what those shortcuts do is
they run a thing in task scheduler so remap hide runs this here multi clipboard runs this
task here and lock keys runs this task here they're allowed to run with highest privileges
which means well it runs as admin without the pop-up box requiring you to click yes
and no and all that jazz and those run these as admin like I just said like this one allows
me to drag Windows around by holding the alt key like in Linux so right now I'm holding
down alt and I'm dragging it from anywhere I want it's not flawless it doesn't work on
maximize Windows but as you're about to see it works on full screen which is a bit of a
problem so I don't use it anymore now we come to what I consider my masterpiece this allows
me to make auto hockey scripts on a computer that doesn't have auto hockey installed this allows
me to upload my dot AHK script to drop box by the way the AHK script will be unusable on
say a school computer and the home computer will recognize that files there and run it through
the AHK to exe converter so for the sake of demonstration because I'm sure that didn't make
too much sense I have got my tablet open and the files ready to go so I when this is running
every two minutes it will double click on this shortcut running it right now it links to something
that doesn't exist being remote dot AHK in this folder here okay I've set it so when I open up this
I'll have five seconds to react all the things are in place so remotely you'll place in code
dot AHK and remote dot AHK via the dropbox website and let's go
yes it's working so opens up the converter does that converts it and boom we're done here
let's close that and open up here code dot exe and now if I run that that opens up
the exact code that I put into the AHK file so this allows me to make scripts
remotely from anywhere provided that that loop is running on my computer
so if I say delete remote dot AHK and this shortcut won't do anything
and then if I bring it back from the dead which one is it I don't even know restore that one
then when I run this yet again it does all of that so that is auto hotkey in a nutshell
very useful program I really enjoy it it's giving me a lot more options with my keyboard
and with what I can do with my computer I could probably make a bot to do a specific
thing in a game if I so wanted so yes thanks for sticking around if you've made it this far into
the video which I doubt any of you have like if you like subscribe if you want more and that will be
me for this video see you guys ice out
