Stay tuned for the full show!
Hey guys welcome back to Everly's Build a House. So in our last video we had just finished pouring
the walls of our basement and so we'll go over kind of what the guys did next to get ready for
building the floor in our house. So if you remember in our last video there were some
deck ledgers that were just temporarily held on the back of the house just with screws and they
were just screwed into the ICF webbing. Aaron and his dad had then drilled and wet set some bolts so
that later after the concrete had cured they could go back and tighten those. So they did that and
then on the inside of the house if you remember there were all those cutouts in the styrofoam
and then they were covered with plywood. That was so that all the concrete would infill into
those holes and so then Curtis and Aaron stripped off all the plywood and you could see all the
exposed concrete. Then they went ahead and temporarily held up the floor ledgers just with
screws again into the ICF webbing and then they had to take a hammer drill and drill into all
those concrete squares and then set in all of the bolts and tighten them so that the floor
ledgers could be hung. So that was the next step. Check it out.
I showed you these before we poured the concrete. These are those bolts that we had
sitting in the board ready to go for when the concrete is poured and they were wet set in
there so a little later on we're going to go and crank on all these nuts and tighten that up
and that'll suck that to the wall and that's going to hold up our deck.
Yeah so here's all those nuts will get tightened up and that's actually what's what's the strong
part. We screwed those all into the webbing but that's not strong it's just there to hold it until
the concrete and the bolts do. We're doing the same thing inside here we're just Dad and I we're
just screwing this up to the webbing and tomorrow when I get the right tools that I need like a
right hammer drill bit and I'll go and I'll drill those and we'll get those installed and that will
be right now it's just sitting up there with a couple of deck screws so it's not strong if you
put any weight on there it would just pull right off so we'll bolt it in tomorrow and that'll keep
it strong. So we poured our wall this week and here's what those cutouts look like filled up with
concrete. Here we've got our braces and stuff here's those dowels full of concrete too so that's
what'll hold our floor our basement floor and this here will look like that eventually
but we need to bolt through this into those concrete cutouts and that's what'll hold us
into the floor up. Now the other thing here is these beam pockets that we put in there
so the steel beam will sit right inside there right on top of the concrete wall
and that will hold like the whole middle of the floor up basically all the way from here
all the way over there
so we've got these dowels all the way to the inside to hold the floor up
we've got those cutouts up there to hold the upstairs floor
beam pockets here
that's how that works
so
our floor trusses have arrived
here's our big steel beam it's going to go into those beam pockets and then be held up by
three telebos
um
um
So, that's it for this video, I hope you enjoyed it and I'll see you in the next one.
I hope you enjoyed it and I'll see you in the next one.
I hope you enjoyed it and I'll see you in the next one.
So, that's it for this video, I hope you enjoyed it and I'll see you in the next one.
Cool, this is going to be our view.
Okay, here's the finished floor.
So, those ledgers bolted on there.
We've got the truss sitting on the ledgers.
The other end of the truss is on the steel beam, which are on the teleposts.
These two are, I believe they're 12,000 pound rated posts and this one is 21,000.
I think that's because of this hole, I'm not sure exactly how all the engineering works,
but there must be more load there because of this hole here or something.
We went with 20 inch web trusses and this lets you keep everything tucked up top there.
All of our ducts are going to be up in the webbing, coming off the top of the main duct,
which will be in the mechanical room on the other side of the beam there.
Then everything will come off the top and shoot up over top.
So over here we've got the ledgers, over here the ledger.
These trusses, they also, as well as supporting the floor this way, they also support the walls.
These walls can't fall in with these trusses built the way they are.
They would basically have to crush all of these trusses.
From that wall to this wall is held up by those trusses.
Now that doesn't provide the same strength this way though.
So for that, the engineer had a detail for us and we've got these braces, I guess they are.
So they, we had to cut out the ICF so that actually bears on the concrete, not on the foam.
Foam is obviously just going to squish.
And then you do some blocking and you've got a gusset there and we glued and screwed the heck out of everything.
And these are every, oh and there's also the boards up on the plywood there.
So between these braces and the plywood being, or the decking being glued and screwed on there,
that will provide that lateral support this way.
So the trusses do it north and south and the braces, oh and the strong backs here too.
Also tie these all together, I forgot to mention these guys.
There's certain locations we had to put in, they're called strong backs.
So this will tie all the trusses together.
So when you're walking upstairs, you know, it's not bouncing around or nothing, nothing moves.
It's six nails or screws per truss on every one of those strong backs.
So I'm glad I've got that pass load nailer because holy cow, that was a lot of nails.
And that is basically our completed floor.
Another thing I should maybe mention here, this hole is where the stairs are going to be.
So those trusses didn't come all the way to the beam here, obviously.
So we had to make our own beam, this is a 2 ply, 2 by 10, just with regular joist hangers.
Nailed the joist hangers to the trusses there and those trusses are doubled up to carry the load.
And there's actually, there's a bracket for those two.
See if I can get a shot of it up there, you see that little bracket.
It connects those trusses together so they can't pull apart.
And then this beam sits in between them and those trusses bear on that beam.
And this is, this will be the hole for our stairs.
It won't be quite this big, we have to build out it's a little bit right up here.
Not quite the fireplace, but kind of in the TV fireplace area there.
Everything went pretty well.
Learned a few things, it was kind of fun to do.
So that's how that works.
