Hey everyone, Nathan here, Absurd Being.
Alright, Henri Bergson, duration is what we're into today.
Before I do actually, I did say at the beginning, I think two videos ago, this series I'm not
going to kind of work my way through any one book in particular.
I'm certainly not doing like a chapter by chapter breakdown, but there is, I am just
basically following Bergson's thought through time and free will, and then we're going to
look through matter of memory, and then finally we'll go through creative evolution.
So I'm really following Bergson's timeline anyway, but it's not a kind of, I mean if
you're thinking of reading along, or if you're trying to kind of anchor these videos in something,
I am really following those books, although very much unlike Heidegger and Sartre and
Ko, I'm not doing a kind of chapter by chapter breakdown, I'm more focused on the bigger ideas
I think.
Anyway, that's just kind of a side note.
So we're still, we're looking through time and free will, and we're going to be looking
at duration today, and we'll start with space.
So space, we're just kind of flesh this idea out at the beginning here, because it's going
to be something we will contrast to duration.
So there are two kinds of space that Bergson is interested in, the first he calls the perception
of extensity, and this is basically an original lived spatiality, which is experienced as
being full of qualitative differences.
Bergson calls that heterogeneous, an important word for Bergson, it comes up again and again,
it comes up in distinction, in contrast to homogenous.
So those words are good to kind of become familiar with.
So this kind of, this sense of space is something that we live, it's not something that we abstract,
it's not something that we conceptualize, it's our lived way of being in a space, being
in a space with other things, being anchoring ourselves, orienting ourselves in our environment.
So it's a lived spatiality, and it has these qualitative differences, and you can think
about this perhaps an easy way to think about it is the difference between right and left.
If you have, if one hand is dominant, so I'm right handed, the right hand feels different
to me from the left, things on my right side feel different from the left, it's not just
the two aren't equal, the two aren't kind of, I can't do what I can do with my right,
with my left is equal, equally as well, if I go to throw a ball, it feels natural if
I do it with my right, the left side, it's kind of strange, so and that carries over
into the way that I kind of subtly perceive my orientation in the world, in relation to
other things, the right side just feels a little bit different from the left, I don't
know my right as being different from my left through kind of thinking about it, it's a
natural lived difference, and that's just a small example of this, these qualitative
differences that a lived spatiality has, the heterogeneity of a lived spatiality, obviously
Milo Ponte picks up on this and talks about this as well, and phenomenology of perception,
he talks about this in a number of different senses, one was with tribes people, kind of
because primitive tribes people who, when they think about the location of their clan
encampment, it's associated with this feeling of a kind of a peaceful feeling, it's not
just another point on the map, it has an effect of quality to it, and you could say the same
thing about many religious believers today, the church has a different feel where the
church is, it's not just another building, it has some special kind of feeling associated
with it and affective quality, Mecca is a great example, so important that Muslims have to orient
themselves in the world in relation to it, or they have to direct themselves to it, to go
through that, the prayer ritual that they do, so again, location, it's not just a compass
point, there's a feeling associated with it, and so that's apparent in many different ways in
everyday life, the example that Bergson gives, which is a good one, is animals are navigating
through however they do it, whether it's magnetic fields or whatever it is, the directions aren't
the same for them, that one direction has kind of a privilege over others, depending on what
they're doing, so if they're trying to get back home, many animals are able to navigate, follow a
straight line, basically back to their home, and however it is that they're able to do that,
that line back to their home is obviously has a different feeling from other directions,
and so that's this lived spatiality, the other kind of space Bergson calls a conception of space,
and so this is space which we're conceiving as, we're conceiving of it as a homogeneous medium,
which makes abstract, objectifying thought possible, because it gives us a background
on which to juxtapose things to each other, we talked about this a little bit in the last video
with psychic states, they're intensive, they're intensities, but we tend to spatialize them,
and it means that we end up thinking these psychic states are measurable, that they're
quantitative, when in fact they're qualitative and intensities rather than this kind of something
that can be analyzed and measured and quantified. So okay, conception of space, it's an abstract
homogeneous background, so every point in this abstract manifold that we're imagining when we
think of space in this way is the same, no point is privileged, no point is special, every point is
just another point with a coordinate, with a set of coordinates which directs us to that,
which individuates that point amongst others, but there's nothing special, there's nothing
else special about it, it's just like the same as every other point on the plane, whatever it is
that we're thinking of, so this kind of space, it's an abstract way of thinking about something,
it's not real space, this conception of space doesn't exist anywhere, it's an abstract tool
that we invoke whenever we want to objectify, whenever we want to analyze something,
so it's no longer within the world, it's not a part of the lived world, it's not contaminated
with our qualitative feelings, it's this kind of pristine idealized model,
and this kind of space is only available for highly intelligent animals or animals
capable of higher kind of cognitive functioning, and so it's connected with the intellect,
and that's a nice contrast with what we said before, space has perception of
extensity, all animals have this, you don't need any special kind of cognitive abilities,
it's present for all animals, this one however, this abstract conception of space
is only available for animals with a higher degree of intellect,
so with that in mind, let's turn to duration,
okay duration, so first of all perhaps why the word duration, why did Berkson shy away
from the word time, the reason is basically because, actually let me just let me just get
into it and then I think it'll be clear, so when we think of time, we usually think of time as this,
as a dimension, right, another dimension like space, so it's a static background homogeneous
medium in which events unfold, it's like a container through which we're moving,
when we think of space in the same way, this kind of background which plays
no active role in what we do, it's just this, each point is the same as any other point,
no points are privileged, no moments are privileged, that I mean it's a fundamental idea
in science, right, that's what it is to be objective, but if we when we think of time like this,
we think of it as this this kind of background medium in which things happen, then it actually
means that all of those individual moments in time coexist, right, we're kind of, it's like a timeline,
right, you've got the past here, the present here, and the future there, all of those moments we can
see before us at once, so all of those moments coexist which means there's no actual duration,
nothing is actually enduring through time, and if that's the case, then there's no time because
that's fundamentally what time is, it's that enduring, that sense of persisting through,
that sense of persisting, the sense of living, if you get rid of that, if we replace it with this
abstract idea of time as a timeline or time as a dimension similar to space, then we can easily
throw up every moment on this on this this ruler, and all moments coexist, we're no longer engaged,
we're looking from the outside as a spectator, and if we have that situation, there's no sense in
which time is happening, time is not flowing at all, and if time's not flowing, it's not time, it's
space, and so that's that's the way that we normally think of time as the static background
which which we can project in front of us past the present and the future, and if we have that
idea, what we've done is spatialized time, and it's the same as we talked about just before,
space, perception of extensity and the conception of space, we've got duration which is lived,
it's along with that perception of extensity, it's qualitative, it's engaged, it's something that
is experienced, as opposed to over here the conception of space and the conception of time,
the scientific, and the normal, the typical understanding that we have of time is just
another dimension, it's something that is, it's an abstract idealized conception, it's not what we
fundamentally live, and if it's not what we fundamentally live, it can't be metaphysically
true, right, so we're living in reality, if our description of reality doesn't match what we're
living, then we've got a problem, but that's what we have, we kind of have that situation now,
we've got this pristine idealized scientific account, which again, there's, I'm not criticizing
science at all, but it's not describing fundamental reality, it can't be, because it's excluding,
that's a reality that no one lives, no one can live in that reality, it's an idealized
conception, it's an abstract model, but it's not what we actually live, and so these ideas you get
space and time, they don't map on to what we actually experience, and there's that divide,
and it's kind of, I think it's come to the fore with consciousness, because there's just no way
to bridge that gap, and so we're talking about pie in the sky notions, like emergence, which doesn't
mean anything, doesn't explain anything, or integrated information, which again, I can't see it going
anywhere, because it's just ignoring the fundamental divide that's there, that we're trying to bridge
something which is fundamentally lived, fundamentally experienced with a static
abstract model, and I don't think it's going to work, that there has to be a complete reevaluation
of the situation, anyway, I've drifted, so time without this sense of duration, time without
this sense of persisting or enduring, is actually space, which brings us to duration, duration itself,
and let me give you a quote, pure duration is the form which the succession of our conscious
states assumes when our ego lets itself live, when it refrains from separating its present
states from its former states. Okay, so there are a couple of important things in that quote,
it's interesting actually, Bergson's not, he doesn't, he's not describing, he's not defining
duration, he's talking about duration, he's talking about our conscious states actually,
our psychic states, and the way that our psychic states succeed one another, there's a flow
with our psychic states, that is a kind of duration, that's the form of duration that
our psychic states go through, so succession is key, succession is important in duration, there has
to be this progression, there has to be a flow, a flux, a change from one state to another, if
you don't have that, pretty much obviously, right, you don't have duration, you don't have time, you've
got space, masquerading is time, so succession's important, there has to be a succession, we saw
this in the end of the last video as well with the bell, the ringing of the bell, each bell, each
peel sounds one after the other, so there's succession there, and that's a form of duration,
and not just succession though, you have this succession, but where we don't
lock ourselves into the present and separate the present from other states, so duration is this
succession, but it's also this kind of a wider, broader, into it, no that's not a good word,
a broader sense of an awareness of prior states, and perhaps future states to come,
so it's not locked into this present moment, again typically how we think of time, right,
we think of time, we're locked into this present, we're always in the present, it's never the past
or the future, past is just a memory, the future is just expectation, the only thing that's real is
the present, but that's an idealized conception of time, right, no one lives that, no one lives
locked in the present moment, we're always, our present is always informed by the past,
it's always, our past moments always carry through, they bleed into the present, if they didn't,
we wouldn't be able to live, we wouldn't be able to function, and as they bleed into
the present, the way I described it before is I'm leaning into the future at the same time,
so I'm not locked into this single moment, I'm a broader temporal
existence, let's say, so we refrain from just separating ourselves in this,
locking ourselves into this present, separating ourselves from other moments, other states,
and that's, that goes against kind of the normal everyday sense of time, but also things like
Buddhism, which is, which focuses on the present, there are elements of Buddhism I think, in fact,
a lot of Buddhism is very complementary to science and very, overlaps with science in a
number of places, which is why it has a lot of respect I think in the West, but again, here,
the Buddhist idea that the present is the only, is the only thing real, you only ever live in
the present, it's just not true, we don't live in the present, we're not locked into the present, where
we are a broader temporal, we have a broader temporal existence than that, but having said that,
so we're this, we span this wider temporal field, but we're not explicitly positing
each of these states, so there's only one state present before us at once, that's what it means,
that's what a succession is, if you, if you don't have, if you have more than one
state before you at one time, it's not a succession anymore, then it's space, you've just
thrown everything up against the wall and you can see it all clearly laid out before you,
but there's no enduring there, right, so enduring, there's a succession, there's only
ever one state before you, but there's an awareness of these other states that have
gone before and these other states that are coming, but it's kind of, well to go with Maloponte
in Sartre, it's non-thetic, it's not explicit, we're not explicitly juxtaposing these states,
we're not putting them up one one by one, you know, in front of us, we're not laying them out,
which would be to spatialise time, which would be to lose what we're trying to look at,
which is duration, which is time, rather they instead of juxtaposing them like that,
we have this kind of awareness, this non-thetic awareness of them, other states,
and the way that Berkson describes this, he doesn't use the word non-thetic, that's,
I don't know where that came from, I first heard it in Sartre, I'm not sure he coined it though,
but both Sartre and Maloponte use it, but Berkson talks about the past and the present
coming together into an organic whole in which the past is gathered up without being explicitly
posited, so we've got this organic whole, which means that we're not looking at individual moments,
individual states or individual elements in the succession, but they all, they're all kind of,
they're all there in the present moment, so when I'm listening now, I'm only hearing the single
peel of the bell, the single ring of the bell, but that ring, it contains all of the rings that
came before it, they've all kind of, they're all interconnected in this organic whole,
and that is how I'm going to, well that's how Berkson's going to describe it in this next quote
I have, which is, which is more, which is a better, I think, definition of duration itself, so anyway,
it's, he says, duration is a succession without distinction, a mutual penetration, an interconnection
and organization of elements, each one of which represents the whole and cannot be distinguished
or isolated from it except by abstract thought, and that is exactly what I was just getting at,
the succession, but a succession without distinction, there's only ever one moment present, but
that moment is, it's interpenetrated, it's interconnected with all the other moments,
we see the whole thing together, we get this picture of an organic whole,
and we can't break it apart without going into abstract territory, without losing
what it is that we're focusing on here, whether that we're interested in, duration, the psychic
states, how they appear for us, as soon as we break them down by state by state, then we're
juxtaposing them, we're abstracting them, we're spatializing them, and that's again something
that I remember, I remember saying those, almost those exact words in the videos on the Loponte
somewhere, as soon as we abstract, as soon as we break something apart, we've lost what it is
we're looking for, we start looking at a reflective representation of the thing, an idea of the thing
rather than the thing itself, so anyway what I wanted to focus on or emphasize in that quote,
duration is not just succession, but it's that mutual penetration of elements of states,
and just an interesting kind of side note is I feel that description, that process, the succession
which is the succession of states which are interconnected the way the person's talking
about, I think that is what consciousness is, it's what kind of makes consciousness conscious,
if you like, and I'm working on a series of articles at the moment which I'm trying to kind
of disentangle the mess that is consciousness at the moment, and I'm doing it through
Bergson, through this idea of duration, and I think it's really interesting, I think this is very,
everything just comes together so nicely in Bergson in a way that
I haven't seen before, you get this from a phenomenological perspective
in Heidegger and Milo Ponti and Sartre, although maybe a little bit less with Sartre actually,
but here he's, this is pure metaphysics now, so he's really looking at describing
what reality is, not just our phenomenological, not just reality from our phenomenological
perspective, but reality itself, so yeah it's just, it's all good, this is great stuff,
okay let me keep going, so psychic states originally endure or they succeed one another
in penetrating each other in this way that that makes an organic whole, but when we think about
them we necessarily, we necessarily conceive of them as coexisting simultaneously in a certain
order, and when this happens we have spatialized duration, so what's important in there is that
we necessarily conceive of them in this way, and this makes kind of duration
a little bit tricky to touch if you like, to grab, because when we use the only tool we have for
thinking, which is our minds, we automatically go spatial, we automatically think in terms of space,
that's just the way our brains work or our minds work, and so the only way we can think about
things is through this spatial approach, this analytic abstract approach, if we didn't do that
we wouldn't be able to think, we'd be like the animals, we'd be navigating through space
in that perception of extensity, through space as a perception of extensity, but we wouldn't have
the capacity for abstract thought, we wouldn't be able to think about what it is that we're doing,
and that's our gift, but it's also our curse because when we do that,
when we're thinking about something like duration, to think about it in the first place,
to intellectualize about it, to abstract, that in itself negates duration, that act negates duration,
so the act of thinking about it dissipates the thing we're trying to think about,
which makes it kind of a tricky thing to get your head around, and you kind of have to approach it
obliquely, you have to look at it kind of from the corner of your eye, because if you look at it
directly it disappears, if you try and think about it, kind of the way that we normally think about
it, and there's no other way to think, that's the trick here, there's no other way, there's no special
way of thinking, there's only one way of thinking, and that's a spatial way, that's a logical way,
it's kind of like, and I really think this is the Taoism, the Taoism that,
what is it, the Tao that can be spoken of is not the real Tao, something like that,
but that applies so well here, duration that you can speak about, that you can think about
is not the real duration, that duration is something that can only be lived, it can only,
it only works in a life, in a lived situation, abstracting it out from that situation
immediately loses what is essential, what's intrinsic to duration,
and I just want to go through another example that Berkson gives here, he talks about
a pendulum swinging backwards and forwards, and imagining, keeping that in your mind,
he says, I shall perceive one and the other, each permeating the other and organizing themselves
like the notes of a tune, so as to form what we shall call a continuous or qualitative multiplicity
with no resemblance to number, I shall thus get the image of pure duration,
but I shall have entirely got rid of the idea of a homogeneous medium or a measurable quantity.
Okay cool, so a pendulum swinging backwards and forwards, when I think of it, when I perceive
it, when I live it, each of those swings permeates every other swing, it's, there is no
isolated single swing, each swing is part of a greater whole, like the notes of a tune,
and that's probably the best example, it's funny you didn't use that example, Husserle used it
and really, really hammered it out, I think, nicely with the melody, a melody doesn't make
any sense, unless you've got a broader focus, unless, you know, if you're locked into the
present note, then the, what about, then there's no melody there, right, there's no melody in the
individual notes, melody comes from the notes flowing, each note being interconnected with
the note that came before it, and that is coming after it, and we're kind of, the melody leads
us somewhere, even as it came from somewhere, and we're aware of that, that's what it is,
that's what duration is, that's what it is to be, to live your time, not just to abstract it out there,
not just to spatialize it, and that, Berkson calls, I almost got a millipant, I did that in
the last video too, that Berkson calls a qualitative multiplicity, so it's a multiplicity,
because you've got, you've got a succession, right, the pendulum swinging 10 times, 15 times,
but it's qualitative in the sense that we are, we're aware of it, we've got this
broader sense of, of the present swing in a, in a broader, in a, in a greater whole,
and that's, that's what duration is.
Same idea as the bell ringing, so yeah, important pure duration cannot be measured,
because it's not a quantity, exactly the same as we saw with intensities, intensities of psychic
states, they can't be measured, because they are purely qualitative, we think they can be measured,
we think we can count them and, and treat them like number, like objective quantitative data,
but that's only because we've spatialized them already, as soon as once we've spatialized them,
yeah, we can, we can go ahead and measure and count and do all of those wonderful things where
that puts them into equations, but as, as, as the experience is that they actually are
they're qualitative, they're not, they're not quantitative, so I like that, that, that term
qualitative multiplicity, it's the multiplicity we talked about at the end of last, the last video,
it's the second kind, we didn't, I didn't use the word qualitative multiplicity, I think I just
called it the multiplicity of psychic states, but that, that's what it is. Interesting point,
which we're not going to drill into here, but we will come back to, is we've got this idea, duration,
succession of psychic states that all interpenetrate each other, but how do they
melt into each other like this? How is that affected? That's a good question and Berkson
answers it by saying memory with, with the word, with the capacity memory. So memory is, I think
of memory as the, the engine of duration, the driver, it's what, it's what allows those states,
those separate states to interpenetrate like this, to, to connect together into a whole.
And we're going to, we're going to spend a little bit of time on memory
a little bit later, but, but that's coming anyway, so just, just be aware of that.
I'll give you a couple of, a couple more definitions, I think, just to, just because they're nice,
Berkson talks about these quite nicely, duration, he talks about it as a synthesis of the past and
the present with a view to the future. Again, that idea, there's a connection, there's a
past and the present, these states are blended together in someone into a whole and with a view
to the future. And that's, it's, it's there in Berkson, but it's very much understated. He, he
doesn't pay much attention to the future, which is interesting because Heidegger's the exact
opposite, right? For Heidegger, the future is, is the, the main ecstasy, the other ones past and the
present, they're, they're important, obviously they all, they're all intertwined, but for Heidegger,
it's the future, that's the key. For Berkson, very much it's the past and we'll see this when we
talk about memory a little bit more as well. But, but it's just an interesting, interesting thing to
think about. One last definition, and this is from creative evolution. Duration is the continuous
progress of the past, which gnaws into the future and which swells as it advances.
Just a nice description. I mean, these people, all of these philosophers, they have these,
the philosophers that we've been reading, they all have this real knack with words, and that's a
nice description. Continuous progress of the past gnawing into the future, swelling as it advances,
beautiful. One consequence of this, and this is going to lead us into the last section of this
video, is that it means change is constant. Duration is the continuous progress of the past. So
one thing that is underlying this is the idea of change, becoming, and creation.
And Berkson talks more about this in creative evolution, but what I want to say about this is
quite small, and it ties in nicely with duration, so we'll look at that now.
Right. Basically, change, creation, and becoming. Essentially, these are all
three facets of the same thing, three kind of, and that thing is duration. So it's underlying
durations, underlying these three notions. And that's the way I describe them here. There's
kind of consequences of Berkson's idea of duration. So let's have a look at some things.
There are a few things I wanted to say here. The first is that change obviously occurs in between
psychic states. So we're kind of restricting our discussion here of duration to psychic states
for now. So change occurs obviously in between each psychic state. So the succession
of psychic states is a change in between them, but change also is taking place in each state
itself. So whatever it is that's succeeding, whatever elements are succeeding each other,
in addition to the change in between each element, there's also a change in within each element.
Every state is itself constantly changing because just to exist is to change.
And that means, again, just a consequence of the fact that every state is enduring, fundamentally
enduring. So not only is there change in between states, but the states themselves are constantly
changing. They are constant change. And that, I mean, I've already said it, it's a key element, but
this idea of continuity in Berkson becoming, there is no, nothing is static in Berkson,
everything, reality, psychic states, even the natural world is in a continual flux.
There is no, there is no stasis in Berkson. Let me give you a quick quote, duration means invention,
the creation of new forms, the continual elaboration of the absolutely new.
And that's from Creative Evolution. And it's a nice quote for this section because it leads
me into four points that I want to make, four points that I want to make. First, all change is
creation of something new. And that's, that follows from the fact that every moment, every current,
every present includes the whole of the past behind it. So that's this idea of
all moments interpenetrating each other into an organic whole. Right? It means that every, every
moment is brand new simply because it's, it's this moment plus everything that came before it.
And it's a continual pushing into the new. So even if this moment has happened before,
right, everything is identical. But because this moment, it's not the first time because it's
happened before in the past. It's no, it's not the same. Just that is enough to make it a bit,
to make this moment different from the last moment or from this state of affairs, different from
the prior time that this same state of affairs occurred, because this state of affairs includes
that prior identical state of affairs. So whenever you factor in the past into the, into the present
in the way that Berkson does here, every, every change is creation of, is the creation of something
new. It leads into something new. And this means that change is fundamentally unpredictable.
To predict something involves projecting what has, what has already been seen or
inferring something based on what has already been seen. But if each moment is new, if each
moment is brand new, a genuinely new creation in the way that we're suggesting here, prediction is
impossible. And that, that again, it's a more central element in creative evolution. And we'll
talk about it later in, in relation to that book. But, but for now, that, that's something to just
kind of bear in mind. All changes, the creation of something new, that means that, that whatever
occurs, all change is fundamentally unpredictable. And we think though about things like abstracted
physical systems, so things that systems that we take out of the hole and, and isolate by themselves,
those kinds of systems don't endure. They don't undergo duration, if you like. So those abstracted
systems, then there is, since there's no duration going on there, they, it's possible for them to
enter the same state twice. So if the same state occurs, it's not, it's not different from a prior
state. We can treat it as identical. And in fact, it is identical because there's no duration,
because it's been abstracted out from the hole. So there's only duration if you have that,
that prior buildup of the past with you. If we take something out, stick it there on its own,
isolated, then it doesn't endure, then we can predict future states. There's nothing unpredictable
about that because there's no duration going on. And the example that, that Berkson gives is the
system cup, kettle, and water. So you got those three things. Those are elements that we've broken,
we've pulled out from the hole, from the, from the natural world into the static artificial
system, this static artificial grouping. And now there's no duration, there's no, there's no past
essentially. If the water in the kettle boiled at 100 degrees Celsius yesterday, then I can reasonably
expect that we'll do so today. And that's fully predictable. We can, we can predict that with,
without any problems, as opposed to something like a psychic state, which is always part of,
of a human, an individual, a whole, an organic totality, those can never be predicted. And this
is going to be a core part of his argument for freedom, which we'll look at a little bit later.
The last thing I wanted to say that, that follows on from that quote, duration means invention,
the creation of new forms, the continual elaboration of the absolute in you,
is that it also means changes are irreversible. So you can never
undo something, go back to a prior state.
If you go, if you try and go back to a prior state, everything, even though everything is identical
to some earlier state, again, just the fact that this state has happened before makes this state
different. So whatever change takes place, because it's, and it's really saying the same thing as,
as what I said in the second point, in the first point, actually, all changes creation of something
new. So you, you can never undo a change, go back to a prior state. And the way I've expressed this
is that every moment is always experienced for the first time. So there's never any creation
is absolutely new change is what better change is absolute creation, the creation of the absolutely
new. And that's change creation and becoming just just a little bit. Like I say, we'll talk
more about it in the context of creative evolution. But for now, let's head to a summary.
Okay, so we talked about space. First, we had the perception of extensity. And this is that heterogeneous
lived space that we, that we occupy, that we orient ourselves in, as opposed to the
conception of space, which was an abstract, homogeneous background, which, which lets us
juxtapose things, which gives us a static, unmoving, fixed kind of
space in which to analyze, in which to measure, in which to count, in which to,
to do all of those things that the intellect likes to do. Then we looked at duration itself.
I talked about duration as being succession and mutual penetration. So those are really the two
key ideas of duration. We looked at duration as a continuous progress of the past, which
gnaws into the future. That was another definition. And finally, some consequences of duration
in the form of change or creation or becoming. And some of the points that I made here,
every state is constantly changing. So the state itself is constantly undergoing change. And this
is talking about psychic states here. Change is genuine creation. So it's the creation of the
absolutely new changes unpredictable. Therefore, we can never, and again, within psychic states or
within any, any state that is, that is enduring the change that happens is unpredictable,
fundamentally. And finally, change is irreversible. Every moment is always experienced for the first
time. And that is the first video on duration. We'll, we'll continue this theme in the next video.
But yeah, I really like this concept duration. It's a really nice, and it's just so novel. It's
just so, there are bits and pieces of it in other places. But I don't, I mean, I'm not sure maybe
prior to Berkson, there was someone who had something very similar. But certainly from
the philosophers that I've read, this is, this is so unique. And because it's just kind of,
he's been pushed aside, Berkson. Durations just kind of languished there. No one's,
no one's done anything with it for, for 100 years. So we're the first to get into it, maybe.
Anyway, that's duration. Thanks for listening. I'll catch you in the next video.
