Welcome to the third lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
Last time, we took a look at classical physics, the basic view of the physical world that prevailed at the end of the 19th century.
Classical physics was a tremendous achievement. It was a powerful synthesis of ideas and it was very successful at explaining all kinds of phenomena.
Now in classical physics, matter is composed of tiny particles called atoms.
And if you assume that matter is made out of atoms, that explains a lot of chemical and physical properties of matter.
It explains the laws of chemical combination. It explains the behavior of gases and so on.
On the other hand, light in classical physics is a phenomenon of continuous electromagnetic waves.
How do we know that light is a wave phenomenon?
We know because we can observe constructive and destructive interference of light waves in Thomas Young's two-slit experiment, an experiment we actually performed to see for ourselves that light travels as waves.
So now, we're going to continue the story.
We're going to continue the story into the 20th century.
At the beginning of the 20th century, two revolutionary thinkers, Max Planck and Albert Einstein, began to question the 19th century synthesis and to introduce quantum ideas into physics.
Why would they do that? What was wrong with classical physics?
The problem was that there were just a few leftover experimental puzzles about light and matter.
And to solve them, they needed to change the entire structure of physics.
So, let's begin.
The first puzzle is the problem of thermal radiation.
When we heat up a solid object, it gives off radiation. It gives off light, long wavelength light.
And an everyday example of that is the light bulb.
When we run an electric current through the tungsten filament of a light bulb, that filament gets very, very hot.
And it emits light.
Now, when we do this, we can ask how much radiation is emitted.
And we can ask, at what frequencies do the light waves come out?
They might be in the visible range. There's a fairly narrow range of frequencies that we can perceive with our eye.
Or it could be lower frequency light than that, infrared light, or it could be higher frequency light than that, ultraviolet light.
Now, when we analyze the thermal radiation from an object, the simplest case actually turns out to be when the object itself is black in color, what's called a black body.
The reason for that is kind of paradoxical and surprising.
It turns out that the more efficient an object is at absorbing light, the more efficient it is at emitting thermal radiation when you heat it up.
And so, a black body would be a perfect radiator of thermal radiation.
And it turns out that this thermal radiation called black body radiation is quite interesting.
At a given temperature, all black bodies, no matter what they're made of, radiate in exactly the same way.
And so, at the end of the 19th century, many scientists tried to apply the classical theory of heat to explain black body radiation.
And it turns out that this works pretty well for explaining the low frequency light, the infrared radiation that comes off of a black body.
But the classical theory predicts way too much high frequency radiation, way too much ultraviolet radiation.
So, back to the light bulb.
We run the electric current through the tungsten filament.
It gets very hot.
In fact, it gets more than 2,000 degrees Celsius.
And what kind of light comes out?
Well, mostly it's infrared light.
Mostly it's light that's at a too low a frequency for us to see.
But there's also a good deal of visible light.
And there's almost no ultraviolet light from an incandescent light bulb, which is why you don't need to wear sunscreen around an incandescent bulb.
It doesn't emit enough ultraviolet light to give you sunburn.
Okay, so let's try to apply the classical theory of heat to this.
And when we do this, we find out that ultraviolet light coming from the light bulb should be much more intense than the visible light,
and that should be much more intense than the infrared light.
We get it exactly wrong.
There should be immense amounts of ultraviolet light coming out of the light bulb.
This prediction is so badly wrong, so radically wrong, that it came to be called the ultraviolet catastrophe.
And if your theory cannot explain how a light bulb works, well, you need a better theory.
That's where Max Planck came in.
At the time of our story, Planck is a German physicist at age 42, which is quite old for a revolutionary, in fact.
And he's been working on the black body problem for some time.
Planck realizes that this is a really important problem, a problem that's going to teach him something fundamental.
Why does he think this?
It's because all black bodies, whatever they are made of, radiate in exactly the same way.
So if he can figure out why that is, he'll learn something fundamental about the relation of heat and light.
So he's been working on it for a long time, and finally, in desperation, in the year 1900, he proposes a strange hypothesis.
Planck says, suppose that light is not emitted and absorbed continuously, but only in discrete amounts.
These discrete amounts, he called light quanta.
This is the quantum hypothesis, the quantum and quantum mechanics.
The energy in one light quantum is related to the frequency of the light.
The equation is E energy is equal to H times F.
Well, where H is a fundamental constant of nature, a new fundamental constant, which was later called Planck's constant.
And Planck's constant has a tiny value.
It's 6.6 times 10 to the minus 34th joule seconds.
That's really small.
If we wrote that in decimals, if we put the decimal point, we'd have to write 33 zeros before we got to the first six.
So that's an incredibly small number.
And so we multiply Planck's constant times the frequency of the light, and that tells us the size of the quantum of light energy.
Now, because Planck's constant is so very, very small, light quanta are very, very small as well.
They're very tiny.
And that's why energy appears continuous because it comes in discrete units, but the discrete units are very small.
And the light bulb, under Planck's hypothesis, the light bulb would emit something like on the order of 10 to the 20th power, 100 million trillion light quanta every second.
Okay, how does the light quantum hypothesis explain black body radiation?
Well, higher frequency light has quanta that have higher energy.
And if an object is going to emit a quantum of light, it has to get together in one place enough energy to do so.
So it's just harder for an object to emit an ultraviolet photon.
The ultraviolet photons have high frequency, they have higher energy, it's just harder to emit them.
And so Planck's hypothesis predicts no ultraviolet catastrophe.
The quantum hypothesis, in fact, exactly accounts for all the details of black body radiation.
Now, Planck's idea is pretty radical.
A continuous wave should carry any amount of energy.
The amount of energy carried by the wave is just related to how strong the wave is, and you can make a continuous wave of any strength.
Planck himself recognizes how radical his quantum hypothesis is.
On the very day when he worked out that the quantum hypothesis solved the black body radiation problem, he said to his son,
today I have made a discovery as important as Newton's discovery.
That's quite a statement to make, but as we'll see, it's entirely justified.
Okay, that brings us to the second puzzle.
The second puzzle is the problem of the photoelectric effect.
Now, consider the following experiment.
Suppose we take a metal surface and we polish it to remove any layer of oxides off the surface, and we put it in a vacuum.
And now we shine light on the polished metal surface.
What happens?
Well, it turns out that electrons, which are tiny, electrically charged particles, they are constituents of atoms,
and electrons are emitted from the surface.
So this is why it's called the photoelectric effect.
Photo for the light, electric because you emit electrons.
The photoelectric effect was discovered in the late 1800s, and very soon scientists had done experiments on it,
and they'd made some curious observations about the nature of the photoelectric effect.
They could measure both the number of electrons that were emitted by the surface and the energy of the electrons, how fast they were going.
And what they discovered is the energy of the electrons, how fast they were going, does not depend at all on the intensity of the light that you shine.
If you shine a brighter light, you get more electrons coming out of the surface, but every electron is moving at the same speed as previously.
This is quite amazing.
If you imagine that the electrons are being sort of shaken out of the metal by the oscillations of the light, then if the oscillations are stronger,
surely the electrons should be more shaken by the light.
But even if you do a thousand times brighter light, even if you shine a light of a thousand times greater intensity on the metal surface,
you won't have more energy in the electrons. You'll just have more electrons.
That's very strange.
Well, what does determine the energy of the electrons?
It turns out that's dependent on the frequency of the light.
If the frequency is too low, in fact, you get no photoelectrons at all.
Infrared light may not produce any photoelectrons from your metal surface.
At higher frequency, you get electrons out, and at even higher frequency, you get faster, higher energy electrons out.
So the observation is that the energy of the electrons does not depend on light intensity.
The energy of the electrons depends only on the frequency of the light.
And that seemed very puzzling.
So along comes Albert Einstein.
Albert Einstein, he's a very romantic figure in the history of science.
He's justly famous for all kinds of discoveries.
This is the year 1905, which is Einstein's year of miracles.
He, in this year, discovers the theory of relativity, demonstrates the equation E equals MC squared.
He explains all kinds of other things, and he also provides a new theory to explain the photoelectric effect.
By day, he's a technical expert third class in the Swiss patent office in 1905.
By night, he's a physics revolutionary.
Einstein is aware of Planck's work, and so he realizes that Planck's quantum hypothesis amounts to thinking of light as a stream of discrete particles.
These particles were later called photons.
So Einstein realized that Planck's hypothesis was saying that somehow light is made of photons.
And the energy of one photon is determined by Planck's formula.
Energy is Planck's constant times the frequency of the light.
Okay, that's kind of a strange picture.
How does that explain the photoelectric effect?
Well, here's what Einstein says.
Einstein says that each and every photoelectron that comes out of the metal gets its energy from a single photon, a single photon striking the metal.
Now, some of the energy of the photon is used up in prying the electron loose from the metal.
The electrons are bound to the metal, and so it takes a little energy to pry them loose.
But whatever energy is left over after that, the electron gets.
And so photons in bright or dim light of a given color have the same energy.
So the electron energies are the same, whether you have a bright light or a dim light.
But if you change the color, if you change the frequency of the light, then the photons have different energies.
The same light with higher frequency, same intensity of light with a higher frequency, should have photons with higher energy.
And so the photoelectrons that are produced will have a higher energy.
And Einstein is able to give a detailed account of the photoelectric effect in terms of photons.
Now, this is a very radical idea, and in fact, several experimental physicists were very skeptical.
So they went off and they did the experiments very carefully.
They measured all kinds of things about the photoelectric effect, and they found that the experiments, the experimental results, agreed exactly with Einstein's theory in every detail.
And so in fact, Einstein won the Nobel Prize in 1921 for the photoelectric effect, not for relativity theory or any of the many other things that he did, but for the photoelectric effect.
It was that important.
So with Planck's explanation of black body radiation and Einstein's explanation of the photoelectric effect, we've sort of gotten ourselves in a weird situation for the theory of light.
I mean, the two-slit experiment, we did the two-slit experiment, it seems to prove that light is a continuous wave. It's a conclusive experiment.
On the other hand, when we do the photoelectric effect, that seems to prove that light is a stream of discrete photons.
So there's something really, really funny going on, but it isn't just about light.
It's not just something funny about light, which brings us to the third puzzle.
The third puzzle is the problem of heat capacities.
So what is heat capacity? Heat capacity, the heat capacity of an object, is the heat energy needed to raise an object's temperature by one degree Celsius.
How much energy do I have to add to the object so that its temperature will go up by one degree Celsius?
Now, if I have an object with a very high heat capacity, then that object is hard to heat or cool.
It takes a lot of energy putting in to make it hotter. It takes a lot of energy taken out to make it cooler.
On the other hand, if the object has very low heat capacity, it's relatively easy to heat it or cool it.
You don't have to add much energy to heat it up. You don't have to extract much energy to cool it down.
So heat capacity is a very significant quantity in the theory of heat, which was one of the aspects of classical 19th century physics.
And in the 19th century, there was actually a long-standing puzzle about pure solids.
A pure solid is a solid made of one type of atom, a solid of one particular element.
So to explain this puzzle, I'm going to introduce a couple of examples.
We'll consider platinum metal and diamond, which is made of carbon.
I figure as long as we're doing thought experiments, we might as well use very expensive materials in our experiment.
Alright, so classical heat theory, the heat theory of the 19th century, predicts that all pure solids should have about the same heat capacity for the same number of atoms.
How does this work? Well, it works that at a given temperature, all atoms should vibrate with the same energy on average,
and heat energy is the energy of microscopic random vibrations of the atoms.
And at a given temperature, they should all have about the same energy.
Platinum, the atoms are very heavy, and so they vibrate slower at a given temperature.
Carbon atoms are much lighter atoms, and also in diamond, they're held together by very stiff covalent bonds.
So they vibrate much faster at a given temperature, but the amount of energy in a platinum atom or a carbon atom should be about the same at a given temperature.
And that means that all substances, the prediction is, all substances made of one kind of atom, all pure substances, should have about the same heat capacity for a given number of atoms.
So what does experiment say? Experiment says, no, that's not quite true.
So let's consider doing this experiment, and we can imagine doing this experiment at three different temperatures.
We can imagine doing it at a very high temperature, say a thousand degrees Celsius, or at an intermediate temperature, room temperature is good, 20 degrees Celsius,
or very, very cold temperature, like 200 degrees below zero Celsius, about the temperature of liquid nitrogen.
And so we can measure the heat capacities of materials at different temperatures.
And if we do the experiment at a very high temperature, a thousand degrees Celsius, hotter than any oven,
then we find that both platinum and diamond behave about as expected.
You see, the classical theory actually predicts that all solid objects should have a heat capacity of about 25 in particular units.
The units are joules per degrees Celsius per mole, but 25 is the number to remember.
And both platinum and diamond have heat capacities of about that amount.
Maybe they're not exactly right, but it's pretty close to that number.
A thousand degrees Celsius, both of them behave as expected.
But now we can imagine doing the experiment at 20 degrees Celsius, room temperature.
And then we find that platinum behaves roughly as expected, but diamond's heat capacity is much too low.
It takes much too little energy to change the temperature of diamond.
And again, we find if we do the experiment at liquid nitrogen temperatures,
200 degrees below zero, that both platinum and diamond have unexpectedly low heat capacities.
And the heat capacity of diamond is very, very tiny.
So this doesn't agree at all with classical physics.
Along comes Einstein again.
And what Einstein's going to do is he's going to do something really radical, strange, and amazing.
Einstein is going to apply quantum ideas not to light, but to the vibrations of atoms.
Einstein says, suppose atomic vibration energy comes in discrete quanta of size.
Energy equals Planck's constant times the frequency of vibration.
In other words, the Planck formula applies not just to energy and light waves,
but also to the energy in atomic vibrations.
This is the first application of quantum physics to matter.
There's no light anywhere in the problem.
Light is irrelevant to measuring the heat capacity of these materials.
And this is a direct challenge to Newton's mechanics,
the most successful theory of physics that had stood for more than 200 years
as the gold standard for accurate and far-reaching theories.
It's a direct challenge to Newton's mechanics because a vibrating atom in Newton's mechanics
can have any energy whatsoever.
So what does Einstein say?
Well, consider these pure solids.
Consider just some pure solid.
At very high temperatures, there's a lot of heat energy for all the atoms to vibrate just as expected.
But suppose we consider the same solid at low temperatures.
Then there's not enough heat energy for all the atoms to have at least one quantum of energy
because the atom can have zero quanta or one quantum or two quanta and so on.
But if there's not enough for everybody to have one quantum,
that means that a lot of the atoms will not be vibrating at all.
And so Einstein will say,
since a lot of the atoms aren't even vibrating,
the heat capacity of that material will be lower than expected.
So at high temperatures, it should behave about as expected
because there's plenty of heat energy.
At low temperatures, a lot of the atoms are fixed in place without any quanta of vibration energy
and only a few of them are vibrating, the heat capacity is lower.
So what's the difference between high temperatures and low temperatures?
What counts as a low temperature for a given substance?
And it depends on the substance.
It depends on the speed of vibration of the substance
because it depends on how big the quantum of energy is.
Therefore, the frequency of vibration.
So for diamond, you have very high frequency vibrations
and that means that the quantum of vibration energy is relatively high.
And that means that both 200 degrees below zero and 20 degrees above zero
count as low temperatures for diamond.
Even at room temperature, most of the atoms in a diamond are not vibrating,
do not have one quantum of vibration.
For platinum, on the other hand, those atoms are much more massive,
the vibrations of the atoms much slower,
and so room temperature, 20 degrees Celsius,
counts as high temperature for the platinum vibrations.
There's plenty of energy to have plenty of energy quanta for all the atoms.
But 200 degrees below zero, that's low temperature even for platinum.
Einstein's idea with a few refinements
actually precisely explains the observed heat capacities
of pure solids of all kinds at all temperatures.
It's a remarkable agreement with experiment.
Okay, what's happened in the first decade of the 20th century?
Max Planck and Albert Einstein have introduced quantum ideas
to explain a series of otherwise baffling observations.
Blackbody radiation, in the case of Planck, photoelectric effect,
and then later the heat capacity of pure solids,
explained by Einstein.
Both of these were puzzles,
or all three of these were puzzles of classical physics.
And in each case, Planck and Einstein find
that energy comes in discrete units,
discrete quanta, the quantum in quantum physics.
And the size of the quantum is e equals hf.
Energy is Planck's constant times frequency,
frequency of light or frequency of vibration,
and it's the same Planck's constant for everything,
the same Planck's constant for blackbody radiation,
the same Planck's constant for the photoelectric effect,
the same Planck's constant for the heat capacities of pure solids.
This is one of those really interesting moments in the history of science
where we're on the verge of a new point of view.
You can tell that there's a great new principle of physics in the auffing,
a principle that is universal,
because the quantum hypothesis appears to apply both to light and to matter.
We don't quite see the details yet.
We don't quite have the whole idea.
We just see a little bit.
Now, the universal principle, the universal quantum principle
that applies to both light and to matter
is a direct challenge to the classical physics
that prevailed at the end of the 19th century,
because in classical physics, energy can come in any amount.
Energy is a continuous quantity.
So this means that Planck's and Einstein's discoveries tell us
that the universe is discrete in ways that we never expected,
that the old resolution of the universe
into matter-made of discrete things
and light-made of continuous wavy stuff,
that old distinction must not be quite right.
Well, next time, of course, we're going to probe the other half of the mystery.
Not only is nature discrete in ways that we never expected,
but it will turn out that nature is also continuous in ways that we never expected.
So far, we've seen that light, electromagnetic waves,
can also act as a stream of particles, a stream of photons.
But next time, we're going to find out that particles of matter
that we thought were completely discrete
can also act as waves.
So every sort of stuff has a little bit of things.
Every sort of thing is a little stuff-like.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
