Welcome to the fourth lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
In the previous lecture, we saw how, in the early years of the 20th century, two revolutionaries,
Max Planck and Albert Einstein challenged the ideas of classical physics, especially,
but not exclusively, about the nature of light.
The experiments seem to present us with paradoxical results that are very hard to understand together.
On the one hand, Jung's two-slit experiment demonstrates that light is a wave.
We see the constructive and destructive interference of these waves.
We can measure the wavelength of light, which is less than a millionth of a meter.
On the other hand, Einstein's analysis of the photoelectric effect demonstrates that
light is composed of discrete particles, discrete photons.
The number of photons, the light intensity, determines the number of electrons produced
in the experiment, and the energy of the photons, the light frequency, determines the energy
of the electrons that are produced.
We can use this to measure the energy of the photons.
Now we can't just dismiss either of these experimental results.
Our understanding of light must somehow encompass both the wave and the particle ideas.
So, what's our goal in this lecture?
Our goal in this lecture is to try to sort out the mess, to try to resolve the paradox
a little bit, and to show how this paradox applies not just to light, but also to matter.
The quantum view can be summed up in a single phrase, wave-particle duality.
So what does that mean?
Well, it's something like this.
The true nature of light cannot be described in simple terms.
Our language just isn't equipped to describe the way light really is.
We need both wave and particle pictures to explain the behavior of light.
But that might make us uneasy.
How can we use both wave pictures and particle pictures?
Isn't that a logical contradiction?
Won't we get in trouble trying to use two contradictory pictures to describe light?
That's an immensely tricky question.
It's maybe the trickiest question in all of science.
And we'll spend the next few lectures trying to understand that question and trying to
see how the scientists in the early 20th century wrestled with it.
For now, let me give you a rough rule of thumb, a rule for wave-particle duality.
The first rule of thumb is that light travels in the form of waves, with frequency and wavelength
exhibiting constructive and destructive interference and so on.
Light travels as a wave.
The other rule of thumb is that light interacts, it's emitted or absorbed, in the form of
discrete particles, discrete photons, lumps of discrete energy.
So Young's two-slit experiment is an experiment about how light travels.
How does light travel through a barrier that contains two slits?
And so, since it's an experiment about how light travels, we get a wave result.
But the photoelectric effect is an experiment about how light interacts with matter, how
light delivers its energy to a polished metal surface.
And so we get particle results, we get discrete photons.
We call our story in lecture two how the history of physics is sort of the history of asking
whether nature is fundamentally discrete, thing-like, or fundamentally continuous, stuff-like.
Well, the answer for light appears to be that light is both discrete, thing-like and continuous,
stuff-like.
It's the properties of both kinds, which is a very strange new answer to an old question.
All right, so that picture of wave particle duality is a bit oversimplified, but it's
not too bad for a start.
Light travels as a wave, interacts like a particle.
Now, even in the early days of quantum theory, it was clear that quantum theory was not just
about the nature of light.
Remember Einstein's analysis of the heat capacities of solids at low temperatures, the heat capacities
of a pure solid, a solid containing only one kind of atom, was much less than we expected.
Einstein explained this by applying quantum ideas to matter, to the vibrations of atomic
constituents of the solid.
The energy of atomic vibration comes in discrete amounts.
A physicist would say that this energy is quantized.
This energy follows the quantum rule.
So we already know that this terrible quantum business is not just a problem with light,
it also has infected matter.
It's something that applies to everything.
So where does all this lead?
Well, I want to skip ahead a little bit in our story.
I want to skip from 1908 when Einstein does his work on the heat capacities of solids
all the way up to 1924.
I will come back and talk about what happens in between, but let's jump ahead to 1924.
What's happened in the meantime?
Quite a lot of things have happened in the meantime.
The First World War has happened in the meantime, but also in the story of quantum physics,
there have been many discoveries about quantum physics, lots of hard thinking about quantum
physics.
Indeed, a lot of perplexity about quantum physics.
It's pretty clear that quantum physics is the most important new thing in physics, but
for a whole generation, physicists are unable to make a coherent theory out of quantum ideas.
So 1924 along comes Louis de Broglie.
Louis de Broglie is a French aristocrat, a bon vivant.
In fact, he's a prince of the blood.
He's also a physics doctoral student.
And in his doctoral thesis, he proposes a radical new idea.
He proposes that quantum wave particle duality applies not only to light, but also to matter.
He says that particles like electrons must also have wave characteristics.
Electrons have frequency, they have wavelength, they exhibit constructive and destructive
interference effects and so on.
This sounds very strange.
We think of electrons as particles.
We think of electrons as little baseballs.
How can a baseball have a wavelength?
But even though the idea is very strange, de Broglie's idea is very soon spectacularly
confirmed in the laboratory.
In an experiment that was done several different places, they shot electrons at a crystal.
And in a crystal, the atoms are arranged in very orderly ranks and rows.
It's a regular arrangement of atoms.
And the electrons go through the crystal and they come out the other side, but they only
come out in certain directions.
The electrons go this way or this way or this way, but not in between.
Why?
Well, the spaces between the atoms act like the slits in Young's two-slit experiment.
And the waves of the electron, whatever those are, the electron waves constructively interfere
in some directions, destructively interfere in others.
So the electrons only come out in certain directions.
And in fact, you can measure the wavelength of an electron.
So de Broglie is right.
How does it work?
How are the wave and particle pictures connected to each other?
Well, let's suppose we have a particle of mass m moving at a speed v.
For example, a pitched baseball.
Now the baseball has two important characteristics.
First of all, it has energy.
The energy of the baseball is one-half its mass times its speed squared.
And this is sometimes called kinetic energy.
Energy due to its motion.
What does the energy tell us?
Well, the energy basically tells us how much work the pitcher had to do to throw it.
There's a closely related characteristic of the baseball as well, the momentum of the
baseball, which is just the mass times the velocity.
It's just the mass times how fast it's going.
And the momentum answers the question, if the baseball hit you, how hard would it hit?
So energy and momentum are characteristics of a particle.
Now waves, as we saw, are characterized by their frequency, f, and their wavelength,
which is denoted by the Greek letter lambda, as you'll remember.
You recall we talked about the frequency and wavelength of sound waves.
The frequency of a musical note is a few hundred waves per second.
That's the number of waves that pass by a fixed point in space like your ear each second.
And the wavelength of a musical note is something like a meter, maybe a bit smaller than a meter,
maybe a bit bigger than a meter, but it's a pretty good size wave.
And that's the spatial separation between successive disturbances in the periodic wave.
And so De Broglie's idea is to somehow connect the particle properties, energy and momentum,
to the wave properties of frequency and wavelength.
Now, the connection between them is going to involve Planck's constant, the constant
that Planck found that relates energy and frequency.
So we already know one of the relations.
It's the Planck's old formula that the energy of the particle is related to, is in fact
equal to Planck's constant times the frequency of the wave.
What De Broglie does is he adds another relation.
He says that the momentum and the wavelength are related, that the momentum of the particle
P is equal to Planck's constant divided by the wavelength of the wave, lambda, H over
lambda.
And that's the relation between momentum and wavelength.
Now, remember that Planck's constant is really small.
It's a very, very tiny number.
And so that means that the typical wavelengths that we're talking about for electrons and
atoms, that's going to, that wavelength is going to be really, really tiny.
The wavelength for an electron and an atom is very small, less than one nanometer, one
billionth of a meter in size.
These are very short wavelengths.
And already, you can see that the more massive the particle is, the more its momentum will
be at a given speed.
And so if its momentum is larger, then De Broglie's formula tells us that its wavelength will
be shorter.
Its wavelength will be even shorter.
The electron wavelengths are already really tiny.
The wavelengths for more massive particles are even smaller.
And because the wavelengths are so small, it's extremely difficult to do interference
experiments and see the interference effects for large particles.
So it's essentially impossible to do an interference experiment with a baseball.
The wavelength of the baseball is just too short.
Okay, so we can do interference experiments with electrons.
We really can't, as a practical matter, do it with a baseball.
So how far can we go?
How large a particle can we do an interference experiment with and see its De Broglie waves
to measure its De Broglie wavelength?
Well, we can do interference experiments with neutrons, for example, which are nuclear
particles that are a couple of thousand times more massive than electrons.
We can do interference experiments now with entire atoms, which are even larger.
But recently, in 1999 in Vienna, a group of physicists led by Anton Zeilinger did the
greatest demonstration yet.
They did what essentially amounts to a two-slit experiment using entire molecules of 60 carbon
atoms.
Well, how can we visualize a molecule of 60 carbon atoms?
Well, it turns out it's very similar to a familiar sort of structure, the structure
of a soccer ball.
Imagine that the lines on the soccer ball, every place where the lines intersect, there's
a carbon atom.
And the lines between the carbon atoms are the chemical bonds between them.
Then the soccer ball has a certain structure of vertices, structure of intersections.
If you count them, they turn out to be exactly 60 vertices on a soccer ball.
And in the C60 molecule, the 60 carbon atoms are arranged in exactly this way.
They form a kind of spherical cage.
Of course, much smaller than a soccer ball, it's about 200 million times smaller than
this soccer ball.
So it's pretty small.
It's a molecule, though, containing 60 carbon atoms.
And they were able to show that such molecules exhibit constructive and destructive interference
as predicted by Lloyd-Abroie.
And the C60 molecule is one million times more massive than an electron.
So that's quite a remarkable experimental result.
Anton Zylinger, the leader of this group, is famous for taking thought experiments, things
that seem very idealized and impossible to do, and turning them into real experiments.
And Anton tells me that his ambition is to do a two-slit interference experiment with
something even bigger than a C60 molecule.
He wants to do it with a virus, a virus that's thousands or even hundreds of thousands of
times bigger than a C60 molecule, to exhibit interference in something that, by some definitions,
is actually a living thing.
It sounds pretty extreme, but I wouldn't bet against Anton Zylinger.
Okay, so the Planck-DeBouy relations connect particle properties, energy, momentum, to
wave properties, wavelength and frequency.
The link between the particle properties and the wave properties is Planck's constant
h.
But you know, that still leaves things very mysterious.
When we talk about electron waves, what do we mean?
What are we talking about?
When we talk about a sound wave, you know what a sound wave is?
It's a periodic disturbance in air pressure that travels through the room.
When I talk about light waves, I have an idea of what I mean.
It's a periodic disturbance in the electromagnetic field that travels through a room.
But if I talk about electron waves, that's a periodic disturbance in what?
When I talk about electron waves, what's waving?
That brings us to the second connection between particles and waves.
And that's called the Born Rule.
Now the Born Rule may sound like a spy novel by Robert Ludlam, but actually what it is
is it's a brilliant insight, one of many, by Max Born, great German physicist and one
of the inventors of quantum mechanics.
He's also, people my age are interested to find out, the grandfather of the Australian
pop singer Olivia Newton-John, so it's a talented family.
Here's the basic problem that Born was considering.
A particle is something that has a definite position in space.
It's here and not here.
A wave, on the other hand, is spread out all over space.
So how do we reconcile these two facts?
How do we reconcile these two pictures in quantum theory?
Those which are located in just one place, and when you go look for a particle, you find
it in one place, and a wave which is spread out all over the place.
And here's the Born Rule, here's Born's great discovery.
The intensity of the quantum wave at a point tells us the probability of finding the particle
at that point.
The intensity of the wave determines the probability of finding the particle there.
So let's take that apart.
What's the first issue?
The first issue is to say something about what we mean by wave intensity.
And wave intensity turns out to be proportional to the square of the wave amplitude.
So imagine water waves, the wave amplitude is the height of the waves.
How high the waves are.
And the intensity of those waves is how much energy those waves carry.
And it turns out that the intensity is given by the square of the amplitude.
So waves that are twice as high actually carry four times as much energy, which is something
to remember when you go surfing.
A wave that's twice as high is really four times as powerful.
So that's wave intensity.
It's the square of the amplitude and it measures in ordinary waves the amount of energy carried
by the wave.
Wave intensity gives particle probability.
Here's Born's insight.
Quantum theory does not tell us where a particle is.
Quantum theory can't tell us where a particle is, it could be here, it could be there.
Quantum mechanics tells us the probability that the particle may be found here or found
there.
Quantum mechanics only tells us the probabilities.
Where the particle winds up, that's random, it's a gamble.
Quantum mechanics fixes the odds.
So let's illustrate the Born rule by doing a two-slit experiment on electrons.
We set up a pair of slits, we send electrons through the apparatus one electron at a time,
and we record where the electron hits the screen each time.
And each time we do it, each particle lands randomly.
If you send through 10 particles, you have just a few scattered spots on our screen where
electrons have landed.
But as you send more and more particles, send 100 particles or 1,000 particles or 10,000
particles, a statistical pattern begins to emerge.
Those probabilities tell us what happens statistically.
If an event has a probability of one-half, that means that if you do the same experiment
many, many times, about 50% of the time, one-half of the time, that event takes place.
So if you send many, many particles, a statistical pattern begins to emerge.
And if you send through billions of particles, so many particles that you can't really distinguish
the individual particles, then what you get is a continuous interference pattern for the
electrons in the experiment.
In the places where you have constructive interference, the electron is more likely to
land there.
The probability is high.
In the places where you have destructive interference, the electron is much less likely to land
there.
Maybe the probability is zero and the electron can never land there.
That's destructive interference.
And of course, we can do the same with light.
We could do Young's Two-Slit Experiment, one photon at a time.
And as it happens, I actually just did that exact experiment in the lab last week.
Instead of using a laser, we use an extremely dim light source, an extremely dim light
bulb essentially, and a dark green filter in front of it.
So we only got one photon, one green photon, at a time in the experiment.
And each photon passed through the slits and hit the screen at a random place.
And we found out where it hit by using a very sensitive photon detector, which in fact is
the only expensive thing about the experiment.
It cost several thousand dollars.
One photon at a time.
And in fact, we arranged it so whenever a photon hit the detector, an electrical signal
would trigger an audible click so we could hear the photons, one by one, hitting the
detector.
Click, click, click, click, click.
Now only a few photons per second reached the detector.
And since the photons traveled from one end of the experiment to the other in a few billions
of a second, that means that only one photon at a time was going through the detector.
Nevertheless, we got an interference pattern.
There were bright spots.
And by bright spots, I mean places where the photon is more likely to land.
The photon would land with fair frequency.
There were dark spots, which were places where the photon seldom or never would land.
And after a long time, the random clicks in the detector resolve themselves into a beautiful
interference pattern.
So this is really a beautiful demonstration of the Born Rule.
The wave intensity corresponds to the particle probability.
Okay.
So let's go back and sum things up a little bit.
The microscopic world in quantum theory is governed by the principle of wave particle
duality.
Everything, light, matter, absolutely everything, has both wave properties and particle properties.
This is true for light.
This is true for electrons.
It's true for atoms.
It's true for molecules of carbon-60.
It's true for everything.
And these wave and particle probabilities are related in a couple of subtle ways.
First of all, there's the Planck-De Broglie relations.
The energy and momentum of a particle are related to the frequency and wavelength of the wave.
If the particle has high energy and momentum, the frequency will be high.
The wavelength will be very short.
If the particle has very low energy and momentum, the frequency will be very low for the wave.
The wavelength will be very long.
Wave and particle properties are related.
And then there's the other connection, which is the Born Rule, that the wave intensity,
which is given by the square of the amplitude of the wave, that wave intensity determines
the particle probability, the probability that an experiment will find the particle in
a particular place.
You see, in quantum mechanics, individual events are random.
Quantum mechanics predicts only probabilities.
It doesn't predict what will happen in detail.
It only predicts the odds of this happening or that happening.
And because of this, everything in nature is both thing-like and stuff-like.
It's thing-like because everything in nature is discrete.
Energy comes in discrete quantum.
Particles come in one particle or two particles or three particles, but not 1.75 particles.
Everything is thing-like.
But everything also is stuff-like.
It's described by continuous waves in space.
These waves are waves of probability, waves whose intensity gives the probability of
finding the particle.
And so even though the particle is discrete, the probability waves can be continuous.
Now, in the next lecture, we're going to go a step further.
We're going to describe how de Broglie's waves tell us about the inner structure of
the atom.
And in so doing, we're going to solve a gigantic puzzle.
What puzzle is that?
Well, it turns out that if classical physics were true, all atoms everywhere should implode
in on themselves, collapse in on themselves, in a very short period of time, a period of
time less than one microsecond, less than a millionth of a second.
So all atoms everywhere should implode in less than a microsecond.
If this happened, it would be very unfortunate.
Luckily for us, it doesn't happen.
Luckily for us, somehow the matter, the atoms making up matter, somehow there's a stability
that classical physics doesn't predict.
The atoms are stable, and that's a mystery.
Why are atoms stable?
The answer next time.
See you then.
