Welcome to the seventh lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
In many ways, this is the most dramatic lecture so far, because drama means conflict.
This lecture is about an argument.
The protagonists are two giants of 20th century science, Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr.
They're two of the founders of quantum theory, and the subject of their argument is the meaning of quantum mechanics.
At stake are our most fundamental ideas about the nature of nature.
So our setting is the 1920s.
It's the culmination of a quarter century of continuing development of quantum theory,
beginning with Planck and Einstein's theories about light quanta, about photons,
and Bohr's theory of atomic structure, his discrete electron orbits, his quantum jumps between orbits.
All this culminates in De Broglie's radical idea that pieces of matter have wave properties,
and this is really the breakthrough, because in the few years after De Broglie's discovery,
discovery after discovery comes in rapid succession.
You have Schrodinger's wave patterns that determine atomic structure.
You have Bohr's interpretation of quantum waves as waves of probability.
The intensity of the wave gives the probability of finding the particle.
You have Heisenberg's uncertainty principle, and you have many other discoveries that we haven't even mentioned.
George Gamoff, a Russian physicist who was part of that story, one of the pioneers of quantum theory,
wrote a book about the years 1900 to 1930, and he called the book 30 Years That Shook Physics.
Well, between 1924 and 1927, you have three years that were a pretty powerful earthquake all by themselves.
Out of a vague, fishy, miscellaneous set of quantum ideas, there was the birth of a solid framework, quantum mechanics,
essentially the same theory that we use today.
So this all amounts to a dramatic turning point in the history of physics.
Of course, the new physics, the new quantum mechanics posed many conceptual and philosophical challenges
that the physicists of the day had to come to grips with, and that's our story.
Our protagonists. First, Albert Einstein, the greatest physicist of his age, maybe the greatest physicist ever.
He's tremendously famous, and he deserves to be tremendously famous. His contributions are too numerous to mention.
He's also a deeply philosophical man. He's a man who cares not just about the mathematics.
He cares about the meaning of the physics, and he's a solitary thinker in many ways.
He certainly thinks of himself as a solitary thinker.
Over the years, he has comparatively few students and relatively few collaborators on his work.
His way is to ponder a problem and think it through himself, and to follow the guidance of his own intuition,
that profound intuition about physics, that almost miraculous and magical intuition of his.
And Einstein is also, in his way, very stubborn.
And it's his stubbornness that allows him to work for years and years on the hardest problems in physics
and see them through, and that led him to some of his greatest discoveries.
Einstein, of course, is the father of wave particle duality in his analysis of the photoelectric effect.
Just because light travels as waves doesn't mean that light can't behave as a stream of particles in the photoelectric effect.
Now, in the 1920s, Einstein realizes that the new quantum mechanics was an important advance.
In fact, he nominates Heisenberg and the rest for the Nobel Prize.
Yet, Einstein finds much to criticize in quantum mechanics.
For example, in an experiment like the two-slit experiment, why does the particle wind up in one place rather than another?
Quantum mechanics gives no answer at all.
It only predicts the probabilities that a particle lands here and here,
but quantum mechanics says nothing about why one possibility is realized and another one is not.
And Einstein sees this as a tremendous flaw in quantum mechanics.
Einstein thinks that a theory should explain individual events, not just general tendencies.
Also, Einstein is philosophically disposed to determinism.
Determinism is the idea that the future is completely determined by the present.
Newton's theory of motion is like this.
If you know completely the positions and velocities of all particles at a certain time, say the present,
then you can use the forces between the particles to predict exactly where the particles will be and what they'll be doing in the future.
And this idea of Newton's theory, this determinism, is not changed by the introduction of Einstein's relativity.
Relativity is also a deterministic idea of the universe.
In quantum mechanics, of course, there's the uncertainty principle, which prevents us from having that kind of exact knowledge,
but Einstein's intuition is unwilling to abandon determinism.
He thinks determinism is right. He says God does not play dice with the universe.
Finally, Einstein at first thinks that quantum mechanics may not quite be logically consistent.
It may have an inconsistency somewhere, and so he tries to find it.
Okay, our second protagonist, Niels Bohr. Niels Bohr is another figure of tremendous importance in the history of scientific thought.
And also, like Einstein, a deeply philosophical man, a man who cares about meaning as well as mathematics.
And Bohr is also a powerful personality. I don't mean that Bohr was an overbearing man.
Let me see if I can explain.
Einstein was regarded with awe and admiration by his peers, not only for his scientific genius,
but also because he was a man of great ethical character.
But in many respects, Bohr inspired not just respect but love among his followers.
Bohr's style of thinking is very different. Bohr developed his ideas in dialogue, dialectically, in conversation with other people.
He was forever bringing other people into his office and wrestling with ideas,
considering all sides of a question and every objection that could be raised.
And Bohr was also quite stubborn in this process. He could wear his colleagues out with his relentless drive to understand.
Let me tell you something about Einstein and Bohr's writings, their different style of writings.
Both, of course, are brilliant and insightful.
Einstein is lucid and elegant. Bohr is subtle and nuanced and sometimes a little obscure.
You can think of Einstein as the lone genius. Bohr is the leader of a movement.
Einstein is the prophet. Bohr is the pope. In fact, his students sometimes teased him by calling him the pope.
But as a matter of fact, much of quantum mechanics was developed by followers of Bohr.
And much of it happened at the Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Copenhagen, where Bohr was the director.
So, what's Bohr's thinking about quantum mechanics?
Bohr thinks that the new quantum theory requires physicists to abandon their old ideas.
And among those ideas that should be abandoned is the idea of strict determinism.
Einstein says God does not play dice with the universe. Bohr says Einstein stopped telling God what to do.
And so Bohr works out a framework for using the ideas of the new quantum mechanics without contradiction.
And this came to be called the so-called Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics.
And Copenhagen interpretation has been the principal way that physicists have made sense of quantum theory ever since the 1920s.
Of course, there are now other approaches than the Copenhagen interpretation,
and we'll talk about those other approaches in the next to last lecture of the course.
For now, let's find out about Bohr's Copenhagen interpretation.
The Copenhagen interpretation rests on Bohr's principle of complementarity.
And the principle of complementarity is a very subtle idea. It's almost obscure. It's very Bohr-like, not boring, but Bohr-ish.
And so it needs a lot of explanation.
The principle of complementarity is founded on the distinction between the microscopic and the macroscopic realms.
The microscopic realms, the electrons and photons and so on, cannot be described in ordinary language.
After a few mind-bending lectures on quantum physics, maybe you agree.
In any case, the macroscopic realm, the realm of large objects, laboratories, people and so on,
can be described pretty well in ordinary language, a thing is so or it is not.
We have simple cause and effect.
And classical physics is approximately valid when we deal with the macroscopic realm with large objects and so on.
Now, whenever we measure the microscopic quantum realm, we always amplify the result to the macroscopic realm.
There's always an electrical signal or a pointer position on a dial or maybe the click of a detector.
Perhaps you remember me talking about doing the experiment of counting photons one at a time in a two-slit experiment.
And we arrange the apparatus so that an audible click was made every time a photon hit the detector.
One photon becoming an audible click that could be heard all across the room, that's a tremendous act of amplification.
And Bohr says that this amplification that happens in a measurement is no accident.
That there must be amplification because we have to have it for the result to be recorded and communicated in ordinary language in the macroscopic realm.
The act of amplification is crucial.
It's how we macroscopic beings get at the microscopic realm of the quantum world.
Of course, that may be cause for some worry because the rules of the microscopic and the macroscopic realms don't exactly match.
The microscopic realm is quantum mechanical.
The macroscopic realm to a good approximation is classical.
We're going to have to be very careful.
And Bohr's principle of complementarity is a way of being very careful.
Now let's suppose we make some measurement on a quantum particle.
A measurement is not just a passive observation.
A measurement is an intervention.
A measurement is an interaction between the particle and the experimental apparatus.
And that interaction goes both ways.
The particle is always affected in some way by that interaction.
And how the particle responds to the interaction depends on what interaction occurs.
It depends on what measurement we make.
Because, of course, different measurements will be different experimental setups and will involve different kinds of interactions.
And that means that different measurements are logically exclusive of each other.
We can do one kind of measurement, or we can do another kind of measurement,
but we cannot do both at the same time because they involve mutually exclusive physical arrangements of our laboratory equipment.
So, for example, the uncertainty principle.
The uncertainty principle tells us that we cannot measure position X and momentum P at the same time.
What's a physical question? Why not?
The answer is the interactions that we need for the two measurements,
the physical arrangement of experimental apparatus that we need for the two measurements,
those two arrangements are very different.
They're logically exclusive.
Doing one measurement logically excludes doing the other measurement at the same time.
And so, Bohr would say that means that position and momentum are complementary quantities.
And when we use ordinary language, the language of everyday life where a thing is so or not,
when we use ordinary language we must use different complementary descriptions in different situations depending on what measurements are actually made.
This is, in fact, Bohr's way of thinking about wave particle duality.
When you do an experiment about wave propagation, you get a wave answer,
when you do an experiment about particles exchanging energy, you get a particle answer.
You have to have two complementary pictures.
And the mathematics of quantum mechanics almost miraculously guarantees that we can do this without ever running into a contradiction.
We never have to use two different ordinary language descriptions at the same time.
We always get to choose which one we're going to make, which one we're going to apply,
which experiment we're going to construct, which measurement we're going to make.
So, to sum it up in a few words, which is a difficult job,
the problem with quantum mechanics, as Bohr sees it, is trying to fit together these different pictures,
like the wave picture and the particle picture.
And Bohr says we only find out about the microscopic world from doing experiments and amplifying the results.
And because of complementarity, different experiments are mutually exclusive.
So we never actually have to use both pictures at once.
That means that quantum mechanics might sound paradoxical at first, but no actual contradiction ever arises.
The moral of the story is the exact experimental arrangement, in a particular case,
determines what it is that's being measured.
And what's being measured determines what picture is appropriate.
So now we turn to the great debate, the great debate between Bohr and Einstein.
What's the debate about?
It's about basic questions.
Is quantum mechanics logically consistent?
Is quantum mechanics valid?
What's the meaning of quantum mechanics?
What is quantum mechanics trying to tell us about the nature of the microscopic world?
Much of the debate between Bohr and Einstein centers on a series of thought experiments.
Remember thought experiments?
They're idealized experiments that might be hard to perform in practice,
but we use them to clarify our thinking about physics ideas.
Einstein proposed a series of puzzles and paradoxes.
Each one of his puzzles is designed to show some loophole in quantum mechanics,
some flaw in the theory, some way around the theory.
And then Bohr responds to Einstein's ideas one by one.
He tries to expose the flaw in Einstein's thinking.
He tries to defend quantum mechanics from the attack.
So that means that it might appear that this is a debate about a series of special examples,
but really it's a profound argument about basic principles.
In this argument, Bohr is at a strategic disadvantage.
He's got to figure out what's wrong with every one of Einstein's paradoxes.
Einstein only needs to succeed in one example.
And succeed, I mean, he needs to show an unresolvable problem with quantum mechanics.
Einstein's on the attack, Bohr is defending.
Now the debate reaches its climax at the Solvay Conferences of 1927 and 1930.
The Solvay Conferences are periodic gatherings of the world's best physicists
to discuss the most important physics problems of the day.
They go on to this day.
And both the 1927 and 1930 conferences centered on the new quantum mechanics.
So during the day, you had lectures and formal discussions and so on,
but outside of that, during meals in the evenings, the real business went on.
Einstein would propose clever thought experiments to show that quantum mechanics does not make sense,
or that the uncertainty principle can be evaded.
Einstein believes that a particle should have definite position and momentum,
and that if we're very clever, we might be able to find them both out at the same time.
On the other hand, Bohr is trying to show why Einstein's clever ideas won't work.
So to give you some flavor of the debate, I want to examine one particular example,
one particular thought experiment proposed by Einstein and answered by Bohr.
I've actually simplified the example somewhat, but I think I've captured the essential physics.
Okay, so Einstein says, suppose a particle passes through a barrier with one slit.
Ah, we're doing the single slit diffraction experiment.
Particle passes through a barrier with one slit.
And because the barrier has one slit, when the particle passes through,
we know that the particle's lateral position, with an uncertainty, delta x, we called it,
which is the width of the slit, let's say.
So the slit has some width. We know where the particle is because it passes through the slit.
Now, of course, we saw that the Broadway's spread out on the other side of the single slit because of diffraction,
and that means that the particle might be deflected this way or that way as it passes through the barrier.
We don't know how it's deflected this way or that way.
We have uncertainty about the momentum.
We just know it might be knocked a little bit to the left or to the right,
and that means we can't predict as well where the particle winds up.
Einstein says, suppose we construct the barrier so that it can move from side to side.
It's free to move.
Then if the particle is deflected as it passes through the barrier,
that deflection of the particle will actually push the barrier the other way.
If the barrier is knocked to the right, that means the particle was deflected to the left.
If the barrier was pushed to the left, that means the particle was knocked to the right.
So if we see how the barrier moves, we can work out exactly what the particle deflection was as it passes through the slit.
That means, of course, if we know how the particle's momentum was changed, its momentum is no longer uncertain.
If we can take into account the effect of the slit on the particle,
then it's no longer random.
We'll know that the particle passed through the slit, and we'll know where it's going to wind up on the screen
because we know the recoil of the barrier, and we can work it out.
So we know x, the lateral position of the particle, with a very small delta x.
We made a very narrow slit.
We know p, the lateral momentum of the particle, with a very small uncertainty, delta p.
And by doing the experiment very carefully, Einstein argues, we can make both of the uncertainties as small as we like.
We can beat the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, which says that the product of the uncertainties has to be at least as big as Planck's constant.
And if we can beat the uncertainty principle, quantum mechanics cannot be 100% right.
There has to be something wrong with it.
So what's Bohr's response?
Bohr's response is to say, not so fast.
But you have to also consider how the uncertainty principle applies not just to the particle, but also to the movable barrier.
The movable barrier has its own position and momentum from side to side.
We can call its position capital X and its momentum capital P.
And if we measure to measure the recoil precisely, to measure very precisely how much the barrier is knocked to the left or to the right,
then we have to, at the outset, have a very small uncertainty in the barrier's momentum.
We just have to know very precisely that it wasn't moving to start with.
Otherwise, we won't know what the effect of the particle was.
So to do this experiment, we must make the uncertainty in the side to side momentum of the barrier, delta capital P, very tiny.
On the other hand, to do the experiment, we have to know the position of the slit in the barrier very precisely.
Because if we don't know where the slit is, then the fact that the electron passed through the barrier doesn't really tell us where the electron was.
So in order to get the electron's position uncertainty very small, we have to make delta capital X the position uncertainty of the barrier with the slit in it.
We have to make that uncertainty very small.
But the uncertainty principle for the barrier tells us that its uncertainty in position and its uncertainty in momentum cannot both be tiny at the same time.
So what's Bohr's response?
Bohr's response is, essentially, Einstein is cheating.
He neglects to apply the uncertainty to the barrier itself.
But the uncertainty principle applies to everything.
And so Einstein's thought experiment won't work. Quantum mechanics is saved.
But notice how it's saved. Quantum mechanics is saved because it applies to everything.
If there's anything in the universe that is truly not quantum mechanical, that anything in the universe for which the uncertainty principle does not hold,
we could use that to defeat quantum mechanics. Quantum mechanics is saved because it is universal.
Okay, the Bohr-Einstein argument goes on round after round.
And Bohr is always able, eventually, to find the flaw in Einstein's proposed thought experiment.
Now, Einstein's no dummy. The flaws in his proposed thought experiments are often extremely subtle.
Sometimes Bohr has to think overnight to figure out what's wrong with them.
But the flaws are always there.
And so after 1930, Einstein is forced to accept that quantum mechanics is a consistent theory of physics.
Is he satisfied? No. Einstein is not satisfied. He is not satisfied with quantum mechanics.
He still believes in determinism. He still thinks quantum mechanics has flaws.
He thinks quantum mechanics is correct as far as it goes.
But he believes that it is incomplete.
So Einstein goes on looking for clues to a deeper view of nature.
And that means that after 1930, the Bohr-Einstein debate shifts, but it does not end.
There's another chapter, an even more amazing chapter yet to come.
And we'll talk about it in lectures 15 and 16 on quantum entanglement.
But this lecture must come to an end here.
In fact, at this point, the first section of our course comes to an end.
In this section, we've traced the development of quantum ideas leading up to the development of quantum mechanics.
Now we're going to turn to something even more ambitious.
Now we're going to try learning not just about quantum mechanics, but learning quantum mechanics itself.
Our goal for the next few lectures is to learn the abstract language that physicists use to describe the microscopic world.
That abstract language is a kind of mathematics.
It's not terribly difficult mathematics, but it is very unfamiliar.
We're going to learn a simplified form of quantum mechanics.
We're going to learn quantum mechanics stripped to its essentials.
And we're going to use a couple of helpful examples to guide us on our way.
And the first example we're going to talk about is to take the phenomenon of interference that we saw in the two-slit experiment,
and we're going to show how it works in the simplest conceivable situation.
We're going to set up our thought experiment.
We're going to analyze it.
We're going to explore it.
We're going to play with it.
We'll also discover a few surprises.
And that's going to be our business beginning in the next lecture.
Now, the next few lectures may be a little challenging, but the payoff will be considerable.
The payoff is to make the tremendous insights of quantum mechanics our own.
And that task begins next time.
I'll see you then.
