Welcome to the eighth lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
In the first section of the course, we've been tracing how a generation of the most
brilliant scientists in human history created the theory of quantum mechanics and wrestled
with its perplexities. We've told how Planck and Einstein and Bohr introduced quantum ideas
into the theory of light and matter. We heard how De Bruy and Schrödinger and Bohr and
Heisenberg built that into a sophisticated mathematical theory, the theory of quantum
mechanics. Now, in the second section, we embark on the task of introducing the theory
itself, quantum mechanics, in a simplified form. We're going to begin with an idealized
thought experiment. It will be our laboratory, if you will, to explore the concepts of quantum
mechanics. And that idealized laboratory is the interferometer. Now, an interferometer is an
optical apparatus with several components. So let's talk about the components of an
interferometer. First of all, there's a light source. The light source generates a beam of
light with a definite wavelength, which we direct into the apparatus. We might use a laser,
but any light source will do. The intensity of the light source, though, can be reduced so that
only one photon at a time is in the interferometer. So we'll be asking, what will that one photon
do? Where will it go? How will it behave? So that's what's at the front end of the interferometer.
At the back end of the interferometer, we have photon detectors, devices that can register
any photons that strike them. Now, our photon detectors will be somewhat idealized. For example,
they will be 100% efficient. Whenever a photon hits them, they will certainly register a photon,
and real photon detectors are not quite that efficient, but we'll assume it's 100% efficient.
And another thing is that generally real photon detectors actually absorb the photons they detect.
For example, they might detect the photon by the photoelectric effect in which a photon is absorbed
and an electron is produced. So the photon is at once detected and destroyed. But we could imagine,
if we like, super-duper detectors that can register a photon without actually destroying a photon.
Such detectors would be very, very hard to build, but they're possible in principle. So whenever we
need a super-duper, non-destroying photon detector, we'll allow ourselves to use it. Now, many photon
detectors are the technological descendants of the old-fashioned Geiger counters. We've all seen
those in movies, the detecting radiation with an audible click. And so we say that a photon detector
goes click when a photon is detected. And that's much like the photon detectors that I told you
about in the experiment that I did with the two-slit experiment, Young's two-slit experiment,
doing one photon at a time. The photo detector that I used made an audible click whenever a
photon was detected. So we have the light source. We have the photon detectors. What's in between?
Well, one of the things that we find in between is a mirror. We find several mirrors
in the experiment. And these mirrors are used to guide the beam around in various directions.
And so we'll mostly ignore the regular mirrors. They're not very important for the operation
of the interferometer. But the most important component of the interferometer are the half
silvered mirrors, also called beam splitters. A half-silvered mirror is a partially reflecting
mirror. It's a piece of glass with a little bit of metal evaporated onto one side instead of a lot.
And so when you shine a beam of light at a half-silvered mirror, it splits the beam,
that's why they're called beam splitters, into a transmitted beam and a reflected beam,
each one of which has exactly half the intensity of the original beam. Half of the energy goes one
way, half of the energy goes another way. Now, there's one detail about half-silvered mirrors
that I'd better point out. And it's a trivial sounding detail, but it turns out to be very important.
The half-silvered mirror is a piece of glass. It has a little bit of metal
coating one side. And if you have light incident on the silvered side, on the side with the metal
coating, and that light is reflected, the reflected light, the reflected light wave,
is actually reversed. It's actually inverted. The electromagnetic fields are reversed in
direction in the reflected wave. This doesn't happen with the light that is transmitted. It doesn't
happen either with the light that is reflected from the other side, the side without the metallic
coating. So this is a funny little fact that the light rays from the silvered side,
the light waves, are inverted. It turns out to be a crucial fact, as we'll see. And it will show up
later on as a kind of a minus sign for those light waves. Okay. So what happens when a single
photon is incident on a beam splitter? What happens to the photon? So let's imagine an experiment.
We have a very weak light source. It produces one photon at a time. We have a beam splitter,
which would split the light beam into two directions. And we have a couple of photon
detectors to see where the photon goes. Now a photon cannot be divided into two pieces.
A photon is the indivisible quantum of light. So what happens? Well, what happens is either
detector might click. One of the detectors will click. In fact, each detector has a probability
of one half, 50%, of detecting the photon. And so we see an illustration of the Born rule.
The wave intensity, half the intensity goes each direction, gives the particle probability. The
particle has a probability one half of ending at one detector or a probability of one half
of ending at the other detector. So it looks at first glance as if what a beam splitter really
does is it chooses randomly. A photon reaches a beam splitter and, so to speak, flips a coin.
Heads, you reflect. Tails, you transmit. That's a naive picture of what a beam splitter does,
but we better be careful because as we'll see, things are not so simple at a beam splitter.
So let's take all these components, the light source, the mirrors, the photon detectors,
and put them all together. And here we have our model of our interferometer. It's called a Mach
Zender interferometer. And this is not a real interferometer. It's just a model. It's made out
of foam board and glue and wood and plastic. It doesn't really work, but it's a great interferometer
for a thought experiment because I can point at the pieces and we can figure out how things go.
So, okay, here's our Mach Zender interferometer. Here's the layout. So the incoming beam comes
from the lower left-hand corner. And it strikes a half-silvered mirror in that corner. The first
mirror here is a half-silvered mirror. So the beam is split in two. And the two beams go
to the two corners where we have full silver mirrors, regular mirrors, to reflect the beams
back together. And the beams are recombined at a second half-silvered mirror here in the
upper right-hand corner. Now, then the resulting beams from that second half-silvered mirror are
directed into these two photo detectors. The output beams are measured by these two photon
detectors. And for convenience, we may refer to this path, the upper left-hand path, as the
upper path, and the other path that the light might travel as the lower path. All right. So if you
set this up properly and you get everything aligned just so, and you send in a beam of light,
find out where the light goes. And it turns out that all of the light emerges in one beam. All of
the light, 100% of the light intensity, winds up at the green detector, the upper detector.
Why? Well, of course, the answer has to do with interference. That's why we call it an
interferometer. The light reaching the green detector can come along two paths. One of them
is the upper path that is reflected at the first half-silvered mirror and reflected at the second
half-silvered mirror. And the other is at the lower path that is transmitted at the first half-silvered
mirror and transmitted at the second half-silvered mirror. Now, I need to tell you, if I want to
tell you how things are reflecting, which sides of my half-silvered mirrors have the metal coating
on them. And I've chosen to put the metal coatings on my half-silvered mirror on the lower side, the
lower right-hand side of the mirror on this side of the interferometer. And that means that
whether the light wave is reflected twice or transmitted twice,
it never is reflected off of the silvered side of a half-silvered mirror. And that means that
it's not inverted. The two light waves, therefore, arrive in unison. They add up together,
you get constructive interference. Well, what about in the other direction? Well, in that direction,
you can get there two ways. You can reflect off the first mirror and be transmitted at the second
mirror. No inversion, no minus sign. Or you can be transmitted by the first mirror and then
reflected by the second mirror. And being reflected off the bottom side of the second
mirror gives you a minus sign. So the two waves arrive at the second detector exactly out of
sync. They cancel each other out. No light reaches the second detector. You get destructive interference.
Now, notice the importance of that fiddly little minus sign. Without it, we'd get constructive
interference both ways, which can't happen, because then more light would come out of the
interferometer than went into it. The interferometer is really a highly simplified version of Young's
two-slit experiment. There are two alternatives. There are two different beams you can follow,
versus two slits you can go through in Young's experiment. And you have constructive and
destructive interference effects. Constructive interference at one detector, destructive
interference at the other. And so 100% of the light goes one way, 0% goes the other way.
It's a super simplified Young's two-slit experiment.
Okay. So let's consider some quantum experiments that we can do with our Mach-Zender interferometer.
Let's send one photon at a time through the interferometer. The photon is always registered
by one detector or the other. But the probabilities exhibit constructive and destructive interference.
We know that from the Born rule. The wave intensity gives the particle probability. And all of the
wave intensity winds up at the upper detector. So that means that the photon lands in the upper
detector all the time, and never in the lower detector. Now, this means that whatever's going
on at a beam splitter, it's not just a coin flip for the photon. Because a photon could flip coin
heads and be transmitted by the first beam, and then flip the coin again and get tails and be
reflected from the second mirror, and wind up at the blue detector. That could happen. That's a
possible way to flip the coins. But since that never happens, we know that what's going on at
the half-silver mirror is something more than just a random choice. Okay. If we have a single photon
in the interferometer, we have somehow interference between the beams, even though there's only one
photon in the interferometer. Which means that the beam must somehow travel both ways. The beam
must somehow figure out both ways in the interferometer, explore both ways in the interferometer,
so it knows to interfere at the second half-silver mirror and wind up at the green
at the green detector. The photon has to travel both ways. That seems very strange. Photons seem
like particles. Particles should make a choice. They should go one way or the other. So what we
have is simply the fact that the photon's location in the interferometer is indeterminate.
Okay. Let's do another experiment. Let's imagine we have the beams going, and I'm going to now block
one of the two beams with my hand. I'm going to put my hand in right like this. Now, what happens
to the light? Well, now, 50% of the time, the photon that I send through will actually hit
the back of my hand. And if my hand were a few trillion times more sensitive than it is, I might
actually feel the photon hit my hand. I might go, ouch. And so with a probability one-half,
the photon hits my hand. But the other 50% of the time, with a probability of one-half,
the photon goes the other way. It misses my hand. It reaches the second half-silvered mirror,
and if the photon reaches the second half-silvered mirror along the upper beam, then the half-silvered
mirror will just reflect it or transmit it with equal probability. So 50% of the time it hits my
hand, 25% of the time it reaches the green detector, and 25% of the time it reaches the blue detector,
which is kind of interesting because it never reached the blue detector before that. So by
blocking one of the beams, I actually make the light brighter at the blue detector. Of course,
we did something very similar with the two-slit experiment. By blocking one of the slits,
we were able to increase the intensity of light at some places on the screen.
Okay, let's suppose we don't actually block the photon. Let's just suppose we
detect it. We use one of those super sensitive, non-absorbing photon detectors in the lower
beam, and we see whether the photon goes by there. And we find out that 50% of the time
the photon travels along the lower beam, and when the photon travels on the lower beam,
it winds up at the green or the blue detectors with equal probability. 50% of the time we don't
see the photon go this way, so we know the photon went the other way, and if that happens,
then 50% of the time it winds up at the blue detector or at the green detector. In other words,
each detector will register the photon 50% of the time, whether the photon went in the lower
beam or not. So there's no interference effect. Each detector fires with a probability one-half.
There's no constructive and destructive interference. It goes away. Why did it go away?
Just because I measured the photon to see which beam it traveled in. The important point here
is that any sort of which way detector, any sort of detector that tells you which way the photon
traveled, will wipe out the interference effect, which relies on the fact that the photon can
be going both ways. Just observing the photon is enough to change how it behaves in this experiment.
Conversely, for interference to occur, there must be no measurement at all. That means the
photon has to leave no footprints behind, no evidence of which way it went,
because if there were any trace of which way the photon went, we'd be able to use that as a measurement
of which way the photon went. So no detective looking at the interferometer afterwards, even
examining the mirrors and so forth, atom by atom, no detective could find any evidence of which way
the photon went. The choice of the photon's path would be the perfect crime, undetectable by any
method. Okay, let's say some more about complementarity here. We've got two kinds of experiments.
There's a both-way experiment where we get interference, and there's a which-way experiment
where we detect which path the photon traveled. And that nicely illustrates Bohr's principle
of complementarity. In fact, there's a neat way to switch experiments here. I can actually take
the second beam splitter and do something with it. If I leave it in, then I get interference.
The photon went both ways and somehow figured out to wind up always in the green detector,
100% of the time, 0% of the time at the blue detector. The photon sort of acts as a wave.
On the other hand, suppose I actually remove the second half-silvered mirror. Then the beams,
instead of recombining at the mirror, simply cross each other, and the detectors will actually tell
us which way the photon went. If the photon went along the lower path, it'll wind up at the green
detector. If it went along the upper path, it'll wind up at the blue detector. So the detectors
themselves will tell us which way the photon went. The light acts as a particle. It chooses a definite
path. Now, we must choose which experiment to do. We can take the mirror out, make a particle
experiment, or we can put the mirror in and do a wave experiment. We make the choice. And whichever
experiment we do, we can't later say what would have happened if we had done the other experiment
instead. It's too late. We didn't do that experiment. We can do another experiment
where we change the position of the mirror, but we can't do the old one. We can't say. We can't
say what the result would have been. I like the way that Asher Parris, the late Israeli physicist,
put it. He said that unperformed experiments have no results. Unperformed experiments have no results.
Okay, let's add a new wrinkle here. This is an idea due to John Wheeler. And this is called the
delayed choice version of the interferometer experiment, which he proposed in 1978. Wheeler
was a disciple of Neal's Bohr. Bohr and Wheeler worked together on the first theory of nuclear
fission, for example. And they were close collaborators. And Wheeler was a deep thinker
about quantum mechanics and the meaning of complementarity. And this is not the last
time we'll be discussing his thinking in this course. So Wheeler's idea is to decide whether
to put the mirror in or take it out after the photon has already gone most of the way
through the experiment. You imagine making this experiment not this big, but maybe 100 million
miles on a side. So it takes 15 minutes for the photon to go from the first half-silvered
mirror to the second half-silvered mirror. And after all but the last few seconds have
transpired and the photon has almost reached the second half-silvered mirror,
we decide whether to put it in and do a wave experiment or take it out into a particle
experiment. So after the photon has already gone 99% of the way through the experiment,
we can decide whether it will have gone one way as a particle or both ways as a wave.
That seems very strange, but essentially it's a language problem. The point is that we can't
give a sensible account in plain language of what happened to the photon until after the
measurement is made. Wheeler's motto for quantum mechanics is this. No phenomenon is a phenomenon
until it is an observed phenomenon. No phenomenon is a phenomenon until it is an observed phenomenon.
Well, what do you mean by observed? What is an observer? Well, actually any physical record
will do. Consider the old chestnut if a tree falls in the forest and nobody's there to hear it,
does it make a sound? Well, Wheeler would say, in fact did say, well suppose you look at the trees
near that tree, perhaps in one of the trees there's a leaf and another leaf is just touching that
leaf. And the sound vibrations from the falling tree made one leaf vibrate and make a tiny scratch
on the other leaf, visible only through a microscope. Nevertheless, that's a physical record
of the sound. And so the tree did make a sound. We can tell afterwards any physical record can
count as an observation. Okay, the interferometer is about the simplest example of quantum physics,
that you really can't make it any simpler. It has interference, it has probabilities,
but even this simple a contraption can still astonish us. So to prove that, I want to tell you
one of my favorite thought experiments. This is one devised by Avshalom Elitser and Lev Weidman,
two Israeli physicists, and it's called the bomb testing problem. So you must imagine there's a
factory and the factory makes bombs with very sensitive photon detector triggers.
So I imagine my fist here is the bomb and my finger is the trigger. If one photon hits the
trigger, the bomb will explode. It's that sensitive. However, some bombs made by the factory have
defective triggers that can't detect a photon. The photon just passes through. The detectors,
the triggers are defective. Now, Elitser and Weidman invite us to put ourselves in the position of
the manager of the factory. And we'd like to test the bombs in order to see if they're in working
order. That's our problem. Now, first of all, why bombs? There are two reasons for bombs. One is
that explosions are very exciting. Remember, the key idea in quantum mechanics, in quantum
measurements, is that a measurement amplifies the microscopic world. And if you have one photon
turning into an entire explosion, that's really amplification. The second reason is that once
a bomb explodes, we cannot reuse it. And that emphasizes the irrevocable nature of our choice
of experiment. We can do another experiment on another bomb, but once the bomb explodes,
the world has changed. We can't go back and do a different experiment. That's complementarity.
We have to make a choice. And then for that particular physical system, that's the choice
we've made. The bomb maybe is in the risk of exploding. Okay, so we want to test our bombs.
Of course, the naive testing method is to take a bomb and send a photon through it.
And if it does not blow up, it's defective. And if it does blow up, it's a working bomb.
Or rather, it was a working bomb. Now, this is not completely useless. In this way, we can
study the quality control at the bomb factory. We can say, oh, yes, the factory is producing
10% defective bombs. But it really doesn't help us for our problem. What we want to do
is we want to identify working bombs, bombs that are guaranteed to explode, at least
really sure they will explode without actually blowing them up. Because we'd like to tell our
customers, yes, we're sure this bomb will actually explode. And when you think about it, that seems
impossible. Because if you send a photon through and the bomb is working, it will blow up. And if
you don't send a photon through, then you can't test the bomb. It seems impossible.
However, there is a way. The Elitzer-Weidman method. The idea is to put the bomb in one arm of a
Mach-Zender interferometer. All right, we'll put the bomb in one arm of a Mach-Zender interferometer.
We'll put it over here on this arm. And let's suppose the bomb is defective. And we send one
photon through. Photon goes through. Now, if the bomb is defective, it will blow up.
And if it's defective, it will not register the photon. It will not measure the presence of the
photon. And so no measurement on the photon is made. And there's interference. And only one
detector could possibly click. The photon always winds up at the upper detector, the green detector.
Now, suppose we include a working bomb. Put the detector right there in the beam.
Now, 50% of the time, the bomb blows up. Well, that's too bad. But what happens the other 50%
of the time? Well, 25% of the time, see, now if the bomb doesn't blow up, the photon must have
traveled the upper beam, 25% of the time, the photon winds up in the green detector again.
And we can't really tell. We can't tell whether the bomb is good or bad because
the green detector could click either way. But 25% of the time, the other detector clicks,
the blue detector, something that could never happen if the bomb were defective.
Because if the bomb's defective, there's interference, destructive interference at the
blue detector, there's no probability of winding up there. So 25% of the time,
the blue detector clicks, and then we are sure, we can certify for sure, that the bomb is in
working order, even though it did not actually blow up. Okay. What this means is that for photons,
it's not just a question of whether a photon went through or did not, whether a photon hits the
detector or does not, there are actually other possibilities. The photon could be
not localized in space. It could be spread out across the interferometer.
Our one photon interferometer is a great conceptual laboratory for exploring quantum ideas. It is
simple. It illustrates constructive and destructive interference. It illustrates the relation between
wave intensity and probability. It illustrates the principle of complementarity and so on.
It has a few surprises to keep us on our toes. So let's not forget about the interferometer.
We're going to return to the interferometer whenever we need to use it to make things clear.
Whenever things get a little bit fuzzy, we'll run back to the interferometer.
So what's our next task? Our next task is to develop a symbolic language for describing
quantum situations. We're going to introduce abstract symbols and some rules for using those
abstract symbols to describe situations like the interferometer. We're going to be able to analyze
the interferometer, or in fact any other quantum physics experiment, using our new abstract language.
And so what we're going to be putting together is a small toolbox, if you will,
of essential ideas and methods for doing quantum mechanics. That's next time. I'll see you then.
