Music
Welcome to the ninth lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
Last time, we began to introduce the theory of quantum mechanics in a simplified form.
We used the example of a photon in an interferometer to explore how quantum probabilities work.
We saw quantum interference and we saw a few of the paradoxes of quantum interference.
Now, we want to introduce formal symbolic ways of working with quantum ideas.
We want to introduce a kind of mathematical language.
I mean, after all, if we want to explore Mongolia, it's a good idea to learn some Mongolian,
especially if the best maps are all written in Mongolian.
Now, our destination is a place that's even more exotic than Mongolia.
Our destination is the microscopic world.
This may be the most technical lecture in our course.
It's not terribly difficult, but what we do will be very unfamiliar. It's like Mongolian.
So, I want to tell you not to be concerned if you don't get it, if you don't get it completely at first.
You have several things going for you.
First of all, in later lectures, we will mostly speak English.
If you don't get this lecture completely, you just miss the parts that are in Mongolian or quantumese.
So, you could skip this lecture and still understand most of what is said later on.
Now, what would you miss? What you would miss would be some of the logical connections.
We really want those. So, let's try to get the hang of quantumese in this lecture.
Now, the second thing you have going for you is that as you use the new language in the later lectures,
you'll find that it will make more and more sense.
You'll find that this new language actually expresses the same ideas that we've been talking about since the beginning of the course.
And finally, you have one more thing going for you. You can always return and review this lecture.
In fact, if you are doing so, welcome back.
So, let's embark upon speaking quantumese.
First, we need a few basic terms and abstract symbols.
The first term is a system.
A system is any piece of the quantum world that we wish to consider in itself.
A photon in an interferometer was an example of a quantum system.
An electron in an atom is an example of a quantum system.
We could imagine a pair of particles, maybe even separated in space, as one quantum system.
Any piece of the quantum world that we want to consider in itself, that's a system.
The second term we need is the idea of a state.
A state is a physical situation of some quantum system.
And we have a special symbolism for representing states.
And it's called, for obscure historical reasons, a ket.
A ket looks like this. There is on the left-hand side.
There's a vertical line. And then there's something in between.
And then on the right-hand side, there's an angled bracket.
And what's inside those funny little brackets is just a label.
We can put numbers, words, funny little pictures.
We can put whatever we like in there. The whole purpose is to identify the physical situation that is being described.
Now, we generally don't put really long labels. We generally choose very simple labels.
But we can put anything we like. It's just a description.
Okay. What else?
We also need the idea of a basis.
A basis is a set of distinct states, a collection of distinct states that cover all of the possible results of some measurement.
So, for example, let's consider a photon in the interferometer, in the middle of the interferometer.
If we look for it, if we make a measurement of the photon's location, we either find it in one beam, the upper beam, or the other beam, the lower beam.
It's either in the upper beam or the lower beam. So, we can make states.
Upper and lower. Write them as kets.
Ket upper, ket lower.
And those together make up a basis for the photon in the interferometer.
Now, it's a key fact about quantum systems that there is more than one different sort of measurement that you can make on a system.
And that's just the key part of the principle of complementarity.
There's more than one different sort of measurement.
And that means that a given system has more than one possible basis, more than one possible collection of basis states.
And we'll talk a lot more about that later.
Now, besides the basis states, there are also so-called superposition states.
Now, the term superposition is meant to suggest a composite, like two photographic images superimposed in a double exposure.
And in the interferometer example, a superposition state would be where we had the photon occupying both beams.
There's the basis state where the photon is in the upper beam.
There's the basis state where the photon's in the lower beam.
But there's the superposition state where the photon is occupying both beams.
Now, in our symbolism, we write the superposition as an abstract sort of sum of the basis states.
We would write it like this.
The state is A times the upper state plus B times the lower state.
And what are those things A and B?
Well, they're numerical factors.
They're very important.
And they're called amplitudes, quantum amplitudes.
Those are the numerical factors in a superposition sum.
And we'll interpret this and learn how to work with it in a little bit as we go.
But for right now, we can always write a superposition as a sum of basis states with amplitudes.
Now, let me just make a couple of remarks.
First of all, in full quantum mechanics, if you were reading a quantum mechanics textbook,
you would find that the amplitudes are not just ordinary numbers,
but might include imaginary numbers like the square root of minus one.
It's a curious fact about quantum mechanics that it makes use of these imaginary numbers.
Now, we're going to simplify and just use ordinary numbers, including positive and negative numbers.
And that'll be good enough for our purposes.
But I have to tell you, this is a simplification.
In fact, I was recently talking with Dan Steyer, a colleague of mine at Oberlin College.
And Dan is one of the authors of a book that I'm recommending for you to read along with this course.
And I mentioned that I was going to leave out the possibility of imaginary numbers in the amplitudes.
And Dan was very concerned.
He thought that was a very extreme simplification.
Nevertheless, I think it's an allowable one for our purposes.
If you want to learn how things work out with imaginary numbers included in the amplitudes,
you can go read Dan's book.
It's not very long. It's an excellent accessible read.
Okay.
The second remark I want to make is I want to introduce you to a convenient number.
And we're going to call this number S.
And S has the value 0.7071, etc., etc.
In fact, it's the number so that if you square it, you get one half.
It's the square root of one half.
And why am I giving this number a special name?
I'm giving this number a special name because it happens to show up in lots and lots of examples that we're going to be considering.
And so, since it shows up in so many examples that we consider, we're going to make up our own special private name for it.
This is not a name in the books.
You see the letter S in a book. It means something else.
We're just going to use it in this course, but it will save us from having to write the square root of one half over and over again.
All right.
Now we have a basic vocabulary.
We have quantum systems.
We have quantum states.
We have both base of states associated with the outcomes of a measurement.
We have superposition states, which are our combinations of the basis states.
These are represented symbolically by these funny cats.
And the numerical factors in the superposition states are called amplitudes.
Now we need some rules for working with these and rules for giving them meaning.
What do these symbols mean?
So let's begin by giving the rules.
Our first rule is the rule of superposition.
And it states that a superposition of two or more basis quantum states is also a quantum state.
It says that superposition states are just as good as basis states.
For example, besides the upper and lower states of the interferometer,
there are also the superpositions like a upper plus b lower.
And for different choices of the amplitudes a and b, we get different superpositions.
That means that the photon may be divided among the beams in many different ways.
And the amplitudes will tell us the details of how that's happened.
Superpositions are just as good as basis states.
They can have many different choices of amplitudes for the superpositions.
Our second rule is the rule of probability.
But in fact, that's a rule we've seen before.
It's the Born Rule named after Max Born who introduced it.
You'll remember the Born Rule.
The Born Rule says that the wave intensity determines the particle probability.
The intensity of the wave in any location determines how likely it is that the particle is found there.
In our new language, if we make the Born Rule as follows, the rule of probability,
if we make a measurement, the probability is determined by the amplitude.
According to the formula, probability is equal to the absolute value of amplitude squared.
Remember, quantum mechanics only tells us probabilities.
It doesn't tell us the actual results of the measurements.
Those are random.
But the rule of probability tells us how to calculate those probabilities.
We just take the absolute value of the amplitude and we square it.
And that's the probability.
So let's take that apart a little bit.
First of all, let me remind you, or perhaps tell you for the first time,
some of the basic facts about probability.
Any event has a probability, which is a number we'll call p, between zero and one.
The probability is a number between zero and one.
If the probability is zero, that means that the event is impossible.
It can never happen.
And if the probability is one, that means that the event is certain.
It must happen.
Now if your probability is in between, it's bigger than zero but less than one,
which means that it's possible but not certain.
Maybe so, maybe not.
That's what probabilities in between mean.
Now what does it mean to have a particular specific probability?
Suppose your probability is 0.37.
What does that mean?
Well, that means that if you did the same experiment over and over again many times,
then the event that you're talking about would happen about 37% of the time.
In the long run, on average.
So if the probability is one half, then if you do the same experiment over and over again,
about 50% of the time you would expect that event to happen.
In short, probabilities predict statistics.
So now that we know what a probability is, let's go back to the Born Rule.
The probability is the absolute value of the amplitude squared, the magnitude of the amplitude squared.
And both positive and negative amplitudes will then give us positive probabilities,
which is part of the answer to why we put in that absolute value symbol to remind us
that both positive and negative amplitudes both give us positive probabilities.
Also, it's to make Dan Steyer happy because if we include imaginary numbers as our amplitudes,
we'll need the absolute value signs for sure.
But let's let that pass.
Okay, let's imagine that our photon state in our interferometer is the state A,
amplitude A times upper, plus B times the amplitude, times the state lower.
A upper plus B lower.
A and B are the amplitudes for being in the upper state and the lower state.
And now let's make a measurement to find out where the photon is.
Well, then the probability that we find out that it's in the upper beam will be the magnitude of A squared,
because that's the amplitude for being in the upper beam.
And the probability that we find the photon in the lower beam is the magnitude of B squared,
because that's the B is the amplitude for being in the lower beam.
Probability is the magnitude of the amplitude squared.
Oh, by the way, that means that magnitude of A squared plus the magnitude of B squared must be one,
because probabilities have to add up to one.
Why? The photon must be somewhere.
So the probability that it's here plus the probability that it's here has to be one.
It's certain to be somewhere.
Now, let's consider another special state.
Suppose we have the state, let's use our handy number S.
Suppose we have the state S times upper plus S times lower.
In that case, each beam would have a probability of the magnitude of S squared, which we said was one half.
Each beam would have a probability of one half.
Interestingly, though, that same thing is true for a completely different quantum state, which is S times upper minus S times lower.
The amplitude for upper is S, but the amplitude for lower is minus S.
Why? Because when you take the magnitude of S squared, you get the same thing as the magnitude of minus S squared.
You get one half.
These two states, S upper plus S lower and S upper minus S lower, they look the same for this measurement.
But in fact, they're really not the same quantum state.
But they happen to predict the same probabilities for this particular measurement, for some other measurement, maybe not.
Okay.
What else do we need?
We've got a rule of superposition, and we've got the rule of probability, the Born Rule, which tells us what the amplitudes mean.
What else do we need?
Well, what we need are update rules.
So how does the quantum state change when something happens to the system?
This is a key requirement.
After all, mechanics is the science of motion, the science of how things change.
So quantum mechanics had better include rules about how the quantum state changes.
In fact, there are two rules for how the quantum state changes.
This is very interesting.
And so I'm going to introduce them, and I'm not going to give them fancy names.
I'm going to call them Update Rule 1 and Update Rule 2.
So Update Rule 1 says that when there is no measurement on a system, the state changes in a definite way that maintains any superposition.
The state changes in a definite way that maintains any superposition.
One of the key things there, one is that there's no randomness in the way that the state changes.
The state itself may represent some indeterminate state of the world.
I don't know whether the photon has been one beam or the other, but the way the quantum state changes is not random at all.
And the second thing is the way the quantum state changes kind of respects any superpositions,
which means that if you know how to update the basis states, you'll automatically know how to update the superposition states.
Now that sounds confusing, but that's okay.
We're going to give an example in a few minutes that will show you exactly how this works.
So next we have Update Rule 2.
And Update Rule 2 is the rule that applies when there's a measurement on the system.
It states that when there is a measurement on a quantum system, the result determines the new state.
The state is updated randomly depending on the outcome.
Okay, the state is updated randomly.
Well, what do I mean?
Let's go back to the interferometer.
We always run back to the interferometer when we're a little confused.
If we go back to the interferometer, and we imagine that the state of the photon in the interferometer is A times the upper beam state,
plus B times the lower beam state, we can imagine making a measurement of which beam the photon is in.
We'll use special non-absorbing photon detectors to determine which beam it's in.
And so suppose we measure it and we find that the photon is in the upper beam.
Well, what's the new state?
The new state is upper.
And what probability does that occur with?
Magnitude of A squared.
Conversely, if we find that the photon is in the lower beam, the new state of the photon is lower.
It must be in the lower beam.
And what's the probability that that occurs?
Magnitude of B squared, the magnitude of the amplitude squared.
So what the new state is, is a bit random.
It depends on the measurement result.
We can't tell for sure in advance which state it's going to wind up with.
It's a gamble.
That's update rule two.
All right, now we have some rules.
We have the rule of superposition.
We have the rule of probability.
We have two update rules, whether or not there is a measurement or not.
Depending on whether there's a measurement, we have one rule or the other.
And it turns out that these rules are almost the only general rules of quantum mechanics.
We'll actually add one more rule in lecture 15.
So we almost have it all down.
All right.
How are we doing in quantum ease?
Well, we have some vocabulary.
We have some definitions to give some meaning to the vocabulary.
We have some grammar, including some rules for how to use the language.
So we really need to begin speaking quantum ease.
So we're going to use our new language for our favorite example, the photon in the Mach-Zender interferometer.
So we're now going to describe, using the quantum language, what we described in the last lecture.
So it should sound very familiar.
On the other hand, it may sound a bit unfamiliar because we'll be using a new language.
At the start, the photon will pass from the upper side to the first beam splitter.
And so we're going to have to first decide how a beam splitter affects a quantum state.
Now, this is how it works.
The upper state is updated to a state that's a superposition of upper and lower because the beam splitter splits the beam.
So the upper state turns into s, our favorite number s, times upper plus s times lower.
That's what the beam splitter does to an upper state.
Well, what about how does the beam splitter work if the light comes from the other direction?
Well, there it does the same thing.
It splits into a superposition of upper and lower.
But remember, the mirror has its silvery coating on the lower side.
And so when the wave reflects off that side, there's a minus sign that shows up.
The wave is inverted.
So in fact, the lower state, the lower basis state updates to s times upper minus s times lower, which we said was a different state.
Now, this is an example of update rule number one.
There is no measurement made at the half-silvered mirror.
So this is rule number one.
If we know how these basis states work, we know how everything works.
And furthermore, the minus sign that shows up is an indication that we reflect from the silver side of the mirror on the bottom.
And that's where that minus sign comes from.
And as we already saw, that minus sign turns out to be important.
Knowing how these basis states behave, in fact, tells us how superpositions behave.
So let's see this in action.
We're going to analyze the Mach-Zender interferometer.
We're going to keep track of the quantum state at each stage.
The input state, the state in between the half-silvered mirrors, and the state that comes out of the second half-silvered mirror.
So first of all, what's the initial state?
What's the input state?
Well, it comes in from this way.
So the initial state is the state upper, the basis state upper.
Now, the photon reaches the first half-silvered mirror.
And we know what a half-silvered mirror does.
We know that the half-silvered mirror will take the state upper and turn it into s times upper plus s times lower.
So after the first half-silvered mirror, that's the state of the photon, s times upper plus s times lower.
It's a superposition of being in the upper beam or the lower beam.
Now, the photon comes around and it reaches the second beam splitter and the beams recombine.
So at the second beam splitter, we use the rule for the beam splitter again.
And it's update rule number one because there's no measurement.
So we come into the second beam splitter in the state s times upper plus s times lower.
So how do we apply the update rule?
Well, update rule number one maintains the superposition.
So all I have to do is apply the update rule to each term in the superposition independently.
So the s times upper state or s times upper term becomes s times,
upper becomes s upper plus s lower.
And the s times lower state coming into the beam splitter becomes s times s lower minus or s upper minus s lower.
So the superposition of upper and lower comes out as a more complicated superposition of upper and lower.
There are four terms in the superposition.
S times s times upper plus s times s times lower plus s times s times upper minus s times s times lower.
So what does that wind up with?
Well, it turns out now we're going to apply the familiar rules of algebra to this.
You just combine the terms and you simplify.
So I said there were four terms.
Two of them involve the upper state.
So I'll combine them together.
So I get that I get s squared plus s squared because I have s times s each time s squared plus s squared times upper.
Now what about the lower beam terms?
Well, I get s squared minus s squared times lower because one of those terms has a minus sign.
So the lower terms cancel.
The lower term goes away.
And the upper term is just two times s squared times upper.
But s is our favorite number.
It's the square root of one half.
If I take s squared, that's one half.
I multiply it by two.
I get one.
And so the final quantum state is upper.
That means that at the end of the interferometer, the photon must be in the upper beam.
It must hit the upper detector.
And that's exactly right.
That's exactly what we concluded last time.
But we got it by means of this abstract language.
Notice that the constructive and destructive interference in the interferometer applies to the amplitudes.
That in some of the terms of the state, the amplitudes canceled out and you had destructive interference.
And in other terms, they augmented each other and you had constructive interference.
It's the amplitudes that keep track of the photon's wave properties in this analysis.
Okay, let's step back.
What have we accomplished?
Well, we've introduced a new abstract language, quantumese, to describe quantum physics.
And this abstract language has some basic rules.
There are superposition states and these superpositions are just as good as basis states.
A photon can be in the upper beam or the lower beam.
It can also be in a superposition of upper and lower.
And for the photon, that's no more uncomfortable than being in the upper beam or the lower beam.
The photon likes it just as well.
They're just as legitimate as quantum states.
We found that the amplitudes that occur in the superpositions give us the probabilities.
You just square the magnitudes.
It's the Born Rule.
We found that the quantum state changes in one of two different ways depending on whether there's a measurement or not.
And we saw examples of both of those changes.
In one of them, the Update Rule Number One, that was like the change that occurred to the amplitude at a half-silvered mirror.
The other one, Update Rule Number Two, was the kind of change you had if you did a non-destructive measurement of the location of the photon in the middle of the interferometer.
And so we've used this language and these rules to describe the photon in the interferometer, this experiment.
And along the way, we made a correct prediction about constructive and destructive interference.
We were able to correctly predict which detector the photon would wind up in.
So that's not a bad piece of work for one lecture.
Of course, it all seems very abstract, but we're describing a strange microscopic world.
We don't have a lot of everyday experience to go on.
Specific examples help us understand what we're doing.
So the photon in the interferometer is a good and I hope a helpful example.
We'll need more examples to aid our intuition.
So that's what we're going to do next time.
We're going to apply our new quantum language to a different system, a system we haven't talked about so far.
We're going to talk about a particle with internal spin.
Now, some of the details will be different, but the basic rules will be exactly the same.
We'll use the same quantum rules for all quantum systems.
So that's next time. I'll see you then.
