Welcome to the tenth lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
Last time, we introduced a new abstract language for the microscopic world,
a symbolic way to represent and work with situations in quantum physics.
We established some vocabulary for the language and some rules for using it.
We applied our language to our favorite example, a photon in a Mach-Zender interferometer.
We predicted constructive and destructive interference.
So this time, we're going to take up a new example.
We're going to use lots of three-dimensional geometry, lots of angles and directions,
so we'll get to practice our spatial skills.
This time, we're going to talk about the physics of spin.
So what is spin?
An electron in orbit in an atom is analogous to a planet moving around the sun.
That was the analogy that Ernest Rutherford made and that played a role in Bohr's model of the atom.
Of course, we know that what's really going on with an electron and an atom is much weirder,
but let's just take this analogy for what it's worth.
Now, each planet moves through space, but it also rotates about its axis.
And it turns out there's something similar going on for quantum particles like electrons.
They not only move through space, but they also have internal spin.
Spin is a kind of angular momentum, a physical measure of the amount of rotation in a particle.
It's analogous to ordinary momentum.
And so what I'm telling you is that electrons have a tiny amount of angular momentum
just due to some kind of internal property of the electron.
Okay, we're going to be working in three-dimensional space.
And we're going to use the famous Cartesian coordinates x, y, and z to describe our space.
So how are we going to visualize these coordinate axes?
And the answer is we can always use our right hand.
If you use your right hand and you spread apart your first and your second fingers
and you stick your thumb up, then you have an x, a y, and a z axis.
The x-axis is in the direction of your forefinger.
The y-axis is in the direction of your middle finger,
and the z-axis is in the direction of your thumb.
They're at approximately right angles, x, y, and z axes.
And so you have a set of Cartesian axes wherever you go.
Now, you shouldn't use your left hand.
Things work out a little bit wrong for your left hand.
But on your right hand, x, y, and z.
Now, we usually point the thumb upward because that's more comfortable.
So when we talk about the z direction, z points toward the ceiling.
z is up.
So that will help us keep things straight with our ordinary language.
Now, a classical spinning object, a classical spin,
for example, like a spinning planet or a spinning top,
is always rotating about some axis.
But the axis can be pointing in any direction.
The axis can be tilted in any way.
So how are we going to describe this?
Well, in fact, the way we're going to describe this is by specifying three spin components.
A spin component is the degree of spin an object has
along the x, y, or z axes in three-dimensional space.
This depends on the total amount of spin,
but it also depends on the angle of the actual rotation axis.
If this pencil is the rotation axis,
it depends on which direction in space that rotation axis is,
whichever direction it is, the rotation is about that axis.
Okay, so let's imagine we have a spinning top,
and it's exactly upright, so its axis is parallel to the z axis.
Well then, the z spin component is actually the total spin,
and the x and y spin components are both zero
because the axis is parallel to the z axis
and is completely perpendicular to these.
Let's take another example.
Let's suppose that the spin axis is tilted over a little bit
between the x axis and the z axis, or the x axis and the z axis.
Now, the x and z spin components are both non-zero.
Each has a part of the total spin,
but the y spin component is still zero
because it's still perpendicular to the direction of the axis of the rotation.
All right, so that's sort of how spin components work.
Now, for a classical spinning object,
each spin component can have any value whatsoever,
from zero to something tremendously huge.
And all the spin components, all three spin components,
can have definite values at the same time
because the spin axis is a definite direction in space.
But for quantum spins, both of these classical facts are false.
Okay, so I say that quantum particles like electrons have spin.
How do we know?
How can we measure a quantum spin?
Well, it turns out that any component of a quantum spin
can be measured by something called a Stern-Gerlach apparatus,
named after the physicist who originated it back in the 1920s.
And in a Stern-Gerlach apparatus,
a particle passes through a non-uniform magnetic field,
a magnetic field that's stronger on one side than the other.
And it turns out that different spins are deflected in different directions,
depending on their spin component.
And the deflection depends on just one of the components of the spin,
and it's the overall orientation of the apparatus,
the angle of the magnets in space,
that determines which component of the spin we are measuring.
So these big Stern-Gerlach apparatus, which are big magnets
that allow us to deflect the particles in a beam,
will allow us to measure the spins of those particles.
So let's think about electrons.
If we measure the spin of an electron,
if we measure any spin component of an electron,
it turns out that that measurement can only give us one of two possible results.
Angular momentum, like energy, is quantized.
It comes in quantum amounts.
And the values that we can get for the spin component of an electron
are either plus one-half or minus one-half
in the basic units of H, Planck's constant, divided by two pi.
That's the basic unit of angular momentum.
There's Planck's constant again.
So for getting the exact units,
the value can either be plus one-half or minus one-half.
Those are the only two possible values for a spin component for an electron.
And so electrons are called spin one-half particles,
because their spin components can only be plus or minus one-half.
Now it turns out that protons and neutrons also happen to be spin one-half particles.
And indeed, there are other particles which have different spins.
There are spin zero particles.
There are particles with no spin at all.
There are spin one particles.
There are spin three-halves particles and so on.
It's an interesting feature of quantum mechanics
that you can only have spins that are an integer divided by two.
Zero, one-half, one, three-halves, two, and so on.
In this lecture, we're going to stick with the spin one-half particles,
like the electrons and the protons and the neutrons, in this lecture.
And notice, by the way, the spin one-half particles are terribly important,
because all of the common constituents of ordinary matter are spin one-half particles.
All right.
What kind of quantum states are there for a spin one-half particle?
What kinds of measurements can we make on a spin one-half particle, like an electron?
Well, to start out with, let's realize that we can measure the electron spin
along any axis in space.
And two especially interesting axes are the x-axis and the z-axis, x and z.
And what about y?
Well, remember in the last lecture how we said we weren't going to consider the possibility
that quantum amplitudes were imaginary numbers, like the square root of negative one.
It turns out that to describe spin components around the y direction,
we would need those imaginary amplitudes.
And so to keep on the safe side, we're going to leave y alone and stick to x and z.
Okay.
So if we make a spin component measurement along the z-axis or the spin component measurement
along the x-axis by orienting our Stern-Gerlach magnets this way or this way,
then those measurements give us basis states.
So for a z basis state, the z measurement, the basis states are we can call up and down.
We write them with little arrows inside the kets.
Remember inside the kets, it's just a label.
We can put whatever we like.
We can put numbers or letters or funny pictures.
And so we'll put little arrows to remind us spin up and spin down.
Spin up corresponds to a measurement of the z-spin component of plus one-half.
And spin down corresponds to a measurement of the z component of the spin of minus one-half.
A basis spin up, spin down.
Okay, how about an x measurement?
Well, then our basis states are spin right and spin left.
Spin right corresponds to a measurement result of plus one-half.
Spin left corresponds to a measurement result of minus one-half.
Spin right or spin left, we represent them by little arrows pointing to the right or to the left inside our ket.
Now either the z basis states up and down or the x basis states right and left are perfectly good basis states for the electron spin.
So we can write the x basis states as superpositions of the z basis states and vice versa if we want to.
So let me just go ahead and show you how that works out.
And once again, we're going to be using our favorite number s, the square root of one-half.
That shows up all the time in this lecture, so we'll be using it.
So let's look at the x basis states in terms of the z basis.
We're going to write spin to the right in terms of spin up and spin down.
And it turns out that spin to the right is just s times spin up plus s times spin down.
It's a superposition of spin up and spin down.
And spin left, the other x basis state, can be written in terms of the z basis by s spin up minus s spin down.
And recalling that s squared is one-half, we know that if we had spin to the right, for example, and we measured its z component of spin,
we would get the two possible values with equal probability, probability one-half, because that's the magnitude of s squared.
Okay, so we can write the x states in terms of the z basis, but we can also write the z states up and down in terms of the x basis.
Now, if you're clever and you remember some high school algebra, you can actually work it out from the equations that we've just given.
It's like solving two equations in two unknowns.
But I'll just give you the answer, and I'll let you see if you can work it out on your own.
Okay, the answer, spin up is s times spin to the right plus s times spin to the left.
Spin down is s times spin to the right minus s times spin to the left.
And so we can write the x states with the z states in terms of the x basis.
It's a relation between x and z.
The spin components, x and z, are complementary quantities for the electron.
They're like position and momentum.
You see, measurements of x and z are mutually exclusive.
We have to take our Stern-Gerlach magnets and align them one way or the other.
We have to choose.
And this means that there's a kind of uncertainty principle for spin.
We can't know both the x component of spin and the z component of spin at the same time.
An electron cannot have definite values for both spin components at the same time.
So in a z basis state, either up or down, z is completely definite.
We know exactly what the z component is.
But x is completely indeterminate.
If we made a measurement, we would not be able to predict at all what the outcome would be.
Plus one-half, it could be minus one-half equal probability.
Similarly, if we had a state that had a definite value of the x component of spin,
either right or left, then its x component of spin would be completely definite.
But if z component of spin would be completely indeterminate.
Now, there may be other states which are a bit indeterminate for both x and z.
But the point is that we can't know x and z components of the spin exactly at the same time.
They are complementary quantities.
Okay, what about macroscopic spinning objects?
What about a planet or a top or something like that?
How does this quantum mechanics work out for gigantic things?
The complementarity of different spin components is negligible for planets and spinning tops and so on.
Why? It's the usual reason.
Planck's constant is so small.
The quantum effects depend on the size of Planck's constant, and it's a really, really tiny number.
When we write it out in usual units, it's a decimal point, 33 zeros before you get the first non-zero digit.
It's a really tiny number.
Remember our discussion of position and momentum.
For large objects, both can be pretty well defined.
Even though they're related by an uncertainty principle, both position and momentum can be very well defined for a macroscopic object,
because Planck's constant is so small.
In a similar way, for macroscopic spinning objects, all the spin components can be pretty well defined at the same time.
And so the macroscopic object has a definite axis of spin, definite direction about which it's spinning.
Okay, let's extend our discussion.
We can do z-states, we can do x-states.
Let's extend to doing some other things.
Let's consider other spin components besides z and x.
Let's stay away from y, though, because we don't want to consider imaginary numbers.
So what we're going to do is we're going to stay in the x-z plane.
So let's imagine we want to look at the spin component of an electron along a direction that is at an angle alpha from the z-axis in the x-z plane.
So this is zero, here's 45 degrees, here's 90 degrees, some angle alpha in the x-z plane.
So to measure this, we'll have to take our Stern-Gerlach magnets and we'll have to tilt them at the angle alpha, but that's okay.
And when we do that, that measurement will have basis vectors in the usual way.
The basis vectors we can call alpha plus or alpha minus.
And if we measure the spin component, then the alpha plus state corresponds to getting plus one-half h, or plus one-half in units of Planck's constant over 2 pi, or minus one-half in the same units.
So for example, actually that includes what we've already talked about, the x-states are actually just where alpha is equal to 90 degrees.
So spin to the right is 90 degrees plus, because the x-axis is at 90 degrees, and spin to the right is the plus one-half state for the x-component measurement.
Okay, so we can actually talk about spin states in any direction.
And all of those spin states can be written as superpositions of the z basis, or as superpositions of x-basis states as convenient.
Now, here's our experiment. We're going to start out with the state alpha plus. This is the state that you'd get if you knew that the spin component at the angle alpha was in the plus direction.
Loosely speaking, I can identify it with a pencil pointing this way. This is our spin component, our spin state alpha plus.
And now, let's measure not that spin component, but the z component. Our Stern-Gerlach magnets are going to be oriented so we measure the z component of the spin.
So the spin is prepared along one axis, but it's measured along another, and there's an angle alpha between them.
So my question is, what's the probability, call it P, that we get the z component to be plus one-half?
If we know to start out with that the spin component is plus along this axis, what's the probability that we'll find that the spin component is plus along this axis at an angle alpha?
Well, it turns out we can work out a table for various angles. And so let me show you the table now. On one side, we have the various angles, 0, 45 degrees, 90 degrees, 135 degrees, 180 degrees.
And on the other side, we have various probabilities. We have a probability of one for zero degrees, and then the probabilities get smaller and smaller until at 180 degrees, the probability is zero.
Okay, so here's the table. Now we have to understand what's in the table. First of all, understand what's easy to understand. If the angle is zero, that's easy to understand because the angle zero, then the spin state we made was up.
It's up along the z-axis, at zero degrees from the z-axis. And we measured spin along the z-axis, the z component of spin, and so we found up, always.
The probability that we got up was one. So zero degrees, that's easy. Of course, you get one.
Another one that's easy is at the bottom of the table, the other end of the table, and that's what happens if our angle alpha is 180 degrees.
So we prepare the spin to have a spin component plus in a direction that is in the opposite direction from the z direction, which means that we're making spin down.
And so if the spin is spin down, then when we measure the z component of spin, we never get that the spin is up, and so the probability is zero.
Another one that's easy is 90 degrees. Because at 90 degrees, we're just making spin to the right.
And when we write spin to the right as a superposition, s up plus s down, then we square the amplitudes to get the probabilities.
We just get one half for the probability that if we prepare it to the right and we measure it in the up-down direction, we'll find spin up.
So those are all really easy to understand. The tricky parts are the other two rows in the table, 45 degrees and 135 degrees.
There's a diagram that will help. Let me show you. In the diagram, there's a half circle which represents the various angles from zero degrees to 180 degrees that are marked on there.
And then next to the half circle is a vertical line, and that vertical line represents the range of probabilities from zero to one.
And we can see that at zero degrees, we can just look horizontally in the diagram to go from zero degree angle to the probability one.
And for 180 degrees, that's at the bottom, we can go straight horizontally on the diagram from 180 degrees over to zero.
And the same thing works for 90 degrees. We can go horizontally from 90 degrees halfway down the semi-circle over to the line and get 0.5, the probability exactly halfway between zero and one.
Now, when we look at the angles 45 degrees and 135 degrees, we find that at 45 degrees, the probability should be between 0.5 and 1.0, and it's actually closer to 1.0 because of the way the circle sits.
And so we actually work out 0.85 for the probability. And similarly, for 135 degrees, that's between zero and 0.5. It's a little closer to zero than it is to 0.5. It's actually 0.15.
And if you remember a little high school geometry, you can derive these numbers for yourself, and you'll find that 0.85 and 0.15 are actually rounded off a little bit.
So I give you the challenge of finding out what the next decimal place is.
Okay, so exactly why does this semi-circle and line trick work?
Well, the explanation is a little involved. We can work it out from what we said, but the point here is just to make the point that we can work out any angle we choose.
We can figure out the probabilities for measurement results if we prepare the spin along one direction, and we measure the spin along another direction.
And indeed, there's nothing sacred about the z direction here. The table lets us calculate the probabilities if we have a spin with a definite component along any axis, and it's measured along some other axis.
This table will allow us to compute the probability that we get the plus result for that problem.
We just need to know the angle alpha between the spin state and the spin measurement.
So it's a pretty handy table, and we'll make use of it later on.
Alright, let's extend the theory a little bit more.
What happens if we rotate a spin?
What does it mean to rotate a spin? Isn't a spin already rotating?
Well, what I mean by rotating a spin is I want to turn the spin axis in some way. I want to twist the spin around in some way.
Now, I can actually do this physically with electrons and protons and neutrons using magnetic fields.
It turns out that the spins of these particles act as tiny magnets.
If you will, the poles of the magnet are along the spin axis of the particle.
And the external magnetic field twists the particles around like a compass needle is twisted around by the Earth's magnetic field.
So we can rotate the spins of these particles.
And in this process, there's no measurement involved.
The rotation of a spin is an example of update rule number one, how a state changes when there's no measurement involved.
So to make something definite, I'm going to imagine we rotate the spin about the y-axis by 90 degrees.
Now, wait a second. Aren't we staying away from the y-axis?
Well, yes, we're staying away from the y-axis.
Because if we rotate around the y-axis, then the x and z axes always stay in the same plane.
That's the safe plane.
And so we'll make our rotations around the y-axis because that keeps x and z well-behaved.
All right, so suppose we rotate the spin about the y-axis by 90 degrees.
How do the z basis states change?
Remember, if we have update rule number one, if we know how the basis states change, we'll be able to figure out how every state changes.
Okay, so if we have the rotation around the y-axis by 90 degrees, a spin upstate changes to s times up plus s times down, which is just spin to the right.
And sure enough, spin up changes to spin to the right. That makes sense.
Now let's see how spin down changes.
Well, when we work it out, we get minus s times spin up plus s times spin down.
And that looks kind of like spin to the left, but there's an extra minus sign in both terms.
In fact, this is minus spin to the left.
This is kind of funny. This is just minus one times the spin to the left ket.
It's the spin to the left basis state times a minus one amplitude.
Now this is not the same thing as spin to the right.
Minus one times spin to the left is not spin to the right.
Spin to the right is something completely different.
It's a funny thing. It's very abstract.
It's a minus one amplitude times the basis state spin left.
And then from these two facts, we can also work out how spin to the right and spin to the left are affected by the rotation
because we can just apply the rule, update rule one, spin to the right is a superposition of up and down,
spin to the left is a superposition of up and down, and we can just apply the rule.
We find that spin to the right becomes spin down and spin to the left becomes spin up.
And all of that makes sense except the funny minus sign.
Why is there a funny minus sign when you take spin down and rotate it around to spin left?
Why doesn't it just go to spin left? Wouldn't that be nicer?
Why does it go to minus spin left?
Well, it turns out that you can't get by without a minus sign somewhere.
You can't do without it and still be mathematically consistent and obey update rule number one.
So there has to be a minus sign somewhere.
On the other hand, the minus sign really shouldn't matter.
Remember the rule of probability.
In the rule of probability, we always square the magnitude of the amplitudes to get the probabilities.
If you get a positive amplitude or a negative amplitude, it doesn't matter.
You get the same probabilities.
The states left and minus left have exactly the same amplitudes except the one for minus left are all negative.
Its amplitudes are the negatives of the amplitudes for left.
And so when we calculate probabilities, we always get exactly the same probabilities for any measurement
left and negative left.
So those states look exactly the same.
Those two kets represent the equivalent physical situations.
State and minus state describe equivalent physical situations.
It's a little weird, but it's okay. It's okay.
So if we wanted to rotate the spin by 360 degrees going 90 degrees at a time, we could do like this.
We'd start with spin up and then we rotate by 90 degrees and we get spin to the right.
And then we rotate by 90 degrees again and we get spin down.
We rotate by 90 degrees again and we get minus spin left.
That's the funny minus sign.
And then we rotate by 90 degrees again using update rule two.
We have minus spin left and since left goes up, minus spin left goes to minus up.
So we start with spin up and we rotate by 360 degrees and we get minus spin up.
It's a funny result.
If you take a spin and you rotate it by 360 degrees, it doesn't quite come back to the same quantum state.
That seems funny, but it doesn't really worry us because the state up and the state minus up look exactly the same.
They correspond to physically equivalent situations.
They give exactly the same results for every experiment, so they're pretty much the same.
But we should keep in mind this curious minus sign that's connected to rotation.
I've gone into it because it actually turns out to mean something.
And that minus sign is going to show up again later in a very surprising place.
All right, a quick recap.
We've studied the quantum mechanics of spin one-half particles like electrons, protons and neutrons.
And we say we can measure any spin component and get either plus one-half or minus one-half for the result.
The different spin components are complementary quantities.
Only one can be definite at a time.
We considered the basis states for z and x, the up and down states and the right and left states.
And we saw how these were related.
Each set of states are superpositions of the other set.
And we can also work out the rules for spins along any angle alpha in between x and z.
And finally, we saw how to rotate a spin using a magnetic field,
and we found this funny odd minus sign after we rotate a spin by 360 degrees.
But the minus sign is not too much of a worry.
All right, that concludes section two, our initial look at the theory of quantum mechanics.
It may not seem as if we have done much.
We have a few rules.
We have a couple of examples.
But in fact, we actually put together a very powerful toolkit for discussing quantum mechanics.
In the next few lectures, we'll see the ideas we've discussed in these three lectures again and again.
We'll see systems and states and amplitudes and probabilities.
And we'll use our language over and over.
Next time, we'll begin section three, which is a tour of the quantum realm.
And our first stop on the tour is the physics of identical particles.
That's next time.
I'll see you then.
