Welcome to the 12th lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
As you will recall from the last lecture, quantum particles are quite different from classical macroscopic objects.
Large objects obey what we call the snowflake principle.
No two of them are ever exactly alike.
There are always tiny differences that would enable you to distinguish one large object from another large object.
But quantum particles can be truly identical.
All electrons are identical with each other. All photons are identical with each other.
Now when we considered this idea carefully, we found that there could be two possible types of quantum particles.
It depended on how the operation of swapping two identical particles affected the quantum state.
For bosons, the swap operation acting on the state just gave us the same state.
Bosons are said to be symmetric if we exchange the two particles.
But for fermions, the swap operation acting on the state returned the negative of the state, the amplitude minus one times the state.
Fermions are said to be anti-symmetric if we exchange particles.
So in this lecture, we're going to be considering bosons, the symmetric ones.
And examples of bosons include photons, the particles of light, helium atoms, and several other examples that we'll see before the end of the lecture.
All right. Where did all this boson stuff come from originally?
What actually is rooted in the same thing that quantum theory itself is rooted in.
I remember the original impetus for quantum theory was to explain black-body radiation to marry together the theory of heat with the theory of light
and explain how warm objects emitted electromagnetic radiation.
That was Planck's motivation in introducing the quantum hypothesis.
And then over the next couple of decades, Einstein made many contributions to this subject.
And in his contributions, he always, in a very clever way, was able to weave together wave and particle ideas about light.
Then in 1924, an Indian physicist named Sachendra Bose came up with a very strange idea.
Bose said, you can actually explain black-body radiation by just treating light as if it were made of particles.
Provided you treat them as identical particles.
In other words, exchanging two photons gives you a physical situation that is the same as the original one.
It doesn't change the physical state of the assembly of photons.
And so this is a somewhat different approach from Planck and from Einstein, but yet it gives the same answer.
So Bose writes a paper on this and he sends it off to Einstein in Germany.
Einstein reads the paper, he thinks it's a great idea, and he makes sure that Bose's paper is published in the leading German Journal of Physics.
And also, Einstein turns his hand to extending Bose's idea to other particles, to atoms and so on.
And they're a little different from photons.
Photons can be easily created or destroyed in being emitted or absorbed, whereas atoms are conserved.
Atoms persist over time, and so the mathematics is a little bit different.
But Einstein was able to extend Bose's idea to this new situation.
And so the particles that obey these ideas that Bose and Einstein worked out are called Bose-Einstein particles, or bosons for short.
And they follow the Bose-Einstein statistical law, which we will call the boson rule.
So that's what we're about today, particles that follow the boson rule.
Here's how it works.
Imagine that you have three boxes.
We'll call them A, B, and C.
And a particle can be in any one of the boxes.
And so our quantum mechanical measurement is to find out where the particle is.
And there are three basis states for this measurement.
There's the state A, meaning the particle is in box A, the state B, meaning the particle is in box B, and the state C, meaning that the particle is in box C.
And of course, as we know from the rule of superposition, there are also superpositions of these basis states.
Those are also possible, always equally valid.
The particle's location need not be determinate.
The particle could be spread out among two or three boxes, just as the photon's position in an interferometer is spread out among two or more beams.
The purpose of the three boxes is just to provide us with three basis states for our measurement and make our conversation easier.
Okay, now first of all, we've already figured out everything there is to know about the quantum mechanics for one particle.
That's great. We can be in the basis state A, or B, or C, or a superposition.
But suppose there are two particles, and suppose that the measurement we make is where are the two particles?
How does it work out? How does the quantum mechanics work out for two particles?
Well, first of all, let's suppose that the particles are distinguishable, that we can call the particles number one and number two, and we know which particle is number one and which particle is number two.
And let's consider the basis states for this measurement.
And there are nine basis states in all.
First of all, there are basis states in which the particles happen to be in the same box.
There's the AA state. There's the BB state. There's the CC state.
Particles are both together in one of the three boxes. Those are three basis states.
And then there are six basis states that correspond to situations in which the particles are in different boxes.
So there's the AB state, which means number one is in A, and number two is in B.
And there's the BA state, which means number one is in B, and number two is in A.
And so on. There's AC and CA and BC and CB.
There are six states where they are in different boxes, six basis states.
And of course, all of these correspond to distinct physical situations because the particles are distinguishable from one another.
And as usual, there are also superpositions of these states, but these are the states that correspond to the outcomes of our measurement.
Now, there are nine basis states altogether, and of these basis states, three of them correspond to the particles being in the same box, AA, BB, or CC.
In one third of the basis states, the particles are in the same box.
So you can imagine an experiment where you set up the system at random.
The particles are just put into the boxes willy-nilly, and then we do the measurement to locate the particles.
And by chance, then, we would expect to find the particles in the same box about one-third of the time, about 33% of the time,
because there are nine possible basis states, and three of them correspond to the particles being in the same box.
So if the particles are distinguishable, they're in the same box about a third of the time, on average, if we prepare things randomly.
Now let's do the same experiment for two identical bosons.
The measurement's the same, but the boson state must be symmetric if we swap the particles.
Okay, so what does that mean?
Well, the same box states, the states in which the particles are in the same box, they're still okay.
AA is exactly the same if you switch A and A.
AA, BB, CC, those are all perfectly good boson states.
But what about the different box states, the states in which the two particles lie in different boxes?
Then there are only three basis states.
Remembering that our favorite number S, which is the square root of one-half, the three basis states are S times AB plus S times BA,
S times AC plus S times CA, and SBC plus SCB.
Okay, so what do those mean?
Each of these states involves the particles being in two different boxes,
but because they're bosons, you can't tell which particle is in which.
And each of those states is symmetric under the swap operation,
because the swap operation takes AB to BA and vice versa,
and each of these are symmetric states.
So these are the three possible symmetric states,
which have a particle in each of two boxes.
All right, so how many basis states are there?
Well, there are six of them.
And in how many of these basis states are the particles in the same box?
In half of them, three out of the six.
So that means if we set the particle, we set the system up at random,
and we measured where the particles were,
by chance we would expect to find the bosons in the same box 50% of the time.
50% is more than 33%.
If the particles are bosons,
they're more likely to wind up in the same box just at random.
This is an observable difference between a pair of distinguishable particles
and a pair of identical bosons.
The bosons wind up together more easily than we would have expected.
They have a gregarious streak.
They like to hang out together.
It's not because of some special attraction.
It's simply because they are bosons.
And the effect gets stronger, actually, when more bosons are involved.
So if you work it out, if you have three particles in three boxes,
what's the likelihood of them all being together in the same box?
If they're distinguishable particles, well, let's see.
There are 27 ways to arrange the particles.
In three of them, they're all in the same box.
So that's 3 out of 27, which is a probability of one ninth.
About 11% of the time, you would expect the particles to be in the same box
if they were distinguishable.
On the other hand, if they're identical bosons,
it turns out that there are only 10 ways, 10 basis states that are symmetric.
There's one basis state in which there's a particle in each of the three boxes.
There are six basis states in which there's two particles in one box,
one particle in another, and zero particles in the third box.
There's six ways to do that.
And there are three ways that the particles could all be in the same box.
So that means the probability of finding them together,
if you just prepare it randomly, is 3 out of 10, about 30%.
Almost three times as likely for the particles to be all together if they are bosons.
Okay.
The boson rule explains a host of phenomena, including some pretty exotic stuff, as we'll see.
So let's begin with something that's actually fairly commonplace, the laser.
We're talking about photons.
Now, in 1917, Einstein identified three ways that an atom can interact with a photon.
And we'll simplify our treatment of the atom.
We'll just imagine the atom has two energy levels, a ground state and an excited state.
The first way that a photon and an atom can interact is that the photon can be absorbed,
in the process of absorption.
So you've got an atom, it starts out in its ground state.
A photon comes along with just the right energy.
The atom can absorb the photon, the photon goes away,
and the atom jumps up to the excited state.
That can happen.
The second thing that can happen is something called spontaneous emission.
That's where the atom is already in an excited state.
And then, just at random, it can jump down to the lower state, the ground state, and emit a photon.
And it emits the photon in some random direction in space.
And this is called spontaneous emission.
But there's a third way that Einstein realized in 1917.
And that's called stimulated emission.
We've got an atom in an excited state, but now there already are some photons present
with the right energy moving in some particular direction.
Because photons are bosons, because they're gregarious,
because it's more likely for them to wind up together,
it's much more likely for the atom to add its own photon to this group moving in that direction.
And so this process of stimulated emission is quite remarkable.
And indeed, it's this process that allows us to build a laser.
So how do you build a laser?
The first laser was built in 1960, but they're so ubiquitous now that you have lasers all over the place.
So how do you build a laser?
You get a lot of atoms together, and you add some energy so that most of the atoms are in excited states.
And this is called optical pumping.
And the way you add the energy to the atoms, there are lots of ways to do it.
You might have an actual bright light that you shine on it, or electrical discharges,
or a chemical reaction, or all kinds of things.
It could even be another laser.
If you already have another laser, you can use it to optically pump this laser.
Now, we need to arrange it so that there are more excited atoms than unexcited atoms.
More atoms in their excited energy level than in their ground state.
This is called a population inversion.
There are more excited atoms than unexcited atoms.
And we have to have that because otherwise the absorption process will actually defeat us in trying to make the thing turn into a laser.
So we need to make this special population inversion.
Now, we've got some excited atoms that are ready to emit photons.
So we make sure that we have some photons flying around that are moving in a particular direction that we want.
And this is usually done by putting our collection of atoms between a pair of mirrors.
And the photons that we want bounce back and forth between the mirrors many times.
Now, one of the mirrors will be partially silvered, like those half-silvered mirrors we talked about before,
so that sometimes the photon can escape, but mostly they bounce back and forth.
Now, photons are bosons, and there are lots and lots of them bouncing back and forth in the laser cavity, it's called.
And so the atoms in the laser will be much more likely to emit their photons to be part of the same gang.
And so pretty soon you have lots and lots and lots of photons moving in this direction.
And the result is that you have a highly directional beam of light coming out through the partially silvered mirror,
highly directional, having just one wavelength, so-called coherent light.
And that's a laser, which is actually an acronym that stands for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation.
Now, of course, we've already seen a laser in this course.
This is our laser. It's what's called a helium-neon laser. Let me just quickly tell you how it works.
Inside this laser is a tube of gas containing helium and neon atoms.
And actually, it's kind of clever, we excite the helium atoms, and the helium atoms collide with the neon atoms and transfer energy to them,
and so then the neon atoms are excited, and we're interested in the neon atoms.
We get a population inversion in the neon atoms.
When those neon atoms decay, they produce photons of red light, as we saw.
And there are mirrors on either end of our tube, a fully silvered mirror in back, a partially silvered mirror in the front,
so that the light bounces back and forth, and what happens is a beam escapes through the partially silvered mirror,
and this laser emits about 1,500 trillion photons each second.
Now, that's actually much less than an ordinary light bulb. This only emits about half of a milliwatt of energy.
But all that light is in one direction, all of it's at one wavelength, so this is a very special, very intense kind of light source for light of that wavelength.
There are, of course, all sorts of lasers. There are gas lasers, solid state lasers, and so on.
Some operate with short pulses, others continuously. They can be built at all kinds of different wavelengths.
Some lasers are even tunable. You can adjust the wavelength, which is kind of very clever and very complicated.
They're immensely useful in our technology, everything from telecommunications to eye surgery.
And they all depend on the quantum fact that photons are bosons.
And because photons are bosons, it is comparatively easy to get lots and lots of photons with the same wavelength, the same energy, traveling in the same direction in a beam.
That's how a laser works. It's all about the boson rule.
Okay, so much for photons.
The boson rule also explains some amazing phenomena that occur at extremely low temperatures, temperatures near to absolute zero, which is 273 degrees below zero Celsius.
And the first example I want to talk about is the example of liquid helium.
Remember, I mentioned that helium atoms are bosons.
And helium gas becomes a liquid at the unbelievably low temperature of four degrees above absolute zero.
Helium is very hard to liquefy, but at four degrees above absolute zero, you can make a liquid helium, and this liquid is called helium one.
As you'll see, there's also another kind of helium.
Now, if you cool this liquid down at about two degrees above absolute zero, the liquid changes.
It becomes a different sort of liquid. It becomes something called a superfluid.
That's called helium two.
Now, what is a superfluid?
A superfluid is something that can flow without any friction at all.
It can seep through pores less than one millionth of a meter across.
So if you have any holes whatsoever, even ones that are almost too small to see with a microscope, helium can leak through them.
Liquid helium, too, can leak through them.
Helium two conducts heat perfectly.
It's impossible to have a temperature difference between one part or another part of your superfluid.
So it has all kinds of strange properties, zero friction, infinite thermal conductivity.
In fact, helium can even creep out of a container, an open container.
If there were liquid helium in my cup, then the helium could crawl over the side of the cup and down the wall and fill up whatever container this was resting in.
This is a very unfamiliar and very peculiar state of matter.
It's unlike anything that we know at ordinary temperatures.
And the way it works is that it represents trillions of helium atoms in a single quantum state.
It's an example of the quantum gregariousness of the bosons.
Because the helium atoms are all moving together in the superfluid in the same quantum state, they do not collide with each other.
They don't produce the friction in the flow and so on, because they are perfectly in unison.
They behave not as a liquid we're familiar with, but as a superfluid.
Okay, here's a second example of the importance of the gregariousness of bosons.
And that example is superconductivity.
Now metals are conductors.
So an electric current is carried because electrons inside the conductor, inside the metal, move.
The electrons move and that carries electric charge from place to place. That's an electric current.
Now in an ordinary conductor, there's always some form of friction.
There's always some form of electrical resistance to the flow of current.
This is why a current carrying wire can heat up.
This is why a source of power is required to keep the current flowing.
Because there's always this friction to electric current called electrical resistance.
Now it turns out that for some metals and some other materials, this electrical resistance actually goes to zero.
Not just really small, but all the way to zero at low temperatures, temperatures close to absolute zero.
The metal turns into a superconductor.
This phenomenon was discovered a long time ago, actually in 1911.
But it wasn't explained until the late 1950s, 1957, by the introduction of something called the BCS theory.
The BCS theory is named after John Bardeen, Leon Cooper, and John Schrieffer, who developed the theory.
And in the BCS theory, the electrons in the conductors, which are not themselves bosons, they're fermions,
the electrons combine into pairs called cooper pairs.
And the cooper pairs can move around together and they carry electric current because they can carry charge from place to place.
But the cooper pairs, a pair of electrons bound together, a cooper pair is a boson.
So the cooper pairs at low temperatures can flow in the metal like a superfluid.
And because you have a superfluid flow, you have current without resistance.
You have electrical flow without friction.
And that's the phenomenon of superconductivity.
And all kinds of amazing things happen because of superconductivity.
If you set up an electric current in a superconducting loop, it doesn't lose its energy to friction.
So without any additional power, that electric current will continue to flow for millions of years.
So this is a thing with lots of technological applications, especially useful for making very powerful electromagnets.
In electromagnets, you need to run electric currents through loops of wire.
And if you use ordinary wires, you need a lot of power because there's friction to that electric current.
And you produce a lot of waste heat, so the electromagnet must be continually cooled.
If you can manage to make the whole thing a superconductor, then you get the current going and then you just stand back and it stays going forever.
So there's lots of research going on right now to find superconductors that work at higher temperatures or can support stronger magnetic fields.
And there are some superconductors that work more than 100 degrees above absolute zero, which is amazing and a wonderful discovery,
but it's still a long way from room temperature. It's still pretty darn cold.
Okay, we've talked about superfluids and we've talked about superconductors.
Both of these examples show that the boson rule can lead us to new states of matter at very low temperatures, states of matter with unfamiliar properties.
And both of these examples illustrate the tendency for bosons to join together in the same quantum state and act in concert, act together.
Not because of forces that act between the bosons, but just because of the fact that their states are symmetric when particles are exchanged.
Actually, though, these examples that I've mentioned are not as straightforward as we would like.
Because both of these examples, the superfluids and the superconductors, are condensed systems, liquids and solids.
The atoms are really close together and the particles we're talking about, the cooper pairs and the helium atoms, are actually exerting considerable forces on each other.
They're right next to each other.
And so this really complicates things. And just as a technical matter, it makes it harder to say this effect is due to that cause.
So let me give you a third and much cleaner example, a much purer example of the Bose rule in action.
What you do is you create a sparse cloud of boson atoms, sparse nearly a vacuum, just a few billion atoms just floating in space.
And the first experiments for this used rubidium atoms. They turned out to be very convenient.
And so what you do is you suspend the cloud in a vacuum, sitting there in your laboratories, you suspend it in space with a magnetic field and some lasers.
And then you cool the atoms down. This is the hard part. You cool the atoms down to an astoundingly low temperature, so there's almost no heat energy left.
The cloud of bosons is about a 10 millionth of a degree above absolute zero.
A 10 millionth of a degree above absolute zero. And when you do that, the cloud of atoms will form what is called a Bose-Einstein condensate.
And in the Bose-Einstein condensate, thousands or millions of atoms can all be in exactly the same quantum state.
They're bosons. They like being in the same quantum state.
So because all of these atoms are in the same quantum state, the atoms act like a single quantum system.
The whole cloud is described by a single de Broglie wave. The whole cloud exhibits constructive and destructive quantum interference effects.
This is a remarkable state of matter. It was predicted in 1925, but it was not created in the lab until 1995, 70 years later.
So these Bose-Einstein condensates count as both an astounding prediction of quantum theory and a real tour de force of experimental physics,
a real triumph to actually make these things after so many decades.
Okay, we've been exploring the strange physics of bosons. The quantum particles whose states are symmetric when you exchange them, when you swap the particles.
And that symmetry led us to conclude that identical bosons have a peculiar tendency to collect together in the same quantum state,
to be in the same box, to use our original example.
And this tendency, which is pretty weird in itself, is not due to special forces acting between them, but just to the fact that they're bosons.
And it led us to some remarkable conclusions.
We saw how the boson rule for photons led to stimulated emission of light, and thus to the laser.
And we found how the gregariousness of bosons led to some really wild states of matter, unexpected things near absolute zero,
superfluids that flow without friction, superconductors that can carry electric current without resistance,
and Bose-Einstein condensates where you have a whole cloud of ultra-cold atoms described by a single quantum wave.
So next time, we're going to tell the other side of the story.
Next time, we're going to talk about fermions, the other type of quantum particle.
The properties of fermions are just as remarkable, but they are closer, in fact, to our everyday experience.
So, fermions, next time. I'll see you then.
