Welcome to the 13th lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
Right now, we're in the middle of discussing the properties of identical quantum particles.
And you'll recall that we found that such particles come in two basic types, bosons and fermions.
Bosons are particles whose state is symmetric when the particles are exchanged.
Fermions are particles whose state is anti-symmetric when the particles are exchanged.
Last time, we talked about bosons and their curiously gregarious behavior.
It was a lecture full of laser physics and exotic states of super cold matter.
And lots of particles were always doing the same thing.
Bosons are gregarious. They favor doing that.
This time, we're going to discuss the other kind of quantum particle, the fermions.
Fermions include electrons, protons, and neutrons.
They're anything but rare. They include the basic constituents of matter.
And they are very different from bosons.
So let's consider once again the example of particles in three possible boxes.
Boxes A, B, and C.
And one particle can be in any of the three.
There's a basis for particle states, a basis with state A, state B, or state C.
We can write any state as a superposition of those three.
And that will tell us how the quantum particle is inhabiting the boxes.
But suppose we have not just one particle in the boxes, but two particles.
And suppose those two particles are identical fermions.
Well, remember the fermion rule.
The fermion rule is that if you apply the swap operation that exchanges two particles to the quantum state,
you should get back the negative of the quantum state, the amplitude minus one times that state.
If we exchange the fermions, the state picks up a minus sign.
And that minus sign is why we call it an anti-symmetric state.
Now, for a pair of identical fermions, this means that there are only three distinct basis states
for two identical fermions living in the three boxes.
And those basis states are SAB minus SBA.
S, of course, is our square root of one-half, our favorite number.
There's SAC minus SCA, and there's SBC minus SCB.
Now, since the swap operation takes AB to BA and so on, it exchanges the two particles,
if you examine those three states, you'll see that the swap takes each one to its negative.
They're anti-symmetric states, as required.
But notice that all of these states have one particle in each of two boxes.
So can we have a fermion state in which both particles are in one box, say box A?
And the answer is no, we can't.
The state AA is symmetric, not anti-symmetric.
If we exchange the two particles, we get the same state back.
So it can't be a legitimate fermion state.
And if we try to make something out of it, if we try to make something anti-symmetric,
like SAA minus SAA, we just get zero, no state at all.
So the conclusion is that two identical fermions can never be found in the same box.
What we've done is we've established the Pauli exclusion principle,
one of the great principles of physics.
It was discovered by the Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli in 1925
as he investigated atomic structure.
Now Pauli said that no two electrons, in an atom, he was considering,
no two electrons can be in exactly the same quantum state.
And this same principle holds for any sort of fermion, for protons and neutrons and so on.
No two identical fermions can be in the same quantum state.
Now the implications of Pauli's rule were worked out almost at once
within about a year of his suggestion by the Italian physicist Enrico Fermi
and the English physicist Paul Dirac.
And so they're called Fermi-Dirac particles, or fermions for short,
and they obey the Fermi-Dirac statistical rules, which we'll just call the Fermion rule.
Fermions of the same species are identical, and they obey the Pauli exclusion principle.
So if bosons are gregarious particles that like to hang out together,
then fermions are antisocial particles.
They're never found in exactly the same place doing exactly the same thing.
They're loners.
And once again, this is not because of any special repelling forces.
It's not that fermions push each other away by means of forces.
It's just because they are fermions.
And their quantum state must be antisymmetric under particle exchange, as we've described.
That's where it comes from, and that implies the Pauli exclusion principle.
Now, Pauli was interested in atomic structure.
So let's begin with that.
Let's see how the Pauli exclusion principle for fermions applies to the electrons in an atom.
Now, as we saw in lectures ago, the electrons in atoms can only exist in certain discrete energy levels.
And these energy levels correspond to standing wave patterns for the electron about the atom,
to solutions to Schrodinger's equation describing the waves around an atom.
And it turns out that when you do the work to solve the equation,
you find that these energy levels tend to cluster together in shells,
several energy levels of about the same energy with wider gaps in energy in between.
So there's a group of energy levels.
That's the first shell, the second shell, and so on.
And so how many levels are in each shell?
Well, actually, the lowest shell only has one energy level.
But the next one up has actually four energy levels all close together.
And then the next one up has more energy levels.
But let's just stick to the bottom, too.
And so these are the energies that the electrons can have in the atom.
And there's something else to remember, and that is that electrons are spin one-half particles.
In addition to moving through space, they have an intrinsic spin.
So to specify the state of an electron, we need to specify both its Schrodinger wave in the atom
and also something about its spin, one of its spin components.
And usually just so we have something definite, we'll pick the z direction of the spin component.
We have to specify not only what wave pattern it's in,
not only what, therefore, energy level it occupies,
but also what its spin is, whether it's spin up or spin down,
the two possibilities for spin in the z direction.
The polyexclusion principle helps us make sense of electrons that contain many electrons, multi-electron atoms.
Atoms, in other words, bigger than hydrogen, which only has one electron.
And what the polyexclusion principle tells us is that no two electrons can have the same wave pattern and also the same spin.
We can put up to two electrons in each energy level.
You can have two different electrons with the same wave pattern, provided they have opposite spins, but no more than that.
So if there are lots and lots of electrons in the atom, some of them are going to have to be living in the higher energy levels.
And this is very important, because if electrons were distinguishable, or if they were bosons,
then they wouldn't obey the polyexclusion principle, and all the electrons could collect in the lowest energy level.
The world would be very different.
Okay, to see how this works out, let's just work our way along a list of the elements,
starting with the lightest elements, the elements containing the fewest numbers of protons and electrons,
and working our way up. We'll start with hydrogen.
Hydrogen has one electron, and in the energy level diagram for hydrogen,
that electron in the lowest energy sits at the lowest level, and it has some spin.
So one electron in the lowest level.
All right, hydrogen, that's pretty easy.
How about helium?
Now you have two electrons, and both of those electrons can sit in the lowest energy level, because they can have opposite spins.
So you can imagine we have an electron with spin up, and an electron with spin down in the lowest energy level about the atom,
in the lowest energy wave pattern for the Schrodinger wave.
Now, this configuration of electrons is especially stable,
because there's no extra room for another electron to inhabit that shell,
and there's a big gap in energy between that shell and the next one,
and because there's a big gap, that means that if you want to pry one of the electrons loose or excite one of the electrons in helium,
you're going to have to add a considerable amount of energy.
Helium holds onto its electrons very nicely.
So the helium configuration is especially stable.
What's the next element?
The next element is lithium.
Lithium is an atom with three electrons, and so we know how lithium atoms are going to behave.
We know that there will be two electrons in the lowest shell, the lowest energy level, and they will have opposite spins,
and then the remaining electron has to be up at the next level, which is in the next shell.
So lithium has two in the lowest shell and one in the next shell up.
Now, if you look at it just right, that actually looks a little like hydrogen,
because those two electrons down in the lowest shell are nice, cozy, shorting your waves that are tightly bound close to the nucleus.
But then there's a single electron in the outer shell, just as there's a single electron in hydrogen.
So lithium has some affinities to hydrogen, and so we can go on.
We can talk about beryllium, which has four electrons.
Boron, which has five.
Carbon has six.
Nitrogen has seven.
Oxygen has eight.
Fluorine has nine.
And in all of these, you have two electrons in the lowest shell, filling up the lowest shell,
and then some number of electrons, two or three or four or five or six or seven electrons in the outer shell of the atom.
Not completely filling that outer shell, but occupying the second shell up.
And then we reach neon.
Neon has 10 electrons.
And so now we have enough electrons that when we put them in in accordance with the poly-exclusion principle,
with just two electrons of opposite spin in each energy level,
we find that we've filled not only the lowest energy level, but the next four, forming the next shell.
So we've completely filled both the inner shell and the next shell out.
We have two completely filled shells, filled with electrons.
And so we say neon, like helium, is in an especially stable electron configuration.
It should be very stable.
There isn't any room to put another electron in one of those shells.
And the electrons that are there are held in place very tightly because it's a long way.
It's a big step from these shells to the next energy level.
And then we go on after neon.
We get to sodium.
Sodium has 11 electrons.
And so you have two filled shells, an inner one and the next one.
And then in the third shell, there's one electron.
And so that sort of looks like lithium.
There's some filled shells and one electron.
It sort of looks like hydrogen.
So there should be affinities between sodium, hydrogen and lithium.
What I mean by affinities is they should have some similarity in their electron structure.
OK.
What's happening?
The chemical properties of an element depend mostly on how the outer shell electrons in the atom are arranged.
The electrons that are buried in inner shells, full inner shells, do not participate in ordinary chemical reactions in which electrons are exchanged and shared.
So it's the outer shell electrons and how many of those there are and what their configuration is.
The outer shell electrons that determine the chemical properties of an element.
So what do we predict?
Well, by looking at the patterns of how the electrons fill up the shells, we predict that there will be a numerical pattern in the chemical properties.
That numerical pattern will correspond to the shells or energy levels in the atoms.
So we predict that atoms with similar outer shells will have similar properties.
Like hydrogen, lithium and sodium all have one electron in their outer shell and then some filled inner shells or no inner shell as hydrogen has.
And with that one electron in the outer shell participating in chemical reactions, those elements should have some similar chemical properties.
We also predict that atoms with filled outer shells, ones that have a completely filled shell, will be especially stable.
They're much, much less likely to give away or accept electrons in chemical reactions.
And helium would be an example of that. Neon would be the next example.
And all of these predictions that I've made are exactly right.
In other words, Pauli, using the Pauli exclusion principle in exploring atomic structure, is able to explain the periodic table of the elements.
Now we've all seen the periodic table of the elements in high school.
And let me just remind you, the periodic table of the elements is a graphical arrangement of the different chemical elements.
It was first discovered by the Russian chemist Dmitry Mendeleev over 100 years ago.
The elements are listed in the periodic table by atomic number, that is the number of electrons that the neutral atom has.
And in the periodic table, the elements in the same column generally have similar chemical properties.
So hydrogen and lithium and sodium form similar salts, for example.
And that's something that's organized, something that is understood by chemists using the periodic table.
And then the elements all the way over on the right-hand column are the so-called inert gases.
These are elements that do not readily form chemical combinations at all.
And what do you have in the right-hand column? You have helium, you have neon, you have argon, and so on.
All of the features of the periodic table can be explained by the way that electrons occupy the energy levels in atoms due to the Pauli exclusion principle.
Armed with that principle, Pauli is able to explain the organization of the properties of the chemical elements.
It's a tremendous triumph of quantum physics.
Okay, so the fermion rule, the anti-symmetry of the quantum state leads to the Pauli exclusion principle.
And when you apply that principle to the structure of atoms with many electrons, you're able to understand the chemical properties of those elements
and why those chemical properties organize themselves in a periodic way as in the periodic table.
So the quantum physics of identical fermions helps to explain chemistry.
And all of the chemical properties of all of the elements depend on the fermion rule.
And the world would be radically different and probably much, much less varied and interesting if electrons were bosons.
And they all hung out at the lowest energy level of the atom. Then all atoms would look about the same.
Now, the fermion rule is not just about electrons and atoms.
It also applies to nuclear particles, protons and neutrons, in the nucleus.
These things are also fermions. They're also spin one-half particles.
So we can do a similar business about shells and being occupied by particles or not for atomic nuclei.
The protons obey the Pauli principle with other protons.
And the neutrons obey the Pauli principle with other neutrons.
And the protons and neutrons are not identical, so they don't get in each other's way.
And this leads us to what's called the shell model of the nucleus, which is a very successful theory
for explaining the properties of different atomic nuclei with different numbers of protons and neutrons.
And in the shell model of the nucleus, you have separate sets of energy levels for protons and neutrons.
And they aren't quite exactly the same because protons are not quite exactly the same as neutrons.
And the energy levels are grouped into shells, but not exactly the same way as the electron energy levels
are grouped in atomic structure.
So what can we get out of this without working too hard?
One example would be, suppose you have a nucleus that contained exactly two protons and two neutrons.
Now, all of those would be in their bottom energy levels.
They would have opposite spins. You'd have two protons of opposite spin.
Let's see, opposite spin. And you have two neutrons of opposite spin.
Something like that should be exceptionally stable.
You've sort of filled up the lowest energy levels with protons and neutrons.
And it turns out that it is exceptionally stable.
The helium nucleus is made of two protons and two neutrons,
and the helium nucleus is very tightly bound together, holds together extremely strongly.
The reason is because you've filled up the nuclear shells.
And you can predict that there should be certain numbers of protons and neutrons
that lead you to particularly stable nuclei, the so-called magic numbers of nuclear particles.
And these magic numbers, roughly speaking, correspond to the inert gases on the right-hand column of the periodic table.
And things work out a little bit differently from the atomic story because the nuclear forces are different.
The next magic number, instead of being 10, as it is for the electrons and neon,
actually happens to be 8.
And so the oxygen nucleus, oxygen 16, which has 8 protons and 8 neutrons for a total of 16,
oxygen 16 is an exceptionally stable type of nucleus.
Okay, so the Fermion rule with the poly-exclusion principle is not simply about nuclear and atomic structure.
As important as that is, that's a really great thing that you can do with the Fermion rule,
but there's other stuff that you can apply it to.
Not just the structure of atoms and nuclei, but also to things that we see every day.
And as we see, it's the Fermion rule, the poly-exclusion principle that tells us why matter occupies space.
So to begin with, consider a gas.
Now a gas is relatively easy to compress.
It's actually not too hard to compress.
It's very compressible.
If you want to put twice as many atoms of a gas on the same volume,
it's enough to simply double the pressure on the gas,
and you can squeeze that gas into a smaller volume,
put twice as many atoms in a given volume.
So it's relatively, speaking, easy to compress a gas.
The reason is that there's lots of empty space between the molecules of a gas.
And by pushing this a little harder, you can get the molecules to be closer together.
Now a solid or a liquid would be much, much less compressible than a gas.
It's almost impossible to push twice as much solid material into the same volume.
Let me see if I can give you a specific example.
Imagine that you had a piece of ordinary iron.
What's the density of ordinary iron?
Well, it's about eight grams per cubic centimeter under ordinary lab conditions,
under atmospheric pressure, if you will.
Eight grams per cubic centimeter.
That's the traditional units for density.
Now suppose we increase the pressure to two atmospheres.
It's very difficult to see any change in the volume at all.
Now, suppose we increase it all whole bunch.
Let's increase the pressure on this piece of iron to three million times atmospheric pressure.
Why do I pick three million times atmospheric pressure?
Well, it turns out that that's approximately the pressure at the Earth's core,
which happens to be mostly made of iron.
So the iron in the core of the Earth is under three million times atmospheric pressure,
because the weight of all the outer layers of the Earth is pressing down on it.
So here's the question.
What's the density of the Earth's core?
Well, it's a little hard to tell.
We can't get to the Earth's core, but we can send seismic waves through it,
and we can do other kinds of measurements.
We have a pretty good idea.
The central density of the Earth's core, which is made of iron mostly,
is about 13 grams per cubic centimeter.
Only 60 or 70% greater.
If you take the pressure on a piece of iron from one atmosphere of pressure
to three million atmospheres of pressure,
you only reduce the volume occupied by that piece of iron to about 60% of its original volume.
You don't get it down to half the size.
You don't get twice as many iron atoms in the same amount of space,
even pressing on it millions of times more strongly than atmospheric pressure.
The point is that solids and liquids, comparatively speaking,
are almost incompressible.
And there's a related fact.
There's the solidity of ordinary matter, of solid matter.
I can't put my hand into the same space as the podium.
Something resists very strongly.
I try to put my hand into the same space as the podium, but it won't go.
What is it that is resisting so strongly?
Now, one idea you might have is that, oh, maybe it's electric repulsion.
I've got some negatively charged electrons in my hand,
and I've got negatively charged electrons in the podium,
and so maybe they're repelling each other because like charges repel each other.
But that can't be the answer, because in my hand,
they're also positively charged nuclei,
and they're positively charged nuclei in the podium.
Shouldn't they be attracting my electrons just as strongly?
So just electrostatic forces are not sufficient to explain the fact.
Why is it that solid matter is solid?
The answer is the Pauli exclusion principle.
In the podium, there are lots of electrons, trillions of trillions of electrons.
And the low-lying energy levels in this region of space occupied by the podium
are already full of electrons, of all the podium electrons.
Now, it's true, I can add more electrons into that region of space,
but the electrons that I add into that region of space have to have a lot of energy.
They have to occupy the higher energy levels that aren't occupied by the podium electrons,
because the Pauli exclusion principle says those are full.
They have no energy levels, they have no vacancy sign out.
So to put my hand into the podium, I would have to put more electrons into that volume,
because my hand is also full of electrons, trillions of trillions of electrons.
And I could only get those electrons into that volume if I gave them very high energies,
since the low-lying energy levels in the podium are already occupied by podium electrons.
So the moral of the story is that to get my hand into the podium, I'd have to push hard,
really, really hard, unimaginably hard.
I'd have to do immense amounts of work to get the electrons in my hand to have a high enough energies
to find unoccupied energy levels in the space of the podium.
And that would allow me to force my hand into the podium and to occupy the same space.
But that would not be good for the podium, and it would not be good for my hand.
And it's really completely impractical.
You know, when I was back in grade school, they told me that matter was anything that occupies space and has weight.
And it took me a long time till I was in graduate school in physics, I think,
to realize what a host of mysteries that simple-sounding phrase concealed.
Let's consider the property that it has weight, matter has weight.
Well, that's related to mass and to gravitation.
And as Einstein would say, that's related to the energy content and to the curvature of space and time.
So to say that an object has weight is actually a statement that's full of mysteries.
And for our purposes, let's consider the statement that matter occupies space.
This is such a familiar property of ordinary matter, we don't really see how strange it is.
Because on the next page of my textbook, they told me that an atom is mostly empty space, or almost empty.
Almost all of the mass of the atom is concentrated in the nucleus, which occupies less than one trillionth of the volume of the atom.
The rest of the atom is occupied just by the electrons, which are only a few thousandths or one in a few thousandth of the mass of the atom.
So almost all of the mass of the atom is this little tiny thing in the middle.
Why does the atom take up space?
Why is something which is mostly empty so hard?
The answer is the poly exclusion principle applied to electrons.
Imagine that we compare this to light.
Light does not take up space.
You can always add more light to a region of space.
You have a region filled with bright light.
You don't have to push the photons any harder to get them in.
The presence of some photons don't exclude others.
To make the contrary, the laser is based on the principle that the more photons, the merrier.
So we see that the fermion rule, the anti-symmetry of the quantum state when we swap identical particles, has far-reaching consequences.
It leads us to the poly exclusion principle, the fact that no two identical fermions can exist in the same quantum state.
Fermions are anti-social particles.
And that explains the electron configuration of many electron atoms and thus their chemical properties and the periodic table of the elements and all kinds of things like that.
It can be applied to the structure of atomic nuclei and we get the shell model which explains some of the properties of atomic nuclei.
And it tells us why solid matter is solid.
Why matter occupies space.
Clearly, the properties of bosons and fermions and the distinction between bosons and fermions is of gigantic importance to everything that we see.
And that distinction boils down to a minus sign in how the swap operation works on the quantum state.
So, where does that come from?
Is that just one of those things? God just made it that way and that's the way it is?
Or can quantum theory provide us with a deeper insight into the origin of the distinction between bosons and fermions?
Well, in fact, there is a deeper insight.
And that's what we'll do next time.
I'll see you then.
