Welcome to the fifteenth lecture in our course on quantum mechanics. In this lecture, we're
going to talk about the quantum mechanics of composite systems, systems that are composed
of two or more individual particles. We skimmed this topic for our discussion of identical
particles, but now we're going to go back and do it more carefully. In particular, we're
going to follow this road to a different destination. It's going to lead us to the idea of quantum
entanglement, which is a key feature of the quantum world. It's also the subject of the
last round of the Bohr-Einstein debate. We'll return to that story as well. The question
is, what states are possible for a pair of particles? Let's assume throughout that they
are distinguishable in some way so that I can label them as particle number one and particle
number two. There are two possible situations for the pair of particles. There's the possibility
that we may be in a simple state or we may be in an entangled state. What do I mean by
a simple state? What I mean by a simple state is that each particle has a quantum state
of its own. For example, particle number one might be in the state u, and particle number
two might be in the state v. Then we would just say that the composite system is in the
simple state that we'll call uv. The first letter tells me what the state of one is.
The second letter tells me what the state of number two is. These simple states that
I'm describing are often called product states. Why are they called product states? The reason
is that composition works kind of like multiplication. Let's suppose that particle one starts out
in the state u, right enough, but particle number two is in a superposition state. Say
a times state v plus b times state w for amplitudes a and b. What happens when I put these two
together and I make the simple state, the product state? Well, that simple state is
the state u times, if you will, a times v plus b times w. That works out to be a times
the state uv plus b times the state uw. The composition of systems distributes over the
sum in the superposition. It acts like multiplication. We call these simple states products. They
are product states because we make them by just taking the product of two single particle
states. Now, this is called the composition rule, and it's our fifth and final general
rule for quantum mechanics. Remember, I promised there would be one more. Remember, here's
the list of rules we have. There's the rule of superposition, which says that superposition
states are okay. They're just as legitimate as basis states. And then there was the second
rule, the rule of probability, the born rule, which says that we compute probabilities by
taking the amplitudes, taking their magnitude, and squaring them. Then there were the two
update rules. Update rule number one told us how the state updates when there's no measurement.
It updates according to a definite rule that respects superpositions. And then there was
update number two, which tells us how the state updates when there is a measurement.
And then the update is random. It's probabilistic, and it depends on the outcome of the measurement.
Now we have the composition rule. And the composition rule says the state of two or more particles
is either a simple product state or a superposition of simple product states. Now, not every state
is a product state. When we take superpositions of them, we can sometimes arrive at a state
which is quite different. And the states which are not simple product states are called entangled
states, states with the quality of entanglement. And we might also say that particles are entangled
together or that a pair of particles has entanglement. So what is entanglement? If two particles
are in an entangled state, then neither of them has a definite quantum state of its own.
Otherwise, we'd have a simple state. If they had their own quantum states, they'd just
go together by the composition rule. So neither individual particle actually has a quantum
state. That's a very strange idea. In classical physics, each particle always has its own
definite state, its own definite position and momentum, no matter what. Quantum physics,
however, says that the quantum state might only exist for the pair of particles, or a
whole group of particles, not for the particles separately. And in this situation, the particles
are said to be inseparable. They cannot be considered independently of each other in
some sense. Now, this has nothing to do with distance, because particles that are very
far apart in space may be entangled, though they typically got that way because they
were once close together and they interacted with each other. Nevertheless, the entanglement
does not diminish with distance. They can be as far away as we like, as distant from
each other as we like, and still be entangled. And the other thing about entanglement that's
kind of funny is an interesting result. If we measure one of the particles, if we perform
a measurement on particle one, say, then, of course, we update the state using update
rule number two. But that update rule applies at once to both particles, even if the other
one is far away. This is the trouble. This is the trouble. This is what's going to perplexus
for this lecture. So here's a really useful example of entanglement. Imagine you have
two spin one-half particles. Then you can put them together and form a state of the
composite system, which is a total spin zero state. The total spin zero state is just S,
our favorite number, the square root of one-half, S times up down minus S times down up. The
minus sign is important. S times up down minus S times down up. And that is an entangled
state. It's not a simple combination, a simple product of one particle states. And the interesting
thing about the total spin zero state is it's a state of this composite of two spin one-half
particles that collectively have spin zero. The pair has spin zero. It's a possible state
for a couple of spins, that if you combine them together, the total spin is zero. For
example, the spins of electrons in the helium atom ground state are actually in this state.
And there are lots of other examples in nature. So we can make two spins in a total spin zero
state. So what are the properties of this total spin zero state? Well, one is that if we make any
measurement of any spin component of one of the spins, we could get either result with
equal likelihood. The probability of either result is always just one-half, the either result
being plus one-half or minus one-half in the basic units of spin. So neither particle has
a definite spin along any direction. Neither particle has a definite spin component along
any direction. So that's curious. The second point about the total spin zero state is that
the total spin component of both particles along any axis that we choose is zero. The
total spin is zero. So if I make the same spin component measurement on number one and
number two, we must always get exactly opposite results. So for example, prepare a couple
of spin one-half particles in the total spin zero state, and let's measure the z component
of spin on particle number one. Now if we find that particle number one is spin up, which
will happen with a 50-50 probability, then we know immediately that particle two has
to be down because they have to be opposite. The total spin is zero. Alternately, if we
find that particle number one is spin down, we know immediately that particle two is spin
up, no matter how far apart particle one and particle two are. Similarly, we could measure
the x component of spin on particle one. And if we found that particle one had x component
of spin to the right, then we would know that the x component, we know that particle number
two is spin left. And if we found that particle one was spin to the left, we would know that
particle number two is spin to the right. And so on. If we make the same measurement
on the two spins, we always get exactly opposite results. And you know when we make a measurement
on spin one, and we find out what a spin is, we make these new spin assignments, according
to update rule two, these new spin assignments, updated spin states on particle number two
immediately. We make them immediately by update rule two, even if particle two is very distant
from particle number one. And that's kind of curious. So quantum entanglement, because
it becomes the focus of the last stage of the Bohr-Einstein debate. So let's recall
the state of the debate so far. In the late 1920s, Einstein tried to show that quantum
mechanics was not quite right by proposing a series of thought experiments to find an
inconsistency, for example, an exception to the uncertainty principle. But Bohr was able
to find a flaw in every one of Einstein's proposals. And finally, after the Solvay conference
of 1930, Einstein reluctantly accepted that quantum mechanics was consistent. But at that
point, he still thinks that quantum mechanics is not complete. Einstein believes that there
are things in nature that are real, but are not described by quantum mechanics. Okay?
Like what? Well, like the results of measurements. See, quantum mechanics does not predict what
measurement results will occur. It only predicts probabilities. It sets the odds. But what actually
happens is random. But when we actually make a measurement, one result or the other does
actually occur. We see one result or the other. Quantum mechanics provides no explanation
about why one appears rather than another. And so Einstein says every effect should have
a cause. That there should be something in our physics, maybe something we do not yet
know about, something beyond quantum mechanics that really causes one result or another.
Quantum mechanics does not include this something. Quantum mechanics is not complete. But how
could we know that such a something really exists? Or is this just a kind of conversation
that we can never come to a conclusion with? How can we know? Well, in 1935, Einstein, together
with Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen, Einstein Podolsky-Rosen, EPR for short, together write
one of the most consequential quantum mechanics papers in history entitled, Can Quantum Mechanical
Description of Physical Reality Be Considered Complete? And in this paper, EPR call attention
to the strange nature of quantum entanglement. There's some of the first people to point
out the properties of quantum entanglement. They don't actually call it quantum entanglement.
That term is actually invented by Schrodinger later in the same year. So we're going to
talk about the argument, the very profound argument in the EPR paper. And we're going
to express this argument in terms of this total spin zero state for two separated spins.
Alright, so imagine you have two spin one half particles in a total spin zero state.
Now before we make any measurement on spin one, spin two does not have a definite state.
Spin two gains a definite state instantly when we measure spin one. It's always opposite.
Before we measure spin one to be, spin two is opposite. That's total spin zero. Now this
happens even if number two is very far away. This is the thing that Einstein called spooky
action at a distance. The means by which spin two acquires its state is kind of mysterious
and magical and instantaneous and he thought that was crazy. He'd do something over here
and then something magically happens over here. Suddenly, oh, spin two has a state. So Einstein
wants to argue that there must be something we're leaving out, something that is real
but not quantum mechanics. Okay, so how do we know when something is real? And this is
where the EPR paper gets interesting. They put their cards on the table. They give a
criterion of reality, a way to decide whether something is real or not. And here's their
criterion of reality. If you can predict something about a system without disturbing or interacting
with that system in any way, then that something that you can predict must be real, must really
exist. And that something must have been real all along before you predicted it. After all,
you didn't touch the system in any way. It hasn't changed. You were able to predict this
thing without ever touching the system. So it must be real. That's a common sense view
and it's very hard to argue with it. Okay, so let's go back to the quantum mechanics
of spin. Remember, no spin one half particle can have definite values of both x and z at
the same time. In quantum mechanics, x and z are complementary variables. They cannot
be simultaneously real. That's what quantum mechanics tells us. So EPR suggests the following
experiment. Create two spins in a total spin zero state. Now if I measure spin in the x
direction on particle number one, I will know the value of the x component of spin on particle
number two. It must be exactly opposite what I found over here. And if I measure the z
component of spin on particle number one, then I'll be able to predict the value of z on
particle number two. It must be exactly the opposite. So without touching two in any way,
making all my operations on particle one, I can determine whether, I can determine its
x value or its z value for certain. So by the EPR criterion of reality, both the x value
of spin for particle two and the z value of spin must be physically real for particle
number two. They must both be real because I can predict either one of them without touching
particle number two. Therefore, there must be physically real things that are not included
in quantum mechanics, because quantum mechanics doesn't allow x and z to be real at the same
time. And therefore, quantum mechanics is not a complete description of nature.
Or again, let's cast this as a game. Suppose I give you a spin on half particle, and if
you wish to make an x measurement, I can predict what result you'll get. And if you wish to
make a z measurement, I can predict what result you'll get. How do I do it? Well, I made a
pair of spins in total spin zero state, and I kept one of them, number one for myself,
I gave you the other one. And to predict either x or z, I just make my own measurement, and
I predict the opposite result for you. But I don't touch your spin in any way. And the
common sense conclusion that you would draw is that your particle must already have had
definite x and z at the same time to start out with, because I can predict either one.
Okay, the EPR paper was published, it arrived in Copenhagen at Bohr's Institute, and it
produced immediate consternation. One person who was there described it as striking like
a thunderbolt. The argument appeared very powerful. And Bohr thought it was wrong somehow,
but it was extremely difficult to figure out what was wrong with it. Bohr has immense difficulty
in framing his reply to it. He goes over and over the EPR paper, struggling to think clearly
about their argument. And eventually, he does frame a reply, a reply that is tricky and
hard to understand, but very profound. And he published his reply a few months later
in a paper with exactly the same title. Can quantum mechanical description of physical
reality be considered complete? The same question, a different answer. First, Bohr notices that
when we play the game, I cannot really predict both x and z for your particle. I mean, here's
how we can play the game. I give you a particle, you choose what measurement you're going to
do and tell me what you choose. I can do my own measurement and predict the result of
your measurement, then you make your measurement and confirm my prediction. Notice the order
of the moves. I give you the particle, you decide what to measure, then knowing that
I make my measurement, then you make your measurement and voila, I was right. Here's
a way we can't play the game. We can't play the game as follows. I give you the particle.
And then I predict both x and z and then you choose what to measure and make a prediction.
I can't actually predict both x and z because in order to make a prediction, I have to make
a measurement and I have to choose which measurement to make. The key point here is that I must
choose whether to make the x or the z measurement on particle number one and those are still
complementary and since I cannot make both measurements at once, I can't actually know
both x and z for your particle at once. What complementarity means is that I have to choose
what thing to predict for you. I can't predict both of them. I can only predict either of
them. Bohr says that part of the two particles, particle number one and particle number two
must be regarded as a single quantum system, not two separate systems. Why? It's because
the quantum state that we have is only a quantum state of the pair, the total spin zero state.
It's entangled. I can't tell you a quantum state for each particle independently. The
whole point about entangled systems is that the individual pieces do not have quantum states
all by themselves. Bohr says we cannot actually know both x and z for particle number two
at the same time. If we predict one of those things, we cannot say what would have happened
if we had predicted the other because the prediction means a choice of measurement and
as Asher Peres said, unperformed measurements have no results. So Bohr says of course there
is no action at a distance as Einstein called it. Particle number one does not exert any
instantaneous forces on particle number two or exchange any energy instantaneously with
particle number two. But there is complementarity at a distance in the entangled system. The
x and z measurements on particle number one are still complementary, still mutually exclusive
even though the two particles in the pair are widely separated. What Bohr is saying is
that the EPR criterion of reality is ambiguous. It's not adequate for quantum mechanics.
It reflects classical thinking. The measurement that I make on particle number one in order
to make my prediction on your particle, the measurement that I make is of course not a
conventional disturbance or interaction with the other particle. But it does affect the
circumstances. It does affect the whole set of conditions under which you make measurements
on particle two. This is the way Bohr put it. And so x and z are not simultaneously real.
I can predict one or I can predict the other, but I can't predict them both at the same
time. And it is this complementarity at a distance that blocks the EPR argument, that
prevents you from drawing the conclusion that Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen drew, namely
that quantum mechanics is not a complete description of the world. Okay, that's Bohr's argument.
They said, it's tricky, it's subtle, it's hard to understand. Einstein was not really convinced.
And a lot of other scientists were not so sure either. Most physicists concluded that
Bohr's response was correct as a logical matter, that he'd shown that the EPR argument was
not airtight, that it didn't prove that quantum mechanics was incomplete. But the EPR argument
nevertheless retained a lot of intuitive force. It's based on ideas that are very common
sensical ideas. It says, if I don't touch it, but I can predict something about it, the
thing I predict must be real, must have reality, independent of my prediction. So it's hard
to argue against these ideas without sounding as tricky and obscure as Bohr. And there the
matter stood, actually, after 1935. The final round of the Bohr-Einstein debate is inconclusive.
There's lots of questions that still remain in the air. Are EPR somehow correct? Is quantum
mechanics, after all, an incomplete description of physical reality? Does entanglement reveal
this to us? Do quantum variables like the X and Z spin components for a spin really have
definite though hidden values? Can one particle instantaneously affect another one at a distance?
Is Bohr's subtle, obscure sounding counter argument that you have complementarity at a distance
rather than action at a distance correct? The EPR paper detonated in the middle of quantum physics
and the shock wave kept going for decades. And it drew the attention of the physics community
to the question of quantum entanglement. Quantum entanglement as a central mystery of quantum
mechanics. Nevertheless, the issue would not be completely understood for about 30 years
after the EPR paper and Bohr's reply. Then, in 1964, the Irish physicist John Bell dropped
an even bigger bombshell. Bell turned the EPR argument on its head. And the EPR argument
led the way to a dramatic new understanding of quantum entanglement. Something that Einstein,
Podolski and Rosen, indeed, that Bohr never dreamed of in the 1930s. That story is next time.
I'll see you then.
