Welcome to the 23rd lecture in our course on quantum mechanics.
In the final two lectures of this course, we will probe some philosophical issues about
quantum mechanics. We'll ask, what does quantum mechanics mean? What does it tell us about
the nature of reality? Some physicists avoid such questions as a matter of principle. They
say, I know how to use quantum mechanics, I can solve the mathematical problems, and
I can make predictions about laboratory experiments, and that is good enough. And this attitude
is understandable. For many everyday purposes, it makes sense to carry on with the practical
business without worrying about deep philosophical puzzles. You don't have to resolve the nature
of human existence before you get up in the morning. Also, some physicists are wary about
philosophy. They're wary of philosophy. They think philosophy is dangerous. They think
that Einstein was led astray by his philosophical ideas, that he was prevented from accepting
quantum mechanics because he was committed to determinism, because he believed God does
not play dice with the universe. These physicists would heartily agree with Bohr, Einstein stopped
telling God what to do. They would say that Einstein missed the boat. These physicists
would say that the best thing to do is just to set philosophy aside as much as possible
and get to work on new physics. With all due respect, I have to disagree. I think we have
to wrestle with these questions. I think they're important. Part of the reason we are so fascinated
with quantum mechanics is these questions. I also disagree about Einstein. His philosophical
concerns led him to draw attention to important issues like entanglement. And even if he did
not quite accept quantum mechanics, his questioning of the theory drove our understanding forward.
His questioning forced us to sharpen our thinking, and that was a hugely valuable contribution.
I think Bohr's general approach to things is right, that deep understanding comes from
discussion, dialogue, argument, and disagreement can drive it forward. So we should not get
hung up on philosophical issues, but we should not be afraid of them either. In this lecture,
we're going to examine three different ways that physicists have come to interpret the
meaning of quantum mechanics. One way will be familiar, but the other two are quite different.
And this is a remarkable fact. Even though quantum mechanics is 80 years old and counting,
parts of it are more than 100 years old, there is still radical disagreement about
its interpretation. Physicists agree on how to use quantum mechanics. They agree how to
do the mathematics. They agree how to apply it in experimental situations. But they disagree
about what quantum mechanics tells us about the nature of reality. These are essentially
philosophical questions. Is the world truly non-deterministic? What's the status of a
quantum state? Is the quantum state of a system objective or subjective? Is it truly something
out there, some actual property of the system, or is it all in our heads? Does it really
just reflect our knowledge of the system? And here's a key question. What is measurement?
Measurement, after all, seems special. We use the instantaneous and random update rule
number two to tell what happens in a measurement rather than the smooth, predictable update
rule number one. We have a whole special rule about measurement. And yet, a measurement
apparatus, like anything else, is made of atoms. Why don't we just treat the measurement
apparatus as just another quantum system? What is it about a measurement apparatus that
gives it its special measurement-ness? Now, there are three main schools of interpretation
of quantum mechanics. And they are, first, the Copenhagen interpretation, second, the
hidden variables interpretation, and third, the many worlds interpretation. And we're
going to discuss each of these in detail. First, the Copenhagen interpretation. And this
is the standard approach. This is the one that we have used, the interpretation of quantum
mechanics that has shaped our own discussion of the subject. And it was formulated and
championed by Niels Bohr. And it rested on the principle of quantum complementarity.
That's what the Copenhagen interpretation is built on. And in this interpretation, in
some sense, the microscopic world does not really exist on its own, not the way that
large-scale objects and things exist. As John Wheeler said, no phenomenon is a phenomenon
until it is an observed phenomenon. Wheeler actually liked to tell the following story
about Bohr, who was his mentor. And Bohr was trying to explain the quantum two-slit experiment
to his old philosophy professor. And the philosophy professor was having a little trouble understanding
the details. And he said, Niels, he said, when the electron is in the middle around
the barrier with the two slits, where can it be said to be? Bohr's reply was, to be?
What does it mean to be? That's the Copenhagen interpretation. In the Copenhagen interpretation,
measurement is special because it is how microscopic quantum-somethings are amplified
into macroscopic reality. Of course, that raises the question, what is the line between
microscopic and macroscopic? And Bohr talked about this. Bohr said, that line may be drawn in various
places. He says that there's a whole chain of events with the atom at one end and the
physicist at the other and the boundary between the microscopic and the macroscopic is somewhere
in between, but exactly where that boundary is, he said, is actually not a crucial question.
You can draw it various places and get the same answers. Now, we can analyze at least
some of the workings of a measurement apparatus using quantum mechanics by applying quantum
mechanics to the measuring apparatus. But for the Copenhagen interpretation, it is vital
that we draw the line between microscopic quantum and macroscopic classical somewhere.
Okay, there are some puzzles with this whole approach. And a famous one, I suppose, is the
puzzle of Schrodinger's cat. This is a thought experiment from a paper by Schrodinger from
1935. And in this thought experiment, a cat is seemingly brought into a quantum superposition
state, a superposition state where you have an amplitude times the alive state plus another
amplitude times the dead state, A alive plus B dead. And that seems like a very strange state of
affairs for a cat. And Schrodinger himself did not take this too seriously. The paragraph in
which the famous cat is introduced begins, one can even construct quite ridiculous examples.
And the Schrodinger cat was one of those examples. But others did take it seriously and worried
about the application of quantum mechanics to the macroscopic world. Eugene Wigner, the great
Hungarian physicist, he imagined his friend examining Schrodinger's cat. And he asked,
is his friend now in a superposition state as well, a superposition state of seeing a live cat
and seeing a dead cat? So all of these things suggest that there may be some problems with the
Copenhagen interpretation. The Copenhagen interpretation relies on this distinction between
the microscopic and the macroscopic. But it doesn't really tell us exactly how to tell the
difference. It doesn't tell us where to draw the line. It doesn't establish the border. And that's
a problematic thing because all of the macroscopic apparatus, all of the pieces of equipment we
use to do experiments in the quantum world are made of quantum pieces, atoms and molecules.
How do we make sense of that? It's also the case that complementarity often seems like a way
just to avoid tricky questions. Remember what Asher Paris said, unperformed experiments have
no results. That seems like a great excuse, but does it really not make sense to ask what would
have happened if we had done something different? Now, the Copenhagen interpretation does provide
some fairly clear guidance for actually using quantum theory, which is why it has been the
standard for interpreting quantum mechanics since the 1920s. But there's some question about whether
that interpretation is good enough, is robust enough for the challenges of extending quantum
theory to a quantum theory of gravity or quantum cosmology, which is applying quantum mechanics
to the whole universe. These are things people want to think about, want to try to do. Is the
Copenhagen view of quantum mechanics good enough for those problems? Okay, now we're going to turn
to the second of our three great interpretations of quantum mechanics, and this one is the hidden
variables interpretation. Now, if you go back to the origins of quantum mechanics, this was actually
De Broglie's original way of thinking about quantum waves. He said that actually both particles
and waves exist, that it's not like an electron can be a particle or a wave, it's actually both,
they're both present. And the wave travels through space, and it guides the particle around. The
wave is what's called a pilot wave for the particle. The particle is moving in some complicated way,
as steered by the wave. And this general idea was actually put on solid footing by David Bohm in
1952. So let's talk about Bohm's theory. Bohm's theory is a theory that appears exactly like quantum
mechanics in any experiment. It makes exactly the same predictions as quantum mechanics, and that's
why it counts as really a way of interpreting quantum mechanics. It's not really a different
theory. But in Bohm's mathematics, particles always have definite positions and definite
velocities at every moment. They move about in fiendishly complicated, but completely
deterministic ways, guided by a quantum field, a wave. So in the two-slit experiment, the quantum
wave exhibits interference, and it's that quantum wave which steers the particle around in such a
way that it winds up where the wave is strongest, and stays away from places where the wave is zero.
Now, Bohm's theory was meant to prove that quantum mechanics was capable of supporting a
deterministic interpretation, that quantum mechanics was compatible with physical determinism,
because in the early 1950s, many people believed that it was not. But the result of his theory
was that we have a new way of interpreting standard quantum mechanics. Standard quantum
mechanics is just one way of calculating on average how Bohm's hidden variable mechanics works.
Now, you may be worried. You may say, what about entanglement? I mean, remember Bell's theorem.
Bell's theorem says that you can't have any theory of hidden variables that function locally that
agrees with quantum mechanics. And indeed, when you look at the details, Bohm's hidden variables
must work in a non-local way, that distant parts of the universe in Bohm's theory can
instantaneously affect each other at arbitrarily large distances. That seems a little strange.
But in fact, Bohm did not regard this as a flaw in his theory. Bohm thought that this was actually
an expression of a large-scale, even cosmological order in the universe. And this order is very
different from the reductionist ideas that are common to modern science. What do I mean by
reductionist? Well, reductionism is the approach that to understand something in the world, to
understand x, what you do is you break x up into its parts, and you understand the parts and how
they interact with each other. So ultimately, you try to explain everything in terms of the
individual atoms and how they behave and interact. You understand everything by reducing it to a
problem of the little tiny pieces. But if there were a large-scale cosmic order, as Bohm suggests,
then the more reductionist we were, the farther we would be from that cosmic order. So reductionism
will never give us a complete picture of the world. Bohm says that standard quantum mechanics is
about as far as we can go in understanding the world on the reductionist road, and that it is
possible to get a deeper view of nature. But in order to get that deeper view, it will require us
to abandon our old ideas, including reductionism. Now, Bohm's ideas have met only limited success.
Relatively few quantum physicists have subscribed to these hidden variables interpretation, but some
of the ones that have include some of the giants. We saw that De Broglie was a subscriber to this
view. Einstein probably would have agreed with this view. Arguably, John Bell himself subscribed to
this view of quantum mechanics. And Bohm's ideas are subtle and provocative, and they continue to be
developed and discussed to this day. So it's a real, live interpretation of quantum mechanics,
which brings us to our third and in many ways the strangest interpretation of quantum mechanics,
the so-called many-worlds interpretation. The many-worlds interpretation was proposed by Hugh
Everett III in 1957. Like Feynman, Everett was another doctoral student of John Wheeler,
proposing something remarkable about quantum mechanics in his PhD thesis.
Everett's basic idea is this. Why do we have two rules in quantum mechanics? Why do we have
update rule number one, which takes place when there's no measurement, and update rule number
two, which takes place when there is a measurement? He says, that's not the way the world works.
Everett says, there is no update rule number two. Everett wants to include measurement rules,
include measurement apparatus, and even observers, you and me, all as quantum systems,
all as parts of the universe. And he says that the entire universe always evolves
according to update rule number one. And update rule number one is a fixed rule. It's deterministic,
in a sense, so the quantum mechanical state of the universe always changes in a deterministic way.
So, if the quantum state always changes in a deterministic way, why do we see randomness?
Why do we see probabilities, things happening one way or the other, without apparent definite
cause in quantum experiments? The reason is that we only see part of the universe, not the whole.
Everett gives a very strange account of measurements. So, we're going to give an example of the Everett
view, and we're going to imagine a universe that's very simple. It contains just two things. It contains
an observer, Joe, and it contains a spin one-half particle. That's the entire universe. Now, the
spin starts out in a superposition state. A times up, plus B times down. A superposition with
amplitudes A and B. And Joe starts out in some state, we'll call it Joe zero. This is the state of
Joe, ready to make a measurement, but not having made it yet. Joe's a quantum system. He gets a
quantum state too. And so, the initial state of the universe is one of these simple product states
that we get by the composition rule. The initial state of the universe is A times the state
Joe zero, spin up, plus B times the state Joe zero, spin down. That's the initial state of the
universe. So, what happens? Well, now Joe proceeds to measure the Z component of the spin of the
particle. Now, this will do the following. If the spin were initially spin up, it would take you
from the state Joe zero spin up to the state Joe sees up, spin up. The state Joe sees up is
shorthand for the state of Joe in which he has the psychological perception of the spin being
plus one half in the Z direction. Similarly, if the spin were initially down, Joe zero down would
evolve to Joe sees down and spin down. And this is how the measurement process would work.
But the measurement process is just a normal interaction of systems. There's nothing
different about it. And so, it follows update rule number one. Update rule number one, which respects
and preserves superpositions. And so, what happens is that the universe, which starts out in a super
position of spin state up and spin state down, now evolves into a new state. Amplitude A times
Joe sees up and spin up, plus B times Joe sees down, spin down.
This is a definite deterministic evolution of the universe's state. Each term in that
superposition, each branch of the superposition has a situation in which Joe sees just one thing,
either Joe sees up or Joe sees down. And what Joe sees agrees with the state of the spin in the
branch of the superposition in which Joe sees spin up, the spin is up. And when Joe sees down, the
spin is down. And indeed, if we had a more complicated universe that had two observers, we had another
observer, Willie, then Willie and Joe, when they measured the same component of spin, would see
the same thing. They would agree with each other in each branch of the superpositions.
But the branches are both still present in the overall state of the universe.
They're still present in the overall state of the universe.
It's as if the universe has split into two. Each branch is invisible to the other.
So in the process of measurement, Joe becomes entangled with the thing that he observes. And it's
that entanglement between Joe and the system that he observes that causes Joe so much conceptual
trouble. So how was Everett's radical idea received? Well, there were relatively few early
adopters of the many-worlds interpretation. It was highly controversial. But over the years, it's
become increasingly popular among physicists. It's still a minority view, but another generation or
so of physicists might see this change. It's a frequent plot device in science fiction writers,
who want to write about alternate worlds. For example, what if the Nazis had won World War II?
You can write such a story. All you have to do is set your story in another branch of the
Cosmic Quantum State, because in another branch of the Cosmic Quantum State, different quantum
events happened and the Nazis won. So that's what we're going to do. We're going to do a
quick analysis of the Cosmic Quantum State, because in another branch of the Cosmic Quantum
State, different quantum events happened and the Nazis won.
Okay. There are good points and bad points about the many-worlds interpretation. What are some of the
good points? Well, one good point is that it gets rid of the special measurement process. We get rid
of the measurement in the same way that we can analyze any physical interaction on the same
grounds with the same rules. It lets us apply quantum mechanics to the entire universe, and that
makes it very attractive for those physicists who are working on developing a so-called theory of
everything. For example, physicists working on super string theory and related ideas most often
adopt some version of the many-worlds theory as their everyday interpretation of quantum mechanics,
because that allows them to apply their quantum theory to the whole universe. That's what they're
after. They're all, on the other hand, some bad things about the many-worlds interpretation.
One of the obvious bad things is that it asserts the existence of vast numbers of
unobservable branches other than the things that we see. This makes one think of Occam's
razor. William of Occam was a 14th century philosopher, and he said that a theory should not
involve a lot of extra unnecessary stuff, that your theory should be economical.
So it's a good question. Does the many-worlds interpretation, the many-worlds theory,
violate this? Or does it exemplify it? Does it violate it in that it posits lots of
unobservable worlds in which things happen that we don't see but are somehow still part of the
universe? Or does it exemplify Occam's razor by saying, no, no, everything is simpler because we
have a more unified set of principles. There aren't two ways for the state to change. There's just the
one. Everything always happens according to the same rules. And there's another problem.
After the measurement, the universe is in that state A, amplitude A times Joe sees up,
spin up, plus B, Joe sees down, spin down. If that's the state of the universe, why is it that Joe
subjectively sees the result up with the probability magnitude of A squared? Why does he
see down with probability magnitude of B squared? Where do the probabilities come from? Both branches
are present. Why is it that Joe subjectively experiences them with these likelihoods?
Where does the Bourne rule come from? That's one of the crucial elements of quantum mechanics.
It's one of our basic rules. If all the branches of the superposition are always all there,
why is it that we subjectively see them with probabilities given by the Bourne rule?
Now, there have been some very clever mathematical suggestions about this in recent years. In my
view, none of these suggestions are 100% convincing yet. So I think that the observed
probabilities that we see in quantum experiments are still a little puzzling in the many worlds
interpretation. But with all these problems, the universe of the many worlds interpretation
is an astounding and dizzying thing to contemplate. It contains all of the quantum possibilities
at once. It exists in a vast, ever more complicated, stupendously entangled, quantum superposition.
In fact, many people prefer to use the term multiverse for this quantum cosmos described
by the many worlds interpretation. There are also a few other interpretations of quantum mechanics.
Most of these appear to be variations on these basic three, the Copenhagen interpretation,
the hidden variables interpretation, or the many worlds interpretation.
And these interpretations differ in some interesting ways. For example, they differ in their regard
to probabilities. It's only in the Copenhagen interpretation that probabilities are real,
that there's real randomness in the world. In the hidden variables interpretation,
the apparent randomness is simply due to our ignorance of hidden factors and the cosmic
universe spanning order that governs the universe. In the many worlds interpretation,
our perception of randomness comes from the fact that we only perceive part of the universe,
only one branch of the superposition in our direct experience. Now,
that means that both the hidden variables theory and the many worlds theory, both the
hidden variables and many worlds interpretations of quantum mechanics,
are actually deterministic views of the world. Of course, they mean something different by
the world than the Copenhagen interpretation means, but each of these interpretations
supposes that the world includes things that we don't see. In the hidden variables interpretation,
tiny variables, hidden variables that are inaccessible to us. In the many worlds interpretation,
all of these other worlds that contain the other possible results of measurement interactions.
So all of the interpretations of quantum mechanics seem a little problematic.
All of them are hard for us to imagine. All of them ask us to accept things about the world
that seem bizarre. So what is it about quantum mechanics that makes it so hard to figure out?
What is it about quantum mechanics that allows us to interpret it in so many different ways?
There weren't rival schools of interpretation for Newtonian physics. What is it about quantum
mechanics so different? What is that central mystery of quantum mechanics, the thing that
makes it all so elusive? That's the question. That's the question we'll grapple with next time.
I'll see you then.
