Space-time is just our headset, but we lose ourselves in the game.
And we take the game as the reality.
For Essencia Foundation, I had the honor of sitting down with one of my absolute intellectual
heroes, cognitive psychologist Donald Hoffman, to discuss the nature of reality.
Before I share our full conversation, here are some of the highlights.
I'll say this, there is no physicalist theory that has at any time proposed a specific conscious
experience that they can explain.
There's not one on the table.
The distinction that we make between conscious and unconscious, and between living and non-living,
is not a principle distinction.
It's a mistake.
It's a rookie mistake that we make by mistaking our space-time headset for the final truth.
What if you were unable to wake from that dream?
How would you know the difference between the dream world and the real world?
Were you happy with the movie The Matrix, what it did sort of culturally with that metaphor?
The Matrix really does open people's minds up to the possibility that what they're experiencing
is just a simulation, right?
Now in The Matrix, though, once you pop out of the simulation, there's another space-time
world.
So when Neo takes off the headset, he's back in the space-time world.
So it's Trinity and everybody, they're all in the space-time world.
So what I'm saying is even more radical, that whatever is beyond space-time is utterly
unlike space and time.
But this is like fundamental stuff, right?
This is the real cool stuff.
We are still thinking of traveling in space-time, and we have all these space-time fantasies.
Most of the galaxies that we can see, we could never go to.
Space is expanding so quickly that we could never get to them through space, moving at
the speed of light.
So there's all this real estate out there that we can see that's waving at us and saying,
nanny, nanny, you can never get here.
Well, that's if you go through space-time.
But if space-time is just a headset, think about the options that come, you don't have
to go through space-time.
You could go around space-time.
When we let go of the physicalist framework, we say, no, I am consciousness.
I transcend this.
Death is just stepping out of this headset.
In other words, we're wired up to take the headset seriously, and so consciousness wired
itself up to take the headset seriously.
But part of the waking up process is to step back and go, oh, wow, okay, oh, no, no.
I'm not a little thing inside the headset.
The headset is inside of me.
I'm eventually going to take the headset off.
So I can have a looser relationship with all this stuff.
I don't need to get that big house to be something.
I don't need to have that big scientific paper.
I don't need to be acknowledged.
Has it done this for you, Donald?
Has it done this for you, what you're now saying?
Yeah, sort of this realization in your personal life?
It's interesting.
It does it for me when I am conscious.
Okay, great.
Donald, I'm really, really happy that we can do this.
So nice to have you on the other side and sitting here.
Thank you very much, Hansen.
It's a very kind of you to invite me.
Yeah, we just spoke about your background.
I thought if it's okay with you to start a bit on a personal note, could you tell a little
bit about your background and your upbringing?
Well, I was born in an army hospital in San Antonio, Texas.
My dad was a GI.
He was just trying to find himself.
We went into the army, newly wed, and I was born nine months later.
So they were both just like 21 and trying to figure things out, and they were having
a hard time making ends meet.
They didn't have enough money to eat at the end of the month, so it was quite something.
But six months after I was born, they moved to California.
So I basically was raised in Southern California all of my life, and he was an engineer, and
my mom, she had a bachelor's in biology, and she ended up doing some computer programming
when I was about 10 years old.
She was one of the early programmers and sort of got me interested in computers.
My dad was an engineer.
He had a master's in chemistry and worked at various high tech companies that were at
the early stages of building storage devices for computers and so forth.
And then he became a Christian when I was 10 or 11 years old, and that changed things
quite a bit.
My parents both jumped into it pretty heavily, and by the time I was in my mid to late teens,
he was an associate pastor at a church and went on for decades afterwards to be a pastor.
So I was really, from about age 10 on, really raised pretty heavily in a fundamentalist
Christian Protestant kind of background.
So it was pretty intense, and of course, well, in my case, I was the oldest.
I didn't rebel.
I went along.
It took me a long time to get a perspective, to be able to step back and start to get a
perspective on it.
My younger brother rebelled earlier, and my sister has never rebelled to this day.
And did you ever personally believe, did you have the faith as well as a teenager?
Well, yeah, I believed in God, and my thoughts about that have changed over the years with
what that word actually means, but there is a sense in which I still think that consciousness
is fundamental, and the grandfather in a chair with a long white beard is not what I think
of when I think of consciousness.
So it had a big influence on me, both positive and negative.
It really made me think about things beyond space and time, but I think it made me think
about them in not very functional ways.
And so I had to step back and really sort out what were, I mean, there are beautiful
things when Jesus says, love your neighbor as yourself.
That's, I mean, there's many, many beautiful things, but it's a mixed bag.
And so we each have to sort out that mixed bag and take what is really good and try to
be kind to everybody in the process.
But I think it's so great that your work offers, in a sense, I think a refuge.
I mean, that it is to me, alongside with people like Bernardo and more people who think consciousness
might be fundamental.
So I think that's really great that you're offering that intellectually through science
to people.
And a question I had has to do with the, I hear you say a lot in interviews that you
want to make things mathematically rigorous, right?
And I am not a mathematician.
Understanding of math does not sort of extend beyond high school.
And what exactly, if you had to define, and that's maybe a two, a weird or broad question,
but what is math exactly?
Is it sort of a symbolic representation of reality?
I mean, that's what I now think.
But how would you define mathematics?
So mathematics is the way of getting rid of fuzzy thinking and hand waving and therefore
the dogmatism that can come with it.
Because I know what's right.
Because if you try to come at me with some argument, then I'll just sort of change my
view enough so that, but if I put it down in an equation, then it's hard for me to dodge
and weave.
It's not impossible, but it makes it much, much harder to dodge and weave.
So mathematics is infinitely complicated.
This is a Girdel, Kurt Girdel in 1930, 1931, when he was a young man, like 25 years old,
proved perhaps one of the greatest intellectual achievements in all of human history.
It was called Girdel's incompleteness theorem.
Without going into the details, it entails that there's no end to the exploration of
mathematical structure.
In some sense, it seems to me that it entails that you can't be omniscient about mathematics
because it just really, we'll put it this way, the kind of omniscience involved would
be stunning omniscience.
It would have to, I would have to, is beyond my conception of the kind of omniscience that
would be needed to have a full comprehension of the math.
Finally, any finite formal system is, Girdel shows us, merely a scratch on the surface
of this infinite depth of mathematics.
And so that means that math is a two-edged sword here.
On the one hand, it cuts through our dogmatism and our fuzzy thinking.
And so it's absolutely essential.
Because one thing we know about human nature is that we're dogmatic.
We know what we know, and we know that the other guy's wrong, and we're not in conversations
typically to learn, we're in conversations to show other people that we're right and
they're wrong, with happy exceptions.
But with mathematics, when you're forced to state your ideas with mathematical precision,
there's no hiding, right?
And when I say, for example, that I think that consciousness is fundamental, and then
I say, and here's what I claim the structure of consciousness is.
And so I write down some math.
Now I get the other, so that's the first side of the sword, and it's wonderful, right?
It really cuts through dogmatism and fuzzy thinking and dodging and weaving.
On the other hand, Girdel has told us that essentially there's infinite wisdom beyond
any formal theory that you could write down.
Yeah, by proven by math itself, that's so astonishing.
It's proven by mathematics.
It's really, truly stunning that the mathematics itself gives us the insight that no mathematics
that we could do is ever the whole truth, and in fact, that there's essentially unbounded
intelligence of mathematics beyond what you could do with what, and who knows, and mathematics
isn't the whole world, but that's just part of it, certainly part of reality.
And so already we know that reality transcends any mathematical theory, so that also entails
that there can be no scientific theory of everything.
And yeah, yeah, it makes us humble, right, Girdel made us humble.
It's very, very humbling, and so what we have then, so someone might say, well, just throw
up your hands, you know, let's just party and, you know, we can't know it all, then
why know anything?
And I think that that's the wrong attitude, it's not my attitude anyway.
It is, we do have this wonderful tool, and we do find that it is incredibly effective.
Eugene Wigner has said that the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics in the natural
sciences, he was amazed at it, and a lot of us agree.
It's truly stunning that using Newton, Newton's equations, we can send rockets to planets,
and it works quite well.
And with Einstein's equations, we get even, you know, greater fidelity, and with quantum
theory, you know, well Maxwell's equations and quantum theory, we're talking literally
on opposite sides of the world using technology that would not be possible without the mathematics,
absolutely not.
And so the mathematics is at once empowering, and it avoids dogmatism, and it really then
is humbling.
Once you really understand it, it's truly humbling, and so, and I think for me, it then
is a pointer to a way of thinking about what is consciousness about.
If consciousness is all there is, then mathematical structure is only about consciousness, because
that's all it's there for it to be about.
So, then Gertl is telling us that there's no end to the variety of conscious experiences
and conscious activity.
Whatever consciousness is, is literally unbounded, because mathematics is unbounded.
Yeah, I'd love to go a bit deeper into that, but I'd first like to ask you, you just said,
I mean, it avoids mathematics, avoids fuzzy thinking, right?
And we, I'd like to talk a bit about sort of the two paradigms, physicalism versus
idealism.
It's a big spectrum, of course, there's a lot in between.
But could you sort of sketch our Newtonian worldview and how we always thought about
consciousness and why that felt so scientific or scientifically correct, and what quantum
theory did do that notion?
Right, so many of the early scientists, like Newton himself, were actually believers in
God and Christians, and Newton apparently wrote more theology than physics.
His, the Newtonian world was essentially a mechanical world.
You could write down these differential equations, and if you knew the starting conditions with
precision, then you could predict pretty much everything that was going to happen going
forward.
And so, it led others like George Barclay to, who was a bishop in the Christian Church
of England or something like that, to come up with his version of idealism as sort of
a counter to what he viewed was the, the mechanism, the mechanical view of the universe that came
from Newton.
So he, he was a reaction in part against that.
And but eventually, you know, idealism had a heyday in the 1800s, but in the 1900s it,
sort of died out, largely died out, the success of Newton, and then the success of, you know,
Einstein's special in general relativity theories, and then the success of quantum mechanics.
Now, with quantum mechanics, the early theorists, many of them like Mox Planck, for example,
clearly thought that space and time were not the fun, not the final thing.
They, they thought, you know, Mox Planck was very, very clearly thought consciousness was
fundamental, and he, he said so.
And there was a period in which many of the early thinkers in quantum theory, you know,
from like 1926, 1925, until World War II.
So that, that period in there, there was a lot of soul searching about what was quantum
mechanics telling us deeply about who we are and the nature of the universe and, and is
the physicalist idea that space and time and matter are fundamental.
So those, I mean, that's the, that's the physicalist idea.
Space time is fundamental, and the particles in space time, you know, quarks, leptons and bosons,
those are our new fundamental particles right now.
That, that is the fundamental grounding reality, and everything else is just a complicated pattern
of the interactions of, of those particles in space time.
Many quantum theorists began to question that early on, but after the start of World War
II, things changed.
We got the shut up and calculate kind of attitude because physics now, you know, in quantum physics
became put in service of, of the war, and, and it became highly funded and it made the
atom bomb and, and all of a sudden it was a completely different thing.
And so that, the, the early generation that started, that were thinking, what does this
really mean?
That, that really got shut down in large part by World War II, but, but more recently than
it, you know, like the conference that we'll be having here at Chatham, there's been a
lot of thought now about the nature of what our current physics theories are telling.
Quantum field theory now, with gravity, you know, trying to understand how those interact,
has, has led some, but not too many, physicists to, to once again wonder whether consciousness
is fundamental.
That, that, I would say, not, I don't know too many physicists.
I've been to an FQXI conference a few years ago on the role of the observer in, in quantum
theory and it, it became very, very clear there that the idea that consciousness might
be fundamental was, was basically not on the table.
It, it, it's, it's not taken seriously, but what is taken seriously is that space time
is doomed.
That's really interesting, you know, and we're, we're talking big, big giants in, in physics.
Ed Whitten has said that, who, one of the ones who's been foundational in string theory,
M theory.
Nathan Seiberg at the Institute for Advanced Study, and then very influential, Nima, or
Connie Hamed, who's also at the Institute for Advanced Study, and, and it's, it's become
very, very clear from the actual structure of the physical laws themselves that space
time cannot be fundamental.
And this is, again, where the mathematics is really powerful, just like Gertl used the
mathematics to show that mathematics, at least any finite axiomatization of mathematics,
can't be the whole thing.
So the physicists are using the theory of space time to show that space time can't be
the whole thing, and that is the beauty of the mathematics.
It tells you where the theories stop.
This is where space, space time is great.
It's a wonderful framework for a while.
And here is where it stops.
It stops at about 10 to the minus 33 centimeters and 10 to the minus 43 seconds.
It ceases to have any operational meaning.
And what happens, but you're referring to the Planck scale, right?
The smallest scale that we have in physics.
What exactly happens at that, at that scale that makes you say space time is doomed?
So, of course, I'm not a physicist, so I'm telling you what the physicists say.
But what the physicists will tell you is that the way that you probe smaller and smaller
regions of space, in other words, to have a better and better microscope to look at smaller
and smaller details, you need to have wavelengths of light that are getting finer and finer,
because you have to have fine wavelengths of light to resolve fine detail in what you're
looking at.
Well, that's fine.
Requires more energy.
From quantum theory, we understand that the energy is proportional to the frequency, E
equals h nu.
So as the frequency goes up, you need more energy.
So that's fine.
So unless there's gravity, and that's the problem.
So if it was just quantum mechanics, you could, in principle, go as far as you wanted, as
much energy as you wanted.
But the problem is with gravity and Einstein, energy and mass are equivalent.
So as you put more and more energy into a smaller and smaller region of space, you're
essentially putting more mass into a small region of space, and then, unfortunately,
you, at some point, at around 10 to the minus 33 centimeters, you just start creating black
holes.
And so the very thing that you're trying to study no longer exists.
And if you put more energy, if you say, I'm frustrated, I'm just going to try to go smaller
with higher and higher frequencies, you just make the black hole bigger.
So the problem literally grows.
So that's one reason.
The second reason is that in quantum theory, the measuring devices themselves, the thing
that you're using to measure the spin of the electron or the position of the gluon or something
like that, these devices themselves are physical devices.
And so they're quantum mechanical systems with their own degrees of freedom.
And therefore, they have their own limits of precision, Heisenberg uncertainty kinds
of things.
And so if you want more and more precise measurements, you have to have more and more degrees of
freedom in those measuring devices, which is going to make them heavier and heavier.
And at some point, once again, the device will collapse into a black hole.
So if you have a small, if you have a room and you're trying to measure something in
a room, it turns out there is nothing that you can measure with precision.
So there are no local observables in any part of space and time.
Yeah. So if you want to pinpoint space time down to the smallest and really know what
it is at the smallest level, it will blow in your face.
It will become a black hole and that's right.
And beyond that, then the very notion of space and time of lengths and distances and time
beyond that level simply has no operational meaning.
So we're not they're not saying that there are pixels that at the bottom level, there
are these pixels like the pixels on your screen of your computer screen or something
like that.
No, it just means that the whole notion of space time itself ceases to make sense.
So it stops. Space time is doomed. It cannot.
So this is a huge blow because with Newton, right, space time is fundamental, although
Newton believed it was more of a dualist view because he thought that there was a God beyond
space time.
But once the scientific world let go of that, then it's just space time and it's part
of the particles are fundamental.
And we thought we thought that it was infinitely deep.
You know, you could always we thought reductionism was going to work.
We could just go to smaller and smaller scales in space time to find more and more fundamental
laws.
And so and with with, you know, Boltzmann and his work on thermodynamics and so forth,
we had our first taste that maybe something like that could really work that we could
not the first taste, but a compelling taste that that kind of reductionist thing could
really work.
So we were off to the races with reductionism reductionism would be yeah, reductionism is
so I understand this, but this is just for people watching this reductionism means going
down into space time, the smallest building blocks of space time and see if we can understand
that. And if we understand that we then we have lost that sort of govern everything bigger,
including consciousness.
That's right. So it's going to be as we go to smaller and smaller scales will just find
deeper and deeper laws. And so that was that was the the dream. And it's a new tonic.
But Donald, what I'm very curious about your take on quantum mechanics or at least how
you would explain it. I've read this book, Quantum Enigma by Bruce Rosenblum and Fred
Cutner. I heard it was sort of a good introductionary book. And I found it very, very, very good.
And they say with quantum theory, physics and counter consciousness. And I was just
wondering, I've read the book, and I still find it hard to sort of retell it to people
because it's just so counterintuitive. How would you explain that that in quantum theory?
Or I mean, if you agree, did physics encounter consciousness?
Well, some of the earlier pioneers of quantum theory did think that. So Max Planck, I think,
Schrodinger, arguably, Wigner, some things that von Neumann writes, wrote seem along
those lines, although I won't pin them with that. But I would say, when I talk to modern
day quantum physicists, I don't, when they talk about the role of the observer in quantum
theory, the observer is a technical term. It's some kind of measuring device, perhaps
another quantum system, another physical system. And the idea that consciousness is fundamental
is a tiny minority view. I would say under 1% in my interactions. They understand that
in many of the interpretations of quantum theory that we need to have some notion of
the role of the observer, although in the many worlds or multiverse kinds of interpretations
you can start to let go of that role of the observer in some sense. But they have their
own problems. So I would say that for those who want to ignore consciousness and still
be quantum theorists, they can do that. And many, many brilliant physicists are doing
just that. Even the ones who take the notion of agency as really important in quantum theory
that somehow the wave function is not a state of the external world independent of the agent,
but is actually a statement of the degrees of belief of the agent about the outcomes
that they will experience if they do certain experiments, certain measurements. But even
in that case, and the theorists doing this are brilliant, most of them are going to say,
I don't know what an agent is, and I'm not going to commit that it's consciousness. I'm
just talking about, I'm doing quantum theory, you tell me what an agent is, but it's probably
going to be some kind of, when we really cash it out, it's probably going to be some kind
of quantum physical system with just lots of degrees and freedom and so forth. But don't
worry with me about that right now. I'm just going to assume that there's some notion of
agent that will leave undefined. So I don't see, what I do see is brilliant researchers
like Neymar, Connie Hamed and Juan Maldesena making bold moves beyond space-time. They're
saying there is, space-time is doomed. It's the work of our generation to find out what's
beyond space-time. So how do you do that? What kind of flashlight are you going to use
into the dark beyond space-time? Because even though quantum field theory and gravity together
tell us that space-time isn't fundamental, they can't tell us what's beyond. They just
say, this is how far I go and no further, but they can't tell you what's next.
But when you say you think consciousness is fundamental, you are not in the school of
and indeed you're right. That is a minority. I think the consciousness causes collapse sort
of interpretation of quantum mechanics. Von Neumann, who still sort of believed that.
And John Wheeler, I don't really know. I'm curious also on your thoughts on John Wheeler.
But so you are not thinking that consciousness somehow collapses a world in superposition
into a classical world?
No, that's not my view. I think that the closest to my view among the standard quantum interpretations
is Chris Fuchs, Cubism, quantum Bayesianism. Right. And I think it's a brilliant interpretation
where Chris Fuchs says, look, the way a function is not some objective thing out in space and
time, it's in the mind of the agent. It's the degrees of belief of the agent. And he's
very consistent in pointing out that when you're thinking about probabilities, you can
either be an objective probabilist or a Bayesian subjectivist. And he gives good reasons to
think that, you know, just on probability alone, you should be thinking about a subjectivist
interpretation of probability. And then once you adopt that, then well, the quantum wave
function is really how probabilities of interpretation.
Just for people who've now totally lost it, when we talk about objective probabilities,
then you believe there is an actual world out there, and you just don't know it, right?
And then you have to deal with these probabilities. And that gives you sort of a way to predict
what's going to happen, right? But there is an objective world. And subjective probabilities
would be that you just don't know what's out there, or how would you describe this?
You could be a realist about the external world and be a subjectivist about the probabilities.
So the objectivism and subjectivism, the probability is about what do we mean when we say the probability
of tails is half? Well, does it mean that if I flip the coin a thousand times, you'll
get exactly 500 heads and 500 tails? That's sort of a frequentist kind of view that what
probability means is what frequency, if you do lots of observations, will you end up with?
And the subjectivist says, well, no, it's not about objective frequencies that are measured.
It's more about your degrees of belief, about what you expect to have happen. And so you
could have prior probabilities. I expect the sun to rise tomorrow at whatever time, 5.30
in the morning, because it's been doing so for thousands of years. And so I have this
prior. I would say it's 0.99999. A lot of nines that the sun is going to rise tomorrow,
but there is a tiny chance. And that's a subjective degree of belief.
And so now if you have this idea that what we're dealing with in quantum theory and when
we're talking about the wave functions of various, like two gluons hitting each other
and four gluons spraying out, like in the Large Hadron Collider, and you're asking what
are the probabilities of these various events? And you write down these scattering amplitudes,
these amplitudes for it. I think the Cubist would say that is merely me as a theorist
putting, as a good Bayesian, putting down what I expect to have happen, what I expect
to see. Whereas an objectivist would say, no, it's really a statement about something
true and about the objective world, and you can measure that truth with frequencies by
lots of observations. And so my view then is more like Chris Fuchs in the subjectivist
view, but in which case then, I don't need to have all these worlds out there. I'm positing,
okay, maybe the coin comes heads or maybe it comes up tails. I don't need to have a
world branching out there. I'm just wondering about the difference. So I don't need to have
all this metaphysical excess of, well, there's a whole universe in which the thing came up
heads and the other one in which it came up tails. It's a metaphysically high price to
pay for being, you know...
But what I find so funny about this, because I now understand this after a year of sort
of getting my head around it, is that I now understand that your position makes less metaphysical
claims because people on the street will think you're making a crazy metaphysical claim that
consciousness is primary. And they say, of course, there's a world out there and they'll
maybe have read something about the many worlds interpretation that there is parallel universes
and that they think is sort of not a metaphysical claim. So where's this, how do we end up
in this sort of misunderstanding of what metaphysics, what is sort of a heavy metaphysical claim
and a light one?
Well, I think many of us intuitively would agree with Einstein. Einstein was a realist
and he thought that the moon was there when no one looked. He didn't think that the act
of observation when I look up there and see the moon that I'm creating the moon when I
look at it, the moon is really there and Einstein wanted physics to be that way and he didn't
like the spooky interactions at a distance that he himself sort of pointed out in quantum
theory that things could happen faster than the speed of light apparently and of course
they weren't any causal interactions, they were nothing, no information traveling through
space faster than the speed of light as it turned out. But he didn't like it because
he wanted to have a sort of a new tone, a classical world view where space and time
was much more interesting than Newton thought but nevertheless it wasn't spooky like quantum
theory seemed to be indicating and so I think most of us intuitively would agree with Einstein
and he's not bad company. If Einstein thinks that space and time are fundamental and objects
are the moon is there when no one exists, who might argue with Einstein. So I think
a lot of us intuitively think that and I think I know why. The developmental psychologists
have told us why. So Piaget said that children, he thought by the time they're at 18 months
of age, get what he calls object permanence. That is we're programmed genetically at a
certain point in our lives to just believe that up to a point when mommy has the doll
and it's where I can play with it, the doll exists while I'm playing with it but as soon
as mommy takes the doll and puts it behind the pillow and I don't see it, it's gone.
It doesn't exist until you're around 18 months of age according to Piaget. Later work showed
us maybe three or four months of age, much earlier than you thought, where you get what's
called object permanence which is the pre-programmed belief that object really exists even when
you don't perceive it. So you start to become a metaphysical realist not because you're
argued into it because you're programmed to believe it. So the reason why it's so hard
for us to let go of the idea that the moon doesn't exist except when you look and create
it. To let go of the idea that things really are there, we want the dolly to be there,
we want the moon to be there is because we believed that before we were rational. It's
the water we swim in intellectually and so it's really hard for us to even see that,
to question it. When I remember giving a talk to my own department, Cognizant's department
where I was explaining my argument from evolution why we are creating everything that we see
on the fly. So the physicists have an argument that space time isn't fundamental and therefore
somehow the act of observation must be creating what we're, because it's not space time,
whatever is there. I have an argument from evolution of natural selection to the same
and so I gave it to my department a few years ago and the argument was pretty clear so they
were nodding their heads and oh yeah and I realized that they followed the argument but
they didn't know what it really meant so I said look this means that neurons don't exist
when they're not perceived. Neurons cause none of our behavior and then look of horror
throughout all my colleagues who used to think that I was a reasonable and possibly intelligent
guy. All of a sudden looks of horror what is this guy saying? So it's not, it's a deep emotional
thing. It's like being told that someone that you thought you knew really well all your life
has been in a suit and they're really a Komodo dragon and you didn't know it. It's just that
appalling an idea. And how has this all been for you personally? I mean because this is
all intellectual and mathematics but at night when Donald goes too bad and you ponder about
this you know how does that sort of, what's the impact? What has the impact been on you
personally? Well it's, I know first hand how difficult it is to let go of the object permanence.
I see it, that is my default mode. So even though I've been working on this mathematics
and publishing papers for decades on this kind of topic, when I'm not paying attention
I'm a realist. I just automatically fall to that point of view. So it's the way I think
about it is like if you've ever played a virtual reality game that's highly immersive,
you put on a headset and body suit and you know when you first get in, hey look, this
beautiful world that I'm involved in, maybe it's Grand Theft Auto or whatever it might
be, some VR version of that. So you're immersed, you're seeing all this stuff and when you
first go in you have this sense of detachment. Here I am outside of the game with just this
headset on, but once you get into it you're in the game and your emotions get tied up
in it and you lose yourself in the game and so effectively that's what I'm saying is
happening here. Space time is just our headset but we lose ourselves in the game and we lose,
we take the game as the reality and what science has done, what physics has done is
study space time very, very well. They studied our headset and they studied the headset so
well that they discovered it's just a headset and that's the power of the scientific method.
We studied space time because we thought it was a fundamental reality. We were lost
in the game but because we didn't just wave our hands and get dogmatic about it, we actually
wrote down equations and then Einstein wrote down, Einstein was the one that really blew
this thing open with general relativity because he had the notion like in 1907 that if I was
in an elevator standing on a scale to weigh myself and all of a sudden the cord broke
and the elevator started in free fall, how much would I weigh on that scale and Einstein
realized I wouldn't weigh anything. He said like the happiest thought of his life. That
was the key idea for general relativity. If I was on a free falling elevator and standing
on a scale I would weigh nothing. Brilliant idea. It took Einstein, I don't know, seven
or eight years or something like that of intense work to turn that idea into mathematics and
it was, and he's Einstein, right? He's not such a smart guy. He's a really, really smart
guy. It takes him seven or eight years. He has to learn the mathematics. It was fairly
unusual mathematics, Riemannian geometry and so forth. But he learned the mathematics
and struggled and struggled and finally turned it into mathematics in 1915 and turned that
idea into one equation. That one equation then, a year later, a German guy, I guess he was
fighting in World War I and had time and the brilliance to work on Einstein's equations,
discovered what we now call the solution that's called black holes. Einstein didn't know about
black holes and he didn't like it. The key thing was you can be as smart as Einstein
and be so smart that you write down the field equations of general relativity and then those
equations come back and teach you something fundamental about black holes and then black
holes are what tell you that space time cannot be fundamental itself. There's got to be something
beyond and so that is what I love about the hard-nosed scientific attitude, is turn it
into mathematics. If you have a theory that is good enough to tell you where it stops,
that's the kind of theory that is the heart and soul of science. If you have a theory
that allows you to dodge and weave and always dodge any objection, I have absolutely no
interest. You're not playing the science game. You're playing some personal game.
Let's stay in that headset metaphor, which you've used very often of course and it's a great metaphor.
First of all, were you happy with the movie The Matrix, what it did sort of culturally with that metaphor?
Yeah, I think the Matrix really does open people's minds up to the possibility that what they're
experiencing is just a simulation, right? Now in The Matrix though, once you pop out of the simulation,
there's another space time world. So when Neo takes off the headset, he's back in the space time world,
right? And so it's Trinity and everybody, they're all in the space time world. So this, what I'm saying is
even more radical that whatever is beyond space time is utterly unlike the other space time
space and time. It's utterly outside of space and time and that's really hard to think outside
of the space time box. When I talk about conscious agents, people go where are they? I mean, they're not
in space and time, where are they? And you have to turn things around. Space and time is inside the minds
of the conscious agents. It's just like someone inside the virtual reality game of Grand Theft Auto.
The players inside could say, you think you're not really riding a red Mustang and you don't think
that green Ferrari really exists? Well, where are you? Well, I'm outside of the game. This game is just a headset.
But if you're not on the game, where could you possibly be? Where else is there besides the game?
And that's the same situation we have with space time. We can't think about being outside of that game.
But that's what our mathematics is telling us. You've got to think outside of that box and the best
physicists are, well, the best. The physicists that I'm really interested in, like Neymar,
Connie Hamid and Juan Maldecedo and others, Benny Costa, these guys are taking the bold step of moving
beyond space time and they are finding beautiful structures beyond space time that are really,
they don't know what they're about, but they're there.
Yeah. I think what people find so hard and also me myself, at first I was more attracted to this idea
of our brains being a receiver to a larger consciousness, right, that you see sort of the radio.
What's that interpretation called? I think it's Aldous Huxley, who sort of popularized the idea.
But you also say that your brain itself is just a sort of and your whole body itself is a projection
in space time. It's not real. It has no causal role to play for consciousness at all.
That's right. So right now I don't have a brain. I have no neurons. If you looked inside my skull,
you would find neurons and brains, but that's because you would create them as you looked.
The act of observation is creating what you see. So the brain isn't a receiver for consciousness
because the brain doesn't even exist. The brain itself is just a symbol inside of consciousness
that consciousness makes now and then and then deletes. So it's just like when, if you're playing a virtual reality
game, like the Grand Theft Auto, and you have your headset on, and if I look over to the right,
and I'll see a green Mustang. Well, there is no green Mustang, right?
What I'm really interacting with in this metaphor is some supercomputer somewhere.
It's got all this megabytes of software and diodes and resistors and voltages and magnetic fields.
I don't know anything about that. I don't have to know, but that's the reality, quote-unquote,
in this metaphor. There's no green Mustangs inside that computer anywhere.
There's nothing green inside that computer that looks like a Mustang.
So I'm creating the Mustang when I look and I'm deleting it when I look over here.
Now I see a white Porsche. Well, now I've deleted the green Mustang and I'm creating the white Porsche.
So we create the stuff on the fly.
But someone else might be looking at that green Mustang, right?
For that person, it will still exist.
But the it will be a different green Mustang than the one I saw, right?
Because I create my own Mustang in my head and they create their green Mustang in their head.
And we think that we're seeing the same Mustang because we agree.
Is there a Mustang to my right? Oh, yeah, there's a Mustang to your right.
And so we think that we're seeing exactly the same thing.
And that's that baby principle, the object permanence you mentioned, right?
That my child learns that.
But the hard part also is that people find difficult to understand is that if, for instance,
I take alcohol or psychedelics, which is something in space-time,
that definitely has a causal effect on my consciousness, right?
Right. So it's absolutely the case that space and time are an interface that allow us to do things
that can affect consciousness.
So for example, right now, you are affecting my consciousness.
And you're doing it through space and time. You're doing it through an interface.
So we know that even with the idea that consciousness is fundamental,
that one consciousness can affect another consciousness through the intermediary of space and time.
And in fact, that's what space and time are. They are this interface.
It's an interface that some conscious agents use to interact with other conscious agents.
So it's no surprise that actions that we take using an interface could affect our consciousness.
That's what the interface is for.
Now, but the reason why people have a hard time understanding this is because we make another mistake.
We mistake, because we mistake our interface for reality,
we also make a fundamental mistake that things that look simple to us
are therefore necessarily simple in and of themselves.
And things that look dead to us are necessarily dead.
So for example, if I look in the mirror, I see my face.
I presume when I look at your face, you're conscious.
And so faces point to conscious objects.
Well, I look at my cat, I am surely alive and it's probably conscious.
And an ant, certainly alive, people might begin to wonder about consciousness.
When I get down to microbe alive, probably not conscious.
And when you get down to virus, now we even debate about whether it's alive.
When we get down to particles, absolutely not alive.
And only if you're a panpsychist, you might say that they have some consciousness associated with them.
But a physicalist would say no consciousness.
That whole way of looking at things is fundamentally flawed.
It's mistaking a limit of our interface for an insight into the nature of reality.
An interface necessarily has to simplify things.
But that's what an interface is there for, it's to hide most of the reality
and the part of reality that it shows you, it's dumbing it down.
Well, so with certain symbols, like human bodies and human faces,
we get perhaps the most insight into other consciousnesses.
With other symbols like cat and dog and mouse, we get less insight.
And with other symbols, we get almost no insight.
Well, that doesn't mean that I'm not interacting with consciousness.
It just means that my interface gave up.
Well, no surprise, that's what interfaces do.
They give up at some point.
But it's a rookie mistake to take the pixels of my desktop interface
as the fundamental elements of reality.
And so right now I'm looking at a bunch of pixels which is Hans' face.
So those pixels are conscious.
But if I go smaller and smaller, the pixels that correspond to the door behind you
or whatever, those aren't conscious.
Well, that's the wrong way to think about the pixels.
Those are just pixels.
They're a portal through which I'm actually interacting with something on the other side.
So we've mistaken our interface for the reality.
So the distinction that we make between conscious and unconscious
and between living and non-living is not a principle distinction.
It's a mistake.
It's a rookie mistake that we make by mistaking our space-time headset for the final truth.
And so as a result, now to get back to your question,
when we start to do things like take drugs or get hit on the head
and we have changes in consciousness,
well, first there's no surprise that the interface allows you to change consciousness.
That's what it's for.
It's what consciousness is used to interact and affect other consciousnesses.
When I have something that I call a drug, if I'm a physicalist,
I'm thinking, hey, there's nothing to this, but some chemicals.
This is a chemical formula.
There's no consciousness here.
So here is this physical thing, a chemical, and look, it's taking down your consciousness.
So that shows that physicalism is true.
Physicalism, your brain is creating your consciousness,
this drug is affecting your brain, so it's changing your consciousness.
But again, it's a rookie mistake.
Just because something has so simple in my interface that it looks like a chemical
doesn't mean I'm not interacting with consciousness.
It just means that I'm getting very, very little insight from my interface
into the consciousness that I'm interacting with.
So I'm always dealing with behind the screen of my interface,
and I'm always dealing with consciousness,
just like in Grand Theft Auto.
Behind the screen, I'm dealing first with a supercomputer,
but then with all the other people around the world that have their headsets
and body suits on, I'm affecting them.
I'm talking with them through that interface.
And so there's no surprise that the interface is giving me no insight
into the consciousness that I'm interacting with,
but what is the glory of science is it has the tools to tell us a headset is just a headset.
And that's what the math is telling us.
When they say space-time is doomed, basically physics has learned
the headset is just a headset.
And we're starting to look outside the headset.
Now, Nima and these other physicists, I am not saying that they
in any way endorse my idea that consciousness is fundamental.
So I would bet that they don't.
I would think that they are just saying,
look, we're finding these structures beyond space-time.
I don't know what they're about yet,
but we're just let's stick with the math, let's find these structures
and show how space-time arises and hats off to that.
That's, I think, brilliant.
Yeah, but at least they agree with you on the point that what we're in is not fundamental.
So if you call it a headset or not, but space-time cannot be it.
And there you agree.
Absolutely.
When they say space-time is doomed.
I've heard you explain this a lot of times, but I'd like to hear it now from you again,
maybe in different words today, but what makes you take the leap then to say
if space-time is not fundamental, consciousness must be.
There's a couple reasons.
Maybe the biggest one is the poverty of my imagination.
What else would I do?
It's sort of like what if I'm interested in consciousness.
I'm interested in my emotions, my sensory experiences, the sense that I have of being,
even when I'm not really perceiving or thinking.
I'm still, you know, when you're at night with your eyes closed and not seeing anything
or perceiving anything, you're still, there's this sense of I am, the sense of being there.
And it's perfectly plausible if space-time is fundamental and physicalism is true
and reductionism is true to take all of that stuff that I just said, my conscious experience and so forth,
as, well, that's not real.
I'm just a brain.
I'm just a body.
And this is perhaps, you know, some weird, effective matter when it gets complicated enough.
But when space-time isn't fundamental and I realize that particles are not fundamental
and reductionism, as Nima Arkani-Hamedis said, reductionism is dead.
Reductionism is completely dead.
It doesn't work.
So many physicalists, many of my colleagues in cognitive neuroscientists who are,
and some of them will be here at this workshop, so they're cognitive neuroscientists,
I would say almost to a person, every one of them is a physicalist.
And so they're looking to see how consciousness emerges from complex neuroactivity or whatever,
integrated information or global workspaces or neuromocular tubular collapses.
So they're not going to think of consciousness as being fundamental.
They're going to think of it as somehow emerging.
But they take consciousness seriously.
So most of my physicalist colleagues, not all, but most take consciousness seriously.
They say it's not something to just be dismissed.
It's not an illusion.
Dan Dennett and Keith Frankish will say it's an illusion.
It's just flat-out an illusion.
We've been misled.
But most will not.
But they have not been able, with their own theories, and this did affect me,
when I looked at their theories, I realized there's no beef here in the following sense.
Specifically, there's no specific conscious experience that anybody's ever explained.
Integrated information theory.
I asked Julie Tononi about this back in the late 1990s.
He came to talk early on in his career at the University of California, Irvine,
at the Helmholtz Club, and we had him there.
So I asked him at the Helmholtz Club to give me a particular example.
He couldn't do it.
One specific, the taste of chocolate, or the filling of a headache, or the smell of garlic, or whatever.
What is the specific conscious experience that your theory can say?
This is the integrated information that must be that conscious experience.
It must be the taste of chocolate.
It couldn't be the...
Yeah, and we're talking here about the code.
Let's call it the algorithm.
Show me the exact code that must be the taste of chocolate or garlic smell.
Exactly right.
Because in some sense, you can think about what they're doing is proposing these circuits.
The circuits have certain kind of integrated information.
Okay, great.
Sounds very, very rigorous.
Give me the circuit for one conscious...
Just one.
I just want a circuit that you say must be one specific conscious experience.
It must be the taste of vanilla.
And it could not be the smell of garlic.
Just give me one.
We're trying to do science here.
We need some predictions of specific...
The predictions they're making is, am I conscious at all or not?
And that is an artifact.
What they're getting is an artifact of our interface.
When I get certain kind of complexity now in my interface, I can start to see the consciousness.
That doesn't mean that there's no consciousness otherwise.
It just means that that's when my interface lets me see the consciousness.
So it's no surprise that you can get these complexity measures in the variables of your interface
about when you can detect consciousness or not.
That's no surprise.
That follows from my theory, that my approach in which consciousness is fundamental.
So that's no surprise.
What would be a surprise, from my point of view, is that they could explain any specific conscious experience.
So every...
I'll say this, there is no physicalist theory that has at any time proposed a specific conscious experience
that they can explain.
There's not one on the table.
And again, nothing personal here.
I'm friends with a lot of these people.
I'm friends with Stuart Hameroff.
And last time I was on stage with him, I pressed him.
Give me one.
Stuart, what is the orchestrated collapse of quantum states in neuronal microtubules
that must be whatever you want?
The smell of barbecue, whatever you want.
You think he's still like Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose are physicalists in that sense?
They are like the objective collapse kind of school, right?
Which states that there must be an external real world out there.
Well, either that or dualist, but probably mostly physicalist.
I would say that somehow this non-computational aspect of physics,
they think may be somehow where consciousness somehow emerges.
But what I want when I talk with Stuart is, okay, great.
Give me one.
What is the specific orchestrated collapse of neuronal microtubule states that must be whatever you want?
Can you give me one?
And so I had to really press him on the stage.
It took me several presses to really get him to say, I don't have one.
And he knows the next time we're friends.
I'd love to have a beer with him and so forth.
He's a great guy.
Next time I'm on stage with him, I'm going to ask the same question.
And I'm sure he knows it.
I'll ask the same question.
And the point is, and again, this is nothing personal.
These are good friends.
And what I'm hoping is, I mean, they're so smart,
if I can get them off of this physicalist thing where they're doomed to fail, right?
Space-time is doomed.
There's no way that you can boot up a theory of consciousness
if you start with particles or any structures inside space-time.
You cannot do it.
So I see all of my friends and colleagues in this field.
Many of them just IQ's out the wazoo.
But when you have, I mean, if I'm trying to set up, for example, a theory of space travel,
and I believe in flat earth, good luck.
I mean, you just have sort of the wrong framework to think about space travel.
Yeah, I think for people, it's just very nice to bring it back to that,
because people know the matrix, they know sort of VR, metaphors,
to sum up everything we've discussed so far.
So when we entered this game or this simulation or this matrix,
object permanence sort of psychologically made us forget that we put on a headset in the first place.
And now we are sitting here as two adults and it's your life's work to sort of get to the point
that you know we have a headset on and to describe that headset.
And then, of course, to think about how we can put it off again, right?
That's right.
And once we realize that space and time were not fundamental,
space time is doomed and reductionism is dead,
then we're free to begin to think about what's beyond space time.
And my hypothesis is that it's a network of conscious agents.
And I have a, you know, with my colleagues Cheyton Prakash and Manish Singh and Chris Fields
and Robert Prentner and others, we're all developing this mathematical model.
Not that I believe that we're right, I don't.
I believe girdle that any mathematical model that we come up with will only be scratching the surface,
but I don't think that we're wasting our time.
We, in some sense, make some progress.
We do at least counter our own dogmatism and we look beyond.
And somehow when we get new deeper theories, we also get new deeper technologies
that are telling us somehow that we're getting some kind of insights
that are tapping into something that we couldn't tap into before.
So I'm working with my colleagues, collaborators on this mathematical theory of conscious agents,
and then what we have to do is show how space time emerges specifically with mathematical precision.
We have to show exactly how space time emerges as a headset.
So what is it about the dynamics of conscious agents that is being captured by the space time headset that we use?
Can you prove that? It's my lack of understanding of mathematics,
but can you prove something like that mathematically?
Well, I wouldn't use the word prove, but what you can do is you can write down a mathematical projection.
So you can say, here is this mathematical model of conscious agents.
It's like the Twitterverse, right? So it's a big social network.
And you can say, here's how Twitter works.
You know, this guy tweets and he follows and he retweets.
So you can sort of write down the laws of how tweeting works.
So it's like that. So I've got this social network of conscious agents.
They have their own laws about how they work.
And then you can look at the patterns that evolve in that, right?
So like with the Twitterverse, it's like what is trending and why and so forth.
How do you get these little in groups where you have echo chambers and so forth?
So you can look at all the things that happen.
Then you can say, okay, let's ask what about what aspects of this complicated dynamics of conscious agents
gets mapped into what we call space and time?
How precisely, with mathematical precision, like what are the trends in the behaviors of conscious agents?
And really that's the way we think about it.
Technically we call it the asymptotic or long-term behavior,
but it's really like trends in social media.
How shall we capture those long-term behaviors, those trends,
in the format of space and time and what we call physical objects?
How do we do that?
So we've actually, at this workshop, I'm going to be proposing a mathematically precise path.
I won't say the path now because it's just a bunch of mathematics that wouldn't make any sense,
but there are like five or six steps, precise mathematical steps from the dynamics of conscious agents
all through permutations, through these polytopes, through the amplitude,
and then into space-time.
So there's this mapping that, and so the idea then is I've got this high-level picture with my team,
and now we have to work out, it's going to take years to work out all the details of each step in this,
but we see the path from the dynamics of conscious agents through permutations
and Birkhoff polytopes, to grass monions, to the amplitude, into space-time.
So there's a lot of work to be done, but once we do that,
once we have enough progress on that, then we can get to the other thing you're talking about,
which is it'll give us new technologies, essentially.
Once we know what's beyond, well, I won't say once we know what's beyond space-time.
Once we have our first baby step theory, the first baby step beyond space-time that's really solid,
it'll be conscious agents 1.0, then maybe in five years it'll be conscious agents 10.0 or something like that.
So it'll move quickly and throw away the...
This is like fundamental stuff, right? This is the real cool stuff.
We're still thinking of traveling in space-time, and we have all these space-time fantasies, right?
So also science fiction, don't you think that when you look at what Christopher Nolan does in his movies,
that's really great. I admire it as a filmmaker. I think it's absolutely fantastic, and it's very close to science.
To me, the really fascinating stuff also for art is to fantasize about what we could do, right?
Because when we go outside of space-time, we do not have a clue what we're waiting for, right?
That's right. So one of the things that occurs to me, most of the galaxies that we can see, we could never go to.
Space is expanding so quickly that we could never get to them through space, moving at the speed of light.
So there's all this real estate out there that we can see that's waving at us and saying,
nanny, nanny, you can never get here. Well, that's if you go through space-time.
But if space-time is just a headset, think about the options that come in.
You don't have to go through space-time. You could go around space-time.
Think about Grand Theft Auto. Everybody that's got the headset on is playing Grand Theft Auto.
They're stuck within the game. But if you're a software engineer who knows about the computer and the software,
you could take the guy who's driving the fastest car and winning the game.
You could give him flat tires out of nowhere. You could take the gas out of his tank.
You could turn his car upside down and put it somewhere else anytime you want to.
But you're not stuck in space and time. The whole notion of causality.
Nothing can go faster than a certain speed inside Grand Theft Auto.
And in space-time, nothing can go faster than the speed of light.
Well, that's all just part of the headset. Once you go outside this headset, you can tinker with it.
But then you're also sort of, then we also can take the matrix metaphor again, right?
Neoprogramming itself like new skills out of nowhere.
It potentially could be possible, you're saying.
It certainly does seem to be quite possible that we could be interacting with other conscious agents
in a way that we can't even conceive right now.
And tapping into an intelligence that is inconceivable,
literally inconceivable because it transcends any conceptual system.
And if this idea that we are consciousness is correct
and that that's what is the fundamental reality,
then the girdle's incompleteness theorem tells us that, in fact, you and I already are that infinite intelligence.
We're projected into a particular headset and waking up to that fact.
And that then raises an interesting question, which is what is consciousness doing and why?
And what girdle seems to be saying to us is that there is an infinite, unbounded,
unstoppable realm of exploration that consciousness needs to do.
And so what consciousness is doing is exploring all of its possibilities,
maybe to understand itself.
So it's the old oracle of Delphi, know-thyself.
But do you think, a lot of questions here, when I'd like the ontology of conscious agents,
what are your thoughts here?
I mean, what are we talking about those conscious agents outside of space-time?
I mean, people would say we think spirits or gods, but any thoughts?
Right.
The theory that we have picks just two aspects of consciousness,
because when you're trying to do a scientific theory, what you're trying to do is say,
what are the minimal ingredients that I need to boot up a completely general theory?
And if you ask yourself the question, so if I'm thinking about consciousness being fundamental,
well, what kinds of things do I want to really understand?
I need to understand experiences.
I need to understand free will or action.
I need to understand learning, memory, problem-solving, intelligence, the notion of a self, emotions.
So now if I just assume all that stuff, I'm not making a scientific theory.
I'm just saying, well, that's what, I'm just sort of sitting back with a beer and saying,
well, that's what exists.
But if I'm trying to do a scientific theory, what I have to do is to play that game,
is I have to say, okay, out of all that stuff I was talking about and more that consciousness has to be dealing with,
what are the two things or the one thing that I need to really turn into mathematics
and say this is the foundation and then boot up everything else?
That's what science is about.
So what we've picked is there are conscious experiences like the taste of chocolate.
And those conscious experiences can influence other conscious experiences.
Those are the assumptions.
That's it.
There are experiences and experiences, probabilistically influence other experiences.
That's the minimal.
So notice there's no notion of memory, problem-solving, self, none of that stuff is there.
So we have to build all that stuff from the raw materials of just conscious experiences affecting other conscious experiences.
So that's what we're really up to is a mathematical model of that.
Now you could say, look, you picked the wrong starting point.
That's fine.
That's the kind of critique that I would welcome.
I'd say, okay, pick some other starting point, make your own networks of whatever you want to call them,
but then you'll be having to explain other things.
And that's perfectly fine.
So I picked what I thought I couldn't get away with.
And one reason why you want as few things as possible that you're assuming it to begin with is because the things you assume are your miracles.
The scientific theory has its assumptions.
Every theory has an assumption.
Those assumptions are the things you're saying.
If you grant me these assumptions, then I can explain all this other good stuff.
But I'm not explaining these assumptions.
And that's what I mean when I say they're miracles for that theory.
They're the things that you just say, please let me have this.
And then I'll explain all this other stuff.
So you want to have your miracles as few as possible.
Now, of course, I've helped myself to a big miracle, conscious experiences.
Which is, I think, it's very natural to say it's only the last couple of hundred years that we find that a weird assumption to make.
But actually, it's the only thing we have, right?
This is Descartes.
But then we forgot about that.
And we got so immersed in what we assumed to be the real world that we forgot about that primacy of consciousness.
That's what dawned to me.
I mean, we were looking inside conscious.
We're doing the Large Hadron Collider.
We do that in consciousness.
We let these particles accelerate and burst into each other.
It's within consciousness, everything, right?
That's exactly right.
So when you start to look at it, you realize, well, no, this has just been a headset all along.
Space and time has just been a headset all along.
It's really consciousness looking at other consciousnesses through this filter.
And so, yeah, the experiences are fundamental.
My experience of space and time is just my experience.
And as soon as I close my eyes, the moon literally disappears.
It's gone.
Now, there's something out there.
Not out there in the sense of out there in space, but there's something out beyond my experiences.
And it's, by hypothesis, other conscious agents.
So I'm interacting with other conscious agents.
And what I see are things like the moon or an amoeba or a rock.
It's not that the rock is conscious.
It's just like, again, like the pixels in my Grand Theft Auto headset that I see as a Porsche.
Those pixels are not a Porsche.
Those are just pixels.
I'm making the Porsche in my consciousness, right?
And that's the same thing.
So I'm not saying that the rock is conscious.
The rock is my pixelated headset.
When I look at Hans, I see a face, skin, hair, and eyes.
What I'm seeing is not your consciousness.
I'm seeing something that I created.
In fact, that hands is now gone.
And now it's there.
But your consciousness presumably stayed there even when I wasn't paying attention to it.
Yeah, it's an icon that refers to something else.
And what I'm wondering is also a question I had is, could it be that those conscious agents in creating space time as a headset built in certain hacks, so to speak?
We know, for instance, death is one.
I mean, if I jump in front of a train, I'll die and I'll somehow, right?
We know that the headset's off then, right?
I suppose that.
And what are other ones?
I mean, is meditation one?
Are psychedelics one?
What are your thoughts there?
I think that there's an infinite variety.
That the headset that we have right now is just one of it, literally an infinite variety.
And so this might sound similar to an idea that a physicist named Max Tegmark has put out.
So Max Tegmark has the idea of these multiverses.
But he thinks that mathematics is fundamental, that it is the fundamental reality, not consciousness, mathematics.
And not space time, at least not our space time.
And also, I think, building on Gertl's incompleteness theorem, he points out that there's an infinite variety of mathematics out there.
And so that's his level, what he calls level four multiverse.
Every kind of mathematics that is possible is actual, and it's all out there.
So it really exists.
And my guess is, in a similar spirit, I don't take mathematics as fundamental.
I take consciousness as fundamental.
And mathematics is like the bones of the living organism of consciousness.
So it's different from Max Tegmark's view.
But where it's similar is, where as Max says, everything that's mathematically possible is mathematically real, and that's my multiverse.
I'm saying every structure of consciousness that's mathematically possible is consciously real.
And that's my consciousness multiverse with all the possible headsets that it could have.
And so our little space time one is presumably one of just many that are concretely right now inconceivable to us.
But what's interesting to me about consciousness is, in this framework, why is it doing this?
Why should consciousness go to all the effort of, like, this is a pretty amazing space time universe.
Billions of light years across.
It's got trillions of stars and hundreds of billions of galaxies.
And in this framework in which consciousness is fundamental, what's happened to consciousness put on this headset
programmed itself to get lost in it, to think of itself as a tiny little object in this vast universe,
to slowly wake up and to recognize as vast and as amazing as this whole thing is, I transcend it.
Is that what consciousness is about?
It's knowing what it is by knowing what it's not.
So it really immerses itself into a headset like space and time and gets lost in it and flounders in it
and really it has to learn how to play it.
Don't touch the fire, you'll burn it.
Don't step in front of the car.
It's painful and so you're learning all how this headset works and then you're learning about how fantastic it is
and then you wake up and realize, I'm not a little thing inside that headset.
That headset is a tiny little thing inside of me.
I am not that.
And that's how consciousness is knowing itself.
And maybe if one way of interpreting girdle is that that process is never ending, there may be a deeper wing
which you can just view it as a vast incredible intelligence that just knows that,
but every perspective on that gives you this temporal feeling of coming and waking up to it.
So there may be an even deeper perspective in which you could look at the whole thing as just a vast intelligence
that already knows it all, but any projection of that, you're seeing it as a process of coming to know itself.
So what's interesting is if this is anywhere close to right, then you and I, anybody that, any person,
is really part of that infinite intelligence, but wearing a headset.
But we're wearing a headset that has really strict limits on it.
If I ask you, please imagine a color that you've never seen before.
Just one specific color that you've never seen before.
Well, does anything happen?
Nothing, I mean, nothing happens.
But there, you know, it turns out that there are women called tetrafemes who have four color receptors.
Most guys have three, 93% of men have three color receptors, 7% of men have only two.
These women have four color receptors, and experiments strongly suggest that they have a new dimension of color experience
that no man could ever imagine, and most women can't imagine either.
And so they're having concrete experiences that you and I can't even, we can't even imagine.
And so what's stunning to me is that consciousness, if we, if you and I really are not separate,
we're just different headsets on the one big consciousness, the one infinitely intelligent consciousness.
So we're not separate from that.
We really, I mean, it would be pretty stunning that we are actually not just connected with,
we are projections of that infinite intelligence.
But projections that, we've taken the projections so seriously that we can't even imagine a new color.
We've really restricted our imagination, even though within consciousness at a deeper level, all things are possible.
All possible experiences are there.
Yeah, we truly sort of somehow forgot who we are and the function being to expand this whole thing, right?
It was needed somehow too.
But what I'm wondering here, I heard you say you're reading or maybe even reevaluating religious literature.
And because this is so similar, of course, to Eastern philosophy and traditions of meditation that tend to bring you back to sort of this primordial awareness that you're a part of
and make you see that all else is created from that awareness.
So I'm just wondering here what your thoughts are.
Is science and these traditions of introspection mostly already coming together?
Are we going to see a science that sort of includes introspection maybe even?
I think that we'll need to go there.
I think that we'll need scientists.
If this idea is anywhere near right and we really are the infinite consciousness in a space-time headset,
the best way to do our scientific research is, of course, to use our mathematics and to do all the stuff that we're doing right now, the study and so forth,
but then also to step back, to literally let go of thought completely and just dive back into that non-conceptual, infinite intelligence.
You're doing that, right?
I do. I spend a couple hours a day, even more, two or three hours a day meditating.
Are you then breaking outside the headset?
I'm making a tiny crack into the headset.
I would say a tiny crack.
When I read the experiences of others, I would say that there are many far more advanced than me,
but I do go into periods of complete inner silence,
and I think in those periods, whatever ideas I have that might be of any interest come from that.
I think that if we really cultivate that as scientists and as artists and writers and so forth, whatever endeavor we might be involved in,
going into ultimate complete silence, letting go of the restrictions of our conceptual system really puts us in touch with this infinite intelligence
from which we can then take back insights that we can try to then reconceptualize and make useful in this headset.
Many of the great scientists seem to talk in ways that suggest that Einstein would say that he wasn't really getting ideas from just the equations.
He would go and have these vague feelings and ideas and pictures or something like that,
and it would take him a long time to turn the stuff into language and mathematics.
So he would suggest that he was going, and I think many of the great physicists and scientists more generally,
and then of course people in the arts and humanities who are doing wonderful work,
they're getting their inspiration probably even with just brief periods of silence,
maybe that they don't even know that when they go into that inner silence that we let go of the headset temporarily and tap into this deeper intelligence.
If this is right, I would suggest that in the future we would train our scientists with all of the standard tools,
but also teach them to tap into this infinite intelligence as well, spend time on a regular basis,
letting go of all of your theories and recognizing that hey, in some sense, every theory we come up with here is child's play.
All of it is child's play.
Gertl tells us everything that you come up with is child's play.
There's a quote from Newton that I'll put up at the end of my talk at the workshop where he basically says,
I don't know what other people think of me, but I think of myself as a little boy that spent my life on the seashore
picking up a pretty pebble or a shell while the whole ocean of unexplored is beyond me.
It's just sitting there and I think that's the right attitude.
I don't have a theory of everything.
In science, we'll never get a theory of everything.
We can't.
We'll get a theory of everything except our assumptions.
Those assumptions keep going down and down and down forever, Gertl tells us.
Your theory of everything except your assumptions is basically a theory that barely scratches the surface.
In that sense, it changes the whole dynamic.
Right now, a lot of the dynamic is I'm this little tiny thing in this vast space and time and I don't feel very significant.
The only way to get significance is to make my mark, to make a new scientific theory,
a new piece of art or that piece of literature, the great American novel.
Finally, the great American, whatever it might be.
I'm trying to make myself significant or have some lasting value by something I do.
That puts a lot of pressure on you.
You've only got 60, 70, 80, maybe 90 years to do it and then will they really look at your painting 200 years from now?
Who knows?
You're really grasping at stuff to get significance for yourself and it's sort of a struggle.
Or I can just say, screw it, I'm going to drink and have a good time.
I'm not significant.
I just acknowledge that I'm here to have a good time.
But when we let go of the physicalist framework and we say, I am consciousness, I transcend this.
Death is just stepping out of this headset.
So that puts all that I'm doing in a very different framework.
So I feel the innate drive to try to be significant and to be better than the other.
That's sort of wired into us just like object permanence is wired into.
So I see that's all, in other words, we're wired up to take the headset seriously.
And then so consciousness sort of wired itself up to take the headset seriously.
But part of the waking up process is to step back and go, oh wow, okay.
Oh no, no, no, I'm not a little thing inside the headset.
The headset is inside of me.
I'm eventually going to take the headset off.
So I can have a looser relationship with all this stuff.
I don't need to get that big house to be something.
I don't need to have that big scientific paper.
I don't need to be acknowledged.
This is just all.
Has it done this for you, Donald?
Has it done this for you, what you're now saying?
Sort of this realization in your personal life?
It's interesting.
It does it for me when I am conscious.
When I let go of thought and sit there in consciousness without thought, yes.
But as soon as I get back into thought, then I'm back into the old self that says,
oh, it's just, and by the way, it's automatic.
It's just like, yeah, the moon is there.
Yeah, I need for my own significance to solve this problem or publish this paper.
So I always have to step back and look at that and go, OK, there it is.
So part of it, see, that may be part of the whole waking up process
because when I step back and I go, OK, look, there it is.
It feels bad.
I feel like I'm under pressure.
Why am I under pressure?
This is a game.
Oh, I'm taking the game.
So I got lost in the game again.
OK, so here I am lost in the game.
So the periods of consciousness where you go, oh, look at that.
I'm competing with so-and-so.
I feel mad at so-and-so.
Wait a minute.
Because Joe just stole my Ferrari and Grand Theft Auto.
It's just a game.
Who cares if Joe stole my Ferrari and Grand Theft Auto?
Yeah, I absolutely love it.
But it's so beautiful because this brings me back to discussions I have
with Pornardo and Essentia, of course, is that we want to communicate pure science, right?
You don't want people to shift or accept an idealist worldview
because they want meaning in their life, right?
Like you would pick a religion because you want meaning.
No, you want it because it's true, because it's more truthful than physicalism.
But you do get, as a sort of bonus, a lot of extra meaning, right?
Because do you think culturally and where the world's at right now
that this shift towards your view that consciousness is fundamental
could also sort of bring us further and sort of make us tackle problems within the game
that we are now sort of just talking climate, inequality, everything we see happening right now?
What are your thoughts there?
Yes, I think that this does lead to a perspective on social interactions
and climate change and things like that.
So communism, in principle, sounds like a great idea.
No ownership, everybody works and shares.
And if we were all wonderful consciousnesses and that's it, that would be fine.
But when we're plunged into this headset, it's competition.
It's nature, red, and truth, and claw.
And so communism doesn't work because we're all asleep.
We all buy the headset.
But if we wake each other up, if consciousness,
so there are certain spiritual teachers who are doing that,
like Eckhart Tolle, for example, and many others who are doing a great job
of sort of helping to wake people up and say, you're not a little thing inside space and time.
You are the fundamental consciousness.
The only way for us to get social institutions that work better is for the people to change.
Right now, we need things like democracy and maybe even blockchain
because we don't trust each other.
So why do we have democracy?
Well, if we have a monarch, we know that the monarch, it's luck of the draw.
If it's Nero, you're in trouble, if it's Marcus Aurelius, you're great,
but that's very unlikely you're going to get Marcus Aurelius.
So when we have people that are asleep,
that believe that they're little items inside the headset,
then we have to have all these rules in place and so forth.
But as we wake up, then I think, and maybe that's what consciousness is about in this headset,
is humanity waking up.
And maybe the science for the last several centuries where it studied space and time
and all of a sudden realized space time is doomed and my interpretation realized it's a headset.
That was a huge part of this consciousness waking up.
That space time is doomed as a big one.
Now realize it's a headset, realize, oh, we're the consciousness beyond the headset.
And then as we wake up, maybe we can have a different kind of interaction with each other inside the headset.
And so until there's a waking up, then we just have to use the standard rules and enforcement
and democracy, avoid the monarch and all this stuff because any one person in power makes the whole thing vulnerable.
The blockchain takes it to the extreme where you basically, you'd have to have a third of the players
that are trying to be negative or take things down for the thing to fall apart.
With a monarchy, you just need one player to take it down.
But when you have a blockchain, you need like a third of the players to be malicious,
what they call Byzantine attacks and so forth.
So I think that changing human nature simply by waking us up to what we really are is the way forward for the social things.
Otherwise, what we have to do is just make sure that we have the right rules.
And you do this and I think that is sort of noble and so important that it's done through mathematics
and not sort of because we had spiritual and religious traditions doing this,
but we also see them falling back in that headset reality, right?
And that's all about power and sort of control.
Whereas at the core, some of them or many of them I think point to this,
but it feels as if mathematics is maybe the most safe way to do this.
You just don't make mistakes in doing so, in waking up.
Make sure we really wake up and not sort of fool ourselves.
I think so. I think that the mathematics is a gift that it counteracts dogmatism,
it counteracts fuzzy thinking, it counteracts being asleep in some sense.
It really is a wonderful tool to wake us up.
I think there's something really deep there.
Mathematics and its relationship to consciousness, I feel like my insight into that is trivial.
I just have a deep feeling that my understanding is trivial.
But I say that math is the bones of consciousness, I mean that's a metaphor,
but I feel like Newton, I'm like a baby boy on the shore and there's something really deep out there.
And Donald, did you two close our interview because we started with your upbringing,
your dad being the fundamental of minister in a fundamental Protestant church.
Is he still alive, your father?
He died five years ago.
Sorry to hear that, but did you ever discuss your work and theory?
Did you have discussions with him about this and what did you think about what you did, your work?
I did and I think he had mixed feelings about it.
I think that he still thought the earth was 4,000 years old,
but I think that he also liked that I was saying that consciousness is fundamental
because he thought that that was true.
But he had a notion of God that's sort of separate from us in some sense
and the notion that I have is more that we are all one with whatever that one consciousness is.
And that may be what Christianity really means deep down when it says that we're all children of God,
that that might be what that means.
So he had I think mixed feelings, he wanted me to pursue this because he liked that it was not physicalist.
So he loved the mathematics and the science that was showing that space-time isn't fundamental.
And I learned not to argue with him about evolution of a natural selection and the age of the earth
because within the interface, when you take on the framework of the interface,
it's just wrong to say it's 4,000 years old.
It's just wrong.
Now if you step outside the interface, then I can say the very notion of time itself is an illusion.
It's an artifact of projection into our headset.
So there is a deep sense in which it's not 4,000 years old, it's not a billion years old.
But within the interface, if you're playing it within the interface, then you need to play fair within the interface.
It's not 4,000 years old.
It's so funny because it really reminds, it's the sort of discussions I have with my dad.
He really likes the fact that all of this is pointing to consciousness being primary,
but the moment I start telling that we are all one or part of this one consciousness,
I mean, I'm much into Bernardo's thinking here as well, then I'm losing him
because he really wants this God-creator, sort of exactly what you're saying outside of creation.
Yeah, I agree.
Now I'll just say one little thing too about the Eastern traditions that are more mystical,
that what this can do is they talk about language as pointers.
The word isn't it and so forth.
But what science can do is really up our game on pointers.
It can really help us.
It's nothing to boast about that we've used the same pointers for 3,000 years.
I'm using the same pointer that the Dowdy Ching used or something like that.
There's nothing to boast about.
What we like as a way to get surely if consciousness is infinitely deep,
we don't want to be sticking with the same pointers all the time.
We need deeper and new pointers.
And that's where science and spirituality together, not antagonistically,
but the insights of spirituality with the rigor of science together can evolve new pointers
that help us to avoid one of the big problems of human nature, which is dogmatism,
both among scientists and among spiritual people.
Spiritual people can be very, very dogmatic, but I know the truth.
It's very, very nice to have the mathematical stuff to actually push you
so that we believe dogmatically space-time is fundamental.
Our math said, no, no, no.
Your best theory of space-time tells you that space-time is not fundamental.
That's how we avoid dogmatism.
You need to bring math into church.
Yes.
I will go to those sermons.
Those are sermons I will go to.
Thank you so much, Donald. You have to leave.
This is a great pleasure.
Thanks. Good to hear that.
And a pleasure as well. Thanks so much.
