Mathematics is power, lecture seven. Set theory to infinity and beyond.
Axioms are the bedrock of any theory. So an axiom is an idea that seems to be universally true.
And of course you can dispute that immediately. How can you tell if something's universally true?
So we'll settle for something a little bit easier. How about universally accepted?
You might complain about that, but I'm going to ignore you if you do.
Because if enough people accept it and there's good reason to accept it and enough smart people go over it,
I think that's the best we can hope for as human beings.
So we take axioms and we see what we can build out of them.
This was Euclid's great insight and great genius.
He took a number of axioms and he built up all of geometry out of them.
We'll actually talk more about that in the next lecture.
The idea of an axiom is it has to be intuitively plausible.
How could it hope to be universally accepted if it's not intuitively plausible?
Now is that enough?
And so what sorts of axioms are there in set theory?
And why is set theory useful?
And why was it taught as part of the new math movement?
I'll try to answer those questions.
The axioms in set theory come down to that people thought,
maybe we can just talk about belonging and not belonging,
which sounds a lot like the binary ideas that we talked about with computers.
It's either a zero one, up or down, in or out.
It belongs or it doesn't belong.
There seems to be a real appealing simplicity in that idea.
And so most of the axioms of set theory hinge on, you're in, you're out.
There's a set that contains things.
It talks about how sets can be compared to one another.
And then there's a few technical axioms that I don't want to get into too much.
So why is set theory useful?
It's actually foundational.
As I gave some hint of in the first lecture, you can build all of the real numbers out of set theory,
because you can start with an empty set and that's zero.
Then the set that contains the empty set, you can call one and build everything up.
Why was it taught as part of the new math movement that took place in the 1960s after Sputnik?
That's a good question that I don't have a good answer for.
I think that the main thing that happened is America was so worried that Russians had gotten a huge leap in science and technology
that we as a country decided it's tremendously important that we build up our math and everyone's science and math capabilities
and asked what is the best way of doing math?
What's the most high-tech way of doing math?
And mathematicians who were perhaps better versed in theory than education leapt in and said set theory because set theory is foundational.
One of the ideas of set theory harkens back to the logic lecture where we talked about paradoxes.
This was Bertrand Russell's paradox.
He actually forced a change in the way set theory happened early on.
At the beginning, anything could be a set.
You could talk about the set of all automobiles.
You could talk about the set of all even numbers.
You could talk about sets of objects and numbers together.
Whatever set you wanted to define, so long as you could come up with a description of it,
what's going to be acceptable as a set.
Russell observed the following and I'll try to give an example to make this clear as well.
He said, suppose you have sets that are contained in themselves.
A set could be contained in itself at that time.
A set might not be contained in itself since sets could be anything.
So he asked what turned out to be a devastating question.
Consider the set of sets that don't contain themselves as a member.
Is that set a member of itself?
It can't be because it's the set of all sets that don't contain themselves as a member.
But if it doesn't contain itself as a member, then it has to be a member of itself
because it's the set of all sets that don't contain themselves as a member.
So here we have a classic unavoidable, beautiful logical paradox.
