Well, if there are infinitely many more irrational numbers than there are integers,
is there any set that's bigger than irrational numbers?
Cantor proved that, in fact, this is the case.
He showed that if we consider the set of all functions,
we talked about functions earlier, the set of all functions
is, in fact, infinitely larger than the set of all irrational numbers.
Then you can ask the next question, is there a bigger infinity than there are
of all functions? And the answer turns out to be yes.
And you can keep asking these questions, given a set of any size,
is there a larger set, not a set that's larger by adding one thing or even
infinitely many things, is there a set that is infinitely larger?
And the answer is always yes. Anytime that you can imagine a set,
there is a set that is infinitely larger than it.
So there are infinitely many infinities. Cantor gave them names, he called them
a laf not for the size of the integers, then a laf one for the size of the irrational
numbers, then a laf two for the size of functions, and so on forever.
Now that we start talking about the a lafs, a whole number of interesting
questions can spring to mind. The one is, we know there are infinitely
many, because as soon as you have one size of
infinity, you can build an infinitely greater size,
the next level up as it were. How many infinities are there?
There are so many infinities that there is no number of infinity,
no a laf, large enough to specify how many infinities there are.
Because if there was a number that large, you could always create a larger
infinity than it and contradict it. It was these sorts of problems that
became immediately apparent when people started
thinking about this that led to the criticism of Cantor
and the hectoring of him and the driving of him to the insane asylum.
Most mathematicians since then have embraced these ideas
and seen them as a gigantic cathedral of unspeakable beauty.
Let me talk about why Cantor began to explore these kinds of numbers and
ideas. What he wanted to do was classify transcendental
numbers. Now transcendental numbers are a kind we
haven't talked about yet. They're a very special number.
Transcendental numbers are not solvable by
polynomials. Now we talked a lot about polynomials when we talked about
calculators and computers. Those are things of the form
x squared minus 5x plus 1. If we deset them equal to zero, then we're
solving the polynomial for zero. And if something is a solution of a
polynomial, we call it a root. Consider all polynomials that have
integers as coefficients. So just like the ones that I've been
describing now. 27x to the fifth minus 15x to the
fourth plus 3 billion x squared minus 1 equals zero.
If something is a root of that equation, if something solves that equation,
then we call it an algebraic number. The question was asked in the 1800s.
Are there numbers that are not roots of algebraic polynomials? Is it possible
that every single number is a root of some polynomial with integer
coefficients? This is the question that Cantor wanted
to explore because it was very hard to show that numbers were
transcendental. It took an enormous amount of work to
show that pi, for example, was transcendental. Or Euler's constant
e, or the golden ratio, phi. All these numbers took very long involved
in special proofs to show that they were transcendental.
And so the question was asked, how many transcendental numbers are there?
Are there only a few? Well Cantor had the sense that
most numbers were transcendental, or at least infinitely many.
And so he came up with this beautiful scheme, this whole
algebra of infinity, to show that there were infinitely many
transcendental numbers. And it went kind of like this.
If you consider all polynomials that have only an x in them,
there's listably many of those. There's x, there's x plus 1,
there's 2x, there's 2x plus 1, there's 2x plus 2,
and so on. We can create a giant square of those,
and they are all listable. Then if we add in a third term,
so we have x squareds, and x's, and 1's, then there's again
still a listable quantity of those polynomials.
We can keep adding terms. It's like another bus driving up to the infinity
hotel. At every time there will still be a listable
number of polynomials. So when all is said and done,
the solutions for those polynomials must also be listable.
But the diagonal argument showed that they were unlistable.
And so that says there are infinitely many more
numbers that aren't algebraic, and that says there are infinitely many
transcendental numbers. So Cantor, without constructing a single
example, trumped all the other mathematicians
by proving there were infinitely many transcendental numbers
and one fell swoop. Infinity wins, beauty wins, it's a triumph of logic.
That was the birth of set theory and some of the
fascinating ideas that come out of it. The final lecture, lecture eight,
will be on fractals, chaos, dimensions.
This ends lecture seven.
