The way that chaos and fractals tie together in the most beautiful of ways is the idea of a strange
attractor. Attractors are important because when you look at how systems evolve over time,
if they're chaotic or not, things move towards attractors. In some sense, what we see over time
are attractors. We call them sinks, right? Things tend to fall into holes. Holes are sinks. Gravity,
the earth is an attractor. Matter coming together attracts more matter and more matter,
and everything comes here. We see the end result. We don't see the tiny particles moving through
space. There are some attractors that are very strange because they come out of chaotic processes,
and although they attract things, they turn out to have fractal dimensions. The most important one,
the one that kicked off that subject, is the Lorenz attractor. It was discovered by a scientist at
MIT who was studying weather phenomena. He was trying to come up with a simple model that would
explain how weather evolved, and when he ran his primitive computer in the early 1960s and looked
to see how the system evolved over time, he found that he got this amazing thing and result,
and that the closer and closer he looked at it, the more detail and the more length there was,
that in fact it's what we would now call a fractal, and that it had chaotic behavior,
depending where he started, the system would evolve in completely different directions.
So we see that the idea of strange attractors and chaos and fractals, like so much of other
math, brings in many of the different kinds of ideas that we've been talking about,
trying to model the real world, trying to understand it by abstracting, trying to see
what happens, talking about errors and probability. We talked about entities, the power of numbers,
how numbers are used to name different objects, and how the concept of number finds its power when
we use it to start classifying things and talk about averages or means or how they vary over
time. We talk about equations and how solving equations allows us to optimize and find answers
and allow us to make predictions into the future. We've talked about functions and how functions
are maps that go from one space to another and that functions allow us to compute numbers.
We've talked about sets of objects and points and dimensions and how when we merge them together
in different ways, we might end up with infinity or infinities of infinities. We might end up with
strange attractors. We apply logic to our objects. We take the ironclad laws of reason and
instantiate them into all these different things and see how they play out. What can we derive
from it? How do we model the world? We've abstracted the ephemera, the things of the world. We've put
them together. We create these models. These models tell us what's going on as best we can.
They allow us to make predictions by seeing how they evolve over time. They enable us to see
deep into things the more we think about it. They enable us to understand things better.
Many scientists would say that what our brains do are create models of the real world, visual
images, symbolic representations, word sentences, paragraphs, all these things model reality.
Mathematics is an extremely precise, accurate, ironclad logic way of doing the same. When we
apply our models to the world, there will be errors, but most of the genius of mathematics
is refining the error and understanding that we can bound the error and making sure that the error
is small. When the error is small, our model is good. When our model is good, we make predictions.
When our predictions work out, we've created new brilliant technologies. Mathematics is a very
powerful way of looking at the world. It's an intellectual tool that allows us to open many
hidden chests of the universe, understand the deep things therein, and create enormous advantage
for ourselves. It's propelled us to where we are today and will push us further into the future.
Math truly is infinite and unlimited.
This ends lecture 8.
If you enjoyed this program, the modern scholar series from Recorded Books offers courses in a
variety of subject areas taught by some of the world's greatest professors. Visit
www.recordedbooks.com for a complete listing of available courses.
This course is copyrighted 2013 by Recorded Books LLC. The lecture text is copyrighted 2013 by William
Goldblum-Block.
