These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the Teaching
Company. The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines. The lectures
in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long. By listening for less than an hour a
day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks. Browse our catalog or website
and imagine how much you can learn if you spend just 30 minutes a day for the next
year in the best college classrooms in the world. The lectures are university professors
carefully selected by the Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction
and teaching excellence. These lectures are titled, The History of the English Language
Second Edition, Part 1. The lecture is Professor Seth Lair. Professor Lair is the Avalon Foundation
Professor in Humanities and Professor of English and Comparative Literature at Stanford
University. He earned his BA from Wesleyan University, a second BA from Oxford University
and his PhD from the University of Chicago. From 1981 to 1990, Professor Lair taught at
Princeton University before joining the faculty at Stanford. Professor Lair's research interests
include medieval and renaissance studies, early tutor literary culture, textual criticism,
old and middle English literature and children's literature. He is the author of ten books
including Chaucer and his Readers and Inventing English, a Portable History of the Language.
In addition, Professor Lair is the author of more than 100 scholarly articles and reviews.
Professor Lair has received numerous awards for his scholarship and teaching. He has received
fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities and the Guggenheim Foundation,
the Beatrice White Prize of the English Association of Great Britain for Chaucer and his Readers
and the Hoagland Prize for Undergraduate Teaching at Stanford. In 1996, Professor Lair was the
Hearst Visiting Professor at Washington University in St. Louis and in 2002, he was the Helen
Cam Visiting Fellow at Cambridge University. Professor Lair prepared the course guidebook
that comes with these lectures. The course guidebook includes a detailed outline of each
lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical notes and a bibliography. To get the most out
of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them
before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1. Introduction to the Study of Language.
English. What is it? Where did it come from? And where is it going? This is a course of lectures
on the history of the English language. I'm Seth Lair of Stanford University and in the course of
this set of lectures, we're going to look at some of the ways in which the English language
developed from the mix of Germanic dialects in Anglo-Saxon England, from old through middle
and modern English, and also how the study of language in the 19th, 20th and 21st centuries
has affected the ways in which we think of ourselves as speakers of the language. And
so we're going to be looking at society. We're going to be looking at literature. And we will
of course be looking at words. But among the many questions we need to ask is precisely
what the English language is. And so let me begin by reading some passages from different periods
in English. See if you can understand what I'm saying. See if you can hear the modern words
behind the old pronunciations. Passage one.
Was that English? It is the Northumbrian dialect of old English, the poetry of Cadman from about
the year 680. Now let's turn to another example of English. Juan that April with his short assorta,
the draught of March, a person to the rota, and bothered every vein in switch the core of which
virtue engendred is the fluo. When Zephyrus ek with his suet a breath in spirit hath, in every
halt and hath the tondra cropus, and the young son hath in the ram his halve course he runna,
and smal afoolas marken melodia, that sleep another nigt with open ear, so pricketh him
natur in her carages, van langen folk to go on pilgrimages, and palmeras for
to second, strongestrandis to ferna, halwis, coath in sundrylandis, and specially from every
shearest end of engeland to contibore the winda, the holy blissful martyr for to seca,
that hem hath halpen on that they were seca. The famous opening lines of Chaucer's cantibary
tales, middle English from the end of the 14th century, and then to bae, or not to bae, that
is the question, whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of Ut Regis
Fortun, or to take arms against his say of troubles, and by opposing in them. Lines so famous they
may not need attribution, but when read in an approximation of Shakespearean late 16th
century pronunciation, they may seem alien and odd. And so in each of these passages
there may be something that is familiar to you, and there may be something that is strange.
What I'm going to be doing in this course is not simply tracing how we got from old
to middle to modern English, but I'm going to be looking at methods for the study of
language historically, and in this and in my next lecture I'm going to be asking questions
about the problems that motivate the historical study of English, and then I'm going to detail
some texts and contexts that may help us understand where English came from, what are its literary
and cultural artifacts, and what it might look like in the future. So let me begin with
some large questions. When we come to the study of the history of English, we see many
debates today that are at work in the past. These debates have a history and they have
a context, and we can understand our own contemporary and social issues about language with the
past, and so a good place to begin is, is there a standard English? Should there be
a standard way of speaking and writing irrespective of the region from which we come, the class
from which we originate, and the language that we grew up with? Now this may be a debate
today, but it is a very old one as well. As early as the 10th century, teachers in the
church schools of Anglo-Saxon England were arguing the same point. Some of these teachers
claimed that there should be rules for spelling, for pronunciation, for dialect, and usage,
and as we will see in subsequent lectures, those debates bequeath to us, not just larger
arguments about language, but the very literary texts we read, texts such as Beowulf, Cadman's
hymn that I began with, and other works from the Old English period that are the product
of the medieval scriptorium. In the later medieval period, the 13th and the 14th and
the 15th centuries, there were questions too about what constituted a standard. Should
it be the speech of London? Should it be the language of a particular region? Should it
have lots of French words in it? Or should it not? And in the 16th and 17th centuries,
pedagogues and pedants debated on whether a standard should now be grounded in university
education. In the 18th and the 19th centuries, these debates were played out in the schools
and in the courts and in the official loci of royal or regional or administrative production.
American English also invites us to ask questions about a standard. Should we take a regional
standard as a model? Or should we take standards from learning and education? Now, when we
ask questions about standards, we must ask another set of questions, and this will be
another central theme for this course. Should the study of language be prescriptive or descriptive?
Now, what do I mean by these terms? When we study English and when we use a dictionary,
we are ostensibly recording such things as spelling, meaning, pronunciation, and usage.
But when we describe, when we record, we are in so many ways also prescribing. That is,
when we say something about English, if we have a particular level of authority, if we
speak with a rhetorical control, if we are affiliated with institutions of arbitration,
or if we find ourselves ensconced in print, our words may take on a level of authority
that makes each description into a prescription. In other words, when we describe something,
we may be telling people how things should be, not just how things are. And this history
is central to the study of language, from the Anglo-Saxon period to the present. The
question raised by teachers and scholars was, really, should we prescribe behavior?
And when we look at the history of dictionaries, we are invariably looking at the ways in which
particular authors, editors, and scholars adjudicate between their need to describe a
language as they perceive it, but also their position as a regulator or a legislator of
language is such a thing possible. As we will see in later lectures, such dictionary makers
as Samuel Johnson, whose great dictionary of 1755 is, in many ways, the fulcrum on which
previous and subsequent lexicons balance Samuel Johnson, recognized by the time he
finished his dictionary, that English was as mutable, as fluid, and as immutable as
ever changing, as perhaps a river or a stream, and that in trying, as he said, to enchain
a syllable, one might as well try to lash the wind. Is prescription something that is
futile? Very often, what we prescribe are not just habits of pronunciation or forms
of spelling, but categories of grammar. And one of the central questions that I'm often
asked is, why is English grammar seemingly so simple? And by this, most people mean something
like the following. When we study French and German, when we study modern European languages,
what we're invariably looking at are forms which have grammatical gender, forms that
have case endings, all kinds of things in grammar books that we need to memorize. We study Latin,
we study grammar. English doesn't seem to have that kind of thing, and one of the issues
in the study of English is therefore, why English moved from a highly inflected language
in old English to a relatively uninflected language in modern English. And this narrative
dovetails with other narratives, for example, narratives about pronunciation and narratives
about spelling. When we look at grammar and when we look at case endings, we're very
often looking at the ways in which people spelled, wrote, and pronounced. And some of
the arguments that we'll see later in this course hinge on whether or not habits of
pronunciation changed grammar. In other words, did people stop pronouncing case endings?
Did people stop spelling the way they spoke and start spelling according to conventions?
And so, this relationship between grammar and spelling is a central one. Let's look
at spelling. Anyone who comes to English as a child in school, or anyone who comes to
English as an adult from another language, invariably is confronted by the strangeness
of English spelling. There are many, what we call, silent letters. There are many clusters
of consonants or collocations of vowels that seem to be mutable, that in some contexts
give us one sound, and in other contexts give us another sound. Why is that? One of the
jobs of this course of lectures will be to show how English spelling has remained historical
and etymological. And by this I mean the following. What we will see is that English spelling,
by and large, preserves older forms of the words. That in the course of the history of
English there was a kind of consciousness, a deliberate recognition that the history
of words could be preserved in spelling. And so we have words like night and knee and
knife and marriage and enough. And these would have been pronounced in Old English, Knicht
and Knaio, or Middle English, Knicht and Knay. We would have had mariage in Chaucer's Middle
English, we would have had naama in the Middle English of his time, and we would have had
enough for enough. And so what we're looking at is the way in which sounds have changed
but spelling is not. But we're also looking at deliberate changes in spelling, as we will
see in later lectures. We will look exactly at how the pedagogues, the teachers of the
17th and the 18th century sought to regulate and control spelling by what they imagined
to be etymologies. In other words, respelling words as if they were Latin words. They may
have come ultimately from Latin, but they may have been entering English by way of French
or other languages. And so their spelling may have been different. And so spelling
debt with a B, or spelling doubt with a B. These are the legacies of 18th century pedagogy
rather than the legacies of medieval pronunciation. And so what we have in the history of English
is a gradual separation between spelling on the one hand and speech on the other. Spelling,
as we will see, is something that becomes conventional and speech changes under it.
Now when we talk about speech, we have another question. And that is, why do people think
we pronounce the words the way we do? The history of English pronunciation is in so many ways
the history of sound changes. And so many people ask me, how do you know how Old English
sounded? How do you know how Chaucer sounded? How do you know how Shakespeare sounded? Well,
one of the things I'm going to be doing in this course is trying to answer those questions.
And for now, let me just say that there are a variety of resources available to us. Some
of them exist in the forms of spelling of words. Some of them exist in textbooks for
children in the medieval and Renaissance and later schoolroom that teach them how to pronounce
Latin by means of their own vernacular. Some of the evidence is in rhyme and in verse. Some
of the evidence, especially beginning in the 16th century, lies in the work of scholars
of that time who sought to record changes in pronunciation, who tried to invent what
we might call systems of phonetic transcription. And so scholars have been able to reconstruct
with a reasonable degree of accuracy what English sounded like at different times. English
sounds different also in different regions. And a theme of this course will also be the
nature of regional dialect. There were regionally defined dialects in the British Isles from
the beginning. And Old English had regional dialects as did Middle English and Modern
English and as American English does as well. And so one of the questions I will ask will
be precisely, how do we recover dialect sounds? What is the relationship between regional
dialect and a national standard? And what is the impact of regional dialect on the development
of a standard? Now dialects come in contact, but languages also come in contact. And another
question I want to ask is what happens when languages come in contact? Old English speakers
came in contact with speakers of French during the Norman Conquest and that irrevocably
changed the sound, the sense, the vocabulary, the idiom, the structure of the vernacular.
In the period of the 15th, 16th, 17th and 18th centuries, explorers from England and
from Europe came in contact with speakers of other languages. Sometimes they were the
languages of European trade. Sometimes they were the non-European languages of exploited
or colonized peoples. New words were always coming in and with these new words came changes
in the structure and idiom of the language. And yet such changes could also affect not
just vocabulary, they could affect pronunciation. When we look at changes in the sound of English,
we can see changes that are precisely due to these kinds of languages and dialects in
contact. The so-called great vowel shift of the 15th and the early 16th centuries, for
example, may have resulted from a variety of dialects coming into contact, from the loss
of French as the prestige language in late medieval England, and from the need to recreate
among an educated, literate elite a form of pronunciation that would in effect replace
French now not as a prestige language, but as a prestige form of language. And when we
look at these languages in contact, we need also to look at translation. Is translation
the word for word mapping of one language onto another or is translation something else?
One of the key objects for the study of translation in this course is going to be the Bible. People
have been translating the Bible into the vernacular since the Anglo-Saxon period. And when we
look at the Bible in Old English, in Middle English, and in Modern English, when we look
at the King James Bible, we're going to be looking not simply at translation, but we're
also going to be looking at another phenomenon, and that phenomenon is Archaeism. That is,
what are the circumstances in which you want your language to look and feel old? What are
the circumstances in which a translation can give us evidence of the history of language
embedded in it? What are the circumstances in which a text of a given time reflects not
the speech of that time, but the teaching of an earlier time? And how, in the case of
the King James Bible in particular, how did this highly formal and archaizing form of
English prose? How did it have an impact on later writers? How did it have an impact
in particular on writers of the American 19th century? Writers such as Abraham Lincoln,
Frederick Douglass, Herman Melville, or writers such as Joel Chandler Harris, who in the Uncle
Rima stories gives us narratives that are as much stories of the Bible as they are
lyrics of the barnyard. What we see in the history of English is a collocation of texts,
is a collection of influences, is a story of context, but what we see in the history
of English as well is a history of our own speech and the literature we read and remember.
One of the arguments of this course is that to understand the history of English is to
understand in so many ways the history of our own culture and society. That is, each
one of us imagines him or herself in language. And whether or not we believe that language
is something acquired or learned, whether we believe that language is innate or language
is learned, whatever we believe about the relationship between language and mind, language
and society constitute a bond of personal expression. And many of the texts that I will
be looking at in the course of this set of lectures are texts that are about creation,
and the ones that I read to you just now, the creation of the world in Cadman's hymn,
the origins of spring and the renewal of life in Chaucer, and the possibility of extinction
to be or not to be in Hamlet's soliloquy, to create or to uncreate. We always create
ourselves in language, and I will be looking at literary texts that focus on the ways in
which an attention to the history of the English language gives us an attention to the imaginative
space of self-creation. Now, I want to lay out a kind of road map for this course, and
in the remainder of this lecture, I'm going to give you some of the highlights of the
following 35 half-hour lectures here. I'm going to begin with issues of method. That
is, I'm going to begin with how we study language and what the discipline of historical
linguistics might be. And so, in order to do this, we're going to need to look at the
way in which sounds are produced in the mouth. We're going to need to look at how earlier
forms of language are reconstructed or reimagined by scholars. And we're going to need to look
at the study of language in society. And so, in my subsequent lectures, we're going to
see articulatory phonetics, the study of sound. We're going to see comparative philology,
the reconstruction of earlier historical forms. And we're going to see sociolinguistics,
the study of language in the group. We're going to see these as fundamental methods
of analysis for understanding the history of English. We're going to begin also with
the prehistory of English. That is, we're going to look at the period of Indo-European,
where you have a culture probably four or five thousand years in the past, of speakers
probably who are agricultural, probably, as we can tell, who buried their dead, who lived
in a particular place, who had certain beliefs, individuals whose words passed into the languages
that descended from them. And as they migrated through Europe or through Western Asia, the
Indo-European peoples split up, and their languages developed into the classical languages
of Latin, of Greek, of Sanskrit, and the modern languages ranging from those from Hindi and
Iranian, in the East, to Celtic, Germanic, and Romance in the West. And when we look
at Indo-European, we will also be looking at Indo-Europeanists, that is, scholars of
language who began to recognize at the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th
centuries, that there were links among living languages, and that there was a method of
study that would enable them to recover forms. We will also see how the study of Indo-European
gives us a study of society, and how in the course of that study we can reconstruct the
social environments from which the European and the Western Asian peoples came. Out of
this Indo-European matrix emerged a Germanic-speaking peoples in the north of Europe, and from that
Germanic-speaking peoples came the languages of Germany, the languages of Holland, the
languages of Scandinavia, and English. And we're going to see how the Germanic languages
not simply gave rise to English, but how they came into contact with the Latin of the Roman
Empire, and how relationships between the Germanic peoples and the Roman Imperium gave
rise to certain attitudes towards language and culture, and to certain words that still
survive in English today. Old English will then be the next moment that we look at, the
world of the Anglo-Saxons, of Cadman, of the great Bede, the historian, and of course of
Beowulf, and we'll see how the Old English language develops a distinctive vocabulary,
a distinctive sound, and how it applies the techniques of older Germanic poetry to create
a vivid imaginative framework for the expression of religious and mythological poetry. With
the Norman conquest we will see the contact between English and French and the rise of
Middle English, and we'll see how French emerges for several hundred years as a prestige
language, and in particular how the British Isles were a trilingual culture of English,
French, and Latin for a good deal of the Middle Ages. With changes in pronunciation, with
new vocabulary coming in, with trade, with commerce, and with colonialization, we see
the origins of modern English, and we can see the ways in which the sound of English
changed, the vocabulary structure altered, and furthermore the way in which English became,
if you like, an omnivorous consumer of new words and new cultures. English migrates, it
emigrates, it moves across the globe, and it lectures on American English, and also on
what I will call the Anglophone world. We will see how contact with other cultures changes
language, but also how each culture looks back to the history of the language to, if
you like, invoke as well as to evoke its origins in a particular cultural moment. When we look
at the history of English and the world, we also need to look at the future of English.
What will English become? In my final lectures, I'll raise some provocations about how things
like the World Wide Web, or English language literature abroad, or the Internet, or such
phenomena as email, or text messaging, how these various phenomena are changing the English
language as we live it at the beginning of the 21st century. Are these changes good,
or are they bad? Is English being debased and corrupted, or is it being enlivened and
enriched? These are questions that I think you need to answer for yourselves. I'll seek
here to provide the contexts and the broader experience of English so that you may encounter
the language in your own life. And what I want to stress in that encounter of the language
is to recognize that the history of English lives today in our own reading and experience.
Old words survive. Etymologies exist. There are strata to our speech. We need to understand
the history of English, I will argue, to understand contemporary debates on language and society.
And I will argue too that we need to understand the regional richness and diversity of English
abroad, English in America, English in the British Isles, in order to understand what
the building blocks of imaginative narrative have been for writers of the past thousand
years. And so, the richness and the scope of English are the theme of my study, but this
is not simply a celebration of a language. English is no better than any other. No period
of English is any better than any other period of English. Rather, what I want to stress
is that the resources of studying the history of the English language are in many ways the
resources of studying the history of ourselves. And so, in my next lecture, I'm going to
call attention to some specific technical methods of analysis so that we may begin,
if you like, the great journey of discovery that will take us from the Indo-Europeans
to the Internet, that will bring us from Old English to ourselves, and that will give
us a sense of the vitality, the richness, the scope, and the range of the English language.
Thank you.
