Lecture 2 The Historical Study of Language
In this lecture, we're going to look at some methods and problems in studying language historically.
Before I begin, however, I'd like to review some of the key points of my previous lecture.
There, I outlined the ways in which the study of the history of English can be motivated by our understanding of how we speak and how we write.
I raised a series of questions about debates between spelling and pronunciation, grammar and standard, regional variation and education, archaeism and modernity.
Our study of English can be informed, as I suggested, by our own experience of language, and it can be informed as well by our experience of reading.
In this lecture, I would like to present some technical ways of studying language historically, and in particular, I'd like to remind you that our primary goal is a historical narrative, that we are beginning with origins and we are ending where, perhaps with the future.
Now, what is language? This is a question that scholars have been asking, quite frankly, for three thousand years.
We can think of some working categories of what language is, and at the close of this lecture, I'm going to suggest what I call some myths of language.
But for now, I'd like to outline some practical methods for the historical study of language.
And these are going to be threefold. There are three tools for studying language historically.
And these are, I'll first, I'll list them and then I will describe them in some detail.
They are articulatory phonetics, that is, ways of representing a language's sound by developing symbols, developed for that purpose, or by describing sounds according to where and how they are produced in the mouth.
Articulatory phonetics. Two, sociolinguistics, that is, the way in which language operates in society, the way in which language brings people together into communities of culture,
and the ways in which attitudes towards language variation, use, and change can help us understand the operations of pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary, and the like.
Sociolinguistics. The third is comparative philology.
Comparative philology is the technique of reconstructing earlier forms of a language or reconstructing earlier languages by comparing surviving forms in recorded languages, comparative philology.
With these tools, we will spend the course examining four specific areas of language change.
Pronunciation, grammar, and morphology, that is, endings of words, meaning or semantic change, and attitudes towards language change.
Now, let me go back and let me talk about in detail the three tools that we will be using for the study of language.
And in the course of this discussion, I will be gesturing and seeking to explain how it is we can understand the location of sounds in the mouth.
So, let's go back to articulatory phonetics.
Now, people who study the way in which languages are sounded or produced or heard are known as phoneticians.
And phoneticians have come up with some precise ways of describing how sounds are produced, where they are produced, what means are used, and how we can develop a technical vocabulary for describing sounds.
What we're going to be doing with sounds and sound production in the course is to understand the way in which the physical production of spoken sound has an impact on language change.
But it's important to understand as well that the mouth is shaped in some special ways.
And so what I would like to do now is go through with you some detailed vocabulary that phoneticians have developed for describing sounds.
And this is a vocabulary that I will use throughout the course to describe a sound so that even without pronouncing the sound, if I describe it, you should be able to reproduce it or to understand what it is.
Now, sounds are determined or classified according to where they are produced in the mouth.
And so moving back from the front to the back of the mouth, we begin with the lips.
Sounds that are produced only with the lips are known as labial sounds.
Labial sounds are consonants like P and B, P and B are labial sounds.
Dental sounds, if you go back in the mouth, dental sounds are sounds that are produced with the teeth.
And so sometimes the teeth are involved with the lips.
So a sound like F in file or V in vile, you can see and hear and reproduce that sound with the teeth and with the lips.
Technically you could say it is a labiodental sound.
A sound like Thin or that where you have the Th produced by the tongue in between the teeth.
To be technical about it, it is an interdental sound.
It is a sound between the teeth.
Now right behind the teeth is a part of your mouth known as the alveolar ridge.
You can touch it with the tip of your tongue.
And when you touch it with the tip of your tongue, you pronounce the sound T or you pronounce the sound B.
These are known as alveolar sounds because they are pronounced with the alveolar ridge.
Other sounds are S and Z or Chi and J, cheer and jeer, year, red, net.
These are all different kinds of sounds, but what they share is that their place of articulation is the alveolar ridge.
Move back behind the alveolar ridge and you feel the soft palate.
Palatal sounds, plush, pleasure.
The arch of the tongue sits in the soft palate and you pronounce these palatal sounds.
Go back even further and there is the vealum.
Vealer sounds, cut, gut, sing.
You can feel the back of your tongue rising to the vealum in cut and gut.
Now if we went even further back in the mouth, you'd hit the glottis.
And glottal stops or glottal sounds appear in many languages.
They may appear in spoken English, but they're not meaningful sounds in spoken English.
That is, we don't make a meaningful distinction when we say a particular sound or a particular word that has a glottal stop, but in a language like, say, Danish.
There's a difference between full, which is full, and full, which is the word for bird.
And the only difference between them is the glottal stop, in the middle.
Sometimes in modern spoken English, we begin a word with a glottal stop like ice.
If you say ice, you can feel the sound originate in the back.
So this is an overview of where the consonants are produced and articulatory phonetics gives us a vocabulary for describing these consonants.
Now, what about vowels?
Vowels are produced according to where they are and how they are in the mouth.
Vowels can be high or low. They can be front or back.
And this is a more accurate way of talking than simply saying long vowels or short vowels in common parlance.
A is a low back vowel because you feel it in the back and in the lower part of your mouth.
Moving up, a is a higher, more front vowel.
E is a higher front vowel.
U is a higher front vowel.
O is a back low vowel.
U is a mid vowel.
The technical worlds of articulatory phonetics are far beyond the scope of this course.
And what I'm trying to illustrate to you is simply this.
That phoneticians and linguists can describe sounds precisely.
That sounds are physical phenomena.
And if you like, that the difference between a consonant and a vowel can be described in terms of sound production.
A vowel is a continuously produced sound.
You can hold a vowel forever.
A, E, we sing on vowels.
A consonant is a sound that if you like, interrupts the production of a vowel.
It may be a stop like lip.
It may be a glide like L in love.
It may be an interdental like thin or thing.
But it is an action of the mouth that interrupts the flow of air that is the vowel.
Consonants and vowels.
These are the broad outlines of articulatory phonetics.
And we need to have an acquaintance with this vocabulary.
So that when we look at sound changes over time, we can understand exactly what we're talking about.
Let's turn to the second of our tools.
Sociolinguistics.
Social attitudes towards language change and language variation are embraced in, if you like, the sociology of language.
And we can think of sociology in this sense as a kind of fieldwork, looking for informants.
Now when we do the history of the English language, our informants are dead.
And all we have are the written records of their speech or of their imaginations.
There were sociolinguists, if you like, not just in our own time but in the past.
It may be anachronistic to call Isaac Newton a sociolinguist or Jeffrey Chaucer or the 13th century courtier Walter of Bibbysworth, a sociolinguist.
Yet these were all individuals who thought and wrote about language in its social context.
They were all individuals who commented on the way in which language shaped society.
Samuel Johnson, the great lexicographer of the 18th century,
who produced in his dictionary of 1755 a template, really, for all future modern dictionaries,
Samuel Johnson is, in his own way, a sociolinguist.
The Oxford English Dictionary, that great work of historical dictionary making
that many of us use in school or at home or in the class,
this is a product of the sociology of language.
And so, when we think about sociolinguistics, we need to think about the ways in which
what we are doing when we're reading early texts is, if you like, a kind of fieldwork of the historical imagination.
Third, comparative philology.
Now the word philology comes from the Greek, meaning a love of language or a love of the word.
And since the middle of the 19th century, the word philology has come to connote
the historical and the empirical study of how language changes,
what the rules or apparent laws are within individual languages,
and how we can use surviving words from surviving languages to reconstruct earlier forms of the language.
I'm going to spend a fair amount of time with comparative philology in my subsequent lectures,
but for now, I want to say something about its very name,
so that you can get a sense of its historical origin.
Comparative philology was developed at the end of the 18th and the beginning of the 19th century,
when people were comparing many things.
They were comparing fossils to reconstruct earlier forms of animals.
They were comparing anatomical structures to understand the relationship of creation.
They were trying to understand the shapes of animals as they developed from embryo to adult.
All of these were comparative in some sense,
and in many ways comparative philology is a discipline that comes out of this same historical,
if you like, scientific world.
And so the world of such geologists and such figures, if you like,
such botanists as Linnaeus, Georges Cuvier, and later Ernst Heckel,
the great figures of comparative botany, comparative geology, and comparative anatomy,
stand side by side the Grimm Brothers as great figures of comparative philology.
If you like, comparative philology is the paleontology of language study,
how we see how early forms can be compared and constructed to give us a sense of what came before.
Articulatory phonetics, sociolinguistics, comparative philology.
Three basic tools for the historical study of language.
What is the object of our study?
The object of our study are, broadly speaking, fourfold.
Pronunciation, grammar, meaning, and attitudes towards language change.
Now I've spent a great deal of time talking about pronunciation,
and they seem perfectly transparent as to what pronunciation is,
the way people speak and the way people spoke.
But some of the questions I'm going to be answering will be,
how can we recover the sounds of the dead?
How is the history of pronunciation linked to the history of spelling?
And also, how is the history of pronunciation linked to the history of grammar?
Now, grammar is a complex phenomenon.
And I'd like to suggest a different set of terms, perhaps more precise than simply grammar.
And one of those terms is morphology.
Morphology just simply means the study of the shapes of things.
And it's a word like comparative philology as an expression that comes again
from this older 18th and 19th century scientific or anatomical world.
Morphology in linguistic study is the study of the shapes of word endings.
And so, the study of grammatical cases, in nouns, the study of verb endings,
these are all aspects of morphology.
The study of personal pronouns, singular and plural forms,
these are all aspects of morphology.
Meaning, or if you like, semantics.
Now, semantics is a word which, in my opinion, has a bad reputation.
It's just a question of semantics.
People will say, as if dismissing an argument by claiming that the distinctions are simply semantics.
But semantics is at the heart of language.
For what it concerns is what words mean.
Do they represent things in the world?
Do they represent ideas?
And how does the meaning of a word change over time?
A little example of semantic change.
Take the word silly.
Our word silly comes from a root.
Seilig, Old English, Seilig.
Modern German, Seilig.
In Old English, as in modern German, it means blessed.
It means touched by the spirit of the Lord.
And over time, the word came to describe not the inner spiritual condition of someone who was silly,
but the outer and physical manifestations of someone who was silly.
You seemed odd, you seemed strange, you seemed, if you like, silly.
And so, by the period of the 15th and 16th centuries,
the word silly was moving from the description of an interior condition
to a description of an exterior condition,
so that in modern English, the word has completely lost its sense of being blessed or being touched.
This is an example of semantic change.
The word remains relatively stable.
The meaning has changed radically.
And so, part of what we'll be looking at is what causes such words to change their meaning.
Attitudes towards language change.
As I mentioned in my previous lecture, one of the themes of this course
is, if you like, the history of the history of the study of language.
And so, one of the questions is going to be, what do people think of language?
What are the metaphors and images that are used to describe language and language change?
Is language like a river?
Is it flowing?
Is language mutable?
Is the experience of speaking a language like the experience of living under the domination of the moon,
sublunary, one of the great metaphors throughout the history of the English language?
Is the experience of language something earthly?
And so, when we look at the study of language,
we need to see how pronunciation, grammar or morphology, meaning or semantic change,
and attitudes or metaphors that describe language and language change and difference,
how these are, if you like, the objects of our study.
Now, let's turn to evidence.
What is the evidence for language change?
Surviving written evidence is important, but it's not definitive.
We have to develop relationships between speech and writing.
Did people speak before they wrote?
Most likely.
Most individuals learn to speak before they learn to write.
Language, of course, is not writing.
Now, how reliable is a piece of writing?
Now, let me speak as a historian of language and as a philologist.
What I want in my evidence is not a beautifully written text by a learned scribe,
nor do I necessarily want a beautifully printed book by a professional bookmaker.
What I want is something different.
I want a handwritten letter.
I want a bit of manuscript marginalia.
I want a diary entry.
I want something from someone who is just educated enough to be able to write,
but someone who's not so educated that what you're getting in the writing are learned spelling conventions
rather than speech itself.
Your best evidence for the history of pronunciation is therefore the writings of the barely literate,
not the fully literate.
But what's also interesting in the history of English is that before the age of print in the Middle Ages,
when scribes handwrote texts, they very often wrote them in their own regional dialect.
People tended to spell as they spoke.
And so before the development of spelling conventions, we can use written texts as evidence for pronunciation.
Now, a modern example of this might be what we call I dialect.
If any of you have read Mark Twain, let's say, or any works of American regionalism,
you'll notice that very often a writer will evoke the sound of a speaker by writing in an I dialect.
S-E-Z, for says, W-A-N-N-A, wana, gana, and so on.
These are ways, not simply of transcribing sound.
What they are ways of doing is they're ways of bypassing spelling conventions.
That is, they're ways of showing us how people may have spoken or evoked the sounds of certain speech.
And so what we have in the history of writing is, if you like, our search for the I dialect of writers
or the writings of the barely literate to give us a window onto early pronunciation.
Now, when we look at speech sounds, the historical study of language presents us with certain rules and conventions of sound change.
So another way that we can reconstruct earlier sounds is by recognizing that there were certain laws, if you like,
and we can work backward from these laws and conventions to reconstruct the sounds of earlier languages.
Now, I will be talking about some of these in future lectures.
But what's fascinating is the way in which linguists have recognized that, if you like,
the sounds of a period in an English language, in the English language, from one time correspond to different sounds of another time.
That is, you establish systematic relationships.
So you know that a particular spelling represents a certain sound, or you know that certain sounds originated in certain kinds of ways.
And so these rules or these laws of sound change, many of which were developed by the comparative philologists of the 19th century,
these also give us access to earlier forms of pronunciation.
And finally, there is another way of understanding how people spoke.
And that is, manuals of the Latin schoolroom or glosses or dictionaries can give us evidence for spoken and written forms of the language over time,
the school books and marginalia of the medieval and the Renaissance classroom.
Now, what I would like to do now is turn to some myths, if you like, of language,
for the historical study of language motivates us in several ways.
Let me review briefly. No language is any better than any other.
No language is more grammatical than any other.
Languages have rules and conventions of successful communication.
The historical study of language is an issue, as I said in my last lecture, a tension between prescription and description.
And we cannot even draw the line clearly between describing and prescribing.
Language is a form of social behavior.
Let me distill these, if you like, intuitions into maxims.
I have four myths of language.
And the first is, if you like, the myth of universality.
That is, there is, as far as we can tell, no universal language.
Now, it is possible that in some remote time in the past of human or pre-human history,
there was an originary language.
And it may be possible to see in surviving languages evidence for a shared linguistic ability,
or a language gene, or the hard wiring of the human brain that makes it capable for all of us to speak and understand.
But what I want to say is that when I say there is no universal language,
what I mean is that there is no single living language that is comprehensible to all speakers,
that there is no way that we can reconstruct a language that would be comprehensible to all speakers,
and that there is no single word or expression in all living languages that is the same.
In the language of the Republic of Georgia, mama means father, and dada means mama.
That, to me, is the ultimate nail in the coffin of the myth of universality.
The myth, number two, of simplicity.
No language is harder or easier for its own speech community to learn.
Six-year-olds in every culture have the same relative ability to speak or to write or to master their language than in any other.
No language is also simpler in an earlier form.
In other words, English was not simpler at one point, nor is English necessarily simpler now.
Languages do not decay. They do not evolve.
And this leads to my third myth, what I call the myth of teleology.
Language change does not move towards a goal.
Languages do not evolve from lower forms to higher forms.
And language change does not move at a steady rate.
This leads me, of course, to myth four, the myth of gradualism.
Language changes in fits and starts.
The great vowel shift, of which I mentioned in my previous lecture, happened in the space of about 150 years.
But the history of pronunciation has been relatively stable for the 400 years since it ended.
Semantic change happened very radically in the Renaissance.
It's happening very radically now, but it may be stable over periods of time.
Language changes at different rates at different times.
Now, when we therefore look in particular languages in subsequent lectures,
and when we look at the origins of the Indo-European languages in my next few lectures,
we're going to be looking not simply at the methods of study,
but we're going to be looking at the practitioners of those methods.
How is the history of the study of language textured by these myths, if you like,
the myth of universality, of simplicity, of teleology, and gradualism?
That, for example, when people discovered relationships among Indo-European languages,
part of what they believed they were discovering were universal or simple forms.
And so, when we look at Indo-European, we're looking at a test case for the mythology of language.
But also, when we look at Indo-European, we're looking at the origins of the languages we see today,
and we're looking at the methods for language study worked out in their context.
And so, I will begin my next lecture with what I call the prehistory of English,
Indo-European, its contexts, and its practitioners.
