Lecture 3 Indo-European and the Prehistory of English
Indo-European, the very name conjures images of a deep past.
Who were the Indo-European peoples?
What language did they speak?
And why should we study it in the history of the English language?
In this lecture, I'd like to answer those questions and I'd like to show how the study
of Indo-European languages can help us understand the historical study of language in the large
and some particular aspects of English in detail.
Let me begin, however, by reviewing some of the key points of my previous lecture.
You'll remember that I ended with the four myths of language.
That is, myths that have inflected our understanding of how language works and also how language
has been studied.
The myth of universalism, the myth of teleology, the myth of simplicity, the myth of gradualism.
These myths, if you like, have controlled many of the ways in which scholars have studied
language in the past and we're going to see them in operation again in this lecture when
we look at the work of 18th and 19th century scholars who discovered Indo-European.
What I'd also like to remind you of are the four foci or the four subjects of inquiry
that we've been looking at, pronunciation, grammar, homophology, meaning or semantics
and attitudes towards language change and variation, and to remind you too of the three
major tools for language study, articulatory phonetics, which helps us describe the sounds
as they are produced in the human mouth, sociolinguistics, which helps us understand
language as a social and cultural phenomenon, and comparative philology, which helps us
reconstruct earlier forms of language or past languages from living examples.
Most of this lecture will deal with the techniques of comparative philology.
And so I want to begin by defining some of the key terms for the comparative philological
study of Indo-European.
By the term Indo-European, we mean a postulated language or group of dialects out of which
the Western and the Eastern European, the Indian and Iranian languages developed.
These languages are believed to have descended from a common language spoken by a group of
people who probably lived in the third or fourth millennium BC in southeastern Europe,
probably in the area around the Black Sea.
The Indo-European languages that survive today are the languages of Iran, most notably modern
Farsi, of Greece, modern Greek, the Romance languages that are descended from Latin, the
language of Albania, the Germanic languages including German and English and Dutch, the
Baltic languages like Lithuanian and Latvian, the Slavic languages including Russian.
There are also two branches of Indo-European that have languages that do not survive.
And it's interesting to mention them now because their discovery played an important
role in developing the idea of the Indo-European languages.
One of these was the language of the Hittites who lived in Asia Minor in the second millennium
BC.
Another was a group of languages called Tocharium, preserved in written documents that were found
in Western China and Tibet.
Now this clutch of languages shares many things in common.
It shares certain sound relationships.
It shares certain words or vocabulary.
It shares certain grammatical forms or features.
And the discovery of these languages gave 18th and 19th century scholars in Europe a
sense of where their languages came from.
Who were the Indo-European peoples?
It is generally believed that they were an agricultural population living in southeastern
Europe in the 4th and 3rd millennium.
And recent archaeological discoveries imply that they buried rather than cremated their
dead.
They were inhumators.
And burial mounds were found.
And this is very important linguistically because one of our key words for burial, sepulchre,
is going to descend precisely from a culture that is a group of inhumators rather than cremators.
They clearly moved into Central Europe and then they moved into Central Asia.
And then there are a series of migrations.
Now how can we know anything about a group of people who lived three to five thousand
years ago and left no written records and very little archaeological remains?
The evidence is in the surviving languages.
If you survey the languages, not just surviving but also past, you get a set of shared words
and concepts.
Let me read some to you and let me note that in this lecture I will be giving you many
examples, many strings of words that are shared in Indo-European.
If you look at the surviving Indo-European languages and compare them with the dead ones,
what you'll see is that just about all of them have a word for snow.
In English, it's snow.
In German, it's Schnee.
In Scandinavian languages, like Icelandic, it's Schnear.
In Gothic, an ancient Germanic language, it's Schnaus.
Now in Russian, it's Schnee.
In Lithuanian, it's Sniegas.
In Old Irish, it's Sniachta.
And in Sanskrit, there's a word Sne, which actually means a sticky substance.
And so what scholars have been able to say is, look, all of these languages have words
which sound remarkably alike.
And they all seem to refer to the same meteorological phenomenon.
And so what scholars have said is, maybe the Indo-Europeans came from a place where it snowed.
Now there are other words in Indo-European which are shared by languages.
For example, many of the Indo-European languages share a word for the beach tree.
German Buche, Bock, Bocca, these are words for beach, but they're also words for book
or for letter, presuming that people wrote on beach bark.
They all share a word for corn, corn, Gothic, cauron, Greek, geron, which actually means
an old man, meaning a kind of dried up seed, Irish gran, Sanskrit gerna.
They all shared a word for wolf, wolf, ulfer, wolf, vilkas, virkas.
They shared words for bear.
They shared a word for the yoke.
They shared a word for honey or mead, where mead is fermented honey.
In Greek, methu means wine, which goes back to the word for fermented honey.
In Lithuanian, medus means just honey, and in Sanskrit, madhu means any kind of liquor.
And so what scholars have suggested is that if you look at these surviving words, what
you can do is place the Indo-Europeans geographically and culturally.
They came from a place where it snowed.
They came from a place where the beach tree grew.
They came from a place where there were wolves, where there were bears, where there were bees
that made honey.
They were the kinds of people who yoked animals together and raised grain or corn.
And so, if you like, scholars have done a kind of linguistic archaeology of the Indo-European
peoples based on the words that survive in modern languages.
But let's just pause for a minute.
Indo-European languages have lots of other words as well.
They all have a word for heart.
German, Hertz, Old Norse, Hertha, Gothic, Hertha.
This corresponds to the K-sound in Latin, Cordus, or in Greek, Cardia.
In Sanskrit, chryd, they all had words for lung.
German, lungan, Latin, lewis, which means light or air-bearing.
Russian, legko, Irish, legko, Sanskrit, lagos.
They all had words for foot.
They all had words for hand.
They all had words for head.
And so, could we say with some assurance that the Indo-Europeans were a people who had hearts
and lungs and heads and feet?
Now there's a certain sense in which it becomes almost laughable to do this kind of comparative
linguistics, because what we're saying here is, look, they all had a word for snow, but
they all had a word for the head.
They all had words, in fact, for star and for sun and for moon.
Look at the moon words, moon, German, mond, Old Norse, mauny, Greek, men, Latin, mencis,
meaning month.
Lithuanian, manhwa, Sanskrit, maas.
Words that mean moon and month.
So yes, they all could see the moon.
What makes the Indo-Europeans unique here?
What's interesting is not simply that they have a shared vocabulary, but that this is
a core vocabulary.
In other words, this information that I have presented to you tells us two kinds of things.
It tells us something about where they were and how they lived, but it also tells us something
about how certain kinds of core vocabulary words are preserved in language.
That is, how the Indo-Europeans developed a vocabulary for the basics of the body and
for the concepts of the cosmos.
And these were the very things that traveled with them for those thousands of miles in
their migrations.
Now, why spend time on this material?
In tracing the origins of words back through time, we are reconstructing a social and an
intellectual structure.
We can see how words of seemingly different sound and sense can go back to shared origins.
I must be honest with you, I am fascinated by the ways in which we take these words and
we can recover historical context.
This is the magic of comparative philology, and in my subsequent lectures, I'm going to
be going into greater detail about some of that magic, suggesting ways in which the
names of gods and goddesses or things or plants or place names have about them, if you like,
the aura of the Indo-European.
But I am also fascinated by the magicians of philology, those late 18th and 19th century
scholars who first discovered the languages and who made the associations that I am sharing
with you here.
Who discovered Indo-European?
At the close of the 18th century, a group of individuals started noticing things about
language.
Now, some of these individuals had studied Greek and Latin, some of them knew the modern
European languages.
But what is unique or original about the end of the 18th century for these Europeans is
that they began to participate in a vast world colonial empire.
English scholars, posted to colonial positions in the British Empire, began to notice something
recognizable in the exotic languages they encountered.
At the end of the 18th century, the English scholar and diplomat, William Jones, working
in India, noticed certain features in the vocabulary and grammar of Sanskrit, which was the ancient
classical language of India.
And he noticed that some of these were shared with Latin and Greek and the modern European
languages.
What did he notice?
One of the things he noticed was the word Raj, which in English we would transliterate
as R-A-J.
Now the Raj is the word used to describe imperial rule or kingdom.
A Rajah is a ruler in the Indian languages.
And Jones noticed that it seemed curiously similar, in pronunciation, in spelling and
in meaning, to a word like Latin Rex, which means king, or a word like the German Reich,
which means empire, or a word like the Celtic Rix, R-I-X, which was a suffix in ancient Celtic
names, meaning the king or a ruler.
Their singetorix was the name of a ruler.
Children may remember asterix, which is simply Celtic for the king of the stars.
And so what Jones noticed was that certain words like this seem to be shared among Sanskrit,
the Indian languages, and the European languages and Latin.
He also noticed certain grammatical features.
For example, he noticed that there were forms of the verb to be that were shared by all of
these languages.
And he also noticed that the languages shared certain kinds of case endings or certain technical
grammatical features.
And so what Jones did after years of research was he published his findings in something
called the Third Anniversary Studies, and the Asiatic Researchers published in English,
in Calcutta, in 1799.
And I would like to read to you a little bit of this address, because it brilliantly brings
together so many of the teleologies and simplicities and universalities, the myths of language,
but it's also an important document in the history of language, and here it is.
Jones writes, it is much to be lamented that neither the Greeks, who attended Alexander
into India, nor those who were long connected with it under the Bactrian princes, have left
us any means of knowing with accuracy what vernacular languages they found on their arrival
in this empire.
And he goes on, the Sanskrit language.
Never be its antiquity is of a wonderful structure, more perfect than the Greek, more copious
than the Latin, more exquisitely refined than either, yet bearing to both of them a stronger
affinity both in the roots of verbs and in the forms of grammar than could possibly have
been produced by accident, so strong indeed that no philologer could examine them all three
without believing them to have sprung from some common source which perhaps no longer
exists.
There is a similar reason, though not quite so forcible, for supposing that both the Gothic
and the Celtic, though blended with a very different idiom, had the same origin with
the Sanskrit, and the old Persian might be added to the same family if this were the
place for discussing any question concerning the antiquities of Persia, a brilliant passage
brilliantly evocative of the late 18th century intellectual world.
What does this tell us?
Jones makes certain associations.
He takes us back to myths of language, his ideas that the Indo-European languages descended
from an original, and that that original must be more perfect than the later ones.
In other words, language change is a matter of corruption.
He implies the sense of linguistic decay.
When he uses phrases like wonderful structure, when he notices that Sanskrit has grammatical
complexity, when he says things like how could something be more perfect or more copious,
when he uses expressions like these, William Jones is not describing languages, he is describing
attitudes towards language.
It is a notion of the antique, of the ruin, of the fragment, a notion of decay.
Jones's discovery of Indo-European, if you like, is as much a product of its time and
phrased as much in the rhetoric of his age as the discovery of the ruins of Pompeii or
of Egypt were in the late 18th and early 19th centuries.
Now for all of his rhetoric and all of his romanticism, Jones's work formed the basis
for later scholars, and in the 19th century, following up on Jones's discovery, language
scholars began to develop the study of comparative grammar.
Scholars in Germany in particular began to codify relationships of sounds among different
languages, and they proposed lines of dissent among different languages, introducing the
metaphor of the language tree.
Now many of you have probably seen something like this, the idea of something like Indo-European
as the root, and then the language is branching off.
And of course, this is very much modeled on biological or evolutionary trees, where you
see the rootstock of an ancient origin, and then things branch out in that way.
In the German of the 19th century philologists, this was the Stammbaum theory, the tree root
or tree-stock theory.
Indeed, our very word root has about it an arboreal metaphor, at the roots of the ancient
languages and the modern ones are branching out.
Now the thing I want to stress is that the discovery of Indo-European and the sound
laws, which I'll be talking about in my next lecture, these were, for the 19th century,
the subject of linguistics.
In other words, if you look at let's say the 1870s, when scholars had formulated a series
of sound relationships, and they showed relationships not only among the living languages, but also
lines of descent among the dead languages, this was what being a linguist was.
What does it mean to study language?
What is a linguist?
A linguist today is something very different from a linguist of 130 or 150 years ago.
So it is important to understand that for the 19th century, the study of language was
the historical study of comparative philology.
The neo-Gramarians or the young Gramarians of the 1870s formulated laws of language change
and in subsequent lectures I'm going to look at some of these laws.
I'm also going to look at one of the earliest ones that was formulated by the brothers Grimm
of fairy tale fame, the great Grimm brothers who, in formulating their relationships among
consonants of Indo-European languages, provide us with valuable empirical evidence, despite
of the imperfections of their work, valuable empirical evidence for reconstructing words
and sounds.
And so, when we locate the Indo-Europeans as they move, as they move out of their home,
what we can see is the preservation, as I'm suggesting, of certain words.
But just as an aside, there are some words that are clearly not Indo-European.
Let me give you a couple of examples.
The word that ends in the sound inth is not an Indo-European word, plinth, labyrinth,
the town of Corinth, the flower, hyacinth.
These are words that scholars have been able to show are clearly words coming from the
pre-Indo-European inhabitants of the Greek peninsula.
They were absorbed by the Indo-European conquerors or settlers, but they are, if you like, fossils
of a pre-Indo-European word.
And it's interesting that many of them enter into Greek, and many of them are mythological.
Is the myth of the labyrinth, for example, or is the myth of the hyacinth more ancient
than the Greeks themselves?
Another issue is what kinds of words Indo-European languages don't have in common.
Indo-European languages do not have a common word for the sea.
In the Germanic languages, sea, sigh, show.
In Latin, mare, and in the Romance languages, mere.
And in Greek, phallassa, these are unrelated words.
And so what scholars have been able to say is, look, the Indo-Europeans in their migrations
each had to discover the sea separately.
And when they did so, they came up with words for the sea, that is, a large body of water.
They came up with these words independently.
But what's interesting by contrast is that all the Indo-European languages have words
beginning with the nav or the now sound, like navigate or navy.
And this is a unit of language that connotes a sound meaning a boat or a ship.
All of the Indo-European languages have words beginning with the sound air, which in modern
English gets transformed to re in a sound change called metathesis or the switching
of sounds that I will talk about in a later lecture.
But what all of these words have in common is a set of words meaning to row.
So if all the Indo-European languages, rather, have shared words for something like a boat
and shared words for the act of rowing, all of them must have known water, lakes, rivers,
streams, small bodies of water, but all of them did not share a word for the sea.
What I'm going to look forward to in my next lecture, therefore, is a way of using both
the shared and the unshared words of the Indo-European languages to reconstruct, if you like, the
society, the culture, and, most interesting to me, the poetic imagination of the early
Indo-European peoples.
Many of our words for poetry and the imagination have their origin in Indo-European, and part
of what I'm going to be looking at, therefore, are not simply the places of life, but the
landscapes of the mind's interior, the literal and the imaginative, the lived and the dreamt,
all of whose words that I've spoken to you just now have their roots in Indo-European.
And so, specifics in the next lecture will bring us to this Indo-European world and
to the ways in which we can use the techniques of comparative philology to reconstruct the
sound, the sense, and sensibility of peoples 5,000 years past.
