Lecture 4 Reconstructing Meaning and Sound
Indo-European once again.
In this lecture I'd like to continue my inquiries into Indo-European language and culture by
bringing to bear the study of historical linguistics on the emergence of the Germanic languages
from Indo-European and also the ways in which the study of Indo-European was very much keyed
to the study of the Germanic languages.
In my previous lecture, I illustrated how the discovery of Indo-European by scholars
such as William Jones depended on the transplanting, if you like, of Englishmen to non-European
places.
Jones, as a scholar, but primarily as a colonial administrator in India, was exposed to the
languages of the Indian subcontinent.
And in the living Indian languages, as well as in the classical Indian written language
of Sanskrit, Jones found similarities of vocabulary and grammar, similarities to the European languages
he knew.
And in those similarities, he suggested that there must have been an earlier language root
from which the modern languages of India and Europe had emerged.
Scholars after Jones built on this recognition, and they developed, if you like, the edifice
of Indo-European, recognizing that the surviving languages of Iran, of Northern India, and
of Europe all shared a historical origin.
At the end of the 18th century, at the beginning of the 19th century, these scholars calibrated
their researches to the reconstruction of older forms.
And at the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century, other scholars discovered
languages hitherto lost, Hittite, the language of the ancient Anatolians or Asian Menorians,
and Takharian, an Indo-European language which was written down in Western China and
Tibet.
I read from Jones' lecture to the Asiatic Society, and I illustrated in that lecture
how Jones is deploying many of the myths of language study that I had been developing
to this point.
Use of perfection, of simplicity, of decay and of corruption, this is, if you like,
the rhetoric of the romantic ruin.
And I suggested that we see the origin of Indo-European studies in the same way as we
see the origin of archaeology or of modern classical studies, that the recovery of Indo-European
is of a historical piece with the recovery of Pompeii or the ruins of Egypt.
What I would like to do in this lecture is invite you not simply to see Indo-European
as a discipline, but actually as a practice, in other words, to do some philology.
I'd like to invite you to look closely at some of the technical devices of comparative
philology, and in the lecture after this, we're going to be looking at these devices
and these techniques to recover some of the details of the imaginative and social world
of the Indo-European peoples and those who descended from them.
Now before I begin this process in detail, there's something I need to say about the
way in which languages are classified.
The study of Indo-European can help us understand something larger about the way in which we
classify all languages.
Linguists have developed, broadly speaking, two ways of classifying language.
One of them is what's called genetic classification.
The word itself, genetic, implies a growth or a development of a root stock of the branching
into language groups or families.
Genetic classification looks for shared features of vocabulary, sound, and grammar that enable
scholars to reconstruct earlier forms.
This is a historical system, or to use a technical term from linguistics, a diachronic system
of classification.
So in genetic classification, languages are related according to where they came from.
Another way of classifying languages is what's known as typological classification.
This means comparing languages for larger systems of organization.
What does this mean?
Well, we can see this as exemplified in looking at several living languages.
For example, do the languages signal meaning in a sentence by means of inflectional endings?
This is what we call a synthetic language, like Latin, or do they signal meaning by word
order patterns?
This is what we call an analytic language, like modern English.
Diachronic is the word I used in talking about genetic classification to talk about
it as historical.
Synchronic is the word I'll use to talk about typological classification, because synchronic
means at one time.
Synchronic classification is not primarily interested in where languages came from historically.
Synchronic classification is interested in the present features of those languages.
Now, an easy example that I gave you was the difference between a language like Latin,
which operates through case endings, and a language like English, which operates through
word order patterns.
But throughout the world's languages, and here I'm talking about the non-Indo-European
languages, there are many other ways in which we may typologically classify languages, and
it's fascinating in its own right.
Some languages are what are called agglutinizing.
That is, they use individual words or word elements to put together sentences into a
single word.
Modern Turkish, for example, is the most familiar example of an agglutinizing language.
Georgian, the language of the Republic of Georgia, the former Soviet Republic, is also
an agglutinizing language.
In Georgian, if you want to say, I love you, you say it as one word, mkhar har, where the
mk signals the I, khar is the root to love, and khar means that the object of that love
is the second person familiar.
It's all one word.
They are, if you like, agglutinized together.
Other languages are what are called isolative languages.
Many of the Chinese languages are isolative languages in that each individual word or unit
of meaning in a sentence is a single syllable isolated, and that the strings of these syllables
constitute meaningful sentences.
So when we look at the surviving Indo-European languages, what we're looking at are provocations
to describe them genetically or to describe them typologically.
In other words, do we want to go back in the past to see where they came from, recreate
the tree of language, or do we want to look at them as they exist today or as they survive
in written documents by comparing their key features?
Now when we look geographically and when we look genetically, when we look typologically,
we're looking at space.
And one of the things that's characteristic about the Indo-European languages is that
they are the product of geographical migration.
One of the features of the Indo-European languages that scholars noticed very early
on is that there is a group of languages that seemed to go west, that had words for 100
that began with a k or a k sound, sometimes written as a c, and the word and the languages
that went east had a word for 100 that began with an s sound.
Now let me just pause and say that in the Germanic languages and in English, as we'll
see very shortly, this k or c or k sound became an h.
So the western languages are called the kentum languages.
Kentum is the Latin word for 100.
And so if you look at the western languages, you see kentum in Latin, cento, son, cento
in French and Spanish.
In old Irish it's tiad, in Welsh it's kant, in Greek it's a katon.
And this sound, as I said, corresponds to that h sound in the Germanic language, 100,
100, 100, and the like.
So the kentum languages are the languages that went west.
The satum languages are the languages that went east.
Zoroastrian is the old classical language that 19th century scholars associated with
western civilization.
The eastern language that they associated with that civilization was Avistan, or old
Persian, in which the sacred texts of Zoroastrianism were written, and the word for 100 in that
language is satum.
So those are called the satum languages.
And the satum languages will have a word for 100 beginning with an s.
So in modern Hindi it's sau, in Farsi it's sad, in Lithuanian it's cimtas, in Russian
it's shto, and in the other Slavic languages it's similarly shto, beginning with an s.
And so you can see here that kentum-satum distinctions indicate a historical geographical
split.
But what it also indicates is a larger sound change.
What this means is that whenever you see the ka sound in the western languages, it will
correspond to the s sound in the eastern languages.
And in my subsequent lecture I will illustrate how that sound distinction played a major
role in the recovery of Indo-European poetics.
So let's look at classifying Indo-European.
By looking at the modern languages and reconstructing the earlier forms, Indo-European emerges as
a highly complex language grammatically.
By this I mean it seems more complex than English.
It had eight noun cases.
That is subject, direct object, indirect object, possession, agency, there was a vocative case.
That is when you addressed something or someone it had its own special ending.
There was a locative case.
That is the noun took a special ending if it was in a particular place.
There was an instrumental case where if the noun was used as an instrument.
Some of you who have studied Latin may know about the ablative or that wonderful case
which seems to embrace so many of these phenomena.
The Latin ablative, just as an aside, is a descendant of these older Indo-European locative
and instrumental cases where the word takes a special ending because it's doing a special
thing.
It had six tenses each of which was signaled with special verb endings.
It had grammatical gender for its nouns but it had something special which actually does
survive into English and I need to pause a little bit to describe what this is.
When we study Indo-European we are at the mercy of the German philologists of the 19th
century who gave German names to everything.
And one of the names they gave to a phenomenon of Indo-European was ablout, change in sound.
The Indo-European languages and the posited early Indo-European original form used meaningful
changes in the root vowel to indicate changes in tense, changes in location, or changes
in aspect.
This survived into the Germanic languages to indicate a certain set of verbs.
These are called strong verbs.
They're not called strong verbs because they lift heavy weights.
They're called strong verbs because in the Germanic philologists' line they were strong
enough to survive a meaningful change in the root vowel.
Strong verbs indicate change in tense with that root vowel.
Drink, drank, drunk, sing, sang, sung, bring, brought.
These are strong verbs and what you need to know, it seems to me, is that this is the
legacy of an ancient Indo-European system of distinguishing meaning by changing the root
vowel.
By contrast, weak verbs in the Germanic languages simply take a suffix to indicate the past tense.
Walk, walked, talk, talked.
These are weak verbs.
So here we have something that's characteristic of the verbal system of the Germanic languages
and of English that goes back to a feature of the Indo-European.
Now we're going to explore the features of the Germanic languages in detail in a subsequent
lecture, but as I'm suggesting it's important to recognize that these sound changes and
patterns of meaning, if you like, these semantic changes across the Indo-European languages
will matter most for us for the Germanic languages from which English descends.
So by comparing surviving words in the Indo-European languages, we can go back to their originals
and certain relationships of sound and pronunciation have been discovered that enable us to say
with assurance what words are related in different languages.
Words that are related in different languages that go back to a common root are called
cognate words and cognate words have a relationship that can be described by precise sound laws.
By reconstructing sound, this is called phonetic reconstruction, scholars compare the sounds
of surviving languages and they use these sound laws to recover the original.
We can learn much in this process about how certain surviving words are related.
Now for our purposes, the most important tool for reconstruction is the set of sound relationships
known as Grimm's law.
It was discovered by the brothers Grimm.
As I mentioned in my previous lecture, these were the same brothers who gave us the fairy
tales in the early 19th century.
They were researching the linguistic and cultural origins of the Germanic peoples and what they
recognized was that there was a set of sounds unique to the Germanic languages that corresponded
to the sounds of the non-Germanic Indo-European languages.
So what does this mean?
What this means is that there are certain consonants in the Germanic languages that correspond
to consonants in the non-Germanic Indo-European languages and these point to cognates.
English, Fish, Latin, Pisces, English, Tooth, Latin, Dentus, English, Hundred, Latin, Kenton.
What this illustrates is that the F sound in a Germanic language corresponds to a P sound
in a non-Germanic Indo-European language.
So words like Fish, Pisces, Foot, Pedal, Father, Potter, these indicate that relationship.
Or as we see in other forms, we can see how, as I've suggested, the TH tooth is important
because it shows that the non-Germanic D, Dentus, corresponds to the Germanic T.
So we can go through all of these and we can see how, as the Grims posited, Germanic words
with a P correspond to non-Germanic Indo-European words with a B, T corresponds to a D, K to
a G. This is a set of stops, that is, consonants that stop, P, B, T, G, K, G.
There's also another correspondence, which is between the Germanic languages and the
non-Germanic languages, but which only survive in a very restricted set of languages.
And this is what's known as the aspirated stops.
So that, for example, words that have a B in them in Germanic have a BH in them in Sanskrit.
And this is posited that this aspirated BH, BHA, so that brother, for example, okay?
Brother is BH, in Sanskrit.
And so, D, daughter, Drachter, there is a posited DH sound, G, GH, F, as I've already
mentioned, P, TH, T, HK.
This is, if you like, the schema of Grims' law.
Let's look at what meaningful things we can do with these relationships.
What do you do when you get on your knee with a K?
You genuflect.
That is, the K corresponds to the G.
What do you do when you have a problem with your tooth?
You go to a dentist.
The lip, I've already mentioned, labial sounds, the P and the B.
If you have a heart attack, you go into cardiac arrest.
If you have too much gall, you are caloric.
If you use your foot, you peddle.
Now let's try and think about this also in terms of significance.
Grims' law and other sound relationships can enable us to recover the world of the Indo-Europeans.
And while this will be the subject of my next lecture, let me give you some examples now
to anticipate this and to conclude this lecture with a recent literary discovery.
Now in the Indo-European languages, all of the surviving languages have a word that corresponds
to an F word in Germanic, a P word in the non-Germanic, and this word is phi, F-E-E,
which means a certain amount of money in English.
Now in modern German, the word V, phi, spelled V-I-E-H, means cattle or cow.
This corresponds to a P word in Latin, pecus, or pecuniary, a word for money.
And so scholars say things like the following.
We have a set of words that we know are cognate.
In some languages, they mean money.
In other languages, they mean cattle.
What does this tell us about the root language from which these words descended?
It implies, scholars would say, that the early Indo-European world was a world in which wealth
was measured in terms of livestock.
That is, that the reconstruction of the sound is the reconstruction of society.
Let's look at another example.
I mentioned the way in which the H sound in the Germanic languages corresponds to the
K sound in the non-Germanic Western Indo-European languages.
And so you have hundred, and kentum, and cardiac, and heart, and horn, and cornus, cornucopia,
cornucopia, horn of plenty.
You have in Latin a word cara, which means a dear one.
And in Italian, you can talk about caro, my dear one.
Now this should correspond to a Germanic word that begins with an H.
Cara, cara, cara.
Now the Germanic word that begins with an H that is cognate with cara is the word whore.
And in Old English, the word whore means, in fact, just a dear one.
Here is an example of a word that has radically changed its semantic valence.
The one who is dear is now the one who is really dear, who is really expensive.
Now we can play games with this, but we have to take it beyond the level of the game to
move to the level of history.
When we look at historical relationships among languages, we're looking at how languages
have changed, but how they borrow other words from other languages.
And in modern English, as we'll see, English has borrowed technical terms, or has coined
technical terms, from Latin and from Greek.
So we can see in the English vocabulary something of this legacy of Grimm's law in operation.
In other words, doing comparative philology by looking not simply across languages, but
within the immense and voracious word stock of English itself.
Let me give you another wonderful example of this.
And here, Greek.
Greek has a word kleos, and it means fame, as it has been transported by sound or song,
that the hero of the Greek epic wanted kleos.
Now this should correspond to an HL sound in Germanic, and indeed, in old English, you
have a word chlysnian, or you also have a word chlud.
The vowels have changed, but the HL corresponds to the KL.
Now modern English has lost this sound cluster, all we have is an L.
So the H has been lost to us, but it was originally there in the Germanic languages.
And the word chlysnian in old English means listen, and the word chlud in old English
means loud.
So the word kleos, which means fame as presented in poetry and song for a hero, corresponds
to a Germanic set of words, which means loud and listen.
Let's do an etymology.
Who is Heracles?
He is, well we call him Hercules, but in Greek he's Heracles.
That is, he is someone whose name is made up of Hera, the goddess, and kleos, fame.
That is, someone who has fame on account of Hera.
That's what the name Heracles means.
What is the larger payoff of this?
Perhaps the greatest Indo-Europeanist of our time is Professor Calvert Watkins of Harvard
University.
And Professor Watkins is best known for the work he's done in dictionaries and in scholarship
studying the origins of Indo-European.
About 25 years ago, Professor Watkins achieved what every scholar of language would ever
want to achieve.
He showed up on the front page of the New York Times.
And what he showed up on the front page of the New York Times for was a discovery.
He claimed to have found a Trojan version of Homer's Iliad.
What does this mean?
Now look, literature and history are written by the winners.
The Greeks won the Trojan War.
They write the Trojan Epic.
They write the history.
What would be the Trojan War told from the point of view of the losers?
Professor Watkins, in a remarkably meticulous and detailed way, found in tablets inscribed
in Hittite, in the language of Anatolia, the language of the Trojans, the language related
to the Trojans, a specific dialect which he called Luvian, related to Hittite.
He found a text.
Allatita ahazitis aweta willusiati patadu tarwaya issaradu.
Now what on earth does this mean?
What did he see?
He saw aweta willusiati.
And there, in that phrase, he saw Willusium or Ilium.
And allusia, like alto, steep, steep Ilium.
That is Troy in Homer, the steep towers of Ilium, the steep towers of Troy, pata, his
feet, ped, remember, the P and the F?
He reconstructed this text and he argued that what he found on this little shard of clay
was a piece of a lost epic that had the phrase that reminded him of Homer's phrase.
This example of linguistic sleuthing from the Indo-European past gives us a little window
on to history that's been lost to us.
What are the stakes in Indo-European?
It is a fascinating discipline.
It can tell us something about our own words, but it can also give us insight into parts
of history that have been lost to us.
And in my next lecture, I'm going to look with you at some of the ways in which we can
see, technically and in detail, the Indo-European world of the imagination, of poetry, of divinity
and of belief.
