Lecture 6 The Beginnings of English
In this lecture, we leave the world of the Indo-Europeans and enter the society of the
Northern Germanic peoples. We look for the first time at something that is recognizably English,
that is, a vernacular spoken and soon written in the British Isles. This lecture will give you a
fair amount of history, as well as a fair amount of historical linguistics, for what I'd like to
show you are the ways in which the Anglo-Saxon peoples, the Germanic settlers and the British
Isles, developed the language of Old English, what we call Old English, out of the mix of Northern
Germanic dialects descended from Indo-European. But what I'd also like to show are the ways
in which we can use the resources of historical linguistics to understand something of the
culture and society of that group of people. Now, Old English means many things, and what it does mean
is a geographical, a historical, if you like, a genetic and a typological classification.
What is Old English? If I were to describe it geographically, I would say that it is the language
spoken by the Germanic settlers in the British Isles. If I would define it historically, I would
say that it is that language spoken from the time of the Germanic settlement in the middle of the
5th century until roughly the Norman conquest in 1066. If I were to define it genetically, that is,
if I were to locate Old English in the history of the Indo-European language family, I would describe
it as a Lowlands branch of the West Germanic group of languages. That means that it is a branch
of the Germanic languages that comes from a group spoken in the Low Countries, that is,
the areas now largely covered by Holland and Northern Germany and Denmark, and that it was
from that Western Lowlands group that the settlers in England developed. Typologically, we can describe
it typologically as a language with a particular sound system or phonology, with particular grammatical
endings, a morphology, with word order patterns, syntax, and with vocabulary, lexis. Now, let me
go back and take these in some order to give you a historical and geographical context for the arrival
of the Germanic speaking peoples in the British Isles and the origins of Old English. The earliest
inhabitants of the British Isles were a group of Paleolithic peoples, and such phenomena as Stonehenge
or some of the great Stone Circle monuments which still survive today are evidence of their settlement.
But we have no linguistic or literary or verbal remnants of their lives. We know very little
about what they said or what they thought. The earliest inhabitants of the British Isles,
whose language we actually can reconstruct, were the Celts. Celtic is an Indo-European language,
and the modern Celtic languages are Irish or Gaelic, Welsh, Cornish, Manx, the language of
the Isle of Man, Urse, the language of Scotland. The Celtic speakers migrated from Europe sometime
in the second half of the first millennium BC, that is, from about 500 BC on, and they brought with
them an Indo-European pantheon, they brought with them certain key vocabulary terms and language,
and they also brought with them certain techniques, notably ironworking.
Now, it was Emperor Julius Caesar who led the colonization of England through the Romans,
and he kept it as a colony for Rome throughout his life. Britain was a Roman colony well into the
middle of the 5th century AD, and Latin became the prestige language of administration, education,
and social life. Now, let me say a little bit about Roman Celtic relationships.
The Romans spoke and wrote in Latin, and when I say that Latin became the prestige language,
what I mean is that it was the language of administration, the language of government,
the language of high ritual and belief, and the language of learning. There were some Celtic
words that appear to have entered Roman Latin during the occupation. Most of these are words for
places or words for geographical phenomena. For example, the word avan is the Celtic word
for river. Now, in modern England, there are three river avans, the most famous of which
runs through Stratford, Shakespeare's birthplace. So, one could well imagine
Romans with their Celtic guides traversing the landscape of the isles and pointing at rivers,
and the Celts would say often, and of course then that became the name of the river rather than
the denotation that it was a river. The river Thames, Thamesus, or Thames if you like, is
originally a Celtic name. So, there are a few, few Celtic words and place names that came into
the world of Roman Latin. During the last decades of Roman colonial rule in the 5th century AD,
groups of Germanic-speaking tribes and raiders began to settle portions of the British isles,
and by the middle of the 5th century, these raids and settlements became more frequent. By the end
of that century, settlements began to spread from the south and southeastern coasts into the
southwest in the area now known as Wessex. These were tribes that were known as the Angles
and the Saxons and the Jutes, and by the year 547, there was a kingdom of Germanic-speaking
peoples established in the north of England, north of the Humber River. These people came from
the area and called themselves the Anglicans, the Anglians, the Angles, and so they became known
as the Anglians, and there are parts of England today, further south, where the Anglians settled,
and so we think of areas called East Anglia, and so West Saxon, East Anglia. These are
survivals of the Anglo-Saxon incursion, if you like. By the middle of the 7th century,
there were small kingdoms being established throughout England. Some of these were little
outposts, really little more than extended farmsteads and villages. Others were larger,
and very often these villages would be established on the site of older Roman fortified camps.
The word camp itself comes from the Latin word campus, meaning a fortified enclosure,
and so these early encampments were the places where the Anglo-Saxons began to settle.
As an interesting archaeological aside, one of the fascinating things that modern scholars have
discovered is that there are Anglo-Saxon halls, that is, Anglo-Saxon large houses built on the
foundations of old Roman villas, and there is a beautiful Anglo-Saxon house that I myself have
seen in southwestern England, which has a Roman mosaic floor on the bottom. And so what you
can see here are the strata of settlement, and these strata of settlement give us, if you like,
the architecture of early English society, and the architecture of what would be the English
language. In order to understand the English that emerges here, we need to look not simply
at the strata of languages, Celtic, Latin, and then the Germanic dialects that would become
English, we also need to look at the geographical diversity we need to look at dialects. English
has regional dialects almost from the very beginning that there is an English, and these dialects
are really bounded by natural and human-made structures. Rivers and roads. North of the
Humber River in England is Northumbria, and Northumbria is really the first place where you
have a center of English speaking and writing, learning, literature, and culture. In the central
part of England were the kingdoms of Mercia and of Anglia, and then in the southeast there was Kent,
and in the southwest there was Wessex. Now these areas defined by rivers are also areas
that are split by roads, and the central part of England from the Roman period to the present day
is bifurcated, if you like, by a great road. The old great Roman road ran from the settlement
of Londinium through Verilamium, modern-day St. Albans, all the way to Eboriacum, which was the
Roman word, the Latin word, Eboriacum, Pigtown, Pig City, place of the wild pigs. Eboriacum,
eventually in the local dialect, became Eboriacum, became Ahork, became a York, became York.
And so the old Roman road bifurcated England from London to York, and on the west and on the east
different dialects and different cultures evolved because they were split by this major
work of human handicraft and by its patrols, and you can still see fragments of this Roman road
today. So the old English language is a language of dialects, and this is important
because these dialect boundaries will correspond to some important historical moments
in the narrative of old English language and Anglo-Saxon history. I want to begin by talking
about Northumbria. Northumbria is the first area of, if you like, Anglo-Saxon efflorescence,
and the figure who is associated with that Anglo-Saxon flowering of learning and of culture
was the English scholar known as the venerable Bede. Bede completed his ecclesiastical history
of the English church and peoples, which he wrote in Latin, in 731.
Cadman, the first English poet, as far as we know, or certainly the putative author of the
earliest surviving English poem, Cadman was Northumbrian, and his poem survives in his Northumbrian
dialect. What was Northumbrian culture? Northumbrian culture was a culture of the book. It was a
culture of the Bible and a culture of the Gospels, and the great Bibles and Gospels of early English
life were produced there. Enormous handmade manuscripts, rich with illumination, rich with
color, written in Latin, great books the size of tables almost, and you can see them today
in the British Library and in great museums of the world, and these Northumbrian books would have,
in between the lines of Latin, old English words written in, translations, annotations,
the world of learning is going on on the pages of that book. And in this Northumbrian culture,
you have a world in which teaching is going on in Latin and in old English. So what I want to stress
is that the earliest records we have of the English language and the British Isles are in a dialect,
the dialect of Northumbria, and that many of those records are in fact not necessarily original
compositions, but they are interlinear glosses or translations of Latin texts. Now in the middle
of the country, you had Mercia, and you had the Anglians, and there were intellectual literary
and cultural activities there, a loose collection of settlements and kingdoms, but certainly the real
heart of the later Anglo-Saxon culture was not Mercia, not really Kentish, but West Saxon.
The most important dialect of old English was West Saxon, the form of the language spoken and written
in the southwestern part of the country. Now this was the dialect of King Alfred. He's known as
Alfred the Great because he united many of the smaller, warring kingdoms or principalities
in Anglo-Saxon England, and he is in many ways truly the first king of the English. He died in 899,
and in the few decades of his rule, he established several institutions that had an immense impact
on old English in particular, and the history of the English language in general. The first thing
to understand about Alfred is that he set up schools and courts of translation to teach the
classics in old English. That is, literacy was something that went on not simply in Latin,
as it did throughout medieval Europe, but it went on in the vernacular. It went on in English,
and so Alfred's English schools were teaching students in their own language, but Alfred's
English schools were teaching them to read and write in a particular dialect, and what's important
to understand here is the way in which a regional dialect variant becomes a national standard.
The impress of Alfred's West Saxon was so great that not only were Latin texts translated into
the West Saxon dialect, but works that were already in old English, in other dialects,
were translated, as it were, into that dialect. Cadman's hymn, which was originally composed
in Northumbrian, was rewritten into West Saxon, and the impact of Alfred's West Saxon was so great
that scholars of the 19th and 20th centuries, when they came to edit and publish works in
old English, invariably edited them into West Saxon forms, even if those forms were never in the
original. So what we have here is a language that can be divided historically and geographically,
and to review the Northumbrian efflorescence, that period beginning with Bede, roughly from the 7th
to the 9th centuries, which was marked by this rich religious and literary culture producing
Bibles, literary texts, and glosses in Northumbrian, that period of Alfred in the 9th and early 10th
centuries, where Wessex becomes the seat of Anglo-Saxon intellectual literary and political life,
and brings Latin learning into the ambit of the vernacular, and then really almost as a coda
during the 11th century, so-called Benedictine revival, when a new set of teachers and scholars
set up schools for educating students in English and Latin. But by the end of the 11th century,
within a generation or two of the Norman conquest, much of this literary and intellectual activity
was gone. Anglo-Saxon bishops and priests were replaced by Norman and French ones, and by the
middle of the 12th century, Old English had disappeared. Now, what is this Old English that
I'm talking about? In the remainder of this lecture, I'd like to go through and talk about the major
linguistic features of Old English, and I'd like to start with verbs. Now, in an earlier lecture,
I mentioned how Indo-European ablout, or vowel gradation, changes in the root vowel of a word,
were used to indicate changes in tense or changes in aspect in some of the Indo-European languages.
In the Germanic languages, this inherited Indo-European phenomenon, if you like, came to be used
in the development of the verbal system. And there is a group of verbs known as strong verbs
in the Germanic languages, including Old English, of course, which are strong verbs because they
change the vowel in their root. Drink, drank, drunk, run, ran, think, thought. These strong verbs came
in classes or groups, and Old English is distinctive among the Germanic languages
for the number and class organization of its strong verbs. This organization, of course,
goes back to an earlier Germanic inheritance, but when you think of verbs in modern English that
indicate change in meaning through the change in a root vowel, you are talking about Old English
verbs. Weak verbs, by contrast, were those that signaled the past tense in a D or an ED. This
is how they did it in English, in Old English. All the Germanic languages have forms of weak
verbs. The vowel doesn't change. Walk, walked, loved, loved, care, cared. As an aside, let me state
that any new verb that enters the English language will enter as a weak verb. There are no new strong
verbs coming in. Televised, televised. It is not televised, televose. Many strong verbs, in fact,
have changed into weak verbs. For example, the word meaning to grow, wax, was once a strong verb.
Now it's just weak, waxed, waxed. Some verbs still remain strong, shine, shown, but weak verbs have
developed from them to indicate different aspects or different relationships. For example, I
shined my shoes, but the sun shone. You hang a picture, the picture is hung, a man was hanged.
Whenever we want to coin a new verb in English, as I've suggested, we coin it as weak. So this
issue of strong verbs is an important one for understanding the distinctiveness of English
and of Old English in particular. When we look at things like nouns, we're looking too at grammatical
gender. Old English had noun declensions. They were in different groups or classes. And if you
wanted to signal relationships in a sentence, that is subject, direct object, indirect object,
instrument of action, you'd put endings on the words. And these were known as case endings.
And all the Indo-European languages had such case endings. And we see them in, for example,
Latin and Greek. And we see them in many modern European languages today. Masculine, feminine,
and neuter. Now this is grammatical gender. It is not natural gender. The Old English word for a woman,
weef, written W-I-F, weef. That's our modern word wife. That is a grammatically neuter noun.
It is not a grammatically feminine noun. All concept nouns in Old English, for example,
are feminine nouns. So any noun ending with the suffix ness, like witherwerdnessa,
which is a beautiful Old English word which means stress or exhaustion or irritation,
witherwerdnessa is a feminine noun. Now Old English formed its plurals,
as we in modern English do, by adding an s. But Old English, like many of the Germanic languages,
had another way of forming plurals. And these are called mutated plurals. And I want to spend
a little bit of time explaining how these work. Man, man, goose, geese, foot, feet. The reason why
this group of nouns forms their plurals in this way is that in the early Germanic period,
while the Germanic-speaking peoples were still on the continent, before the Angles and the Saxons
and the Jutes made it to the British Isles, there was a set of sound changes. That is,
that a certain suffix that had an i or a j on it would influence the vowel that preceded it.
Dome means doom. If you wanted to make it into a verb, meaning to judge, you would say domion.
But over time that i, domion, that influenced the o and changed it to demion. Doom, deem.
One foot, two fotis. Over time it became one foot, two feet. Now this is an interesting change.
It is a complicated change and it is the kind of change that affects many, many parts of Old
English. The thing that I want to stress here is this. Why is this something that you can use
in your study of the language? You can use it to do two things. You can use it to see
how English has a distinctive plural system, but you can also use it to see how words entered
into the language. During the period of the continental residence of the Germanic peoples,
that is, during the period before the Germanic tribes had broken up, they came in contact with
the Romans and they borrowed many words from Roman Latin. Words that came in that early
would then change as the Germanic languages split up and words that came in that early
into English would change according to this sound change. So let me give you a couple of examples
and then let me turn to some other aspects of the Old English vocabulary.
Money. Latin had a word, monita. Where did you make money? You made money in a
monetarium. That's the late Latin word for a place where you make money, a place where you make coins.
Now, monitarium, you can see, domedomion became deem. Fotis became feet.
Money, monitarium, that changed the O to become mint. And so a mint is a place
where you make money. Let me give you two more examples. Where does a monk live? A monk lives
in a monasterium and in Old English that eventually became a minster. In Latin, you had a word that
meant one-twelfth of something, unisius. Unisius, the E, the I pronounced E, unisius affected
the U and changed its pronunciation in Old English so that the word for one-twelfth was not unisius,
but it was inch. These are ways of understanding how certain words came into the Germanic languages
and changed in Old English. The Old English vocabulary is immensely rich, but it's not
really rich in these kinds of loan words. It's rich in compounds. It's rich in new words that they
put together from other words. Old English made words by combining other words by adding prefixes
and by bringing together nouns and suffixes. They created a rich vocabulary that transformed
the Latin religious language of the church or the Latin administrative language of the Romans
into their own form. So when we look at the Old English vocabulary, we're looking at attention,
if you like, between words that are borrowed and words that are coined, between words that come
from outside and words that are used to express foreign concepts in native ways. In my next lecture,
I'm going to give you an extended example of perhaps the most sublime case of such word
formation, Cadman's hymn, the earliest surviving poem in any form of English, where we see the poet
using the resources of his language to come up with native English words for new Latin Christian
concepts. If you like, we can see Cadman in the monastery or the minster making new words,
coining a culture in the verbal mint of his imagination.
