Lecture 8 Did the Normans Really Conquer English?
1066.
Like all great dates, it's shrouded in mystery and mythology.
What did the Norman conquest do to English?
Did the Normans really conquer the English language?
How can we see the effects of this political upheaval on the history of English and in our
own study of the language today?
In this lecture, I'd like to review some of the major impacts that the Norman conquest
had on the English language, but I'd also like to review some myths.
I'd like to disabuse us of the notion that on some blustery day in the fall of 1066,
the English language and English culture irrevocably changed.
That one day, Anglo-Saxons were a group of pike-toting, mead-swelling barbarians who
overnight were transformed into a group of fox eating champignon in a beurre blanc sauce.
Nothing like that happened.
The English language was changing long before the Norman conquest happened, and it continued
to change throughout the British Isles in spite of whatever influence the French-speaking
Normans might have had.
So let's begin by looking at some of the, if you like, natural changes in Old English.
Things that we can chart and mark to see how Old English was already changing from its
earliest times.
Now one of the things about studying language change in this way is that very often we have
the problem of evidence.
In an earlier lecture, I mentioned that the kind of evidence you want to have, the kind
of written evidence you want to have for studying language change at this fine-grained level,
is you want writing that reflects not the conventions of spelling, not learned forms,
but the writing of people who are literate enough to know how to write, but whose writing
may reflect pronunciation or certain changes as they're going on.
Not necessarily transcriptions of pronunciation, but the recognition that what they're writing
down is something akin to or evocative of their speech.
And in several documents, written texts from the 10th and the 11th centuries, we can see
certain things already happening in Old English.
First of all, we can see that the complex system of noun case endings is gradually being lost.
Old English, as I had mentioned, had an inflectional system in which you used special endings on
nouns to determine whether a noun was the subject of a sentence, the direct object,
the indirect object, the object of possession, or the instrument of an action.
And these were highly specialized and distinctive endings, and they can be codified.
If you study Old English today, you'll memorize them as grammatical paradigms.
But in many late Old English texts, the scribes writing them seem almost indifferent to these
endings.
Is this a case of the endings being lost in everyday speech?
Is this a case of endings, as it were, falling into one another?
The technical term for this is syncretism, that is, where different endings are falling
together into a smaller and smaller group of endings, where you have a limited collection
of sounds that represent a gradually larger and larger set of grammatical categories.
Late endings were being lost.
In Old English, you had to have your adjective agree in number, in case, and in gender with
the noun it modified.
Late Old English texts show us scribes increasingly sloppy, if you like, or indifferent to it,
or perhaps reflecting the fact that in everyday speech, some of these things were changing.
Verb endings were maintained, but they were simplified.
Some of the fascinating features of Old English that were being lost, and I say fascinating,
I mean fascinating to me as a philologist, is the dual pronoun.
Let me say something about the dual.
Indo-European, and some early Indo-European languages, had a pronoun in addition to the
singular and the plural.
I and we.
Now in Old English, you had another pronoun, a third pronoun, the dual, which is the two
of us, unk, or unker.
Old Norse has it, many of the Old Germanic languages have it, and some other Indo-European
languages have it.
This is something that could be used specifically in discourse to refer to a conversation with
two people.
The two of us are going.
You wouldn't say we, you'd say unk.
And so what happened was that this distinctive feature, which was not in the Romance languages,
this was being lost.
Nobody's quite sure why, but it gradually disappears.
Nouns were no longer masculine, feminine, or neuter.
How do we know this?
We know this because when you read sentences in late Old English, you will occasionally
find certain nouns like, for example, a noun like weep, which I mentioned in a previous
lecture.
Now, even though the noun weep refers to a female being, it is grammatically a neuter
noun.
And in a sentence, if you wanted to use a pronoun to refer back to the weep you were
talking about, you would use the pronoun hit, which is the Old English neuter pronoun, what
we would say it.
So you wouldn't say the wife blah, blah, blah, she was doing this.
You would say the wife, it was doing this.
Another time, the wife gradually gets to be referred to as a she rather than an it.
This is an issue not of culture, it is an issue of grammar.
And gradually, natural gender replaces grammatical gender in the system of nouns and pronouns.
Why did these things happen?
Some theories have been proposed and they hinge on three problems, stress, form, and
function.
Let's look at stress.
Old English, like all of the Germanic languages, had fixed stress on the root syllable of the
word.
That is, that regardless of what prefixes or suffixes you added to your word, the stress
remained on the root syllable, come, become, timber, be timber, be timber is the Old English
verb meaning to build.
And so, swerien, answerien, answer.
So what you have in Old English as in the Germanic languages is an insistent stress on the root
syllable.
Now this is not true of the Romance languages, where you have variable stress on words.
But it is true of the Germanic and the belief among some scholars has been that this insistent
stress tended to level out the sounds of unstressed syllables.
That means that any sound or any syllable that did not take a full word stress, such
as a grammatical ending, would not have been pronounced clearly.
So for example, if you were saying manum for an inflected form of the noun man, it might
be manum, manum, and it might be swallowed, garbled, or it might gradually in everyday
speech so dissipate into the distance of the sound that you are no longer able to distinguish
it.
That is one theory.
Another is form and function.
As final endings became harder to distinguish, new ways of establishing meaning were necessary.
What does this mean?
Old English had a fully developed set of prepositions of with, before, on, to.
They were used to signal relationships, among words in sentences, in various kinds of phrases.
But you still had case endings that could do that.
And so, for example, a noun in the date of case did not need a preposition.
Let me give you an example from poetry.
That's a line from Beowulf.
Him, him, the eldest unlocked his word horde.
What's lovely about that sentence, too, is the way in which it gives us another old English
tenning.
The word horde is the mind, and to unlock your word horde is to speak.
There is no preposition in that line.
But him is in the date of case, and so what you must translate as to him, the oldest unlocked
his word, the oldest one spoke to him.
You can do that in old English.
You really can't do that in modern English because you need a preposition.
What's happening in middle English, what's happening in late old English and middle English,
is that as these grammatical categories are losing their distinctions, prepositions are,
as it were, taking over.
And so what you have here is a relationship of form and function.
A corollary of that is that patterns of word order become regularized.
In other words, in old English of the classic period, as in say, Latin, your relationships
among nouns was determined by the cases and the case endings.
And word order, while not irrelevant, was not the primary determiner of that meaning.
What happens in late old English and early middle English is that word order becomes
the way of expressing grammatical relationships in a sentence.
And standard forms of word order, like subject, verb, object, I gave the ball to the boy.
These become the standard patterns.
And so syntax, if you like, takes over as a way of determining meaning.
And English moves from a highly inflected to a relatively uninflected language.
What is the evidence for this kind of change?
Now as I mentioned at the beginning of this lecture, what you want in written evidence
is a level of literacy good enough to record sounds and forms, but not so highly developed
that you're getting conventions of writing apart from speech.
But what you also want, and this is what I'm going to add to that, is you want datable
and localizable writing.
You want to know where a text was written, and you want to know when it was written.
Ideally, you want to know something about who wrote it.
This kind of information will help you localize and determine linguistic change through written
evidence.
Now during the Anglo-Saxon period, scholars, monks, teachers, scribes, they kept annals
year by year histories in prose.
And the so-called Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, which exists in several versions, is one of the
great examples, in fact one of the great European examples across the board, of history writing
in the vernacular.
And this Anglo-Saxon Chronicle was maintained at several different locations.
That is, there were several different monasteries where the monks were doing this.
In Peterborough, in East Anglia, now about an hour's drive from modern-day Cambridge,
in Peterborough, the monks kept a prose history of England up until the year 1154.
That is, almost a century after the Norman Conquest.
You had people writing old English prose.
It changes.
It's impacted.
It's impacted in two ways.
It's impacted in the wrong way to use impacted.
It's impacted by the Norman Conquest.
It's impacted.
It's impacted with language, with words.
It is a dense, cluttered, clustered document.
That is, it's a document that records language change in ways that are at times subtle and
significant.
I want to turn to the Peterborough Chronicle because I want to use it as a piece of evidence
for the details of language change.
Because Peterborough was somewhat geographically removed from the initial impact of the Norman
Conquest, its records illustrated few effects of Norman French.
Now it's organized where each entry is the set of events in a year.
It begins 8.52 in this year, 10.37 in this year, the following happened.
The thing I want to stress is that the Chronicle was not necessarily kept year by year, but
it was, as it were, rewritten year by year.
In other words, the evidence that we have is that in given spaces of time, every 20
years, sometimes every 10, maybe every 5, sometimes every 1, a scribe would sit down
and he would copy out what happened in a given set of years.
So the entries for 11.20 may have been written in 11.20 or they may have been written in
11.22.
The entries in 11.30 may have been written in 11.54.
So we're not talking about somebody year by year writing, but what we are talking
about is a work of history that is arranged year by year, where the changes in language
mark, as it were, in blocks, in gross form, the ways in which the English language was
changing during the transitional period right after the Norman Conquest.
Let me give you an example.
The entry for 10.83 begins on this om yéra, om and e signal a dative masculine singular.
So this is perfect classic old English.
In the year 11.17 the entry begins on this om yéra.
Here you don't have the U.M. ending for this in this year, you have an O.N. ending.
What does that mean?
Does it mean that the ending has actually changed or does it mean that the scribe is
saying om this yéra, where you have an indiscriminate vowel and an indiscriminate M or an N, phoneticians
call that a nasal.
Now maybe this is the scribe's attempt to preserve a grammatical ending, maybe it's
the scribe's attempt to preserve the sound of speech, whatever it is, it's not correct.
In 11.35 the entry begins on this yéra.
You have a total loss of the adjective ending, it's just this, it's not this om, it's
not this on.
But you do have the E at the end of yéra, year, and it still signals a dative.
Concord and grammatical gender is gone by this time, what does that mean?
It means they just don't care about the grammatical gender of the noun.
11.54 the last entry on this year.
Endings have completely dropped away, we are no longer in the world of inflected old English.
This is a fascinating example, it is a simple example, but to me it is a remarkably illustrative
example of how we can trace grammatical change in texts.
What are some other changes and how can we trace them?
There are word order patterns that are being regularized.
We can see in a text like the Peterborough Chronicle, the order of subject, verb, object
becoming the standard for the simple declarative sentence.
Now other word order patterns came to be used for special kinds of expression.
For example, if you wanted to ask a question or stress a point, you would invert the order,
verb, subject, object, so I know the way.
Question, no I the way, we would say do I know the way?
You know the way, statement.
Know you the way, question.
This in modern English is an archaeism and in Shakespeare and in the King James Bible,
the end of the 16th and the beginning of the 17th centuries, you can still see this as
a feature of word order.
Other archaeisms are there, for example, one of the characteristic features of late
Old English and early Middle English as in the Germanic languages is the use of this
indirect kind of relationship where you're talking about a state of mind.
What do I mean by this?
In Old English and in Middle English you wouldn't say I think, you would say me thinks.
Now that's not me thinks, that's not stupid, that's not ungrammatical.
What it is is that the word think here does not mean the operation of active thought, it
means seeming.
Me thinks really is it seems to me.
This is an unstated subject where the object here is the first person.
So when you see things like me thinks, translate it as it seems to me.
This shows up again as late as Shakespeare and the King James Bible and it's the kind
of grammatical inheritance from this period of transition in the English language.
The sound of the language was changing.
French and Norman impact was changing forms of pronunciation, but in certain areas of
the British Isles relatively untouched by the Norman conquest we can still see certain
kinds of changes.
Let me give you some examples.
Old English had a set of characteristic consonant clusters that gave it its distinctive sound.
These include the HL cluster, which is the word laugh.
The HR cluster, ring, which is the word ring.
And the HN cluster, which is the word nay, which a horse does.
These were leveled out to L to R and to N. These consonant clusters were being reduced.
FN clusters were the clusters used to signal if you like nasal explosions, Fnastian and
Fnartnian.
These are the words sneeze and snort, where the FN is gradually changed to an SN.
Another distinctive cluster is the aspirated glide hwatt, written H-W-A-E-T, hwatt is what.
That's the opening word of Beowulf, hwatt, what, listen, it's an exclamation.
This becomes simply a W, hwatt, what, that initial aspiration is lost.
Other sounds are changing.
There is a compression of syllables.
Chloth wayard, the guardian or warden of the loaf.
Chloth, chloth, lof, loaf, cloth, old English loaf, wared, we saw that word in Cadman's
hymn, the warden or the guardian of the loaf.
Who is the guardian of the loaf?
The chloth wayard, the chloth ward, the lovard, the lord.
This is the etymology of the word lord.
Lord is the guardian of the loaf, the meter out of bread in a serial society.
So you can see how this compression is happening over time.
Now another set of changes that's important to recognize is one called metathesis.
Metathesis is the inversion of sounds in order.
Now some people who speak regional dialects, or what we think of as regional dialects in
America, will metathesize.
They may say acts for ask.
When my son was five, he said pisgeti instead of spagetti.
Now metathesis is something that can happen in everyday speech, but metathesis is something
that can also happen at a particular moment in time.
In other words, certain words in Old English were permanently metathesized.
That is, they changed their sound and pronunciation permanently by switching around certain sounds.
Old English bread became early Middle English bird.
Old English oxion became early Middle English ask.
Forch became through, beort became bright.
Metathesis is an important sound change at this time.
I'd mentioned strong verbs, and some of them, like need and help and wax, were changing
to weak verbs.
The system of making meaning was changing at the same time.
So what we have here is a way of looking at Old English, changing on its own, but also
changing in response to certain aspects of the French language as the Normans came in.
Now to this point, I've talked about prose, and I've talked about certain words in isolation.
What I would like to do at the close of this lecture is talk about poetry.
Old English poetry, you will recall from my lecture on Cadman's hymn, was alliterative
in structure.
That is, the Old English poetic line was determined by how many strong stresses there
were in it, and making those stresses alliterate.
It didn't matter how many syllables there were in total in the line, and nor was rhyme
the constitutive principle of organization.
There are some Old English poems in which rhyme is used, but that's just an ornament
or a trick or a tour de force.
On the continent, in France, poetry was working differently.
The organization of the poetic line was determined by the absolute number of syllables in the
line.
If you had eight syllables, it was an octosyllabic line.
And if it was eight syllables, and they were iambic, you would have iambic tetrameter for
beats or stresses or feet, iambic pentameter.
So the decosyllabic line would be pentameter, the octosyllabic line tetrameter.
That's what we think of when we think of poetry.
That is, we think of poetry as regularly metered language with a number of syllables in the
line matters, and where it rhymes.
Yes, there's free verse in the modern world, but in the classic period, and certainly when
we think of, give me a poem, we think of a set number of syllables in a line and rhyme.
This is an importation into England, among the things the French brought were not simply
as we will see in my subsequent lecture.
Not simply words for court and culture and cuisine.
Not simply francophone forms of identity, but they brought a new way of doing poetry.
And as a bridge to my next lecture, I want to end with the opening of one of the most
beautiful poems in early Middle English.
It's called The Owl and the Nightingale, and it's a debate poem in which the narrator
imagines that he is wandered into a beautiful forest, and he hears an owl and a nightingale
speaking and debating their various virtues and vices.
It's a fantasy poem, and there were many of them like this in the Middle Ages.
What's distinctive about The Owl and the Nightingale is the way it begins.
This is a poem that was composed probably about the year 1200.
It survives in two handwritten manuscripts from the mid-13th century.
This may well be the earliest English poem in sustained octosyllabic rhymed couplets.
There are the opening four lines.
Ich was in ohne somre dale, in ohne soothe, dirle, hale,
ich herde ich, holde, greta, tala, an owl, an ohne nischting gala.
Ich was in a somre dale, in one hidden pretty dark nook, where I heard there being held
a great tale or discussion between an owl and a nightingale.
This is French poetry, but it's written in English.
Every single word in these first four lines is an old English word, and yet these old
English words have now been funneled, as it were, into this francophone container, a poem
of rhyme and a poem of octosyllabics.
This poem and these lines, more than any other philology, to me, emblematizes the changes
in the English language, where you still have an old English vocabulary, but now it is pressed
into the service of a continental poetic structure.
And what we'll see in my subsequent lectures is how that poetic structure informs an architectural
and idiomatic, a cultural and a political structure as well.
And we must ask ourselves, where are the old English words in the mouths of the new Normans,
and how does French and a French vocabulary inform the speech and sensibility of the people
who had been conquered?
