Lecture 9 What Did the Normans Do to English?
The Normans may have conquered England, but did they conquer the English language?
In my previous lecture, I called attention to some of the ways in which Old English,
the language of the Anglo-Saxons, was changing almost irrespective of the impact of Norman
French.
We saw how the inflectional system of the language was changing.
That is, grammatical gender in nouns was beginning to disappear.
The case endings that signalled the relationships among nouns in a sentence also was beginning
to disappear.
That set of case endings leveling out and potentially becoming gone.
In the scribal forms of the Peterborough Chronicle, that great Anglo-Saxon Chronicle kept by the
monks at Peterborough until the year 1154.
We saw the written evidence for language change.
The Normans did bring new words, new concepts, and new social and institutional structures
into the British Isles.
And in this lecture, I'd like to detail some of the ways in which their conquest, political
and social, had an impact on language.
But I also want to talk about how it had an impact on literature.
What is the imaginative space, if you like, for the Norman Conquest, and how can we trace
it in literature and culture?
In looking at the Norman Conquest, we need to think about several things before we go
into detail.
And one of the things we need to think about is why new words enter a language.
What happens when two languages come into contact?
Now words tend to be borrowed mainly for two reasons.
One reason is if the donor language, in this case Norman French, is of greater prestige
in the field of borrowed words.
Now the Normans took over the institutions of the church, of government, of high culture
and cuisine, of education.
And so it's fair to say that the prestige language of post-conquest England was largely
a French one.
Now we can talk about a set of words coming in, but we also need to see the way in which
these words change radically, the structure of thought and the habits of experience.
And so the second way in which words enter is if there is a vacant slot for the word
in a receiving language.
In other words, in this case, Old English, if there's no native word for a concept,
and the new language community brings that thing or concept in.
Now let me pause for a minute and remind you of some of the key features of the Old English
vocabulary and of the Germanic vocabulary in general.
The Germanic languages, both ancient and modern, seemed to resist bringing in loan words.
That is, rather than using words from other languages for new concepts or imported ideas,
speakers of the Germanic languages tended to coin new words based on the word root stock,
if you like, of their own language.
We can see this in modern German, for example, where the word television is fernseer, the
far seer.
It's simply a translation, bit by bit, into German of television.
Telephone was fernsprecher, the far speaker.
Now this is but a small example of a larger habit of linguistic experience for the Germanic
peoples.
And so what we saw in Old English was the way in which even though certain words were
coming in from learned in ecclesiastical Latin, the tendency was still to coin new terms.
The point I want to stress is this, that what the Norman conquest did in altering the vocabulary
structure of English was not simply increase the raw vocabulary, the raw number of words.
It changed conceptually or systematically the vernacular and the British Isles.
It changed it from one that resisted the acceptance of loan words to one that accepted almost
voraciously new loan words.
This is an important systematic change in English.
Another important systematic change in addition to the raw number of words coming in was the
way in which this new vocabulary affected word stress.
Now when new words enter a language they can be subject to variable word stress.
You'll remember from my previous lectures how I stress that in the Germanic languages
and in Old English in particular word stress was fixed and pretty much invariable on the
root syllable of a word.
Regardless of the prefixes and suffixes that you added to that word, regardless of
the compounding, regardless of the grammatical form of the word, the stress on the word was
always on the root syllable.
Now this is not true for the Romance languages, it's not true for French and it certainly
wasn't true for Norman French.
So one of the things that happens as the Norman French and if you like Latinate vocabulary
increases in the English vernacular is that the English language begins to accept the idea
of variable word stress.
Let me give you a couple of examples from modern English to illustrate the point.
In modern English we have a word record where the stress is on the second syllable.
That is a verb to record something.
But when we put the stress on the first syllable and we say record what we have is a noun.
So here you have the same word where different stress patterns on different syllables can
change the meaning and the grammatical function of that word.
We can do the same thing with words and suffixes.
For example the word cannon, C-A-N-O-N, where the stress is on the first syllable, cannon.
That word means an accepted set of texts, values or individuals.
We talk about the cannon of literature.
We talk about the cannon of the saints.
But the act of making cannons is canonization.
You can see here that when we add the suffix we move the word stress away from the root
syllable to the stress on the suffix, cannon, canonization.
And so this change in stress, in addition to the raw increase in vocabulary, is something
of immense importance in changing the texture of spoken English after the Norman conquest.
Now another important change after the conquest was a change in poetry.
Let me remind you about Old English poetry.
Old English poetry was a literative in structure.
That is, as you'll remember from Cadman's hymn, the principle of organization was the
repetition of an initial consonant or vowel in a word.
And what mattered was not the quantitative number of syllables, but the qualitative aspect
of stress.
In other words, the number of strong stresses in a line.
Rhyme was not the organizing, constitutive principle of poetry.
Now in my last lecture, I concluded with the poem known as the owl and the nightingale.
This is a poem that was probably composed about the year 1200, and it is, as far as
we can tell, the first sustained poem in English written in octosyllabic rhymed couplets.
That is, rhymed couplets, rhymed verse, where each line has eight syllables and four stresses.
Now I want to read that selection again and go back to it to recall some of the things
I've said and look forward to some more important issues.
Here are the first four lines of the owl and the nightingale.
It was in our summer dala, in our soothe, dearla, hala, a herditch holde, grete, tala,
an ule, an onichting gala.
I was in a summer valley, in a secret hidden nook, and I heard a great tale or debate held
between an owl and a nightingale.
As I stressed in my last lecture, even though the poetic structure is French or continental,
rhymed verse, octosyllabic lines, iambic rhythm, every word in those four lines is an old English
word.
But now let's go to the fifth line.
What does the poet say?
That plate was stiff and stark and strong.
The debate between them was stiff and stark and strong.
Now what's fascinating here about this line is that the word used to describe the actual
debate between the owl and the nightingale is the word plate.
And that word plate, which is at the heart of our word complaint as well, this is a word
from Norman French.
It means discussion or argument.
It is a technical term from French rhetoric, from the schoolroom, and from government debate.
So this is a very important moment, that at the point where the poet is going to define
what's going on between the owl and the nightingale, he shifts into French.
And yet, after that, the line is stiff and stark and strong.
Now that is an alliterative phrase, because stiff and stark and strong all begin with
ST.
It is as if, in these lines of the owl and the nightingale, you can hear Old English
alliterative poetry struggling to release itself from the newly imported and constraining
French octosyllabic line, as if Old English has been shoehorned into Norman French.
This line crystallizes what I'm talking about.
That is, the way in which languages in contact change not simply by adding words, but by
changing texture, stress, and literary structure.
Let's now turn to some of the words themselves.
What are the words that the Normans brought into English?
Now the borrowings from French come from two different areas.
There are really two periods of borrowing, and one is with the Normans and the other
is with the later Parisian or central French loans.
Norman French loans are in the 11th and 12th century.
They come with the original group of the conquerors, their families, and their lineal descendants.
And these are religious terms, words like prophet, saint, Baptist, miracle, paradise,
and sacrament.
Other words of social and political control, prince, dame, master, court, rent, poor, rich,
prison, crown, purple, prove.
They're terms of architecture, and in particular there's a very important word, and that is
castle.
Now I want to say something about the architecture of England.
The Anglo-Saxons did not build monumentally in dressed stone.
What I mean by that is that when the Anglo-Saxons built big buildings, they did not quarry stone
and cut or dress it into cubes or rectangles and mortar them together.
The Anglo-Saxons built big buildings either in wood, and you'll remember from a previous
lecture that the verb to build in Old English is bay timbrian to be timber.
They either built in wood or they built in flint cobble, that is they built in flint
rocks that they would quarry and then stick together with mortar.
And many of these buildings still survive in England today.
The Normans, however, built in dressed stone, and the first thing they built when they arrived
in England were castles.
The word castle comes from the Latin, and it means an enclosed or fortified encampment.
Now in the Peterborough Chronicle we have not only evidence for grammatical change, but
we have evidence for social change as well.
I talked about how the Peterborough Chronicle is organized year by year, and in the first
line of the poem in the Peterborough Chronicle written on the death of William the Conqueror,
William died in 1086, we have the line, castles, hailet, wirtchen, and it's followed with
the line, and armamen, sweet the swenchen.
He had castles built and he subjugated strong men.
Now the fact that this poem begins with the word castle is immensely significant, because
it signals linguistically the imposition of a new structure on the English landscape.
Castles, hailet, wirtchen.
What's the first thing you want to know about William the Conqueror after he's dead?
What did he do?
We think of him as controlling England, as setting up the doomsday book, as organizing
the world in new ways.
But what the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle wants his readers to know is that he built castles,
and that these castles come with a new word.
So what we have here is the importation of a word, but what we also have is the importation
of a structure.
I want to read that line again in its context, castles, hailet, wirtchen, and armamen, sweet
the swenchen.
Let me keep reading in this little poem from 1086.
The king was swa switha stark, and benamav is underfeared in many mark, goldus, and mohundrapungra
solfris.
He had castles built and poor men terribly oppressed.
The king was very severe, and he took from his underlings many marks of gold and hundreds
of pounds of silver.
Now what we can see in this passage is a not very good attempt at rhymed couplets.
The owl in the nightingale is an exquisitely controlled rhymed poem.
But I hope you heard in this little poem on the death of William the Conqueror how awkward
the rhymes are.
What I would like to suggest to you is that here an Anglo-Saxon writer is trying to evoke
not just the architectural, but if you like the prosodic change, there is a politics to
metrical choice in the English language.
And here the imposition of a French world is an imposition of castles and an imposition
of rhymed couplets.
Now after the Norman conquest there was a different wave of French coming in.
And in dynastic change and in the struggles to control the English kingship and the crown
more broadly, a new wave of French speakers came in.
And this is what we call central or Parisian French.
Now let me pause for a minute.
The Normans are called Normans because they were originally Northmen.
They thought of themselves, if you like, in terms of heritage as really closer to the
Germanic peoples than to the French people.
And in fact the Normans really were in some deep sense related to the Anglo-Saxons and
to the Scandinavians.
So the issue is that the pronunciation of Norman French has sounds in it that are more
like the Germanic languages, whereas the pronunciation of central French has sounds
in it which are far more like the Romance languages.
So let me give you some examples of differences between Norman French and later central French
that still survive in English.
Even French words that began with a K sound, which were very often written as a C, correspond
to central French words that begin with a SH sound written as a CH.
So if the Normans built a castle, the Parisian French built a chateau.
If the Normans had cattle, the Parisian or central French had chattels.
If the Norman Frenchmen wore a cap, the central Frenchmen wore a chapeau.
Now there are many, many more examples of these kinds of words, and I find it fascinating
that if you like there are these strata of borrowings.
So here we have another instance of regional dialect variation affecting the vocabulary
stock of English.
There were other important sound differences, and one of the most striking is the following.
In Norman French, words that began with an initial W, what phoneticians would call a
glide, W, begin with a G sound, a stop written GU in central or Parisian French.
So for example, the word warden is a Norman French word, but the word guardian is a central
French word.
To ward is a Norman French word.
To guard is a central French word.
If you were a Norman, you were wily.
You had wiles.
If you were a central Frenchman, you had guile.
If you were a Norman, you waged war.
If you were a central Frenchman, you had a nom de guerre.
And because William is a Norman, he is William.
He is not Guillaume.
So what we see here are the strata of French and the changes over time.
Now how can we spot the loan word?
In modern English, we have many examples of spelling that indicate to us words of French
origin.
And I would like to work through them so you can see how it works.
Any word that's spelled with an EI or an EY or an OR or an OY comes from French.
Benign, color, all of these, cloy, joy.
These are words of French origin.
Endings in ION or ION, extension, retention.
These are the French forms of the older Latin endings.
Any noun that ends in ment, like let me think of a particular good one, emolument, that's
a lovely polysyllabic French word, or condiment.
Any word ending in ment is going to come ultimately from a French origin.
Any ending in ANCE or ANCE, existence, these ENCE endings, these are also endings that
come ultimately from French.
Endings in OR or OUR are very interesting, color, honor.
In a later lecture I'm going to explain why Americans write C-O-L-O-R and the British
write C-O-L-O-U-R, or we write H-O-N-O-R and the British write H-O-N-O-U-R.
This is a different issue than what I'm talking about right now.
What I'm talking about right now is the way in which certain words entered from Norman
and central French spelled OR or OUR.
This is very interesting.
In central French words that end in O-U-S are adjectives and words that end in U-S are
nouns.
Now, what does this mean?
This is going to teach you how to spell.
If you say callus, you can mean two things.
You can mean that someone is a callus jerk.
That is, callus is an adjective and it's spelled C-A-L-L-O-U-S.
But if you want to say that you have a callus on your foot, you spell it C-A-L-L-U-S.
This spelling convention still works in modern English.
So what we can see in the legacy of Norman French and central French are habits of spelling
and forms of words that still operate today.
There are other strata as well.
Food.
The Normans brought with them the conventions of French cuisine.
Indeed, our very word cuisine is a French word.
And what writers have noticed for centuries, Sir Walter Scott is probably the best known
who noticed in his novel Ivanhoe that the words for the animals are Old English and
the words for the meats are French.
Why?
The old Anglo-Saxon peasant.
Let's imagine, let's fantasize for a minute.
There, struggling away on the land, is raising a coup, a cow.
And when that coup is killed and the coup's meat shows up on the Norman Frenchman's table,
it becomes biff, beef.
He raises a calf and it becomes voe or veal.
He goes out and slays a deer.
The Old English word deer or deor really just means a wild animal and it eventually comes
to mean our modern deer.
And when it gets to the Frenchman's table, it becomes venison.
You may herd a sheep in Anglo-Saxon, but when you got to the French table, you ate mutton
or mutton.
And so it's these kinds of pairings that show us how French is the language of high culture.
English remains the language of the landscape.
These are the kinds of distinctions that I'm talking about when we try to understand relationships
between Old English and French in modern English.
But there is a larger point that I want to make and I want to conclude this lecture with
this point as a way of segueing into my next lecture on Chaucer's English.
Here's my point.
Old England is a trilingual culture.
That is, Latin had become the language of the church, of education, and philosophy.
French was the language of administration, of culture, and courtiership.
And English is the language of popular expression, of regional dialect, and personal reflection.
Now this is not to say that every educated individual in the British Isles was a fluent
speaker of English, French, and Latin, but it is to say that in the aggregate, the British
Isles from roughly the year 1200 or so, until roughly the year 1400 or so, that for all
intents and purposes, this is, in the aggregate, a trilingual world.
I want to conclude with a couple of examples of that trilingualism as a way of calling
attention to the ways in which the vernacular in medieval Britain is a complex and complicated
problem.
And I want to conclude with a little poem.
There are manuscripts of medieval poems that survive throughout medieval England, and one
of the most beautiful and exquisite and one of the most characteristic collections of
lyric literature in medieval England is a collection known as the Harley Lyrics, named
after the 18th century owner who bequeathed the manuscript to the British Library.
And if you go visit the British Library, you can still see that manuscript today.
It's Harley Manuscript 2253, if you want to call it up and look at it.
And there are many poems throughout this manuscript.
Poems in English, poems in French, and poems in Latin.
It's a manuscript that was probably written in the 1330s.
And it is clear, probably in Hertfordshire, and it is clear that whoever wrote and read
the manuscript was in a broad sense, trilingual.
And at the end of one of the poems, there's this beautiful quatrain which I'm going to
read to you.
Cripsy Heccarmona in Tabulus.
Monotel est mon vie la vie de Paris, mais ici je n'ai pas mort, so well, mais ici,
il y a fait d'ailleurs pour le love of her, d'où elle, it is.
These four lines translate as, I have written these verses on my tablet, that is, my little
notebook.
My dwelling is in the middle of the city of Paris.
Let me say no more, so things are fine.
But if I die for love of her, it would be a pity.
Four lines, the first line is in Latin, the second line is in French, and the third and
the fourth lines are in Middle English.
What this poem shows us is the brilliance of medieval trilingual culture.
That is, the stratification of languages.
When you sit in the school, when you write on your tablets, you write and listen in the
language of learning, Latin.
Where did the medieval English schoolboys go?
This is a time when the universities in England are just beginning, and clearly anyone with
any intellectual aspiration would have gone to the heart of university life in Europe,
and that was Paris.
And so when you left the schoolroom and when you went home to your digs, if you like, you
would go home to the middle of the city of Paris.
But here, when you want to express, if you are an English student, and many scholars
believe this is a poem by an English student in Paris, if you are an English student, and
you want to express the self, you want to express love, you want to express desire, you want
to express the way in which you feel, you speak in your own Middle English.
May I say no more.
Latin, French, and English.
In this lecture and in the previous one, I've tried to suggest the way in which the Norman
conquest and the importation of the French language in its various forms had an impact
on the structure of English, on its sound, on its spelling, and on its vocabulary.
But I've also tried to show you how that importation had an impact on the imaginative
world, on the poetry of the British Isles.
And in my next lecture, I'm going to develop this imaginative world by looking at the poetry
of Chaucer.
Even though all of Chaucer's poetry, as far as we know, is written in English, he is as
deeply a trilingual poet as the author of this little quatrain from the Harley manuscript.
For Chaucer is aware of how Latin, French, and English were used, he brings new words
into the language and in the course of his poetry, and in the course of his great Canterbury
Tales in particular, he synthesizes these three languages into a unique form of literary
expression, which will have a lasting impact on the languages and forms of understanding
of the British Isles for the 600 years after his death.
