Lecture 11, Dialect Representation in Middle English
When I was a child growing up in Brooklyn, I thought everybody spoke in dialect.
There were the peppery yiddishisms of my own family, the malifluous Italian of the people
down the block, the Russian and the recesses of the subways.
I grew up in a world of dialects, and my mother, who was a professional speech therapist
in the New York City Public Schools, sought to bleed the dialect of Brooklyn out of me.
When I was a graduate student at Oxford University, I became aware of the fact that dialect was
not simply a matter for the child in New York, but it was a historical problem as well.
Middle English dialects, dialectology, was at that time one of the key subject matters
for the historical study of language.
Also, when I turned to Chaucer and when I began to read in the Canterbury Tales, I became
both personally and professionally fascinated by the richness of dialect variation and the
possibilities for humor and social critique that dialect could grant Chaucer as well as
people of my own time.
When I was a student, I was assigned a history of the English language by a scholar named
Barbara Strang.
And in that book, there was the following phrase that Middle English was, and she wrote,
par excellence, the dialectical phase of English, in the sense that while dialects have been
spoken at all periods, it was in Middle English that divergent local usage was normally indicated
in writing.
Now this is a very important point, for the point that Professor Strang was making and
that many scholars have made before and since, was that the scribes during the Middle English
period, those individuals who wrote things down in manuscript before print, wrote invariably
in their own regional dialect, that is, they used conventions of spelling to evoke or to
reproduce even the sounds of their speech, and works that would be in one dialect in
the hands of a scribe from a different region could be translated into another.
We saw in my lectures on Old English how regional dialect variation in the Anglo-Saxon period
provoked national standardization, that the Northumbrian dialect of Cadman's Hymn disappeared
in the West Saxon forms of King Alfred's translators, and we also saw how in King Alfred's court
works from Latin would be translated into the West Saxon form of Old English.
What we have in Middle English are varieties of dialects, many of which have their own literary
traditions, and one of the things about looking at dialect in Chaucer and in other literary
works is to see how not simply dialect is transcribed, but how it is evoked, that is,
the way in which dialect humor and dialect representation can be used to express social
satire or philosophical or dramatic claims.
Now you will remember from an earlier lecture that Old English, broadly speaking, had four
major dialects that corresponded to the four major regions of Anglo-Saxon England.
In the Middle English period, their dialects roughly correspond to the older dialect differences,
but in Middle English there are really five major dialects, and once again the major rivers
of England made up the boundary of speech communities, so did the old Roman roads, which effectively
divided the country, and which, well into the Middle Ages, were still the central lines
of transportation through the island.
What I'd like to do in this lecture is first outline the key features of Middle English
regional dialects, then I'm going to read you selections from Chaucer's Reeves Tale,
in which he tries to evoke the sound and sensibility of people from the north of England.
Then I'm going to conclude with selections from a northern English text, the second Shepherd's
play, in which Northerners try to evoke the sound of the south, so the northern dialect
of Middle English.
This is the dialect spoken and written north of the Humber River in England, in Northumbria.
Its central features are a rich Scandinavian vocabulary, and a certain set of sounds keyed
to Scandinavian habits of pronunciation.
Now you'll remember from my earlier lectures, that some of the central, if you like, features
of the Scandinavian sound system, the phonology of Scandinavian, is that it has a predominance
of ska sounds, where Old English or Southern English had sha sounds, and ka sounds where
Southern English or Old English had sha sounds.
So church, kirk, these were not only distinctions between West Saxon and Old Norse, but they
became phonological distinctions, distinctions in sound, between Northern and Southern English.
And so in the north of England, you would say kirk instead of church, you would say,
for example, skirt instead of shirt, and so on.
What you also had was a set of vowel shifts or changes that were very, very important,
and there's one in particular that I want to call attention to.
In Old English, you had long A vowels in particular situations, and these were in words like bone
and home.
Now the Old English word for bone was barn, and the Old English word for home was harm.
In Southern and Midlands Middle English, south of the Humber River, this long A sound became
an A sound that eventually became our O sound.
So Old English barn became bon, and Old English harm became home, and Old English ga became
go to go.
Now north of the Humber River, this sound change didn't happen.
So in Middle English, people still said barn and harm and ga, or gaan for gaan.
This is a distinctive sound that all readers and writers would have noticed.
Because we move south, we move, if you like, along that great Old Roman road that linked
York and London, and to the east there would be the East Midlands.
Now the East Midland dialect of Middle English is in the eastern central part of the country,
and many Londoners came from that area, and what is the East Midland dialect broadly speaking
does form the basis of the major literary language of England at the close of the Middle
Ages.
Much of Chaucer is East Midland English, and while not everything in Chaucer becomes modern
standard English, it's fair to say that for modern readers the most accessible dialect
of Middle English to us is East Midland, because it is the core of the London Metropolitan
dialect.
But to the west of that Roman road, as you move into the western Midlands, you get a
dialect, West Midland, which bordered with the Celtic speaking area of Wales, and which
had as its centers of intellectual and literary activity, cities such as Chester, near modern
day Liverpool, the Wirral Peninsula.
West Midland is a very difficult dialect.
It has different sounds, but it also has different morphology.
Now let me give you an example of a difference in grammar or morphology.
That is a difference in form.
In Old English, the pronominal system all began with H. Hey was he, but she was ha, or heo.
It would have been hit.
So what you have emerging in East Midlands English at the time of Chaucer is a form of
the third person, feminine singular, that becomes she, and that is different from what
stays in West Midlands English, because they are still using the Old English form ha, or
heo, to mean she.
I know this sounds terribly technical, but it's these kinds of technical details that
enable us to draw dialect boundaries, and it was a tension to these differences that
enabled people in Chaucer's time to recognize where you came from.
Now the southern dialect roughly corresponds to that area of Wessex, that is the southwest
of England.
Southern dialects sound from our perspective more advanced.
What does that mean?
It means they underwent certain sound changes faster that went into modern standard English.
But the major distinctive feature of southern English was, now if I were to be technical
and phonological about it, I would say the voicing of initial sibilants and fricatives.
What does that mean?
It means that words that begin with an s in the other dialects of middle English begin
with a z in the southern dialect, and words that begin with an f begin with a v. Thus in
the south you wouldn't say so be it, you would say so be it, and you wouldn't say fox, you'd
say vox.
Now why does this matter?
It matters because the female word for fox in modern standard English is a southern form.
Fox but vixen.
And so the explanation of the v in vixen is that it is an infiltration, if you like, of
a southern form.
In Kent, in the southeast of England, there was a distinctive form of speech that was preserved
well into the Renaissance.
It preserved many old English forms and sounds and distinctive words, documents in Kentish
preserve old English case endings more than any middle English dialect.
I'm not going to talk about the Kentish dialect now, but I am going to talk about it in a
later lecture.
When England's first printer tells a story about some London merchants who get washed
up on the shore of Kent and try to buy eggs at a farmhouse and find that they are incapable
of communicating with a Kentish woman.
So what we have in middle English is a set of dialects that would have been recognizable
as such in the Middle Ages, where scribes use the resources of spelling to evoke or to represent
certain sounds of speech, and also where certain dialectical forms do pass into modern spoken
English for reasons of migration or of contact.
And part of what I will be talking about in many subsequent lectures will be precisely
the ways in which modern standard English is made up of different regional dialect variants
that eventually become canonized into a London or a metropolitan standard.
Let me turn now to the literary representation of dialects.
How did literary writers represent regional variation for purposes of humor or of social
commentary?
We saw in the opening of the Canterbury Tales how Chaucer deployed the resources of his
language to create in effect a kind of anthology of linguistic forms.
The Canterbury Tales as a work of literature is also an anthology of literary forms.
You have saints' lives, you have obscene stories, you have stories from classical antiquity,
you have stories from Italy, you have stories set in France, you have in effect the entire
world of literature encased in Chaucer's Canterbury book.
And the story that I'd like to focus on for my purposes in this lecture is a story known
as the Reeves Tale.
Chaucer's Reeve tells a story.
Chaucer's Reeve is a mean-spirited, a slender, caloric man, as we are told, who was responding
to the Miller who's told a story about a carpenter.
Now the Reeve was an overseer.
What a Reeve was in the Middle Ages was the overseer in seniorial land, and he was the
one who was in charge of making sure everybody got everything done on the land.
But this particular Reeve also had a profession, and that Reeve was a carpenter.
So the Reeve was very angry that the Miller told a story about the carpenter, and the
Reeve is going to tell a story about the Miller.
The Reeves Tale, if you get to read it, is one of the most sublimely dirty stories in
the history of English literature.
And part of what makes it so earthy is the fact that its plot concerns two students from
far in the north of England who go to Cambridge University, and they go to get the grain for
their Cambridge College ground by a corrupt and local Miller.
And in the course of their adventures, they wind up sleeping with the Miller's wife,
with the Miller's daughter, and they have a set of wild, rude encounters as farcical
and as fantastic as anything that one might find in modern or old English literature.
Now Chaucer makes a big deal of the fact that these scholars are from the north.
And when they speak, they speak in the Northern dialect of Middle English.
And so one of them, named John, turns to the Miller in this story, whose name is Simon,
and he says, and I read this in my best approximation, of Chaucerian Northern Middle English.
And him on, quote John, begot ned has na per, imbo serve himself the has na swen.
And what does this mean?
Simon said John, by God need has no peer, he best serves himself who has no servant.
Now what is characteristic about the Northern sounds here is that he says na instead of
no, he says him boss, which is a Northernism, for the form of best and na again, na.
And you can see here that Chaucer is evoking what his London audience would have recognized
as Northern English.
And he goes on saying that the Mancipal, that is the man who was in charge of providing
food for the Cambridge College, will probably be dead because he's had a terrible toothache.
A trivial statement, but one illustrative of the mindset of these scholars, ur mancipal
ihop he will be dead, swa workis eitha wungis in his head, swa instead of so, and wungis,
that's his teeth, it really means sort of the jaw tooth assembly.
But you can begin to hear now the Onomatopoetics of the Northern Rube.
And so the two Northern scholars are standing by the mill and they're amazed at how the
corn goes in and how it gets ground.
And one says, swa, who gots the corn gas in, yech swa inevra be me fadarkin hu the tahapur
wungis pill and fra.
See how the corn goes in and he says gas instead of goes.
But I swear he says by my father's family, I never saw the hopper of the mill wagging
to and fro like that.
Now we say to and fro, but in the north of England they said till and fra.
They said fra instead of fro because that val change hasn't happened that I mentioned
earlier.
And they said till instead of to because it is a Scandinavianism.
And so these two foolish millers, millers mankei if you like, these two students are
talking to each other and one says to the other, i is as ill a miller, I'm as bad a
miller as you are.
Not each arm, which would be a beautiful southern form, not even each bay, which would be acceptable
middle English, but is, I is.
And if you, you know, what I imagine here is redoing the Reeves tale in the equivalent
of regional dialect variation for an American audience.
In other words, how do you evoke in regional dialect the sound of stupidity?
I is as ill a miller as our ye ill is a Scandinavian word.
It is not a southern English word, but more than vocabulary there is the sound.
There is the sublime cacophony of this line.
I'll read it again.
I is as ill a miller as our ye, I ye as as ill miller.
You can almost hear in the crunch of those sounds the hopper of the mill wagging to and
fro.
These are some examples of how Chaucer in his Reeves tale is able to evoke, if you like,
the sound of northern English.
And what I'm talking about is something linguistic and social.
Chaucer is responding to the fact that at the end of the 14th century there really was
a migration of people from the north to the south.
They were coming to the universities of Oxford and Cambridge.
They were coming to London to the ends of court to be lawyers.
They were coming from aristocratic families in the north into London service.
They were coming as part of the larger commercial exchange in the great metropolitan city.
And what's happening here is that the northern English dialect is going to influence standard
English.
We're going to see in subsequent lectures how that's going to happen.
For there are many things in modern standard English that are northernisms.
But in Chaucer's time there is the sense that the north of England is the place of the barbaric.
In my next lecture I'm going to be reading from Chaucer's contemporary, a man named
John of Trevesa, who will talk about northern English in these words.
He will say it is sharp, slitting, frotting, and unshop.
It's sharp, it's slitting, it's frotting, that is scratching, and unshop, unshapely.
You have, in the periphery of English, this group moving into London, and Chaucer is representing
this sound.
I'll conclude the Reaves tale with this wonderful inanity from one of the characters, who says
that he's heard it said, that one should take two things, such as he finds or such
as he brings.
This is a delightful proverb that I think means absolutely nothing, but it's the sound
of it.
He have heard said, he says, man sal ta of toa thangus, slick as he fiendus, or ta slick
as he bringus.
Now here, you can hear not only the long a instead of the o, toa instead of two, but
you will hear to the K sound, so characteristic of the north, because the word for such, that
is the southern word in the north, was not such, but slick.
The word for each was ilk, and as we see here, the sounds of the north are being evoked
once again.
Chaucer is not a professional philologist.
Chaucer is evoking a sound, that is, he's using the most distinctive features of the
north to create for his southern audience a feel for what things must have sounded like.
Now it's important to understand that regional differences exist not simply to express humor,
but also to recognize that in the north and in the south, there were differences of commerce
and culture as well.
And if the south could make fun of the north, the north could certainly make fun of the
south.
I'm going to read to you a passage from a play known as the second shepherds play.
It's called the second shepherds play, because it is the second of two plays about the shepherds
who attend to the birth of Jesus in the biblical story.
And in the north of England, in the 14th and the 15th centuries, you had plays based on
the biblical stories of creation, of the fall, of the incarnation, and of the passion.
And here, in the north of England, you imagine in a comic way the shepherds who were attending
to this.
And so there's a first shepherd and a second shepherd, and there's a character named Mack.
And Mack is a sheepstealer.
He's a thief.
He's a deceitful figure.
But he's a great impersonator.
And what Mack does is he pretends to be a southerner.
That is, Mack wants to be a messenger from the king.
So in the passage that I'm reading to you, the first shepherd and the second shepherd
will see through Mack's disguise and will speak to him in northern English.
And the first shepherd says, Mack, where has the gun?
Tell us, Teeving.
Mack, they say, where have you gone?
Tell us something.
And the second shepherd says, is he coming?
Then Ilkan take head to this thing.
That is, has he arrived?
Then let each and every one pay attention to this event.
They're speaking northern middle English.
Instead of saying each, they say Ilkan.
Now Mack enters.
And Mack says, what?
Itch be a yeoman, he tell you of the king.
I'm a yeoman of the king.
He doesn't say, he is.
Remember, he is as ill a miller.
He doesn't say, he is.
He says, itch be.
This is as southern as you can get.
And it would have been hysterically funny to the northern English audience there.
And he says, the self and the some, sonde from a great lording, the very self-same one
sent from a great lord and such a one, and sitch.
He says, and such, and sitch.
That's southern, not and sleet.
And he goes on.
Fie on you, he says, goeth hence.
Goeth hence, he says.
Not ga, but go, and if that is a southern and go from my presence, he says.
Out of me présence.
He uses a wonderful French word out of my presence.
Remember, ence words are French words.
I must have reverence.
You can hear him rolling the R's and giving that emphasis in a word that reeks of francophony.
And then he says, we who be each, who am I?
And the next shepherd, the first shepherd says, why mock it so quaint mock you day wrong.
Why are you speaking so oddly so quaintly?
You do us wrong, but he says wrong, very northern.
And then the second shepherd says, but mock, lest ye sent, etro, that ye long.
He says, Mac, what are you trying to be like a saint?
I believe you long to be so.
In other words, why are you putting on airs, Mac?
And the third shepherd then enters, and he says, etro, the shrew-compant, the dual mitem
hung.
I believe this shrew can paint.
That is, I believe Mac, this shrew, is deceiving us.
May the devil hang him.
And Mac says, each shall mock-complaint.
I will make a complaint, plate, complaint, big gun French legal term.
And again, each, he says, and mock you all, thwang at a word.
I will have you all be flogged at a word.
Mac says thwang, which is a little slip here, because that is an organism.
And then he catches himself, and he says, and tell even who you doth.
And I'll report to everyone what you are doing.
And then the first shepherd says, but mock, is that soth?
Is that true, Mac?
New takut, that sovran-toth, and set in a turd.
Mac, he says, take out your sovran-tooth and stick it in a turd.
Now there's nothing more delightful than scatological humor.
And there's nothing more delightful in medieval literature than scatological humor.
And what we're looking at here is this brilliant moment when the northern England, the people
of northern England, the northern Englishmen, can make fun of the south, not simply in dialect
and sound, but in pretense and in presence.
And what we have here is Mac using a francophone vocabulary, using forms that would have been
recognizably southern forms and pronunciations, and impersonating.
And it seems clear that what's going on in the second shepherd's play is also not simply
making fun of dialect, but making fun of pretense.
The idea that in the south they are pretentious, they're French, they're French sounding.
Where as in the north, we're somewhat natural.
And what is more natural than to take that sovran-tooth and stick it in a turd?
Let me conclude this lecture on dialects and dialect humor.
Let us remember that these are not transcriptions of actual speech, but that they're evocations.
That is, these are representations of what a given audience expects or thinks people
sound like.
They may give us evidence about sound, but they also give us evidence about attitude.
And this is true for the Middle Ages, as it is for our own time.
Chaucer, and the author of the second shepherd's play, may be engaging as much in evocations
of regionalism as Mark Twain or as Joel Chandler Harris will in the 19th century.
But what these passages also raise are larger questions about standards of style and grammaticality
in the author's own language.
That is, the authors here are using dialect to set their own language apart.
The idea being that for the south, the north is barbaric, foolish, vain, and vacuous.
But in the north, the south is pretentious, foppish, francophone, and courtly.
We're going to see these distinctions at work in my next lecture as we look at attitudes
towards language change and variation in the medieval world and in England in particular.
