Lecture 12 Medieval Attitudes Toward Language
He is as ill a miller as Arié. That line from Chaucer's Reeves Tale sticks in my mind and in my mouth,
as perhaps the best example of the way in which an author can evoke the sound of regional dialect variation.
As we saw in my last lecture, dialect variation in the Middle English period had many, many levels of effect and many strata of impact.
Not only was it a question of the metropolitan making fun of the rural, the south making fun of the north,
but you could see in the Second Shepherd's play the way in which southern or London or courtly affectation could become the butt of scatological humor.
I'd like to develop some of the issues I raised in that lecture into a larger set of analyses and descriptions of, broadly speaking, medieval attitudes towards language variation and towards language change.
I'd like to give you a sense of how writers in the Middle Ages saw the English language changing and also to go back to some of the things I talked about in my earlier lectures on Old English
to review issues of national standard, education, and regional variety.
Now, when we look at changes in language and when we look at medieval attitudes towards language change, we can return to the Old English period.
Now, the central issues for writers and educators at that time were the relationship of Latin to the vernacular, the problem of educating students, and the ways in which business would be conducted.
Now, when I say business, I mean, of course, the business of government and the business of culture.
What was central in the Anglo-Saxon schools was the way in which Old English, the way in which the vernacular was a vehicle for instruction.
Now, this was true not only in King Alfred's time when the West Saxon dialect, remember the dialect of King Alfred's time and place, came to be developed as a standard.
King Alfred, you'll remember, developed a program of translating the Latin classics into English.
He imported writers and scholars from Europe and elsewhere to help with the project, and he came up with a canon of texts to read and study.
He also suggested methods of schooling the young in the study of the English language and the Latin classics.
Now, while Alfred made no attempt to impose his own West Saxon dialect on other writers of the country, that is, he didn't send out minions to translate texts into West Saxon.
The fact is that his own group at court were writing in West Saxon, and anything coming out of his court or from under his aegis carried with it West Saxon as the prestige dialect for the 10th century schools, the late 10th century schools of his time.
I mentioned how some manuscripts of old English were rewritten or recast in the West Saxon dialect, and how English schooling may have gone on in the West Saxon dialect.
It's not because it was better than any other dialect, it's because it was the dialect of the teachers of the area.
Now, about 100 years after the time of King Alfred, the Bishop of Winchester was named Ethelwald, and Ethelwald established a school there in which English and Latin were the languages of instruction.
He made English a primary aspect of English schooling for really the first time, for the issue here is that his pupils learned their lessons in English and Latin.
And it wasn't simply that they were learning in Latin and translating into English, it was that he established what we call a scriptorium, a place where manuscripts would be written where he personally supervised the copying and writing of texts.
He regularised spelling, vocabulary choice, and the style of old English prose.
And so what Ethelwald did at the end of the 10th century was in effect try to create a standard educated old English which anyone could read and write regardless of the region from which they had come.
So by the late old English period, there arose an awareness of dialect variation, and some institutions were established, as Ethelwald's school was, for the imposition of a standard prose for literate Anglo-Saxons.
To continue my review, after the conquest, the teaching of language and literacy was compounded by a new set of linguistic problems.
You had French, you had English, and you had Latin.
And I want to turn now to an interesting example of language use and language attitude in the trilingual world of medieval England.
My test case is a man named Walter of Bibisworth.
He was a 13th century aristocrat who wrote for a group of English aristocrats and gentry who desired to make their French better.
You remember that French had become the prestige language of the court and of learning, and Walter wrote a treatise in verse which was designed to teach them French.
But what he's doing is he's teaching them more than just French.
He's teaching them ideas about the language of French.
Let me read you a little bit of Walter's French.
And as I've already mentioned, as a child of Brooklyn, my French accent may be inflected by the dialectical.
Vous avez la livre et le livre.
La livre et le livre.
Now, what is he saying?
He's saying you have la livre, you have the lip, and you have le livre, you have the hair.
That is the animal like a rabbit.
You have la livre, you have the pound, and you also have le livre.
You have the book.
Now, this is fascinating to me for several reasons.
The first is that what he is calling attention to is the fact that French has grammatical gender and clearly Middle English doesn't anymore.
That the same word pronounced the same way and spelled the same way may mean two different things in two different genders, whether it's la or le.
And here he's illustrating for his readers the idea of grammatical gender that has been lost.
This I find fascinating.
The second thing he's doing is he's illustrating differences in pronunciation.
That is, livre and livre.
Here he is stressing a sound difference that may have been hard for Middle English speakers to recreate.
You have different inventories of sounds and different distinctions in different languages,
and some of them do not necessarily translate to others.
Speakers of English can distinguish between the sounds say in sit and seat,
whereas native speakers of Spanish might not be able to do so.
Both may be maybe sounded like or may come out as seat in some way.
And so the purpose of Walter's treatise is to show us, and I could be technical about it, to show us grammatical and also phonemic distinctions.
That is distinctions about grammar, in this case grammatical gender, and distinctions in vowels and pronunciations.
And so this is a fascinating little bit of things here, but Walter's job is more so.
As you read through this fascinating document, what you recognize is that Walter is showing us that the study of language is an education in culture as well as grammar.
The terms that he is addressing are parts of the body, hunting, commerce and learning.
That is, this is an education in social arts, in words for polite conversation and courteorship and intellectual discourse.
It's, I think, more than coincidence that he wants to have the distinction between the lip and the hair and the pound and the book.
The lip is the organ of speech and the hair, the only reason hairs exist is because you hunt them.
It is an aristocratic practice. The pound is the weight in commerce and in monetary value, and the book is the site of learning.
He goes on, and I'm going to read this in modern English translation, when he says,
The lips around the teeth, the hair hides in the woods, the pound is used in trade, the book teaches us clergy.
La, excuse me, le livre, the book, le livre, nous apprends clergy. The book teaches us clergy.
And so, in these four words, you could say, Walter has distilled the primary worlds of social aspiration, hunting, knowledge, commerce and discourse.
As you read on in Walter's treatise, you'll find other kinds of information.
For example, he gives you many different words for the color red, depending on how it's used.
For example, there is the red hair of a knight, which he says is roue, but the red horse is sore, and the red shield is gul, and the red lance is rouge.
You've got four words for red, each of which has a different social valence or social register.
This is more than a textbook in French. It's a textbook for good French.
By good French, Walter means a skill in both speaking and in reading.
The other thing that's interesting about this text is that in its manuscript, he has inter-lineated that he's written between the French lines, the English words above it,
so that you can build up a vocabulary here designed to enhance one's command of spoken and written language.
Walter of Bibbisworth is a fascinating case study of someone who is teaching across languages and in the course of doing so, teaching across cultures.
Now, what are some of the philosophical implications of this crossing of linguistic boundaries?
If we are to read medieval scholastics, if we are to read the thinkers, the theologians, the philosophers and the pedagogues of the time,
we come across such wonderful phrases as this one, which I translate from the medieval Latin,
man is a grammatical animal.
Medieval theologians believed that humans had a gift for language, but that we've, so to speak, fallen linguistically.
Now, I think this is a wonderful, man is a grammatical animal, that is, man is an animal that has a certain kind of language,
but man is not simply a speaking animal, man is a grammatical animal because man has rules, people have rules of speaking, of teaching grammar.
Now, for medieval theologians, there's the fall that's not just moral but linguistic, and there are, in medieval theology, really two falls.
The first is Eden, and the issue is not simply that Adam and Eve ate the apple, realized they were naked and started wearing fig leaves.
The issue is that before the fall, language was something that uniquely brought together word and thing.
In Genesis before the fall, Adam names the animals. In other words, there is a unique name for each thing in the world.
Language is not arbitrary and conventional, it is essential.
What medieval theologians thought of as Adamic language, prelapsarian, pre-fallen language, meant there was only one way of talking,
and every word simply bore in its essential meaning the idea of the thing.
Adam just knew what the animals were, and the words came.
When the fall comes, there is a split between word and thing.
In other words, the issue for the fall is not simply a fall into sin, it is a fall into the arbitrariness and conventionality of language.
The second fall is babble, that in building the tower of babble, the peoples of the earth are punished by being granted mutually incomprehensible languages.
And so people now cannot communicate with each other.
It's a sense of estrangement, that is, in the fall and Eden, language is estranged from the world.
In babble, we are estranged from each other.
The great father of the Catholic Church, Saint Augustine, wrote in his early fifth century text, The City of God,
and he wrote in Latin, which I translate, that the diversity of languages alienates man from man.
And his word is alienate, alienates.
That is, human beings are alienated from each other because they speak different languages.
We live, Saint Augustine said elsewhere, in a regio dissimilitudeness, in a land of unlikeliness, in a place of dissimilar things.
And so this sense of alienation is immensely important for the medieval theological world,
because it makes clear that living in the world, for the medieval theological mind, is about living in a world of transitory things,
sublunary, below the moon, ambiguous, a land of dissimilitudeness.
Language in this world is therefore fluid, mutable, and transitory.
Chaucer recognized this. In his great poem, Troilus and Crusade, a poem set in ancient Troy, he writes,
and I'm going to read to you the passage in Middle English, and then translate it into modern English.
Yeknoa ek, that in form of spatches change within a thuz in year,
and wordless, though that hardened priests knew wonder niece, and strong just think of them,
and yet they spock'em so, and sped as well in love as men knew though.
Ek fortuit when in love in sundry ages, in sundry laundice, sundry ben usages.
And what he says in a modern English translation is, you know too, that the forms of speech have changed over a thousand years,
and words that had meaning then now seem to us remarkably odd and strange,
and yet people really spoke those words, and they did as well in love as men do now.
For to succeed in love in different ages and in different lands, the habits are different.
What Chaucer recognizes here is that language changes over time.
If you want to be technical about it, you could say that Chaucer articulates a vision of diachronic change.
In other words, he understands that language is a mutable thing, and that time changes language.
Chaucer also recognizes that language changes over space, and so to be technical about it,
we could say that he recognizes synchronic variation.
Now, in the Reeves tale, we had seen how Chaucer can show us dialect.
In Troilus and Crusade, he recognizes that one of the problems of dialect is precisely the issue of reading and misreading his own poetry.
Chaucer feared for the miswriting and misreading of his own poetry by scribes and readers who did not speak his dialect.
Now, you'll remember how in Old English, people were translating Northumbrian into West Saxon.
Chaucer was afraid of what would happen if a scribe from another dialect region got a hold of his poem.
And here's what he says at the close of Troilus and Crusade.
He's addressing his book. He's addressing it as the you, and he says, and now I'm reading again,
and for there is so great diversity in English, and in reading of our tongue, so pray ye God that none misread to they,
nay they mismetre for default of tongue, and read where so though they or else sung,
but yet to purpose of me rather, spetia.
So what is he saying here? Because there is such great diversity in English and in the writing of our language,
so I pray to God that no one miswrite you, that no one miscopy you, he's addressing the poem,
nor mismetre you because of the deficiency of language.
And wherever you are read or sung aloud, I beseech to God that you be understood.
But now let me get back to what I was saying earlier.
So Chaucer is making an extremely important point here.
What he's recognizing is that if a scribe got a hold of his own poetry,
that scribe would translate that poem into a dialect different from the one in which Chaucer had written it.
If that happened, the poem would not scan.
That means that there would not be the right number of syllables.
The poem would not rhyme because the sounds would be different, and this would be because of default of tongue.
So let me stress here, if you like the linguistic relativism of Chaucer.
Chaucer is making clear that language changes over time and that language varies over region.
And this recognition is central to a medieval as well as to a modern notion of what happens when languages operate in the world.
Language is a mutable thing.
And perhaps the greatest medieval commentator on the mutability of English was a contemporary of Chaucer's John of Trevisa.
In 1385, John of Trevisa prepared a translation in English of a Latin work of history called the Polychronicon by a man named Randolph Higdon.
And what Trevisa did in the course of this translation was he offered some additional commentaries of his own on the state of English life and on the state of English language.
I would like to spend a fair amount of time with John of Trevisa because he is a fascinating figure.
And furthermore, because he is able to evoke the sounds and descriptions of linguistic difference in remarkably evocative ways.
This is what he says. I'm going to read a little bit in Middle English and I'm going to read a little bit in Modern English.
What he says is this, that Englishmen from the beginning had three kinds of speech.
And he says there was the southern speech, there was the northern speech, and there was the middle speech in the middle of the country.
Because they came from three different groups of people from, as he says, Germania, that is the Germanic speaking people.
But he says, nonetheless, by mixing together and meddling first with the Danes and then with the Normans, in many people the native language has been corrupted.
And let me read you that little passage in his Middle English.
And he says, nonetheless, by comixion and meddling, first with Danes, first with the Danes, and afterward with Normans, in many the country langage is a peyred.
That is the country language, the native language, has been a peyred. A peyred means corrupted, watered down, or alloyed with base metal.
And some of us, he says, use, and here I read in his Middle English because it is virtually untranslatable.
He said, some use it, strong, laughing, chittering, huddying, and garrying, grisbeating.
You can't even translate it. Wlaffering, chittering, harrying, garrying, grisbeating. This is what, this is the version of barbarianism.
Remember, the Greeks thought the Persians were barbarians because it sounded like bar, bar, bar, bar to them.
And what northern or regional English sounds like to an educated metropolitan Londoner like John of Travesa is laughing, chittering, harrying, garrying, grisbeating.
It's the sounds like of the Reeves Tale. And he says this is true for two reasons. First, and now I'm reading in modern English, the thing that is unique, he says, about the children in England is that from school,
contrary to the habit and manner of all other nations, the children are compelled to forsake their own language and construe their lessons and name their things in French.
And they've done so since the Normans first came into England. So here he's complaining about the fact that we're not really learning English, they're learning things in French.
Second, it's because the children of gentlemen are taught to speak French from the time they are rocked in their cradle and the child can speak it and play with his toys in it.
So now he's talking not just about education, but he's talking about social class and he looks back to the world of Walter of Bibbysworth three quarters of a century earlier when we're really looking at these differences in language and in culture.
And he goes on, socially ambitious men, and the word he uses in Middle English is uplandish, uplandish men, up and even.
Socially ambitious men, he says, want to present themselves as if they were gentlemen and they try with great effort therefore to speak French in order to be thought great better of.
And now he goes on, in English, in Middle English. It's same as a great wonder who English, that is the birth tongue of Englishmen, and her own langage and tongue is so diverse and soon in this island.
And the langage of Normandy is coming of another land and have on man a sound among all man that specketh et aricht in England.
Nevertheless, there is as many divers man of French in the realm of France as is divers man of English in the realm of England.
It seems a great marvel to me, he says, how English, which is our native language, is so diverse and sound in this island.
So there are many different regional dialects of English.
But he says the language of Normandy, nonetheless, is only one way of sounding when it's spoken here.
But there are many different forms of French in the realm of France as there are different forms of English in the realm of English.
So what he finds curious is the fact that there is one form of French, but many, many, many forms of English.
And among the many forms of English, he says, all the langage of the Norumbras, and especially at York, is so sharp, slitting and frothing and unshopped that way southern men may that langage uneath the understander.
The etro, the thought is because far above need to strong men and aliens that specketh strongelich, and also because that the king of England woneth away fair from that country.
All the language of the Northumbrians, remember the northern English, he says, and especially at York, is so sharp, cutting, scratching and unshapely that we southern men may scarcely understand it.
And here we go back to the idioms of the Reeves tale and the source of Chaucerian humor, but he goes on,
I believe this is because they live near strange people and aliens that speak strangely.
Now, who are these strange people that John of Travesa, writing in London in the south of England, imagines these Northerners living near?
Are they the Picts who are painting their faces blue and wearing skirts? Are they the Scots? What's going on?
They may be strange, but they are alien, and I want to focus on the fact that in his Middle English, John uses not just the word, stronge, but he says, aliens, go back to St. Augustine,
that the diversity of language alienates man from man.
There is almost an Augustinian or theological feel to Travesa, as he is limning now the contours of an English land of unlikeliness,
in which people are living in a post-babel world where we cannot understand our neighbors to the north.
They are strange, but also, he says, it is because the kings of England always stay far away from that part of the country.
Now, recall the Second Shepherd's play where Mac, as a bogus servant of the king, can say, out of me presence.
He knows that he can pretend to be a servant of the king, because, as Travesa would say, the kings of England always stay far away from that part of the country.
The north of England for Travesa now is a land of linguistic and political otherness, and what Travesa has to say can resonate with our own attitudes towards English
and what we'll see throughout the course, the way in which dialect variation can be a source of humor,
the way in which the diversity of language over time and over space can provoke philosophical speculation about our condition in the world,
and the way in which the challenges for describing are invariably the challenges of prescribing.
To go back to my opening thanks in this course, every time we describe something, we prescribe.
Every time we say what something is, we may create an environment in which we are saying what things should be.
Let me review where we've been and where we're going.
I began with the methods of studying English, with the look of Indo-European and philology,
with cognate words, and with the ways in which Old English emerged from the mix of Germanic languages.
I showed how Old English was a highly inflected language that gradually moved to an uninflected one,
and how the Norman conquest changed not only the vocabulary of the language, but how it also textured syntax, grammar, sound, and poetry,
that for the world of the Middle Ages, English men and women lived multilingually,
that is, they lived in a world in which language had changed and in which there was great diversity of dialect and strata of speech.
They lived as grammatical animals in an alien world,
and what we'll see in my next set of lectures are the ways in which this sense of alienation evokes itself in radical changes in pronunciation,
in the spread of English across the globe, and in the ways in which the great writers of the Renaissance and modern period
find ways of evoking a land of unlikeliness on the written page.
