Lecture 14 The Great Val Shift and Modern English
If anybody has heard anything about the history of the English language, it's probably the
Great Val Shift.
What was the Great Val Shift?
Why does it matter?
And why has it become a touchstone for the study of the history of the English language?
In spite of its portentious name, the Great Val Shift is really something very simple,
but it had a huge impact on the sound and the shape of the English language between
the time of Chaucer and the time of Shakespeare.
Indeed, it is because of the Great Val Shift that the language of Chaucer was largely opaque
by the time of Shakespeare, and it is because no change in pronunciation as systematic or
as radical as the Great Val Shift has happened since Shakespeare's time that Shakespeare's
language is still relatively accessible to us.
During the period of the Great Val Shift, roughly from the middle of the 15th century
to the end of the 16th and beginning of the 17th centuries, many other changes were going
on in English.
The vocabulary was increasing, syntax was changing, words were getting new meanings,
and attitudes towards language use, regional variation, and public idiom were changing
dramatically.
All of these things go on together with pronunciation to change irrevocably Middle
English into what we might call early modern English.
In subsequent lectures, I will be detailing these other changes, but for now, I'd like
to work through the Great Val Shift, and in this lecture, I'd like to work through the
details of the sound changes, I'd also like to call attention to some ways in which scholars
are able to use written documents to provide evidence for those changes in sound, and finally,
I'd like to suggest some ways in which the Great Val Shift, if you like, has become not
just a fact, but something of a myth of English linguistic history.
Now, it may not be too much to say that the Great Val Shift is the single most important
change that separates Middle English from modern English, and it is also the change
that separates English from the other European languages.
Only six vowels were affected by the Great Val Shift, and they were what we will call
the long, stressed monophthongs.
That is, they were vowels that were in stressed positions in the word.
They were the vowels on which word emphasis fell.
They were held for a long period of time.
That means that there was a quantitative difference between these vowels and other vowels, and
they were monophthongs.
That is, they were single or pure sounds.
A monophthong is a single sound made by keeping the mouth in the same position.
E is a monophthong.
E is a monophthong.
O is a monophthong.
O is a monophthong.
A is a monophthong.
Because as you say them, your mouth stays in the same position.
I-E is a dip-fong.
That is, it is a sound made up of two sounds, and you can feel in saying a sound like I-E
or the sound I-U, like mice and house, you can feel your mouth move from one position
to the other.
That is a dip-fong.
The great vowel shift affected the long, stressed monophthongs of Middle English.
And they were a with the letter A. The letter A represented a as in the word nama, name.
A, the sound A, which was written with an E, and that would have been in a word like
F-E-E-T, the sound E, which was written with an I, and that would have been in a word like
bite, the sound O, as in the word do, which would have been written do, do, and the sound
U, which would have been written with a U, and this would have been in a word like moose
or hoose, that is, mouse or house, A-E-E-O-U.
These are still, by and large, the long vowels of the European languages.
The great vowel shift is responsible for the reason why we say A-E-I-O-U and not A-A-E-O-U.
And so, once you've got that, you're halfway there.
Don't be intimidated by the great vowel shift.
I'm going to try to explain how it happened, and I'm going to have to go back to some of
the material from one of my first lectures on articulatory phonetics.
Now you will remember that articulatory phonetics was the way in which we describe how vowels
and consonants are produced in the mouth, and when we describe vowels, we describe them
according to their height in the mouth and according to their front or back position in
the mouth.
So vowels can be low, middle, and high, and they can be back, mid, and front.
So if you think of it as a grid, you can place the vowels in that way.
One point I want to make, too, before I get into the details of the great vowel shift
is something about long vowels.
Now we very casually use a phrase like a long vowel or a short vowel today when we are
signaling a qualitative difference in vowel sound.
That is the difference between beat and bit, and I think most people would say that beat
is a long vowel and bit is a short vowel, but this is not the way in which I and linguists
use the terms long and short.
Long and short has to do with the qualitative difference, that is, the period of time through
which you hold a vowel.
In Old English and in Middle English, vowel length, that is, quantitative vowel length
was a meaningful difference in the language.
What do I mean by this?
Let me give you an example.
In Old English, you had two words that were spelled the same way, G-O-D.
One of them was pronounced goad.
The other was pronounced go-d.
The first one meant god, and the second one meant good.
The only difference between these words was the period of time you held that vowel.
Go-d, go-d.
Vowel length was, to be technical about it, a linguist would say, vowel length was a phonemic
distinction.
That means that depending on how long you held the vowel, you would signal a different meaning
for that word.
Modern English has lost this distinction, and this distinction is lost during the period
of the great vowel shift.
So let me give you an example.
If I were to say sat, S-A-T, and I were to say sat, S-A-T, and the difference was only
the period of time that I held the vowel, there would be no difference in meaning.
You might think that I was being affected, or that I was stressing things, or that I had
particular difficulty in speaking, but vowel length does not determine change in meaning.
Now in my teaching, I very often use this as an example, and many years ago a student
raised her hand and said, but what about the difference between something that's bad and
something that's bad?
Here you have vowel length that may be uniquely phonemic in English.
Bad, held for a short period of time, means something that is bad.
Bad, held for a long period of time, means something that is good.
So here may be one unique case in modern spoken English when quantitative vowel length makes
a difference.
So now let's go to the details of the great vowel shift.
The great vowel shift can be summarized as follows.
The front vowels were raised and fronted, the back vowels were raised and retracted,
and the high vowels were made into diphthongs.
So let me clarify what all of that means.
Here's one way in which we can think about the great vowel shift, a scholarly reconstruction
if you like, of what happened.
You had two high front vowels in middle English.
You had the sound E as in me, M-I, or M-Y, me-self, or B, B-I, or B-Y, or in a sound
like meace, mice, M-I-C-E, that E sound, E, written I in middle English, is a high front
vowel.
It's pronounced high in the mouth, and it's pronounced so as the front of the mouth, E.
The other high vowel is OO, and you can feel that it is also high in the mouth, OO.
And in middle English this was the sound in hoose, house, moose, mouse.
Now what happened was, E and OO became diphthongs in the course of the great vowel shift.
That means that E became I, and OO became OO.
So meace became mice, and hoose became house.
By the end of the 16th century, these sounds would have probably been pronounced mice and
hoose, and by the 17th century they would have been pronounced mice and house.
This took a long period of time, and in a few minutes I'm going to talk about what happened
in the course of this particular change.
So item number one, the high front vowels E and OO become diphthongs I and OO over a
long period of time.
Second, you have mid vowels, that is, you have vowels that are pronounced in the middle
of the mouth, and these are E and OO.
So middle English, FET, F-E-E-T, would be pronounced FET, and it came to be raised and fronted.
FET became feet, DO, D-O, pronounced DO, came to be pronounced as modern English, DO.
Then, you had the low back vowels, and in middle English, the vowel indicated by the
letter A would have been A, so a word like NAMA became NAAAM.
Now it's a full diphthong, NAAAM, but the important part is A-A, NAMA, NAAAM.
Finally the long open OAA, so SO, SO, came to be pronounced SO in that way.
So this is the way in which the great vowel shift is believed to have worked, and more
than one explanation exists for it.
Some scholars believe that during the 15th and 16th centuries, English dialects were
in contact in new ways.
Migrations from the north and the midlands into London brought speakers into contact,
and this mix of dialects created social pressures to develop or to select a set of pronunciations
that would have new social prestige, and the sounds that were chosen or that developed
appear in retrospect to be the sounds of the great vowel shift.
Now let me stress, this is not a case of people sitting down and saying, we need to
systematically change the way in which we speak, and what we're going to do is we're
going to select a new set of sounds.
What happened was there were many ways of pronouncing vowels, some of them regional,
some of them historical, and over time a particular system of pronunciation sorts itself out as
an accepted standard form.
Now as a corollary to this contact of dialects and changes in pronunciation, what you also
have is the loss of French.
All cultures need a prestige form of language.
Some cultures have a different language.
In the Middle Ages, in England, it was French.
In Russia, in the 19th century, it was French.
In Rome, during the first and second centuries AD, it was Greek.
That is, you have a prestige language that signals class and education.
As French disappeared in the 15th century, if you like, a slot was opened for a prestige
language, and what filled that slot was not a different language, but a different form
of the English language.
And so what we see emerging in the course of the 15th and 16th centuries is a systematic
change in pronunciation that in retrospect becomes the prestige or standard form of pronunciation,
and this is something that operates in tandem with the loss of French.
Now I want to go back for just a minute to those diphthongs.
And I mentioned that I and O from E and O didn't become full diphthongs overnight.
And in the course of the 15th and part of the 16th centuries, you would say a word like
my, not as Middle English, me, but more something like my.
And you would say a word like house as something like hoose.
That is, you would have a lower sound as your first sound in your diphthong.
And so words like modern English bite would be bite, or words like modern English eye
would be oy, and words like modern English fight would be fight.
Now this, I believe, is the origin of pirate English.
We think of pirate English as that argh sound meaty, that late 17th century Johnny Depism
of life.
And I want to suggest that what we think of as pirate English is in fact a regional
evocation of early 17th century English where the Great Val Shift has not fully run its
course and where the long, excuse me, the long, high front monophthongs of Middle English
have not fully diphthongized into their modern form.
I matey.
This form of pirate English, if anybody asks you, how did the pirates speak?
You say they were in fact speaking the form of English in which the Great Val Shift hadn't
fully realized its course and in which the high front monophthongs of Middle English hadn't
fully diphthongized.
Now it's also true that the Great Val Shift hadn't fully run its course as late as the
early 18th century in some areas of England.
Alexander Pope, writing in the 18th century, reveals in his writings that the Great Val
Shift hasn't run its course completely because he will rhyme a word like join, J-O-I-N, with
a word like line, L-I-N-E, and they were probably pronounced join and line, and they rhymed.
I'm told that there are pockets in America where regional speakers will say things like
we're going to draw the line somewhere and we're going to join up, and that it's still
that early sound in forms of regional English.
Pope can do that rhyme on line and join because the diphthongs haven't fully mutated, if you
like, into their modern form.
We can use rhyme, as I'm suggesting, as evidence for the Great Val Shift, but we can also use
writing and in particular the writing of personal letters.
During the 15th and the 16th centuries, there was a rise in the writing of personal letters
among some of the great families of England, gentry families, commercial families, as the
children were leaving the family stead to go to London or to the city.
The families wrote letters to each other, and many of these letters still survived.
Now what we have in many of these letters from families known as the pastins and the
cellies and the stoners, the pastin letters in particular, remain one of the richest probes
of personal epistolarity for English literary history.
What we have here are educated, somewhat educated people, or let me be more precise, people
of varying degrees of education, some of whom learned to write in Chancery schools and used
Chancery forms, some of whom used older Middle English spellings, some of whom were reflecting
their actual speech habits.
What you can see in a set of letters from roughly the middle of the 15th to the beginning
of the 16th century are attempts on the part of these writers to represent the changing
sounds of English.
Let me give you some examples.
Very often you will see the word meet, M-E-E-T, to meet together, spelled M-Y-T-E.
This is middle English, but it's used in a different way.
That is what they're saying is we're going to meet.
Now in middle English, M-E-E-T would have been pronounced mate.
We're going to mate together, we're going to meet together.
If you wanted to say we're going to meet together, you would have to write M-I or M-Y-T-E.
They're using an old middle English convention of spelling to indicate a new sound.
Similarly, the verb to hear, to hear something, H-E-A-R, H-E-R-A, in middle English is being
spelled with a Y or an I, H-E-R-A.
So they're using old conventions of spelling to indicate new sounds.
And when we see these spellings, what we say is here are people who are trying to write
to reflect a change in pronunciation.
In middle English, if you wanted to stay somewhere, you would A-B-I-D-E.
We say abide because the E has become a diphthong.
In the 15th and 16th centuries, when these families are writing to each other, they will
sometimes spell it A-B-E-Y-D, abbeyed, because they want to show that that E sound has become
a diphthong.
So here you have a new spelling that's designed to evoke a new sound, our O-U-R.
In middle English, this would have been pronounced U-R, U-R-Selven, ourselves.
In many of these letters, it is spelled A-U-R to indicate that it is not U-R, but O-R.
Out, I'm going out, would have been pronounced in middle English, I'm going U-T.
This is being spelled O-W-T.
In other words, it's an imagined or created spelling to indicate that the diphthong has
happened.
I have found in some of these letters the word house, which in middle English would have
been spelled H-U-S and pronounced hoose.
I have seen it written H-O-W-S, house, because the scribes and the writers are telling us
this is how we said it.
These are examples.
There are many, many others, but these are examples of how you can see individuals in
England trying to evoke the sound of language changing.
They use either old spelling conventions or they make up new or ad hoc spellings in order
to do that.
So what I would like to do in concluding is review some of the material here with the
previous lecture and look ahead to the next to try to understand why the great vowel shift
is important, but why it needs to be understood as part of a larger set of changes that are
moving middle English to modern English.
First, the growing gap between educated writing and speech.
You'll remember that what Chancery had done was it had set up a system of spelling that
was designed for official documents and that could be learned by a scribe regardless from
what regional area that scribe had come from.
That spelling is gradually becoming conventionalized and becoming divorced from speech, spelling
no longer in effect represents pronunciation.
The texton by setting up his press at Westminster and by printing the works of English literature
in Chancery spelling forms is using an official standard as a literary standard and he's
also in effect historically therefore decoupling the earlier language from its spelling forms.
In other words, you're reading a somewhat modernized chaucer.
What's going on here is also a change in punctuation and one of the fascinating features
of the history of the English language is precisely the way in which punctuation changes.
One could indeed give an entire set of lectures on the history of punctuation.
Let me just give you a little bit now.
During the Middle Ages and during the period largely of manuscript transmission, punctuation
is eye punctuation.
In other words, punctuation is designed to move the eye, punctuation is ear punctuation.
It is designed to mirror the sound rather than the sense.
That is what punctuation is designed to do is indicate how something should be read aloud.
The job of punctuation in the manuscript age is the job not of marking clauses but of
marking breath.
So let me reiterate that early punctuation is ear punctuation.
It signals breaks in reading aloud.
By Caxton's time punctuation is moving towards eye punctuation.
That is, it's designed for the silent reader, signaling syntactic or causal units of a sentence.
Commas, semicolons, periods and the like are designed to break up sentences into units
of meaning rather than into units of breath.
This is something that is also affecting the look of English.
And so, what we see in the history of the 15th and the 16th centuries is a systematic
change in the pronunciation of the long-stressed monophthongs, a gradual divorce between spelling
conventions and speech, but at the same time an attempt on the part of some individual
writers to try to get their spelling to mime or to reproduce changing sounds.
As a coda to this lecture, let me mention a small group of words that seem not to have
undergone the great vowel shift.
There are a small group of words spelled with an ea, stake, great, break and yay.
And if these had participated in the great vowel shift, they would have been stique,
grit, brique and ye.
Now this is not something that affects every single word with an ea.
It is not something which affects lots and lots of names that are spelled with ea, but
etymologically and historically, the words stake, great, break and yay should have participated
in the great vowel shift and been pronounced stique, grit, brique and ye.
Why this is, nobody knows.
And so I'm going to leave you with this provocation that even though linguists may think they
can explain everything, there are gaps in our knowledge and exceptions to our rules.
And in subsequent lectures, I'm going to be opening up many of these gaps and fissures
in our knowledge to show us how the writers and the readers of the sixteenth, seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries sought but sought in vain to fix, to regulate and to manipulate
a language that was changing far too fast for anyone to transcribe.
