Lecture 15 The Expanding English Vocabulary
In the middle of the 17th century, a dictionary of the English language was published with
the title, A New World of Words.
My subject in this lecture is that new world of words, and I mean that in several ways.
Certainly, during the period that the great vowel shift was going on, the English language's
vocabulary was also changing dramatically.
New words were coming in from science, from colonial exploration and exploitation, from
ways of understanding and from structures of experience, from all forms of new coinages
and all languages of the world, European and non-European.
The new world of words evokes the sense that English drew its vocabulary from the globe,
and just as the search for a new world brought economic riches to the old, so it brought
linguistic riches to the old.
In this lecture, I want to look at the rise of the English vocabulary, not just the raw
increase in words, but the way in which English became what it is today, a language
omnivorous, voracious in its verbiage.
When we think of the expanding English vocabulary, we need to think of it in several levels, or
several strata.
The earliest set of terms to come in in the period I'm discussing now, the mid-15th century,
were terms that were called inkhorn terms.
That is, words coined from Latin or Greek, and they were coined for educated effect or
for sonic power.
They were called inkhorn terms because they seem to come right out of the inkwell or right
out of the inkhorn.
In other words, they were a mark not of speech, but of reading and writing.
Even though they were a mark of education by the user, they could be the object of derision
by those who felt that they had little rational basis in the history of the language.
What are some of these inkhorn terms from this period of time that are still in the
English language?
There are a few of them in alphabetical order.
Allurement, anachronism, autograph, capsule, dexterous, disregard.
That by the way is not an early inkhorn, but a late inkhorn term that's first used by
John Milton, erupt and meditate.
What you can hear in the inkhorn words is that they are polysyllabic, that they are
words of Latin or Greek origin, and that they are built up of roots with prefixes and suffixes.
Inkhorn terms fill the learned prose of the early modern period.
In poetry, the corresponding term for inkhorn is aureate, aureate diction.
Aureate means golden.
New coinages and new loans were brought in, and this was called aureation because the
words appeared glistening or golden in their latinity.
There was the belief, as we've seen throughout the course, that English was a mutable language.
We live, as Caxton said, under the domination of the moon.
Things are transitory.
As Chaucer put it in Troilus and Crusade, meanings change, and regional variation makes
it hard for us to understand what someone in a different part of the country may be
saying.
In John of Trevis's words, the birth tongue of English has been a peyred, that is, watered
down, diluted, corrupted in the way that one would alloy base metal with gold.
This view of the native rootstock of English contributed to a parallel view that Latin
or the Romance languages were somehow immutable.
In other words, that if English was a language of brass, Latin was a language of gold.
And so the poets used an aureate diction that was highly polysyllabic, that relied on metaphors
of beauty, of visual splendor, of sweetness, of purification.
These were the aureate terms, and you can see aureation and incornism coming together
in one of the most important educational treatises written in the middle of the 16th century.
Thomas Wilson's Art of Rhetoric was first written in 1553, and he uses terms from aureate
and incorn diction to parody or mock the level of affectation that writers of his day had
used.
And I'm going to give you just a couple of sentences from this passage.
Wilson is writing in effect a parody of a letter of application, that is, a letter written
by a subordinate to a superior, where the subordinate is asking for the superior's help
or benefit, and where the subordinate is making himself seen even less than the superior.
And I'm just going to read these two sentences, and I'm going to read them in modern English
pronunciation, but I want you to hear them because I want you to see how many of these
words you really understand.
The writer writes, pondering, expending, and revoluting with myself, your in-gent affability,
and ingenious capacity for mundane affairs, I cannot but celebrate and extol your magnifical
dexterity above all other.
Now what is this writer saying?
The writer is saying that as I think about what a smart and wonderful person you are,
and how great you are in the life in this world, I can do nothing but praise it.
That's what he's saying.
But pondering, expending, revoluting, indigent affability, ingenious capacity, mundane affairs.
We think of mundane as being not worthy of discussion, but mundane comes from mundus,
meaning the earth.
So mundane affairs really are not low but high, worldly affairs celebrate extol your
magnifical dexterity, that is your ability to do these things, your dexterity.
Dexterity comes from the Latin dexter, meaning the right hand.
The opposite of the right hand was sinistra, that is the left hand.
So if you were dexterous, you were right-handed, and if you were sinister, you were left-handed.
And not just your magnificent, but your magnifical dexterity.
So I'm spending time with these sentences to show you how the vocabulary of the English
language in the 16th century was expanding by using these coinages that came out of learning.
Now some of these terms survive today, but there are some in-corn terms that do not,
and I would like to share with you some of my favorites.
Or to put it more pointedly, I'd like to advocate the return of adeptid, which meant
attained.
Adnitulate, which means to reduce to nothing, adnitulate, to bring to nothing, obstupe fact,
to make unclear.
And one of my favorites, temulant, meaning drunk.
It seems to me that we have so many words for inebriation that one more certainly couldn't
and I would like to vote for temulant.
Why words stayed and why some disappeared, nobody really knows.
But words entered English during this period, not only from the in-corn, but from the ship.
They entered the language from travel, from commercial contact, and from science.
And what I'm going to be doing for the most part in the remainder of this lecture is giving
you lists of words.
In other words, words that have come from other languages during this period of time.
From France, during the period of exploration, contact, war, and social expansion, we have
the following, just as a small sample, alloy, bigot, bombast, dual, entrance, equip, essay,
explore, mustache, progress, talisman, tomato, volunteer.
What do these words have in common other than that they come from French?
Well, they certainly have an evocation of style, of the exotic, of forms of behavior,
and also of things brought from the new world, like the tomato.
Words at this time that come from Italy are very often words for Italian things, argosci.
That is a great journey.
Now this is an Italian learned coinage that's based on a Greek myth, because you had the
Odyssey, which was the journey of Odysseus.
The Argosci was the journey of the Argo, which was the name of Jason's ship in the
myth of the story of the Golden Fleece.
And so the Italian scholars coined Argosci, and it was brought into England, balcony.
How can one not imagine Romeo and Juliet in Verona without that balcony?
That is a word from Italian, granite.
The great quarries were Italian.
And so granite comes from Italy, stanza.
The Italians developed the stanza as the medium of lyric and narrative poetry, violin.
Cremona, and the extravarious, and the Amati families making violins.
And if you think of one thing Italian, you think of the volcano, whether it be Etna or
Pompeii.
From Spain and from Portugal, words entered English, not simply from those languages, but
also from the way in which the Spanish and the Portuguese named things from non-European
contexts.
So what are we talking about here?
We're talking about new fish, new fruits, new vegetables, new things like anchovy,
armada, the Spanish armada, banana, cannibal, cocoa, embargo, maize, meaning corn, mulatto,
potato, tobacco, and yam.
Many words came from Dutch, and these also were words that were grounded in maritime
exploration, smuggler, cruise, jib, schooner, reef, walrus, blunderbuss, tattoo, and knapsack.
Notice how many of these words reflect colonial contact, especially in the Americas and in
Africa.
These are not just words from different languages, but they are words from different registers.
They enter into the registers of colonialization and military engagement.
Words from non-European languages entered through travel, through trade, and through
conquest, and so as English and Europeans came in contact with speakers of Arabic, not just
in the Middle East, but along the great slave routes of the Indian Ocean and soon the Atlantic,
they found words like sash, hashish, mohair, sherbet, sofa, and henna.
In Turkish, dolmen, coffee, kaftan, kiosk.
In Chinese, the word for a flavored fish sauce eventually came to be pronounced as ketchup.
In Africa, there was the zebra, and in North America, there was the raccoon, the moose,
the skunk, the hickory, the totem, and the canoe.
It was a new world of words, all right, but it was also a new world not just from colonialism,
but from science and expansion.
From the natural sciences and from the study of the human body and the animal form, new
words were being coined such as vertebra, torpor, specimen, spectrum, mica, lens.
In mathematics, chord, cylinder, prism, calculus, from philosophy, dogma, critic, curriculum,
crux, propaganda, and alibi.
Now the growth of the English vocabulary prompted several discussions about whether loan words
or new coinages of these kind were in keeping with what was called the genius of the English
language.
I can reel off as I have lists and lists of words, but the question really is not just
whether these individual words are, should be, or became English.
The question that was asked at this time, the 16th, the 17th, and the 18th centuries,
the question that was asked was really, are these new words appearing, breaking down, diluting,
changing the wellsprings of language?
We've seen to this point in the course that English, historically, is a member of the
Germanic Languages branch.
And was English a Germanic language at this time?
Some scholars felt that the encroachments from overly learned Latin, or what was believed
to be affected, indeed, even effeminate French, were changing the overarching structure of
the language.
Such questions were also at the heart of a turn towards education in what came to be
called the excellence of English.
The study of language during the 16th and the 17th centuries, as I will develop in this
and in my subsequent lectures, was really a study of, if you like, cultural politics.
Everything spelling, doing vocabulary, was doing nationalism.
There were many English school masters of the 16th and 17th centuries who reflected on
these problems, and their writings fill volumes in great libraries.
In this and in the next few lectures, I'm going to be drawing on many of their writings
for insights into what people at the time thought the English language was doing.
The figure on whom I wish to concentrate now was a man named Alexander Gill, who lived
from 1564 to 1635.
He was the headmaster of the great St. Paul's school, and he was the teacher of John Milton.
Gill is, to me, a fascinating figure in the history of the English language.
He's very interested in pronunciation, and among the many things he does is to develop
a system, if you like, of phonetic transcription.
That is, he tries to come up with a way of actually spelling to reflect a form of pronunciation.
But his idea of pronunciation is a highly educated and rarefied one.
Gill is also fascinating because he writes vehemently against the introduction of these
incorn terms, these aureate words, these new Latin and Romance forms.
Gill is a genius at exaggeration, and in 1619 he published a book called The Loganomia Anglica.
That is, on the English language.
He's writing in Latin.
I'm going to quote him in an English translation, but I'm going to also pay a little bit of
attention to his Latin.
Now Gill is very much against what we might call the lexical enhancements and the rhetorical
amplifications of his time.
Now just the century before, I'd illustrated how Thomas Wilson could parody aureate and
incorn language in courtly prose.
Gill is looking back to a time further in the past.
He's interested in what he calls the language of our forefathers in antiquity.
And he believes that no language other than English could be, and his words I'm translating
now, graceful, elegant, or apt for the expression of every subtle thought.
His but faults, he says, have crept in.
And he announces with a vehemence worthy of Milton, his most famous student, the following.
And now I'm going to read an extended paragraph from Gill in a modern English translation of
his Latin.
And he writes, about the year 1400, Geoffrey Chaucer, star of ill omen, rendered his poetry
notorious by the use of Latin and French words.
Such is the stupidity of the uneducated masses that they admire most what they least comprehend.
And that time on, a new scurry appeared in writing and speaking.
For since everyone wishes to appear as a smatterer of tongues, and to vaunt his proficiency
in Latin, French, or any other language, so daily, wild beasts of words are tamed and
horrid, evil-sounding magpies, and owls of unpropitious birth are taught to hazard our
words.
Thus, today, we are, for the most part, Englishmen not speaking English, and not understood by
English ears, nor are we satisfied with having begotten this illegitimate progeny, nourished
this monster, but we have exiled that, which was legitimate, our birthright, pleasant in
expression, and acknowledged by our forefathers, O cruel country.
This is one of the most brilliantly insane passages in the history of the English language,
but its brilliance and its insanity can be parsed.
What I want to stress here is that Gil sees Chaucer not as the enhancer of language, which
is what many saw him as, but as the corruptor of language, that is, that Gil is also concerned
with the way in which this influx of Latin and Romance terms has changed the way in
which we speak and is challenged English, and also he creates a set of metaphors that
we need to get behind this English and look at his Latin to understand.
Now, when he says, while beasts of words are tamed, what he's saying in Latin is,
Ita Quotidi, and thus every day, Ferra vocum monstra cacuriat, the ferra monstra, the ferral
monsters of words are tamed.
Now, it's as if words are beasts, and these beasts are being brought into a language that
has now become not a peaceable kingdom of Eden, but a horrific zoo of the linguistic
imagination.
These are horrid, evil-sounding magpies, and his word horrid is the word horridus in Latin.
The Latin word horrid means to bristle, it means bristling, and this is a word that will
become central to the vocabulary of Gil's most famous student, John Milton.
Gil represents an English now as a bastard tongue, a monster living in the house that
should be the home of the legitimate.
And I just want to pause here and just call to your attention how Miltonic his language
is.
I cannot but imagine John Milton, decades later, blind composing Paradise Lost, thinking
of his teacher, horrid.
Right from Paradise Lost's start, we hear of Satan's horrid crew, hell is a horrible
dungeon.
He's the horrid silence of the fallen, molloch is a horrid king.
And in Book Two of Paradise Lost, Satan discovers his own illegitimate and bastard progeny,
pensive here I sat, alone, till my womb, pregnant by thee, and now excessively grown
prodigious motion felt, and rueful throws, at last this odious offspring, whom thou cease
thine own begotten, breaking violent away, tore through mine entrails.
This is sin talking to Satan about how Satan is the father in this incestuous coupling.
The daughter of Satan speaking to the father, the horrors of the illegitimate are everywhere
in Milton.
And I'm suggesting that Gil's vocabulary affects Milton's mind, and that what Milton
is doing is he's looking back to Gil's view of a fall from a linguistic Eden.
The Paradise that has been lost for Gil is a paradise of language.
The Paradise that Milton sees is a paradise of ethics, morality, and of experience.
And I want these things to be held in your mind as we work through in subsequent lectures,
the relationship between the poetry and prose of the time.
In wrapping up, the changing vocabulary of English was affected not simply by this new
world of words, but by a phenomenon known as polysemy.
As these new words entered the language, and as science and technology began to inform
the discourses of poetry and prose, words began to change meaning and connotation.
And what happens in the 16th century is a rise in a commercial vocabulary that provides
literary writers with new possibilities for metaphorical relationships, social relationships,
and personal desire can be expressed in commercial terms.
And we're going to see this in particular when we look at the language of Shakespeare.
Let me just give you an example of some of these polysemus phenomena.
The word cheap, for example, comes from Old English, and it also is a borrowing, you'll
remember, from the continental period, from Latin into the Germanic languages.
And it means exchange, or a place of commerce.
East cheap is still a street in London.
It's the Eastern market.
Good cheap was a good value.
And things that were valued cheaply were inexpensive.
So you have cheap, meaning an experience of economics, of trade, of exchange, and then
something very, very specific.
But during the period of the 15th, 16th, and 17th centuries, the word connoted this range
of meanings, and it could be used polysemously, that is, it could be used for pun, it could
be used for word play, or words like flagrant or ardent, which originally mean on fire or
burning, gradually come to take on emotional meanings.
That is, someone who is ardently in love may be burning in love, but may not be on fire.
So what polysemy does during this period is it makes possible greater ambiguities in vocabulary,
and it makes possible a greater range of figurative or metaphorical diction in poetry and in prose.
So what we see is how the changing vocabulary provokes an increase in the raw number of words
and a set of changes in those words, bringing them into greater metaphorical or greater figurative
resonance.
What we will see in subsequent lectures is how school masters, dictionary makers, and
poets are faced precisely with this problem of the literal's relationship to the metaphorical.
One of the central problems in dictionary making for the 17th and 18th centuries will
precisely be how you distinguish between literal and figurative uses.
So our dictionaries are reflecting not so much a record of actual speech as a system
of definitional organization worked out by the 17th and 18th century school masters.
And when we look at the writings of those school masters, as I will in subsequent lectures,
and when we look at the products of those school masters, poets like Shakespeare and
Milton, we're going to be looking at a collocation of writers using the English language and
writers writing about the English language who are trying to locate themselves as firmly
and precisely in the forests of this new world of words.
