Lecture 17 Renaissance Attitudes Toward Teaching English
How many of you can spell well?
I was a terrible speller as a child, and still am.
And I think there are times when computer spell checkers are the only thing that saves
me from embarrassment.
The idea of spelling well is an invention of the pedagogues and pedants of the 16th
and 17th centuries.
The core of this lecture is going to be the idea of English spelling.
And I want to look at issues in pedagogy and teaching, that is, in spelling, not just
to see how English spelling is regularized, but how, if you like, there's something of
an ethos or an ideology to spelling well.
What emerges in the course of the Renaissance in the English schoolroom and the English
University is an attitude towards language keyed to education.
And this attitude grows out of the provocations of new vocabulary terms, changes in syntax
and pronunciation that I have been detailing in my previous lectures.
Before considering how the institutions helped to shape English, I want to review some of
the major changes in English of the period.
That is, the three major things that have been going on.
And this is a good time to go back over some of the technical material that I have been
outlining in my previous lectures.
You will remember this enormous increase in vocabulary.
That is, that in the period from 1500 to 1700, you see the rise of in-corn terms.
You see science, philosophy, and technology creating new words and new coinages.
We have the rise of orient diction, of an elaborate Latinate and Romance vocabulary in poetry.
And what we also have is an attitude towards language that sees English as voracious or
omnivorous when it comes to new words.
As we will see in my subsequent lectures, Shakespeare is one of the greatest coiners
of words in the English language, and some people think that he personally came up with
something like 6,000 new words and added to the rootstock, if you like, of the English
vocabulary.
Contact through trade, exploration with non-English peoples, introduced new terms, but it also
provoked questions about the philosophy of language.
That is, what was the original language?
Was there a language of Adam?
Was there a language from which we had fallen?
What does it mean to come in contact with the native peoples of North and South America,
and recognize not simply that they have different words for things you've never seen, but recognize
that the very structure, sound, and pattern of their language was so alien or so different
that to some it did not seem like language at all?
The literature prompted this wider, golden or aureate vocabulary, and what you also
had was what I called polycebe, that is, not just a rise in the raw number of words, but
the changing meaning of older words, and so words from economy, words from psychology
could take on figurative meanings, words such as flagrant and ardent that originally meant
to burn or be on fire, were taking on emotional connotations, a word like silly, which originally
meant blessed, was taking on the connotation of meaning odd or unusual.
And so what you see here is a shift in the English vocabulary system and different resources
that different writers could use.
In addition to changes in vocabulary, the period from 1500 to 1700 saw changes in syntax
and grammar.
We've seen from my previous lectures how by about the year 1700, the major patterns
of word order, of word endings, and of grammar have become recognizable as our own.
That is, your standard word order pattern in a declarative sentence, subject, verb, object,
the use of the verb do to ask a question and to create emphasis, the use of do as a replacement
verb, the use of modal verbs, shall and will and may and ought, as helping verbs in the
sentence, and the rise of verbal forms in ing, I'm going to do something, having done
this and the like.
These all contribute to what I considered the greater idiomatic flavor of English during
the time, that English was becoming more and more idiomatic.
Third, you have spelling and pronunciation.
By about the year 1700, the great vowel shift, you'll remember, the great vowel shift is
the change in the pronunciation of the long, stressed monophthongs of middle English.
They have pretty much changed now, and the great vowel shift as a systemic change in
English had pretty much run its course by the year 1700.
And so pronunciation at the beginning of the 18th century, with a few exceptions, is probably
little different from the pronunciation of our own time to two, three centuries later.
But as I illustrated in some writers, such as Alexander Pope, some words still rhymed
in the 18th century that didn't rhyme later, and we can see in certain pockets of American
regional dialect, archaic or older forms of pronunciation that remind us of a time when
the great vowel shift hadn't fully run its way through.
Now during this period, there is a central change in spelling.
Spelling continues to reflect history rather than pronunciation, and we saw that perhaps
the biggest change in attitude towards spelling in the late medieval period is the rise of
chancery, that is, the place where official documents were handwritten for the government
of England, and where scribes, regardless of their regional origin, would be taught
to spell in standard ways.
And we looked in earlier lectures at some examples of chancery English to indicate how
spelling was gradually becoming divorced from pronunciation.
Spelling represented conventions, it did not represent pronunciation.
And what we saw in the work of William Caxton, England's first printer, was how Caxton
re-spelled in effect, the earlier works of Middle English literature, notably Chaucer,
when he came to print them in the 1470s and 1480s.
Caxton took an official documentary standard as a new literary standard, and through the
influence of print, these forms of spelling took hold in the late 15th, 16th, and 17th
centuries.
So let's look at spelling as an issue for school masters in the Renaissance.
Now under the influence of teachers and scholars, literary writers and translators began to
re-spell certain native or certain long accepted loan words in new ways.
So what I would like to suggest is this, there are times when spelling is genuinely etymological.
In other words, times when we still spell the word night, meaning a fighter on horseback,
K-N-I-G-H-T, we spell through T-H-R-O-U-G-H.
We do not pronounce these words in this way, knicht and thruch, but our spelling maintains
the history of their older pronunciation.
These are, if you like, historical or etymological spellings.
In the course of the 16th and 17th century, however, the idea of historical or etymological
spelling took hold with such vigor and such vehemence that certain traditionally spelled
words in English were re-spelled to evoke what scholars believed to be their imagined
etymology.
So what I'm getting at is that there is a new concept at work, that English spelling
should be historical, even if that spelling doesn't really reflect the actual history
of the word.
So let me give you some examples.
Take the words debt, which we spell D-E-B-T, and doubt, which we spell D-O-U-B-T.
Now these words originally came from Latin, and they entered French, but they came into
Middle English from French.
And when they entered Middle English, the word debt was spelled D-E-T-T, or D-E-T-T-E,
and the word doubt was very often spelled D-O-U-T-E.
These were words which in their English spelling never had a B in them.
But schoolmasters of the 16th and 17th centuries insisted on spelling these words with Bs because
they believed that they were ultimately descended from Latin words, and in a sort of sense they
were.
I mean that is, they originally come from the Latin words debitare and dubitare.
Those are the Latin verbs, but they never entered English directly from Latin.
They entered by way of French.
So here is an interesting question about silent letters.
There are words like night, and words like through, which have silent letters because
we have lost their pronunciation.
But there are words like debt and doubt that have silent letters, but those letters were
never pronounced.
The Bs are the spelling fantasies, if you like, of schoolteachers.
Let me give you some other examples of how pedagogical and pedantic spelling reform leapfrogged,
if you like, over the real history of English to go back to imagined Latin roots.
Take a word like adventure.
Adventure comes originally from the Latin ad venere, to enter into or to journey into
something, to go towards.
Again, this is a word that comes into English by way of French.
And in Middle English, the word is aventure.
It's never adventure.
But it was re-spelled just as debt and doubt were re-spelled with Bs.
Here is a word that is re-spelled with a D, ad venture, to reflect this older imagined
etymology.
Take a word like perfect, perfect perfectus perfectum, to make in an excellent way or
to be an ideal of.
This again is a word that enters Middle English from its French form, parfait.
Chaucer's knight in the Canterbury tales is a very perfect gentle knisht.
He's a very perfect or idealized gentle knight.
And throughout the Middle English and early modern period, perfect was in fact spelled
parfait.
Again, it is re-spelled to reflect an imagined Latin origin.
And I'll give you another example, verdict.
Yes, it's from Latin, but it comes into English from French.
And the way it comes into English is in the French form voir-d.
Verdict means to speak the truth.
In French, voir-d means to speak the truth.
We still use that phrase in law when we're talking about interviewing a jury, but when
we talk about the result of that jury's deliberations, we talk about the verdict.
Chaucer's canterbury tales will have its host, Harry Bailey, set up the tail-telling game,
and they will all judge which pilgrim tells the best tale.
And that judgment will be voir-d, and that's how it's spelled in Middle English.
It is a French phrase.
Once again, it is re-spelled, not as French, but as Latin, by schoolmasters of the 16th
and 17th centuries, verdict.
How do these specific examples construct a cultural attitude?
Spelling, and this is the theme of this lecture.
Spelling becomes a social accomplishment.
That is, for the first time, being a really good or really a proper speller is a mark
of literacy.
It is a mark of learning and education.
If you do not spell well, you are considered illiterate.
Our pedagogical preoccupations with good spelling, therefore, are the lineal descendants
of these attitudes of Renaissance schoolmasters.
The equation of spelling, indeed, with almost a kind of moral or ethical, as well as educational
level of accomplishment, this is the legacy of the Renaissance schoolroom.
If spelling represented an ideal of education, the idea of educated speech was also emerging
at this time.
You'll remember from my previous lectures how the question of a standard spoken English
was very often grounded on the level of region, class, or official affiliation.
In other words, was the region of West Saxony, of Wessex, was that going to be West Saxony?
West Saxony English, was that going to be the standard of Old English, a regional form?
Was the East Midland dialect of Middle English going to become a national literary standard?
Was Chancery going to become a standard?
Was the language of the aristocrats going to be a standard?
So older notions of where you came from, or the stratum into which you were born, or the
place where you worked, these old standards of region, class, or official affiliation
give way in the course of the 16th and 17th centuries to a new criterion, and that criterion
is education.
The idea of education was that a person from any area or any class could potentially be
educated to read and write in the same way.
So the new idea here is that if you like education, it faces regional boundaries.
In other words, there should come a point when if you were well-schooled enough, no one
could guess where you'd come from, but also that education prompt region or class.
And this is an important move in Renaissance English, courtier, and diplomatic life.
The idea that individuals could rise in power, not completely irrespective of their birth,
but that their birth did not determine uniquely or irrevocably the class that they were to
aspire to.
And so what you have is you have figures like Sir Thomas Wyatt in the age of Henry VIII.
You have courtiers under Queen Elizabeth.
You have someone like Shakespeare, the son of a glover, who can become quite wealthy,
and who through education or through verbal accomplishment, if you like, can rise in society.
So this is a new idea.
In order to trace this new idea, I'd like to spend the bulk of the remainder of this
lecture reading to you from some selections, from Renaissance school masters, theorists,
writers, pedagogues, authors of textbooks.
These are individuals who reflected on the notions of education, on the notions of regionalism,
and on the notions of spelling that are changing at this time.
They're fascinating figures, and I can only give you snippets of their work.
But what I want to begin with is with writers who worked on education as a factor.
The first writer that I'd like to quote from is a man named John Hart, and he was writing
in the 1560s.
And he wrote that the best English was that of, and I'm quoting him here,
the learned and the literate, which every reasonable English man will the best he can
frame his tongue there unto.
Now this is a very interesting phrase, because what he does is Hart associates learning with
literacy.
In other words, you go to school to become literate, and literacy now is something which
almost exclusively means the ability to read and write well in the vernacular.
In the Middle Ages, a literatus in Latin was somebody who had skill in Latin.
And we saw that for a very brief period in history, maybe no more than a century, in
Anglo-Saxon England, literacy could also be vernacular literacy.
But for much of the Middle Ages, the concept of literacy itself, whenever you called someone
literate, you were talking about their command of Latin.
By the middle of the 16th century, that extends now to a command in English.
But what's also very interesting about Hart's phrasing is the way he uses the phrase every
reasonable English man.
And what he means by reasonable is not simply the casual sense of, you know, a kind of reasonable
or thoughtful person.
What he really means is that located in the individual will be an intellectual quality
of reason, of ratio.
In other words, that the rational thing to do here is to write and speak according to
the standards of the learned and the literate.
And so what Hart does in the course of his work, in fact, is he develops a notion of good
reading and writing, a notion of good English that will seem to us to be class-based or
education-based or keyed to certain forms of pronunciation or spelling.
But he's arguing that it is the rational way to speak and read.
I've mentioned Alexander Gill in a previous lecture.
He was Milton's teacher.
And in 1619, he published his exceedingly important book, the Loganomia Anglica, the
English language.
He wrote it in Latin.
And I've given you some quotations from Gill before.
I want to return to Gill now.
And Gill talked about how education was very important.
And here is Gill in an English translation of his Latin.
And he says that in manners, the opinion of the good, so in pronunciation, the custom
of the learned is to be taken as a basis.
So let me pause here.
That is, good manners are arbitrated by good people.
So good pronunciation should be arbitrated by educated people.
I'll continue.
All spelling, he says, is to be accommodated to the sound not used by plowmen, maidservants,
and porters, but by learned or elegantly refined men in speaking and reading.
Again, a wonderful bit of overstatement on the part of Gill.
Gill is a genius, if you like, of this kind of exaggeration.
But what I love here is the way in which he's talking about English spelling, that it should
be keyed to forms of pronunciation, and that the arbiters of pronunciation should be learned
and elegantly refined men, obviously people like Alexander Gill.
Now for others, regionalism was an issue.
And one of the most influential of writers in the Elizabethan period, that is, the last
decades of the 16th century, was a man named George Putnam.
And George Putnam, writing in 1589, recommended the best English as that of the court and
the region of England nearest to the court, that is, the southeast.
And here he is writing in 1589.
He says the best English, and I quote, is the usual speech of the court in that of London,
and the shires lying about London with 60 miles and not much above.
So it's as almost as if what he does is he takes a map of England and he sets a compass
to a 60 mile radius and puts the point right at the English court and draws the circle around.
And he goes on, I say not this, but that every shire of England, there are gentlemen and
others that speak, but especially right, as good southern English as we of Middlesex or
Surrey do.
But not the common people of every shire to whom the gentlemen and also their learned
clerks do for the most part condescend.
So what he's saying is this, southern regional educated English, the language of the court
and the language of the universities, and the fact is that Oxford and Cambridge are just
about 60 miles from London, so that's your periphery of your radius of good speech, that
the home counties and the universities that these are the loci of good speech.
And he says it's perfectly possible that there are people elsewhere in England who speak
good southern English as well as anybody from this region might, but it's the common
people who do not.
And so what Putnam is arguing for is a notion of a regional standard keyed to the fact that
at that region you have the institutions that arbitrate good behavior and good education.
Let me turn to someone writing about 100 years later, Owen Price, who's writing in the middle
of the 17th century, in his 1665 book called The Vocal Organ.
And he writes that in his book, quote, I have not been guided by our vulgar pronunciation,
but by that of London and our universities, where the language is purely spoken.
So once again, you have a notion of region keyed to the institutions of that region,
and what we also have is a very interesting shift, if you like, semantically in the word
vulgar.
The vulgis, vulgar, the vulgi, that was simply the word for the populace.
Vulgar Latin was not dirty Latin, it was the spoken Latin, the vulgate Bible was the version
of the Latin Bible prepared in late antiquity into, if you like, the Latin of everyday speech.
But by the 17th century, the word vulgar is being transformed into a pejorative.
That is, it's not simply commoner every day, but it's now carrying with it the connotation
of course and potentially of socially unacceptable.
Now in the course of this period, and in the course of these debates, a larger question
was arising.
Should English spelling in fact be reformed?
Some people argued that we should simply keep the system of spelling historically, and that
we should develop systems of pronunciation that are in effect apart from that spelling
system.
In other words, that we shouldn't spell as we speak.
Others argued that we should radically reform spelling to represent pronunciation, and some
writers of the 16th and 17th centuries, including in fact the scientist and natural philosopher
Isaac Newton, became so fascinated with the idea of being able to represent speech in
written form that they developed what we might call phonetic alphabets.
So those are the two poles of argument during the period from about the middle of the 16th
to the end of the 17th century, and I want to conclude with two quotations.
I want to quote to you from the writings of Richard Mulcaster, who lived from about 1530
to 1611.
He was the first director of the Merchant Taylor School.
He was the teacher of the poet Edmund Spencer.
He was later the head of St. Paul's School, and he claimed that English spelling was
fine as it was, that what he wanted was not reform but consistency.
And writing in the 1590s, he's responding to spelling reformers by saying that such
reforms quote, cummer our tongue, both with strange characters and with needless diphthongs.
And he goes on.
If there want distinction, then accent must be meant to avoid confusion or some such device
which may distinguish with praise and not pester the writing with any too odd strangeness.
So what he's saying is this, look, spelling as fine as it is, and if there are some problems,
then we can put in diacritical marks or we can use some forms, we can tweak spelling
a little bit, but we don't want to encumber our tongue with strange characters with weird
letter forms and with needless diphthongs, that is, with elaborate respellings of vowels.
Let's not get confused here.
Let's be rational.
Alexander Gill, again, weighed in, of course, on spelling as he weighed in on everything.
And his remarks on spelling, with which I will conclude this lecture, are really more
remarks on language as a whole, and it's a somewhat extended passage that I'm going
to read now.
For nothing so much contributes to the fame of a people as their language, not skill in
warfare, not knowledge of literature.
For through language these things are made known amongst the people, bequeathed to foreigners
and handed down to posterity.
For none of the languages now spoken by men will be found to be more graceful, elegant,
or apt for the expression of every subtle thought than English.
Admittedly, numerous faults which impede the studies of our youth have crept into our
language, but by bringing back those characters used by our forefathers in antiquity, neglected
through indifference in former times, and by introducing one or two new ones, I have
so restored them all that any inexperienced person will be able immediately to perceive
at first sight the proper sound of our words.
Gill develops a system of spelling with some new characters, and he develops a system of
spelling that is designed to make the sound of English clear to anyone.
But this is more than just a statement about spelling, it's a statement about what Gill
and some of his contemporaries believed to be the essence of English.
What is the genius or the essence of the English language?
These debates raised to a higher level in the 18th century will be debates that we will
see in the work of Samuel Johnson and his contemporary lexicographers and critics.
But for now, let's go back to Gill, and let's go back to that time when we see not just
the school masters but the playwrights on the stage, and in my next two lectures I'm
going to look closely at the work of Shakespeare to see how he reached into the wellsprings
of English and bequeathed to later readers and writers something which they invariably
thought of as the genius of their tongue.
Thank you.
