Lecture 18, Shakespeare, Drama, Grammar, Pronunciation
Shakespeare. The very name evokes the acme of the English language. Shakespeare, perhaps
more than any other writer, contributed, it is believed, new words and idioms to English.
He created character and concept, and in his plays and poems, he gave rise to what many
believe to be the first modern individuals on the stage or in the fictional imagination.
Shakespeare's presence in the history of the English language is unquestionably important.
And what I would like to do in this and in my following lecture is to look in detail
at some features of Shakespeare's language, in particular, how it might have sounded to
his contemporaries, what the nature of his lexical resources may have been, that is what
his vocabulary was, what grammatical features exist uniquely in the time of Shakespeare and
separate that language from our own. But what I'd also like to talk about are some
of the contexts in which Shakespeare's work comes down to us. Such contexts include the
stage and habits of performance, rhetoric and the habits of schoolroom education and
printing and the habits of typesetting, book selling and book marketing that present the
Shakespearean text in a form that visually may seem very alien to us today. Shakespeare
was in many ways the the canonical writer in English. But how much can we attribute
to him? He employed the language of an educated professional, that is, at least up through
the grammar school level. He's clearly very well read and conversant in the ideas of the
age, both scientific and literary. His contemporary, Ben Johnson, in a famous line, considered
Shakespeare to have had, as he put it, small Latin and less Greek. Shakespeare did not
have a university level education, but it seems clear from the basis of his plays and
his poems that he knew the great works of history, that he knew his English literary
forebears such as Chaucer and Spencer, that he knew the work of Plutarch and Roman and
Greek history, and that he knew the plays of the Roman Tragedian Seneca, whether he knew
them in Latin or in their Elizabethan translations. Shakespeare was very much aware of his somewhat
older contemporary, Edmund Spencer, the author of The Fairy Queen, and he's clearly in tune
with many of the social, economic and political developments of his time. Shakespeare can be
read, if you like, as a textbook writer on various subjects of the late 16th and early
17th century. For example, you can read him as a textbook in science. He has a phrase
in one of his plays, Humorous Night. Now, humorous night does not mean funny or witty
night, but night that is wet or dewy, that is, filled with something like the liquid
humors that in Renaissance psychology we were made up of humors, blood and bile and sweat.
And these humors or these forms of experience and feeling took liquid shape, so humorous
night means it's kind of wet or kind of dewy, or a phrase such as the elements so mixed
in him. The idea here is that the elements are the four great elements. It doesn't mean
iron and aluminum and oxygen, it means earth, air, fire and water, that is, the elements
of old alchemy. And so Shakespeare is a textbook of the world. We have the details of London
life, we go to the forest of Arden, we go to the Tempest, to the land of what is called
the Far Bermudes, that is, the island of Bermuda, a place only recently visited at the beginning
of the 17th century. There is a famous anecdote about a playgoer in the modern period who
goes to see a Shakespeare play. And when he's asked about it, he says, well, it was
OK, but it was full of quotations. Shakespeare's plays are full of quotations, not simply in
the sense that we have quoted Shakespeare so much that many of the lines seem as if
they're just quotations or cliches, but Shakespeare is full of the quotations from other earlier
authors, from his sources. He's full of quotations because we cannot but hear phrases that are
Shakespearean in origin and that now seem memorable. And so one of the questions I want
to ask in this and in my subsequent lecture is what makes a phrase memorable? Why is it
that Shakespeare seems to us a tissue of quotations? Before exploring the familiar Shakespeare,
however, I want to say something about how he's unfamiliar or alien. Now you'll recall
how by the 17th century the Great Val Shift had not fully or completely run its course.
And we can use the resources of historical linguistics to reconstruct something of the
sound of Shakespeare's language. Grammatically, that is, when we look at grammar and morphology,
what we see are some uses that to us are only dimly familiar. Now you'll remember from
my earlier lectures that I talked about the rise and usage of forms of the verb do and
ing endings, together with changes in the system of modal verbs, adjustments of syntax
and word order, and the increase in the idioms of everyday English. And these had a great
impact on Shakespeare's language, but also Shakespeare's appropriation of some of these
newer idioms had an impact on their later usage. There are, however, many things about
Shakespeare's grammar that may strike us as archaic. For example, he employed the use
of multiple negatives and comparatives. The most unkindest cut of all is perhaps one of
the most famous. He used the third person, neuter pronoun it, and it's, in distinctive
ways, and I called attention to some of those ways in earlier lectures. And he used older
endings for the second person's singular forms of verbs, like thou dost, and the third
person singular he doth. Shakespeare also, with varying degrees of consistency, used two
different pronouns for the second person, and you'll remember once again, thou forms
that are singular and informal, and you forms that are plural and formal. And in the second
part of this lecture, I'm going to go into great detail by looking at a passage from
the play, Richard the Third, which we could see, in effect, as a kind of drama of the
second person pronoun. When it comes to vocabulary, or if you like, Lexis, Shakespeare deployed
the growing resources of the English vocabulary to increase markedly the lexical basis of
the literary language. So what do we mean by this? Many of his words come from commerce
and trade, many of them coinages, but many of them, too, represent metaphorical or figurative
uses of words or technical meaning. Some display what we might call, also, a functional shift
in their employment as different parts of speech, and I want to pause to give a couple
of examples of this. One idea of poetry, if you like, that I think many of us have,
and that I think Shakespeare develops to its acme, is the idea that you take a word from
one grammatical category, and you put it in another grammatical category. In other words,
you take a noun and you turn it into a verb. Let me give you an example from a line of
Shakespeare. The hearts that spanieled me at heels, that is, the hearts, that is, the
deer, that followed me at my heels like a spaniel. If any of you have had a dog, if
any of you have had a spaniel, you'll know how that spaniel follows the master at the
heels, sort of breathlessly tongue-hanging out, so two spaniel Shakespeare imagines as
a verb meaning to follow like a spaniel. When Shakespeare does this, he shows us, I think,
a new category of poetic language. In other words, Shakespeare bequeaths to later writers,
not simply a set of words or idioms or phrases. I think he bequeaths to later literary writers
an idea of what constitutes the poetic or the literary. In other words, make nouns into
verbs, make verbs into nouns, make certain compounds into adjectives. So when we read
a poet like, let me think, Dylan Thomas, for example, and we come across a line in Dylan
Thomas like, the heron priested shore, where he's describing a beach or a shore.
A shoreline full of herons, and they seem to be holding sway over the beach like priests,
so it is a heron priested shore. What you see here is an example of the kind of verbal,
functional shifting that Shakespeare developed to a high art. Shakespeare gave us an idea
of the poetic and the elevated, but he also gave us an idea of the vulgar and the crude.
No one curses as greatly as Shakespeare. No one disses like the Bard. Here's a little
example from the play King Lear, when Kent confronts the self-important steward. And
Kent describes him, and I quote, as, a nave, a rascal, an eater of broken meats, a base,
proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited hundred-pound, filthy, worsted stocking nave, a lily-livered
action-taking nave, a horse-on, glass-gazing, super-finical rogue, one trunk-inheriting slave.
What is amazing about this passage is not just its string of curses, but that wonderful
phrase, lily-livered. We think of lily-livered as the language of the saloon rather than
the language of the salon. We think of lily-livered as, up there with varmint and buckaroo, a lily-livered
cow-poke. But lily-livered is a Shakespearean coinage, and the genius of that coinage is
sets itself irrevocably into the matrix of the English language. Shakespeare is a master
of rhetoric. Rhetoric in his time was the training of the school. Shakespeare and his contemporaries
would have been trained in the arts of rhetoric and oratory. Rhetoric is the disciplined and
creative use of words for the purposes of persuasion. The job of the rhetorician was
to evoke an emotional response in the listener or in the reader. I had quoted from Thomas
Wilson's Art of Rhetoric in an earlier lecture, and this was one of the first major textbooks
of the middle of the 16th century that dealt with ways of organizing speech according to
formal models. Schemes, tropes, metaphors, images that poets and courtiers and orators
could use, they were all available in these ways. Rhetoric is the art of organizing language
in these special ways, and this was the job of the schoolroom. So when we look at Shakespeare's
poetry, especially in the sonnets and in the soliloquies of the plays, we're going to be
looking at patterns of rhetorical organization. And so what I'd like to do now is I'd like
to turn to an extended passage to illustrate how Shakespeare uses the resources of his
language for particular dramatic effect. And the passage that I'm going to focus on is
a scene in Richard III, and it is the scene between Richard and the woman that he craves,
Lady Anne. Richard is interrupting Lady Anne on her way to Henry VI's funeral. This is
the setup. Now Lady Anne had been married to Henry VI's son, Edward, and Richard had
had him murdered. So Richard raises the question of just what caused the deaths, that is the
deaths of Edward, but also the deaths of Henry VI, and Anne shoots back. And I'm just going
to read it, and what I'm going to do is I'm going to read it in modern pronunciation,
and I'm going to signal the speaker at the beginning of each line or each section. Anne
says, Thou was the cause and most accursed effect. And Richard says, Your beauty was
the cause of that effect. Your beauty that did haunt me in my sleep to undertake the
death of all the world, so I might live one hour in your sweet bosom. And Anne responds,
if I thought that, I tell thee, homicide, these nails should rent that beauty from my
cheeks. Richard, these eyes could not endure that beauty's rack. You should not blemish
it if I stood by, as all the world is cheered by the sun, so I by that it is my day, my
life, Anne. Black night or shade thy day, and death thy life. Richard, curse not thyself,
fair creature, thou art both. Anne, I would I were to be revenged on thee, Richard. It
is a quarrel most unnatural to be revenged on him that loveth thee.
This is an immensely powerful passage, and I want to focus on several aspects of its
sense and of its sound. But first, let me reread the opening few lines in a historical
reconstruction of Shakespearean pronunciation. That is, what these lines might have sounded
like to Shakespeare's audience. And I'm going to read the first five lines of the speech
I just read. Though was the cause and most accursed effect, your beauty was the cause
of that effect, your beauty that it haunt me in my sleep, to undertake the death of all
the world, so I might live onur in your sweet bosom.
Now, the most important thing to notice about the sound here is that the great vowel shift
had not sorted itself out as fully. And when I read it aloud, what I tried to stress was
that the older Middle English, long high vowels, O and E, had not completely turned into the
modern diphthongs, O and I. And so, thou and my, I pronounced like though and moi.
So too, the older Middle English, long vowel, A, had not fully moved up to its modern position,
A, and so what you have is a word like undertake, which I pronounced more like undertak.
These sound changes would have distinguished Shakespeare's English from Chaucer's, but
some words were probably still pronounced as they'd been in Middle English. The words
cause and haunt, scholars believe, probably were still pronounced chaos and haunt as they
had been in Middle English. Now, some words are harder to place, and I want to go through
this in a little bit of detail here. The word world may not have been pronounced with its
old Middle English vowel, world, or it may have been pronounced world. The W changes
the way in which you pronounce a following vowel. It rounds the form. So, very often,
just a pause on W's, you can say things like car, but war. That is the W rounds your mouth
and gets you ready and rounds the vowel. But this is also a historical change, so it's
unclear whether in Shakespeare's time these W's were actually rounding the vowels, world
or world or something like that. Also, the letter R affected the pronunciation of sounds.
Now, depending on where you're from these days, you may say the name Mary, M-A-R-Y, you
may say the word Mary, M-A-R-R-Y, and you may say the verb to marry, M-A-R-R-Y, all completely
differently, or you may say them the same, Mary, Mary and Mary, or Mary, Mary and Mary,
Mary, Mary and Mary. The spoken English of the 16th and the 17th centuries similarly
had what we might call an instability of pronunciation of words that were E-R or I-R spellings.
And this instability is still reflected in some forms of modern spoken English. The word
person and the word person come from the same root, words vermin and varmint come from the
same root, words university and varsity come from the same root. In England you're a clerk,
but in America you are a clerk, in America you go to Berkeley, and in England you had
Bishop Barkley. These are some features of Shakespearean pronunciation that I'm trying
to call attention to and that I'm trying to evoke in, if you like, my representation
of the sound. But what I'd also like to talk about is the way in which this particular
passage is an essay in the second person forms. The entire passage has, at its heart, the
drama of the interchange of thou and you forms, signaling the shifting personal relationships
between Richard and Anne. Richard is trying to woo Anne. She is spurning him. She's
opening with a contemptuous and condescending thou. Thou was the cause. She's talking down
to him, like a servant. Richard responds with a socially correct and formal you, indicating
that he is directing a superior, your beauty. Anne and Richard, in the course of the passage
I read, exchange thou forms and you forms. She vows him, and he use her. But in the final
line of the passage, when Richard really wants to make it clear that he wants her sexually,
he calls her thee, when he says it is a quarrel most unnatural to be revenged on him that
loveth thee. When you love, you love in the second person informal. You love in the thou
form. You can see how Shakespeare in this passage is manipulating the resources of the
language that are lost to us. One must be acutely sensitive to these shifts in pronouns
and in grammar. And this is the point I'm trying to make also about the sort of paradox
of Shakespeare, that he seems so modern, but he can be so alien. That the sounds, even
though they're certainly not middle English sounds, are really not modern English sounds,
and that his grammar, transparent though it may be to us, still hinges on particular details.
And here, as I've suggested in this extended reading, they are the details of the second
person. In addition to the contexts of grammar, vocabulary, pronunciation, another important
context for understanding Shakespeare is the context of print. Now Shakespeare in print
offers many surprises. The passage that I've been talking about from Richard III can be
found in the so-called first folio edition of Shakespeare's plays. This book, which
was published in 1623, contains just about all of his play texts. But 17th century printing,
especially of drama, was a very different enterprise than modern publication. Many of Shakespeare's
plays circulated before that posthumous first folio printing. They circulated in different
prints, maybe from actors, copies, maybe pirated editions, and these were smaller books called
quartos. And in my next lecture, I'm going to spend some time talking about Hamlet, and
the way in which Hamlet appears differently in the major folio edition and in the earlier
quarto editions. What I would like to do now is go back to the passage from Richard III
and talk about how it appears in the first folio. In other words, what is there visually
about the look of Shakespeare's early printed text that alienates us from Shakespeare, that
locates him historically, and that helps explain some issues and resolves some problems that
many of us have in looking at early print. So let me begin with one of the most frequently
asked questions that I get as a teacher of English, as a historian of language, as a
scholar of the book. People will invariably say to me, how come, back in the old days,
people wrote their S's like they were F's. It's not true. When you look at this passage
in the first folio, and when you look at any early printed book, a book printed probably
before the middle of the 18th century, you have various forms of the letters. And one
of these is the so-called long S. That is, it's a long letter and it's a long letter
and it sometimes looks like an F. But the F has a little crossbar and the S does not.
When you look closely at the text, you'll see that the S and the F are different. So
answer number one, people did not write their S's and F's in the same way.
Question number two, when you look at this passage in the first folio and when you look
at many early printed editions, what you find is the word that, T-H-A-T, often abbreviated
as it is here in the line, these eyes could not endure that beauty's rack. And the way
it looks on the printed page is it looks like a Y and then a tiny T superscripted over it.
And this is not it or yet or yet, it's that. And in order to explain why it's that, I
need to tell you a little story. In old English and in middle English and in early modern English,
the sound represented by our modern spelling, T-H, was represented by an older letter that
had descended from the runic alphabet. Runes was the system of writing that the ancient
Germanic peoples had used. And runic letters were adapted by old English scribes to represent
sounds in English that did not exist in Latin. One of these sounds was the interdental continuant,
remember articulatory phonetics, the interdental continuant F, as in the and that. The thorn
was a letter that looked like a big P with a flag on it or it looked like a P with a
taller mast. Now, as this came to be written very, very quickly, the bowl of the P gradually
changed and the top started flattening out so that by the 15th century, when scribes
were writing and when printers began to print, this P with a flag on it started to look more
like a Y with a hat. That is, it looked like a Y but with the top of the Y closed off.
And gradually, printers maintained this as a convention and they would use the Y to indicate
in certain abbreviations the sound P-H. So very often, you will see in early printed
books that that looks like Y-T. It's not. It's the descendant of the old thorn, thuh,
with the abbreviation. So thuh that. Sometimes you will see the definite article look like
Y-E. It is not. The hallmark of the cute is ye oldy shoppy, ye oldy tavern, the daft
definite article in English was never ye. It was the or the. The Y is a printing convention
that descends from the manuscript tradition of writing a T-H sound using the old runic
letter thorn and over time the shape of that letter changed and it looked like a Y. And
so if anybody asks you, it was never ye oldy shoppy. The look of Shakespeare in his time
is as different as the sound of Shakespeare in his time. And so what we need to see in
understanding Shakespeare's place in the history of the language is his relationship to speech
sound, to grammar, to vocabulary and to print culture. In my next lecture, I'm going to
look at some of the ways in which the stage and the page work in tandem and in tension
to give us a Shakespeare that may be remarkably familiar but also one that is radically alien.
And in the so-called bad quarto of Hamlet, we may see things that today we may not simply
let be but which we would rather not be at all.
