Lecture 19. Shakespeare. Poetry, sound, sense.
To be or not to be?
That is a question not just for Hamlet but for us.
What is the authentically Shakespearean?
What is the relationship between what we imagine to be Shakespeare's intention and
the way in which that intention showed up on the stage and on the page?
The medium of print during the Renaissance was almost as variable as writing itself.
Books were very often proofread in the course of their production.
Great fonts would break, individual texts would be corrected or left uncorrected, and
the individual printed book could be as unique an object as an individual handwritten manuscript.
When we look at Shakespeare's plays and poems, we are looking at documents of Renaissance
bookmaking.
And very often these documents reflect the variations, and if you like, the mutations
of the print shop from the sound, of stage, or the mind of the author.
In the case of Hamlet, we have one of the most famous and distinctive of Shakespeare's plays
that comes down to us in several versions.
There is, of course, the version of the play that appears in the 1623 first folio published
posthumously, but there are two earlier versions of the play in quartos.
Now just to pause for a minute, a folio is a large printed volume, and a quarter was
a small printed volume, and that's all you really need to know.
The quartos were smaller if you like hand-sized or pocket-sized volumes.
And the first time Hamlet was printed was in 1603, in something we call the First Quarto.
And the Hamlet of 1603 is short, it seems garbled, the language is remarkably different,
and much of the structure and idiom of the play is almost unrecognizable.
In 1604, there was another quarto printed.
This is the so-called Second Quarto, and here the play is longer, the speeches are more
representative of what we know, the disposition of the lines among the actors, the way in
which the play is organized, the arc and sweep of the tragedy is far more familiar to us.
And so modern editions of Hamlet are based largely on the texts that appeared in the
Second Quarto of 1604, and the first folio of 1623.
Now in those texts, what modern editors give us is a great soliloquy, and so let me begin
with this great soliloquy, and let's look at it as a specimen of Shakespearean language.
To be or not to be, that is the question, whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer
the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune, or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
and by opposing end them, to die, to sleep, no more, and by a sleep to say we end the
heartache and the thousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to is a consummation devoutly
to be wished to die, to sleep, to sleep but chance to dream I, there's the rub, for in
that sleep of death what dreams may come when we have shuffled off this mortal coil must
give us pause.
I'll pause there.
These familiar lines give us the sense and shape of Shakespeare's rhetoric, the question
and answer motif, the setup of a problem.
Now in the school room and the university, students would have been educated by posing
problems.
This is like if you've done, for example, high school debate, resolved, and then you
have a resolution.
For example, resolved, the internal combustion engine has been a great benefit to human society,
and then you had to come up with an argument for and an argument against, well, in the
medieval and renaissance school room, in Shakespeare's time as well, the question might
be very general, for example, should a man marry?
And you would be expected to argue for and against.
And so the question is the Latin Christio.
That's where our word question comes from, but it's not an interrogation, rather it
is a topic for debate.
What is the Christio for today, class, to be or not to be?
And you would be expected to take one side or you'd be expected to take another side.
What Hamlet does in this soliloquy is he takes the Christio of the school room and he turns
it into an inner discussion.
He takes both the pro and the con.
And so Hamlet goes on to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune and on and
on.
These are the extended metaphors, the figurative forms, these are the schemes and the tropes
that Shakespeare would have learned from the rhetorical manuals of his time.
And so I want to begin with the great soliloquy by showing you that it is generated not simply
out of the imaginations of the playwright or the despondency of character, but really
out of the assignments of the classroom.
Let's look at the passage in a little more detail.
This is a passage that works through repetition.
Now in the rhetorical manuals of the Renaissance, repetition was called anaphora, that is the
repeating of an initial word or phrase at the beginning of a line, a sentence or a clause,
to die, to sleep.
That is repeated twice and if you know the play or if you hear it as I read it, what
you'll know is that to die, to sleep appears twice and when it does appear, it appears
in the same place in the line and by opposing end them, to die, to sleep.
And then several lines later, devoutly to be wished, to die, to sleep.
Shakespeare remember is writing scanned verse, it's iambic pentameter verse that is unrhymed.
He's not just repeating words, but he's repeating them at the same point in the line and his
audience attentive to the sway of syntax and the play of meter would have heard this.
The anaphora here is metrical and it's aural.
What you see on the page, what you hear in the ear, locates to die, to sleep at the same
place.
I, there's the rub.
Now the rub, what it really means is it was an obstruction to a bowler's ball in a game.
Imagine life as a game of nine pins.
Do you strike or do you spare?
I, there's the rub.
Now we could go on in great detail analyzing this passage, but what I'd like to do is I'd
like to turn from, if you like, the good Shakespeare that we want him to be to the bad Shakespeare
that we don't want him to be.
In the first quarter text of 1603, the soliloquy appears as follows and I'm going to read
the opening lines of it.
To be or not to be, I, there's the point, to die, to sleep, is that all?
I, all, no, to sleep, to dream, I, marry, there it goes, for in that sleep of death when we
awake and born before an everlasting judge from whence no passenger ever returned the
undiscovered country, at whose sight the happy smile and the accursed damned, but for this,
the joyful hope of this, who bear the scorns and flattery of the world, scorned by the
right rich, the rich cursed of the poor, the widow being oppressed, the orphan wronged,
the taste of hunger, or a tyrant's reign, and a thousand more calamities beside to grunt
and sweat under this weary life, when that he may his full quietest make with a bare
bodkin, who would endure but for a hope of something after death, which pulses the brain
and death confound the singing, which makes us rather bear those evils that we have than
fly to others that we know not of.
I, that, oh, this conscience makes us cowards of us all, lady, in thy arsons be all my sins
remembered.
Now, I read this very differently than I read the good version, and I read it because this
comes off as something garbled.
It comes off as something, how can I put it, improvised.
It comes off as something far more colloquial than the good version.
That is, in the good version, we can see the precision of anaphora and the precision of
balance.
One of the things we can also see in the good version is enjambment.
Enjambment is the technique of having a line run on, that is, where the end of a line is
not the end of a sentence.
And so, in the good version, to die to sleep, a line ending, no more, and by a sleep to
say we end, line ending, the heartache and the thousand natural shocks, line ending, that
flesh is heir to.
You see, you have to read it as a sentence, that each clause doesn't end with a line,
and many people believe that it is the mark of sophisticated poetry not to end each clause
with the end of a line, but in the bad quarter edition, just about every single clause and
every single sentence ends with a line, so it's a sequence of broken up lines rather
than a flow of sentences.
That is the question versus I, there's the point.
Well, it's not a point, it's a question, or it's a problem, or it's a decision to
be made.
To die to sleep, is that all?
Now to die to sleep is that all sort of runs more like a colloquialism than to die to sleep
to sleep, perchance to dream.
I marry there it goes.
This is a far more colloquial version of it than the original.
Is this a sleep of death, or is it a dream of death?
This is the wonderful thing, for in that sleep of death what dreams may come.
That's the phrase of the good version.
The bad version is, for in that dream of death when we awake.
Now let me ask you, what do you like better?
Is death a dream, or is death a sleep?
One prompts a version of imaginative association.
That is death and sleep, sleep and poetry.
But dreaming and death implies something else.
It implies that death is just something that is imagined.
Whips and scorns of time fly to others that we know not of.
These are the kinds of phrases that stick in the mind.
And these are the phrases from the good version.
But in the bad version, to hope of something after death, what we have here feels like
something more like paraphrase it seems to me, something cliched.
In the quarto, in the bad quarto we have something like, you can think of lots of things here.
And what's going on is a kind of collocation of imagined conditions, responses, then a
well thought out rhetorical pattern.
What's also interesting about the bad version is that it uses some phrasings that are really
relatively new and new to colloquial English for the late 16th and early 17th centuries.
And I mentioned the widow being oppressed.
This kind of phrasing here, instead of the oppressors wrong and so on and so on, the widow
being oppressed, it's that use of the new in form that is characteristic of idiomatic
spoken English.
And so there's something about the bad quarto that feels simply more idiomatic and more
spoken than what we have.
What is the bad quarto?
What is the difference between the good hamlet and the bad hamlet?
Now there have been many questions raised as to what this is.
We have a version that may be, one, it may be an early Shakespearean assay, it may be
a trying out, it may be a kind of initial draft that Shakespeare rewrote.
Two, it may be something that is a garbled or badly printed or badly remembered version
of the good hamlet.
That is, it may be something that is maybe a printer's error or a problem of transcription
or of misremembrance.
Three, and what some scholars have thought for a long time, is that what the bad quarto
is is that it's a copy that was memorial reconstructed by an actor.
And what's very interesting is that the character of Marcellus in the bad quarto has lines that
seem to be the right lines.
In other words, they show up almost the same in the second quarto and in the first folio.
And so one theory is the actor who was playing Marcellus decided to make a little bit of
cash and so he reconstructed the play from memory, knowing his own part perfectly but
other parts imperfectly.
And so he put this thing together and what you get is a kind of garbled, if you like,
half-assed Shakespeare.
What's going on here, my gut feeling, is that what we're hearing in the bad quarto
is something more akin to speech, something more colloquial, more like the sound of talk
rather than the elevated organization of schoolroom rhetoric that the second quarto and the first
folio give us.
Shakespeare, good, and Shakespeare, bad.
If I'm trying to disabuse notions of goodness and badness, let's look at an example of
what we might think of as an undeniably good version of Shakespeare.
I'd like to turn from play to poem and I'd like to look at Shakespeare's Sonnet 87.
Shakespeare's Sonnets were published, most likely without his permission, in an edition
in 1609.
And the printed text of the sonnets, like the texts in other cases, like we saw in Richard
III, the text of the sonnet is also a fascinating document of print history.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to read you this sonnet and then I'm going to talk
about some of the reasons why some of the words rhyme, some of the key features of the
vocabulary, and the way in which this sonnet is an essay, if you like, in the vocabulary
of commerce to express relationships of love.
In other words, this is as much a story about love and money as, let's say, the play The
Merchant of Venice is a story about love and money.
And here is Shakespeare's Sonnet 87.
Farewell.
Thou art too dear for my possessing, and like enough thou noest thy estimate.
The charter of thy worth gives thee releasing.
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
For how do I hold thee but by thy granting?
And for that riches where is my deserving?
The cause of this fair gift in me is wanting, and so my patent back again is swerving.
Thy self thou gafest, thy own worth then not knowing, or me to whom thou gafest it, else
mistaking so thy great gift upon misprison growing comes home again on better judgment
making.
Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter, in sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
Like all of Shakespeare's Sonnets, it's organized into three quatrains, three sets
of four lines, and then a concluding couplet.
What is the governing figurative language here?
The vocabulary is a vocabulary about love and economy.
It uses old words in new contexts, and new words to express love as a kind of investment.
As I've suggested, the Sonnet is a kind of version of the Merchant of Venice, where investments
and ships are made waiting for them to come home again.
The word bond resonates with the language of Shylock, I will have my bond.
Here means costly, but it also means beloved.
And here, at the beginning of the 17th century, you have an example of polysemy.
Farewell, you are too dear for my possessing, can mean you're just too beloved, you're
too wonderful for me.
But what it can also mean is you're too expensive for me to keep as a girlfriend.
You're too dear for my possessing.
You're running up a bill, charter, estimate.
These are the words of the new economy.
You know your estimate, you know what you're worth.
The charter of thy worth gives the releasing, Magna Carta, charter, charter or carter just
means a big piece of paper.
And so the charter is a contract between two people, is love a contractual relationship.
My bonds in thee are all determinate.
What that means is that I have invested in you as one purchases a bond and they have
come to term.
That is the investment that I've made in you is maturing, determinate.
But to determine in the 16th century means also to understand the terms in which something
has been written.
So polysemy, the levels of language and vocabulary here are creating, if you like, a double meaning
in every line.
This sonnet is also a sonnet full of mistakes.
That is, many of the important words use the MIS prefix at the beginning.
And so you have mistaking and misprison.
What the sonneteer says is in effect you gave yourself to me because you didn't know your
own worth or you didn't know my worth to whom you had given yourself because you mistook
it.
And so your great gift is growing on misprison.
Now misprison doesn't mean prison.
It doesn't mean to imprison wrongly.
It means to miss value.
To prize, PRISC, is to put a price on.
And the word pris, price in Middle English, means value or reputation.
Chaucer can use it potentially in two ways.
When in his description of the knight in the general prologue of the Canterbury Tales he
says that everywhere the knight went he had a sovereign pris.
That is, he had an estimable or sovereign value or reputation.
But it can also mean, I think, that the knight had a price in sovereigns.
In other words, that he was a mercenary, that he had a price in coins with the sovereign's
picture on him.
And that's why we call them sovereigns.
So what we have here is a sense again of polysemy.
To value or to miss value.
My patent back again is swerving.
Patent doesn't mean rights on an invention.
That is a meaning that does not appear until the 19th century.
Patent means a form of release.
That is, I've yielded my patent up to him.
That's a kind of phrase which suggests that the commercial vocabulary again is being invoked
here.
This is a poem about exchanges.
But it's also a poem about language itself.
In other words, if so many of these words have double meanings.
To learn to read the poem in Shakespeare's own time is to be acutely sensitive to the
fact that in a polysemus world all utterances are ambiguous.
It is a poem not just about exchange between lovers.
It is a poem about exchange in a language.
What does it mean to exchange one thing for another?
Thus have I had thee as a dream doth flatter, in sleep a king, but waking no such matter.
My relationship to you has been like a dream, and such a dream flatters me.
In my sleep I am a king, but when I wake I am nothing like a king at all.
I'm just me.
Go back now to the image of sleep and dream and death in Hamlet.
Because the notion of dream and sleep on the one hand, and of the imaginative world of
poetry, is one of the great sustaining associations throughout the western literary tradition.
John Keats, in the early 19th century, can write a poem called Sleep and Poetry.
And so the relationship between sleeping and dreaming, death and the imagination, place
us here again in the world of exchange.
I exchange myself for a role, in sleep a king.
Go back to Henry IV, part one, from my earlier lecture.
And you now, for my father, Prince Hal says to Falstaff, you now play the king, or you
play me, and I will play the king.
To play the king is central to the theme of Hamlet, and playing the king is central to
all of Shakespeare's poetry.
In sleep I play the king.
These are the larger metaphors.
This is the arc of imaginative language that's at work in this sonnet.
But I want to say a few things about pronunciation.
There are several rhymes in this sonnet that no longer seem to work in modern English.
The sound of the sonnet helps us understand how certain words are pronounced, and it tells
us something about the history of pronunciation more generally at this time.
For example, Shakespeare rhymes the words possessing and releasing.
Now it's very clear that these words are supposed to rhyme.
How do they rhyme?
Now I'm going to get technical here, but I want to explain it in some detail.
Now these probably rhymed on the sound E, that is possessing and releasing.
Now the word relays comes from a Middle English word, which would have been pronounced E, and
possessing has a shorter sound, that is E, E, and E.
During the course of the great vowel shift, these sounds for a period of time actually
merged.
And one of the things that's also changing, you'll remember, is that vowel length, that
is the period of time you hold a vowel, is also no longer a phonemic quality in English.
In other words, it just doesn't matter, it doesn't contribute to meaning.
So you have issues of vowel quality, and you have issues of vowel quantity.
And the historical explanation is to say that two words with two vowels of different origin
for a particular period of time in the history of English pronunciation fall together, and
Shakespeare can rhyme on them, possessing and releasing.
There is another rhyme here, which I think also needs to be explained, and that is the
rhyme on granting and wanting.
Now you'll remember from my previous lecture, where I talked about issues of pronunciation
in the passage from Richard, the third that the W, the glide, has a tendency to affect
the vowel following it in everyday speech.
In modern spoken English, we tend to round our vowels after a W, that is, we say the W
W, and our lips are remaining in the rounded position, W, so that the vowel after the W
is going to be changed, car but war, can't but want, has but was.
This was not always so, and there was a time when you could actually rhyme irrespective
of the W, and so what I would suggest is that what Shakespeare is doing is he's rhyming
granting and wanting, that is, it is an A sound granting and wanting, where the W's rounding
has not affected permanently the standard pronunciation of English.
Let me say something about spelling.
I present this text in its old spelling, that is, in the forms of spelling in the 1609 edition,
and two words in particular are interesting, riches and gift.
Now riches is spelled R-I-T-C-H-E-S, and we no longer spell, in fact, almost never
spelt it that way.
It never was spelled that way in French, and it was rarely, if ever, spelled that way in
English.
This is what linguists would call a case of articulative intrusion.
That is, articulative intrusion is the habit of intruding in the pronunciation of a word
a sound that isn't there because the mouth is in a position to produce certain kinds
of sounds.
For example, a very good example of articulative intrusion is the way that some people pronounce
the word something.
Now if you say something very quickly, your lips are in the position of the M, and then
they're about to go in the position of the T, something, and some people will pronounce
something as if there's a P in it, something.
There's no P in something, but the P sound is articulatively intruded in the course of
saying it, something.
When you say riches, there is a time when, depending on how you say it, you may intrude
the T sound, riches, riches.
Our tongue is at the alveolar ridge, and in spoken English, T is an alveolar sound,
t, t, riches.
And so what the printer has done is he has inserted the T to indicate the pronunciation.
By contrast, the printer has spelled gift, G-U-I-F-T.
The printer here wants to indicate that G is a hard sound.
It's not gift, but it's gift.
This is a spelling convention that Renaissance printers adopted from French spellings, where
the G-U spelling was used to indicate the G sound.
So that, for example, in G-E-N-R-E, you'd say genre, you wouldn't say goner.
But if you wanted a G sound like guillaume or gaire, you'd spell it G-U.
So here is another spelling convention that's designed to indicate a certain kind of pronunciation.
These are details that make Shakespeare's familiar language strange.
It creates in our minds a sense of the historical distance between ourselves and Shakespeare.
And in this lecture and in the previous one, what I've tried to do is I've tried to show
you both the familiar and the alien.
Next when we think we know what's going on, we encounter a sound, a spelling, an idiom,
a text, a version that makes us move towards the exotic.
We should not only hear the great quotations in Shakespeare, but we should hear the unquotable
things as well.
Things in Shakespeare are not only magnificent and beautiful, but they reflect the nature
of the language in its time, its changes and its transformations, the sounds of its
speech, the foibles and the fissures on the stage and the fractures of the letters on the page.
