Lecture 20 The Bible in English
Shakespeare, as we have seen and heard, bequeathed to modern speakers, readers and writers of
English, a range of vocabulary and a vividness of syntax, imagination and figurative expression.
But Shakespeare was of course not the only, nor even perhaps the only major influence from
Renaissance England on subsequent forms of English.
The King James Bible, that product of royal commission, that product of group translation,
that saw print in 1611, the King James Bible was, next to Shakespeare, perhaps the most
important influence on subsequent speakers, readers and writers of English.
In this lecture, I want to look at the history of Bible translation.
I want to look not only at the King James therefore, but at the range of Englishings
of the Bible, to see how in so many ways the history of English is a history of Bible translation.
As we saw in Shakespeare and as we saw in so many other texts I've looked at, we're
going to attend to four areas of difference in our study of biblical translation.
We're going to look at vocabulary, syntax and grammar, pronunciation or sound and style.
Now the passage that I've chosen is a nice one.
It's a short passage from the book of Matthew in the New Testament, Matthew 17, 13 to 15.
And it's a good passage because it illustrates some of these changes most pointedly.
It's a good passage because New Testament translation is something that is sustained
more vividly and more pointedly than Old Testament translation from the Old English through the
Modern English period and also because there are some nice little vocabulary terms in here
that can help us review some of the key themes and structures of the course.
So let me read to you the passage first in the King James Bible version.
So here we have Matthew 17 verses 13 to 15.
Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist.
And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man kneeling down
to him and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic and sorvext, for oft
times he falleth into the fire and oft into the water.
Now this passage gives us the full flavor of, if you like, King James English.
What is biblical about it?
What is biblical about it, first of all, is what we might call paratactic structure.
Paratactic structure means a structure of repeated sentences or clauses joined together
by conjunctions such as and, and then this happened, and then that happened, and then
that happened.
And this kind of paratactic structure is characteristic of biblical narrative.
It's not something that is invented by King James for its characteristic of the Bible's
narrative going back to its origins, but the King James translators bring it out in especially
particular ways.
Also what the King James Bible does is it brings together a history of Bible translation.
That is, the King James translators were not simply going back to original texts in Greek,
in Hebrew, in Syriac, in Latin, and in Aramaic, the King James Bible translators were also
charged with reviewing the history of Bible translation.
And in the course of this lecture, what you will see and hear are the ways in which earlier
translations of the Bible into English make it into King James.
What you also, I hope, heard in the passages I read you just now, and that at this point
in the course, I hope that you are sensitive to is a difference between the Old English
or native vocabulary on the one hand and the Latinate or French or Romance vocabulary
on the other.
And so you can see and hear words like disciples, multitude, certain, mercy, lunatic.
These are words that come from a French or Latin vocabulary, and they are opposed to
words from the native English vocabulary.
We're going to see in the course of this lecture how this vocabulary structure operates.
So let's begin then at the beginning.
The English Bible was rendered into Old English during a set of moments in the Anglo-Saxon
intellectual life.
We saw early on how Bede represented the Northumbrian efflorescence, how King Alfred represented
the rise of scholarship in Wessex, and how Ethelwald, Bishop of Winchester, after Alfred
represented the so-called Benedictine revival.
And what sorted itself out by the 10th and 11th centuries in the Anglo-Saxon world was
a version of certain portions of the Holy Scriptures that were either interlinearly translated,
that is, where individuals would write English words over the Latin words of their Bible
or were written out through.
And what we have from this Anglo-Saxon period is a version of the Bible in Wessexon, and
this is probably from the early 11th century.
So here in Old English is the very passage that I just read to you from the King James.
Tha ongeton his learning knishtas, that he had said be Johanna vamm full Uchtara, and
Tha had come to Theramenigo, him to Jenaerechter, so man ye bigedem knaeoam to foren him, and
kwaeth drichten, je miltsem inum sunna, forefam feis, fylne seok, and evil tholoth, oft
e filth on Thira, and ye loomlecher on Watter.
Now what's the first thing that we notice about this passage?
The first thing that we notice about this passage is that the word disciples, which
is going to be the word throughout the later Biblical translation, is learning knishtas,
knights of learning.
If you are a master of learning, you are a teacher.
If you are a knight of learning, you are a student or a disciple.
Learning knishtas is one of those magnificent Old English noun compounds that we saw in the
poetry of the Anglo-Saxons.
It is a kenning, it is a noun metaphor, and you'll remember how Old English poetry from
Cadman on coined its words rather than borrowed them.
And what we have here is learning knishtas, if you like, a word that comes out of that
metaphorical vocabulary to express someone who is a disciple, a knight of learning.
John the Baptist is Joana vom Ful Uchtara, Ful Uchtara, to put fully under water.
That is, he's not John the Baptist, he's John the complete wetterer, if you like, the
one who would fully place you under the water.
Multitude is mennegu, the many.
We can go through word by word here, on yabigidum knaeum, on bended knees, the UM endings signal
here the masculine plural datives.
What matters is not that you know this in detail, what matters is that you recognize
that this is a profoundly inflected language, and that, as in all Old English texts, meaning
is determined not primarily by word order, but it is determined by the case endings.
Drichten, Lord.
Remember in Cadman's hymn how Drichten is one of the words for the Almighty, and remember
too that it was a word that came from temporal political landscapes.
That is, the Drichten was the Lord of a particular area.
He was a temporal or political ruler, and it's a word now that is applied to God, yamilze
minnam sonna, be mild unto my son, yamilze, be mild.
Why?
Because he is filaseach, he is falling sick.
Perhaps this is a medical condition.
Perhaps this is the Old English way of talking about epilepsy, or the way of talking about
madness, but we can see like learning knichtas, that this is another word that is made up
of compounds, and we can see here the way in which the Old English vocabulary is describing
experience and translating scripture based on the common core of the Old vocabulary.
Finally, I want to call attention to one word here, one of my favorite words in all Old
English, and that is the verb to suffer, tholian.
Tholian is the Old English verb to suffer, and he suffers.
We're told that he tholiaath.
And tholian is one of these magnificent words that has completely fallen out of the language.
Those of you that know Seamus Heaney's great recent translation of Beowulf will know that
Heaney spends a great deal of time calling attention to tholian as well, because he remembers
it as a dialect word of the English spoken in Northern Ireland of his childhood.
To thol was to suffer.
And those of you that are familiar with the great repertory of American popular culture,
Star Trek the original series, will remember that great moment when the enterprise is enmeshed
by the tholians, that evil alien empire who weave a tholian web around the ship.
Surely some writer for this series must have studied Old English in college, and as a little
side joke to the philologists in the audience, gives us a moment of suffering as tholian.
A word that I would advocate returning to the language.
Now I've spent a good deal of time talking about vocabulary, but I want to say something
about the word order in this Old English passage.
Word order you'll remember is not the primary bearer of meaning in Old English, but there
are times when word order needs to be regularized in order to bear that meaning.
And here's the case.
Old English signaled temporal or conditional clauses, not by using the words when and
then, but by using the word the or the word fauna.
And these are words that can mean then, but they could also mean when.
So fa and fauna could mean then or when.
How do you know the difference?
The way you know the difference is by changing the word order pattern that follows it.
When you have fa or fauna, followed by the verb, then followed by the subject, it means
then.
So in the Old English, fa, anjutan, his learning knishtas, then understood anjutan, they got,
they on got, they got it, they brought in, then got the learning nights, then the disciples
understood.
But because you only have one word, you have to keep this word order pattern regularized.
So fa, followed by a verb, followed by the subject, is then.
Fa, followed by the subject, followed by the verb, means when.
So in the next sentence, it begins, and fa, he, come, tu feramenigu.
And when they came to the multitude.
So I want you to get this, fa, he, come, is when they came, fa, anjutan, his learning
knishtas, then got or understood the nights of learning.
This is a feature of Old English, and it is the one piece of word order patterning that
I think is really worth knowing.
That is, when you have a limited lexicon, when you have one word that's designed to
do two different grammatical things, you need to signal that grammatical difference with
word order patterns.
English from the Middle English period on has two words, when and then, and we're going
to see this in the Middle English translation of this same passage.
This translation was prepared by the disciples of John Wickliffe.
John Wickliffe was an ecclesiastical reformer and dissenter in the last decades of the 14th
century, and he was the founder of the heretical movement known as Lollardy.
Now some historians have seen Lollardy as a kind of proto-Protestant reform movement.
It had many tenets, but one of its central ones was that the reading and experience of
the scripture should go on in the vernacular.
That is, people should be able to read the Bible in their own language, and this was
heretical at the time.
So here is the Wickliffe fight, if you like, Middle English translation of the scriptures
from 1380s.
If you like, it's the vernacular Bible of the time of Chaucer.
Thana discipolis understanden that of John Baptist he had said to him, and wannah he
calmed to the company of papal.
A man came to him, folded on knes before him, saying, Lord, have mercy on me sonna, for
he is lunatic, and sufrath evil, for we oftimus he falleth into the fear, and oftimus into
the water.
Now right away, you can tell that there is a difference in vocabulary register, that
you have words coming from a learned vocabulary of Latin and French.
You have disciples, company, mercy, people, lunatic, and suffer.
This is not yemiltziminum sonna.
This is not bimile to my son.
It is have mercy on my son.
It is a high concept French word, and he is not simply falling sick, but he is lunatic.
That is, he is under the domination of the moon.
And you'll remember how Caxton in 1490 talked about how we English live under the domination
of the moon.
We're constantly variable.
To be lunatic was to be subject to the variable phases of the moon.
Now it's important to note here, that Wycliffe is not only enhancing the vocabulary of biblical
English.
What he's also doing is he's providing a model for later translators.
The next major figure to offer a Bible in English is William Tyndale, who is working
in the 1520s.
Now during this period of time, just before the English Reformation under King Henry VIII,
it is still against the law to write and publish a Bible in English.
And so Tyndale had to do his work and had to have his Bible published in Geneva.
And in 1526, his New Testament was published in Geneva, and this is Tyndale's version
of that passage.
Then his disciples perceived that he spake unto them of John Baptist.
And when they were come to the people, they came to him, a certain man, and kneeled down
to him, saying, Master, have mercy on my son, for he is frantic and is sore vexed, and oft
times falleth into the fire, and oft times into the water.
Now look at the difference in vocabulary.
Tyndale keeps the word disciple, which is in the Latin, and which Wycliffe adopts.
But he doesn't say understood, he says perceived.
Now understand is an Englishism, it is an Anglo-Saxonism.
Even though the Anglo-Saxon word is ongeton, understand is made up of understand.
But what he does here is he gives us a more complex, Latinate term perceived.
And I think that what he's trying to do is he's trying to make this moment a moment
of perception rather than a moment of understanding.
In other words, the idea is that he is almost psychologizing the response of the disciples,
that he's interested, if you like, in the interiority of the disciples, and a fair amount
of Tyndale's translation is fascinated with the way in which individuals act out of motive
and out of experience.
Look also at some of the differences.
Lunatic becomes frantic.
This seems more familiar to us, but it's not going to be the word that comes into King
James.
Lunatic versus frantic, and Suffereth evil, sore vexed.
What is the feel of Tyndale here?
The feel of Tyndale, it seems to me, is the feel of heightened, almost portentous rhetoric.
That is, what I think is going on is not simply a matter of adding or subtracting vocabulary.
What is going on is that phrases like sore vexed, or words like master, or perceived,
or frantic, these are words that are coming from both an old vocabulary and a new vocabulary,
to create something that Tyndale wants to be memorable.
That is, he wants his language to be something, how can I put it, something truly biblical.
That the issue is not simply translating the Bible.
The issue is creating a biblical idiom in English.
And that really, it seems to me, is Tyndale's accomplishment.
And so, when we look in detail at Tyndale, and we compare him to what came before and
what came after, you can see that there are certain kinds of forms that become, to put
it casually, Bible talk.
Spake unto them.
When he spake to them, it's not just that he spoke to them.
He spoke unto them.
There is this need to, if you like, enhance the number of syllables, to make it scan,
to create the impression that this is something important.
Were come to the people, not just that they came to the people.
This is, I believe, a conscious archaism.
That is, the use of the verb to be, rather than the verb to have, as your modal or helping
verb, in showing us how the action is going on.
Now there's an old Germanic tendency, in Germanic grammar, to use forms of the verb
to be when you indicate change of state.
And this shows up in Old English, and I think Tyndale is looking back to this kind of conscious
archaism to give a heightened feel.
We can see something of the sound of Tyndale too, in the spellings.
Perceived is spelled P-E-R-C-E-A-V-E-D, perceived.
But he's writing, saying, S-A-Y.
Now I believe that these spellings are also, much like his vocabulary is synthesis.
On the one hand, he's using certain spellings to indicate pronunciation.
On the other hand, he's using certain spellings to, as it were, maintain older Chancery traditions
of conventional spellings.
So how do you use the spelling of your Bible to indicate pronunciation, or to indicate regularization?
So the style of Tyndale, as I'm suggesting, is something that we've come to recognize
as Bible talk, a familiar blend of the colloquial and the archaic.
It seems archaic to us, because many of its idioms and phrasings were adapted by the King
James translators nearly a century later.
So when we get to King James, as I suggested, what we're looking at is we're looking at
not simply a translation from original scriptural texts, we're looking at a translation that
is conscious of and that absorbs the history of English Bible translation again.
So now let me read the King James passage again.
Then the disciples understood that he spake unto them of John the Baptist.
And when they would come to the multitude, they came to him a certain man kneeling down
to him and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic and sorvext, for oft
times he falleth into the fire and oft into the water.
When we are reading the language of the King James Bible, we are not, I believe, reading
the language of everyday speech of 1611, nor are we even reading the language of everyday
commerce or of written communication.
We are reading a heightened language, a deliberately archaic form that maintains distinctive syntactic
and verbal features, and many of these, in fact, do go back to earlier forms.
So what the King James translators do is they reject Tyndale's perceived and they were
leapfrog over Tyndale to Wycliffe's understood, that he spoke to them of John the Baptist,
he spoke unto them, but that's Tyndale talk.
And when they were come to, that's Tyndale talk, but not when they were come to the
people, when they were come to the multitude.
And when they were come to the multitude, I believe that one of the reasons for choosing
a word like multitude is its polysyllabic rhythm, that is, it makes the line scan almost poetically
different then, and when they were come to the people.
And when they were come to the multitude, there came to him a certain man kneeling down
to him and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic.
We go back to lunatic now, and I believe that in this choice of lunatic, the King James
Bible reinforces the modern sense of that word as not simply under the influence of
the moon, but rather crazy and sore vexed.
But that's a Tyndale ism, for off times he falleth into the fire and off into the water.
Now we know from a fair amount of historical evidence that people in the 17th century were
no longer saying falleth, but they were saying falls, that they were no longer saying dust,
but they were saying do, thou dust he falleth.
These are grammatical endings to indicate the third person and the second person respectively.
These are phrasings that are conscious archaeasms, and I believe that for a reader of the King
James Bible in its own time, they would have been perceived as archaic or heightened grammatical
forms.
Is come again that Tyndale ism there?
And so what we're seeing in King James, as I'm suggesting, is this synthesis.
God is addressed informally throughout the Bible, whether in English or in any other
European language.
We pray to God in the informal, der du von dem Himmel bist.
That is a German line from Goethe.
And it is my understanding that many Europeans, when they pray to God and in the language
of the Bibles, in the other European languages, address God using the equivalent of the second
person informal.
One prays to God, not as a friend, but as an intimate, and God is addressed, not as
a peer, but as someone, if you like, in the family.
And what has happened is that the King James Bible, by maintaining this distinction, which
may be just on the cusp of archaeasm at this time, the King James Bible shows us, thou
as a marked or unusual form, rather than you.
It is this form of the use of thou, together with the later 17th and 18th century Quaker
use of thou and thee, in other words, to signal that we are all brothers or friends, it is
this set of uses of thou and thee that have created the illusion that thou and thee forms
are formal or heightened forms.
Grammatically, they are not.
And so what I want to stress here is that when you read the King James Bible, you recognize
that it is using the grammatical resources, not only of its own time, but of the recent
past.
And that being published in 1611, it's standing on the cusp of language change.
These forms of the King James Bible will have a great impact on English and American
writing throughout the 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries.
Writers such as Whitman, Lincoln, Melville, Twain, and Joel Chandler Harris in his Uncle
Remus stories will evoke the sounds, if you like, of King James and the bits and pieces
of Biblicism to create a narrative form.
And what I want to suggest in closing here is that Shakespeare and the King James Bible
not only look back to earlier grammatical forms and pronunciations, they look ahead to
the kind of impact they'll have on the English language in the British Isles and in America
and elsewhere.
And stories such as the one that I gave you from the New Testament, even the little snippet
that I gave you, shows you something also about narrative.
And it shows you about the ways in which narrative can work through parataxis and through repetition.
And it shows you, too, the way in which vocabulary can be uniquely associated with a certain form
of heightened Biblicism.
And so, when we leave the world of Shakespeare and we leave the world of the King James Bible,
we are entering what is for all intents and purposes modern English and the beginnings
of our language, not just in England, but in America and beyond.
