Lecture 21 Samuel Johnson and his Dictionary
The remarkable rise in the vocabulary of English provoked many changes to the language.
And in my previous lectures, I tried to call attention to the way in which such phenomena
as incorn terms, aureate diction, renaissance rhetoric, and the influx of words from technology,
colonialization, and travel and science had all radically increased the wordstock of the
English language.
But I also tried to suggest that a larger attitude change was at work in English.
In other words, that what we see in the period from 1500 to 1700 is not simply a raw increase
in the number of words, but a change in social attitude.
That is, the English language and its speakers become omnivorous or voracious in their appetite
for new words.
And the number of words increases rapidly, new coinages and new phrases.
What I'm going to look at in this and in the following lecture are some of the ways
in which scholars and critics, readers, and writers responded to this remarkable rise
in vocabulary by developing several tools, guides, or interpretive matrices for that
vocabulary.
And of course, the most obvious one is the dictionary.
And so I want to begin this lecture by looking at some issues in dictionary making, looking
at the origins of lexicography, and the ways in which the dictionaries of so-called hard
words at the beginning of the 16th and 17th century give rise to larger problems of lexicography
and larger projects such as Samuel Johnson's Great Dictionary of 1755.
Let's begin with the origins of the dictionary.
Now the earliest dictionaries in English, and by this I mean not dictionaries from one
language to another, because certainly there were dictionaries of Latin and there were
dictionaries of modern languages long before there were dictionaries just of English.
The earliest English dictionaries are, as far as we can tell, lists of what were called
hard words.
In other words, they were guides to the new coinages or to the language that was coming
in from science trade and explication.
William Bullocker published his expositor in 1616, and among the many disciplines that
he lists on his title page are what he calls words from, quote, logic, law, physics, and
astronomy.
And so a book like the expositor is, if you like, a guidebook to technology, a list of
polysyllabic words.
In 1623, the dictionary of Cochrum had words for, and here I also quote from, his title
page, birds, beasts, boys, critics, cities, destinies, and so on.
By 1658, the new world of words of Phillips, if I want to stress this title here, lists
on its title page 41, arts and sciences, from which its words are taken.
And I want to stress that in a phrase like the new world of words and in the title pages
of these dictionaries, what we see are, if you like, the lexicographical equivalents of
the great journeys of exploration and colonization.
The language of colonial enterprise is going to inform the language of lexicography.
And later in this lecture, when we look at Samuel Johnson's own work in the middle of
the 18th century, we're going to see how this notion of colonialization, this notion
of, if you like, military and scientific conquest, corresponds to a notion of lexicographical
and verbal conquest.
Now what are these old books like?
A characteristic of these early dictionaries was an attention to the details of technology.
And in 1736, Nathaniel Bailey published his dictionary of what he called hard and technical
words or terms of art.
And on his title page, he lists 62 separate arts, sciences, and I find this fascinating
what he calls mysteries.
What Bailey did was he did not simply list these strange new or developing words.
What he also included were familiar words.
And he set out to organize his definitions in particular, if you like, hierarchical form.
He was interested in word histories.
He was interested in etymology.
And he was also interested in the relationship between figurative expression and literal
expression.
And one of the things that emerges from Bailey's dictionary, and one of the things that emerges
for lexicographers in the 18th century across the board, is whether one should privilege
the figurative meaning over the literal meaning, even if that old literal meaning has passed
out of use.
This is going to be one of the central questions for Samuel Johnson.
Samuel Johnson, 1709 to 1784, was a lexicographer, a literary critic, a poet, and an essayist.
He was, if you like, the taste maker to his generation.
And in addition to his famous work on the dictionary, he wrote a variety of critical,
interpretive, and poetic works that give voice, if you like, to a vision of the world.
And that vision of the world is psychological, and it is aesthetic.
Johnson is preoccupied with notions of transitoryness and mutability.
One of his poems is called The Vanity of Human Wishes.
And one of his major works, Rassilis, a bit of prose fiction, is very much keyed to this
idea of the mutable and the vain.
But what Johnson was also concerned about was the question of whether or not particular
works of literature and particular texts in the English language would have an afterlife.
In other words, were these works things that were going to survive, and how could he, as
a critic, create not just a canon of authorship, but a canon of language?
Now what's going on in Johnson's dictionary, and how does it begin?
The idea of the dictionary really begins in the 1740s.
And Johnson is concerned with finding a patron, and he finds a patron in the great Lord Chesterfield.
And in 1747, he publishes what he calls a plan of the dictionary.
And he dedicates it to his patron Lord Chesterfield, and he believes that in about three years,
he could produce a dictionary of the English language.
Now his goal in the plan is to express the belief that by registering usage he will fix
the language.
You see, the idea here is to go back to our earlier discussion of prescriptivism versus
descriptivism, was that Johnson believed that by describing the language in a particular
way, and by passing judgment on its forms and idioms, he could fix it.
And in the plan of the dictionary, he writes to Lord Chesterfield, and I want to read you
some selections from the plan, because they're fascinating for the rhetoric of lexicography.
When I survey the plan, Johnson wrote, which I've laid before you, and here he is addressing
Chesterfield, I cannot, my Lord, but confess that I am frighted at its extent.
And like the soldiers of Caesar, look on Britain as a new world, which it is almost madness
to invade, but I hope that though I should not complete the conquest, I shall at least
discover the coast, civilize part of the inhabitants, and make it easy for some other adventurer
to proceed further, to reduce them wholly to subjection, and settle them under laws.
Look at the imagery here, the idea of the lexicographer like Caesar conquering Britain,
and that the English language is like some intractable group of people who must be settled,
subjected, and regulated under law.
He goes on, this, my Lord, is my idea of an English dictionary, a dictionary by which
the pronunciation of our language may be fixed, and its attainment facilitated, by which its
purity may be preserved, its use ascertained, and its duration lengthened.
So the goal of the plan is to create a dictionary that will fix and regulate the English language
and that it will do so, not just through techniques of recording usage, pronunciation, and grammar,
but that it will do so as part and parcel of a larger imperial enterprise, if you like,
an image in which Johnson sees himself as something of a Caesar of the word.
Now the dictionary took longer than the three years Johnson projected, and it was not until
1755 that the dictionary was finally published.
Here in the preface to his great dictionary, Johnson realizes that his plan to fix the
language was unrealizable.
What he recognizes is that language is mutable and in flux, and like Caxton, who saw English
lying under the domination of the moon, Johnson saw the English language as what he called
sublunary, mutable and transitory, and in the preface of 1755 Johnson recognized that
his goal could not be to form, but as he says, to register the language.
And so what I would like to do is share with you a couple of Johnsonian moments from the
preface, moments when he sees language as living, moments when he sees the language
as a landscape, for example, when he says that the language is akin to trees in a storm,
and trying to fix the language would be like trying to control them.
It would be like trying to rope in a river.
One magnificent quotation from the preface that I'd like to read to you is a moment when
Johnson realizes not so much the futility but the immensity of his project, and he says,
I saw that one inquiry only gave occasion to another, that book referred to book, that
to search was not always to find, and to find was not always to be informed, and that thus
to pursue perfection was like the first inhabitants of Arcadia to chase the sun, which when they
had reached the hill where he seemed to rest, was still be held at the same distance from
them.
And so there is a sense here for the dictionary that Johnson recognizes the mutability of
the English language, he recognizes the futility of trying to fix it, and he also recognizes
using a different set of metaphors that the job of the lexicographer is really not so
much colonial and imperial as it is almost mythical.
And so what's going on in the dictionary itself?
What does he innovate?
What does he borrow?
And how is the dictionary a testament to this Johnsonian sense of linguistic mutability
and flexibility?
How is it as much a work of autobiography as it is a work of lexicography?
So let me begin by saying that Johnson's synthesis and innovations are really many.
His is the first dictionary for the general reader rather than for the specialist, that
is, it is not a list of hard words from new sciences, rather it is designed as a book
for the individual, for the literate, for purchase.
It's sought to bring together what Johnson thought of as the best in the study of the
history of the language to that date.
A characteristic 18th century, if you like, critical attitude was to survey and synthesize
and then draw from that synthesis the best and most representative, whether it be in
criticism or science or in this case lexicography.
Johnson limited his selection to about 40,000 words of general usage.
And the challenge of a dictionary like this is defining words of general usage.
It's actually easier to define hard words than it is to define everyday words.
And one of the great achievements of Johnson's dictionary is the creation of aphoristic definitions.
And let me give you some examples of these aphoristic definitions.
If I were to say to you, how do you define common words like net or network?
How do you define a word like cough or oats?
Or how do you define a word like lexicographer?
You might be hard pressed because so many of these words seem so straightforward.
If you look up network in Johnson's dictionary, you get this magnificent definition and I
quote, anything reticulated or decussated at equal distances with interstices between
the intersections.
Now this is probably as good a definition of network as you're going to get.
But the definition uses words far harder and far more complex than the word being defined.
Is this a case of Johnsonian humor or irony, and it may well be, or is it also a recognition
that part of the challenge of the dictionary lies in the way in which every definition
generates a multiplicity of words.
To go back to the lines of the preface, as he says, I saw that one inquiry only gave
occasion to another, that book referred to book, that the search was not always to find.
And so what Johnson is doing in these definitions is he's giving, I think, the reader the sense
of, if you like, the infinite regress of language, that word provokes word.
Take a word like cough, a convulsion of the lungs, vellicated by some sharp seriosity.
That's one of my favorites, oats.
He defines as a grain which in England is generally given to horses, but in Scotland
appears to support the people.
So here is, of course, a little bit of political jabbing and a little bit of Johnsonian wit.
And of course, when you look up lexicographer, you get a writer of dictionaries, a harmless
drudge, that busies himself in tracing the original and detailing the signification of
words.
Was Johnson simply a harmless drudge?
The drudgery of the dictionary lies not simply in collecting words and illustrative definitions.
It also leads to more ambitious goals.
And Johnson is really, if you like, an aesthetician of the word.
It seems to me that the precise goal of the dictionary is an education in aesthetics.
This dictionary, he says, is written for that reader who would aspire to, and I quote, exactness
of criticism or elegance of style.
Unlike his predecessors, Johnson did not argue for a class-oriented diction.
He did not argue for a dialect based on region.
He did not even argue necessarily for education as the primary criterion for language use.
Rather, Johnson really argued for aesthetics, for judgment of the beauty, as he says, exactness
and elegance.
And so his illustrative examples and his definitions are really keyed in the end to questions of
aesthetic.
As I mentioned earlier, the dictionary is a work that articulates this distinctive eighteenth-century
idea of synthesis itself, that is, an ideal of discovering what had proved to be the most
generally durable or characteristic quality in things, and then to profit by using that
quality as a standard working basis.
So Johnson attempted to find the best in English usage of his day and to sanction and to stable
it.
But Johnson does not want to legislate language.
One of the discussions and debates that was going on in the 17th and 18th centuries was
whether there should be a national academy of language.
The French had the Academy Française, the Italian had the Academia della Crusca, and
many writers of the 17th and 18th century weighed in on whether there should be a national
or royal academy of language.
Johnson rejected that idea because, as he said, we cannot legislate language as he put
it when we see men grow old and die.
We recognize, as he said again and again, that language itself is mutable, that new
words are coming in from science and art, that polysemy is constantly at work, and that
certain words are changing meaning.
Now I mentioned earlier in this lecture and I mentioned earlier in my previous lectures
how one of the central debates was, if you like, the relationship between the figurative
and the literal.
And one of the central questions of that debate was precisely whether one should define words,
as he says like flagrant and ardent, as meaning literally on fire or burning, or more figuratively
emotionally charged or excited, which were the common definitions of the time.
And we can see that Johnson is interested in the way in which these particular ranges
of words are going on.
Johnson, even though he is not using class explicitly as a marker of linguistic usage,
is very conscious of class and register in language.
One of the things that Johnson does in his definitions is he will very often signal whether
a word is low or colloquial or slang, and low is one of his words, one of his judgment
words, if you like.
Another is affectation.
He says, for example, for the word chaperone, he says an affected word of very recent introduction.
He doesn't like it because it's French.
By contrast, Johnson identifies a set of words that he considers low, and these words are
really, again, not grounded so much in vulgarity or content as they are in aesthetics.
Johnson doesn't like words that sound bad.
He doesn't like words that are repetitive, that are on a monopoetic, or that are evocative
of the social class from which they come.
There are some Johnsonian low words, swap, wobble, budge, coax, twiddle, twaddle.
So what Johnson is doing is he's providing his reader not only with definitions, but
he's providing his reader with a guide to usage.
And as a dictionary today enables readers to figure out the appropriate word for a given
moment, so Johnson's dictionary in its own time was designed to do that.
And in this, he reminds us of so many of the 17th and 18th century scholars that we've
seen before.
So what I'd like to turn to now is a set of, if you like, Johnsonian attitudes towards
language and the way in which Johnson's attitudes towards language inform some of the technical
accomplishments of the dictionary.
Now I had mentioned the issue of mutability, and I repeatedly talked about Johnson's sense
of transitoriness and vanity.
In the preface to the dictionary, he talks about how we must laugh at the elixir that
promises to prolong life a thousand years.
Therefore he derides those lexicographers who would embalm their language and secure them
from corruption and decay.
And this reminds us, of course, of the imagery of the plan, where he wanted, quote, to preserve
the purity, as he said, of English.
Now he recognizes that this is impossible.
So Johnson recognizes that technical meanings become figurative.
He recognizes that words are, if you like, classed by register.
And so the arbiter of language, or if you like, the arbiters of language for Johnson,
are going to be literary and aesthetic writers rather than necessarily scientific writers,
and when Johnson quotes from scientific or non-fiction writers like Locke, or like Newton,
or like Hume, he's selecting quotations for their rhetorical or their aesthetic value.
And so we can see here, in so many ways, that Johnson's achievement is to select quotations
from, how can I put it, from the best, from the most exact, in literature and in culture.
And if you look through Johnson's dictionary, certain writers will rise to the surface, if
you like. Shakespeare is everywhere in Johnson. Milton's Paradise Lost is everywhere in the
dictionary. John Locke and David Hume are everywhere in the dictionary.
And you can see here, in the kind of uses and the selections that Johnson's doing,
you can see how he is creating not just a canon of words, but a canon of texts.
And so what Johnson is doing is, he is applying the standards of quality and judgment, drawn
from literary criticism and English literature, to standards of language performance in everyday,
literary circumstances. This is, it seems to me, the primary Johnsonian innovation in
lexicography. And reading through the dictionary, you can recognize these forms. But reading
through the dictionary, you can also see Johnson once again. And I want to turn before my summary
to one last extended quotation from the preface, the sense of the Johnsonian life here. It
is the fate of those, he says at the beginning of his preface to the dictionary, who toil
at the lower employments of life, to be rather driven by the fear of evil than attracted
by the prospect of good, to be exposed to censure without hope of praise, to be disgraced
by miscarriage or punished for neglect, where success would have been without applause and
diligence without reward. Among these unhappy mortals is the writer of dictionaries, whom
mankind have considered not as the pupil but the slave of science, the pioneer of literature,
doomed only to remove rubbish and clear obstructions from the path of learning and genius, who
press forward to conquest and glory without bestowing a smile on the humble drudge that
facilitates their progress. Every other author may aspire to praise. The lexicographer can
only hope to escape reproach, and even this negative recompense has yet been granted
to very few. Whatever is at stake in Johnson's emotional condition, the fact remains that
his dictionary of 1755 did not simply escape reproach, but was something of great praise.
It ran through four editions in his own lifetime, and it ran through many editions afterward.
Indeed, the impact of Johnson's dictionary was so great that the scholars around the
Philological Society of England at the end of the 19th century, when they set out to
create a new dictionary, what would eventually become the Oxford English Dictionary. They
originally called it the New English Dictionary because Johnson's was the old.
Let me summarize some of Johnson's achievements and look forward to some of the issues in
my next lecture, when I'll talk about the location of Johnson's work in the larger
context of 18th and 19th century theories of language and language teaching. Johnson's
dictionary regularized the spellings of words. He ordered them alphabetically, he preferred
certain spellings over others, and he codified the spelling reforms of the 17th and 18th century
grammarians that I had talked about in my previous lectures. He broadened the vocabulary
of everyday speech, that is, even though Johnson limited his dictionary to 40,000 words, what
he did do was that by including those words, by giving them aphoristic definitions, and
by using quotations from the great writers of English literature and English intellectual
life to illustrate them, he made the words part of everyday speech. He also established
this reliance on literature, and so the quotations from great writers and from relatively unfamiliar
writers to enter the canon in ways that Johnson's dictionary becomes a testimony to his own
reading, but if you like it also becomes an anthology for later readers as well. Literary
history becomes linguistic history, and, and this will I think become a central theme
for not just this course, but for all of our reading of literature. What Johnson's dictionary
does is it has as its implicit argument the notion that great authors are linguistic innovators,
and that the history of literature is therefore the history of the English language. Johnson
also sought to excise slang and colloquialism from polite speech by distinguishing classes
of words that he called low, and he also therefore made it possible for individuals in effect
to educate themselves by using the dictionary. The dictionary becomes now, for the first
time, an arbiter of linguistic social life. As I mentioned, Johnson's influence on the
OED was profound, and his influence on later lexicography was remarkable. And certainly
the influence, it seems to me, is not simply in his words, but in the status of the dictionary
as a book. Johnson's dictionary is really the first dictionary that's in the home.
It's the first dictionary to be reprinted and published in ways after Johnson's lifetime
that make it affordable. And there are many, many copies of early editions of the dictionary
which are abbreviated or abridged, many copies not in the great large folio books of the
original publication, but in much smaller, if you like, home bookshelf sizes, so that
the idea of looking up in the dictionary, the very notion of the dictionary as a social
as well as a linguistic necessity originates with Johnson. And with Johnson we can see
then that synthesis that I have been building towards, that is, the way in which an increasing
vocabulary in English changes in pronunciation and spelling and debates on pedagogy and the
politics of language come to be codified, if you like, into a handbook for social experience
and language. And as we'll see in my next lecture, the larger issues of propriety itself
as a grammatical as well as a social category inform the cultural perspectives of the late
18th and early 19th century and lead us to an understanding of how the dictionary becomes
both an arbiter of language and a guide to life.
Thank you.
