Lecture 23 Dictionaries and World Histories
So what's a dictionary good for?
In my previous lectures, I've illustrated the ways in which English dictionaries originated
in the hard-word lists of the 16th and 17th centuries,
how they responded to the influx of new words and coinages into the English vocabulary,
and how, in the figure of Samuel Johnson,
the idea of the dictionary as a book for the home, for the individual,
as keyed to aesthetic judgment,
and as located in a view of language as mutable and transitory,
how all of these things come together to bequeath to us
the modern idioms and ideologies of dictionary making.
I also suggested that when we look at modern dictionaries,
such as the Oxford English Dictionary,
what we're also looking at is the legacy of these 18th-century lexicographers.
And in the work of William Loth and Joseph Priestly,
I illustrated the tensions between prescriptivism on the one hand
and descriptivism on the other.
And, broadly speaking,
I tried to illustrate how dictionaries invariably toe the line
with great difficulty between describing and prescribing usage.
What I would like to do in this lecture is look at some words
and some aspects of change in meaning in particular
to show what a dictionary is good for,
or to put it more precisely,
how we can use a historical dictionary
such as the Oxford English Dictionary, the OED,
how we can use such a dictionary
to give us access and insight into individual words
and some principles perhaps of semantic change.
One of the things that I have resisted doing
in the course of these lectures
is asking and answering why questions.
Why does language change?
Why do words change meaning?
Why did the great vowel shift happen and so on?
And linguists and historical linguists in particular
shy away from offering explanations
for why particular changes happened.
We can document them in great detail,
what the relationship is between social pressure
or class involvement or the anatomy of the mouth
or contact among languages and dialects.
All of these, what the precise relationship is among them,
is invariably doubtful and debatable.
What I would like to do, however,
is suggest some whys for language change in this lecture
or to put it more precisely again
to provide some contexts for explaining
how certain words change their meaning
and perhaps therefore look forward
to the ways in which our own words
might change their meaning in the future.
And so I'd like to begin with a set of principles
that I've drawn from some recent works
of linguistic theory and the history of language.
And so one principle is what is called
the relationship ambiguity and limitation.
That is, the argument that if a word or a form
has two meanings so incompatible that they cause ambiguity,
one of the meanings dies out
or more rarely the form itself becomes obsolete.
And ambiguity and limitation, I think,
have two subspecies as it were.
One of them is homonymy.
Now we all know what a homonym is.
We all know that homonyms are two words
which are pronounced identically
but which mean radically different things
like T-H-E-R-E and T-H-E-I-R,
there and there.
And when I was a child growing up in Brooklyn,
homonymy became for me a point of enormous tension
because I, like so many children of my generation,
was taught to distinguish with great precision
between a word like which, W-H, which, the relative pronoun,
and which, a sorceress without the H.
And I was taught that the aspiration of the W-H
was different from the non-aspiration of the W.
But for me and for my peers,
which and which remained homonyms for life.
A vivid moment of personal embarrassment
also remains for me that moment in second grade
when we were all supposed to go around the room
and come up with homonyms.
And in my best Brooklyn accent of the time,
I reported that I had a pair of homonyms
and it was orphan.
And the teacher said, what do you mean?
And I said, well, orphan I go to the store
and little orphan Annie.
And clearly these were not homonyms
but I'm offering this little tidbit to show you
that homonymy remains both culturally
and personally for many people an issue of contention.
Now for Old English speakers,
homonymy may have also provoked change in language.
An extreme example of homonymy
of the following sets of words in Old English.
The word ah, which means ever.
The word ah, which means law.
The word ag, which means egg.
The word ah, which means water.
The word ah, which means horse.
And the word ag, which means island.
And if you see them spelled on the page
and you pay attention to the precision of my pronunciation,
you could argue, well, they probably are in homonyms,
but in everyday speech and certainly in casual conversation,
the similarities of pronunciation may have been so great
that in order to avoid ambiguity,
that is in order to limit the possible
misunderstandings and misapprehensions of the word,
different words came in either from other languages
or from other dialects.
So for example, the word ah for law disappears
and is replaced by the word that eventually becomes law
that comes originally from Latin and the Romance languages.
The word ag, meaning egg,
eventually disappears in its West Saxon
or Southern Middle English form
and is replaced by the unambiguous
Northern or Scandinavian form, egg.
And you'll remember Caxton's story of the Mercers,
that is the merchants who are trying to buy eggs in Kent,
the London merchants who are buying eggs in Kent
and go to the farmhouse and they ask for eggs
and the wife says, I speak no French
and they're looking for air, iron.
So here the issue is that perhaps a form
from another regional dialect comes in
in order to disambiguate homonymy
and make possible the fewest number of confusions.
So this is one potential explanation for change in language.
We've seen polysemy previously,
that is where one word has several meanings
and some of these meanings can overlap over time.
Let me give you some examples of polysemy
to show how using the resources of a historical dictionary
like the Oxford English Dictionary
can help us understand something of change in meaning
in an individual word.
Now the word I'm going to focus on is unkuth.
An unkuth means not kuth.
Kuth comes from the Germanic root meaning known
or being aware of something.
And something that in Old English was unkuth
was something that was simply unknown
or unfamiliar or strange.
And this form survives in written and spoken English
until the middle of the 17th century.
But gradually the word came to describe things
that were not simply unknown
but were strange or unpleasant
because they were unknown.
And this meaning originates probably
at the end of the 14th century
and can still be found in some regional uses today.
Uncommonly, awkward and clumsy
is another set of definitions that the OED gives
and this version probably begins
in its earliest citation
at the beginning of the 16th century.
And in the middle of the 16th century
if you were unkuth, you were rough and rugged
and by the end of the 17th century
only by the end of the 17th century
does the word unkuth mean uncultured
in this modern way.
And so what I want to show in this kind of narrative
is the way in which you have a word
of several meanings overlapping over time
and as we've seen throughout these lectures
the way in which change in meaning
can move from a particular condition
to a description grounded in that condition.
Something that is unknown becomes something
that is alien, strange, weird, rugged, rough, uncultured.
And so what we have here
is if you like the true etymology of unkuth.
What we do not have is the bogus
or folk etymology of unkuth.
The idea that unkuth means now uncultured
and therefore that there must be a root
in unkuth without the un, kuth,
where kuth takes on this imagined nominal status
as in a phrase like, he's got no kuth.
That is imaginary.
It is completely ahistorical.
I wonder if eventually the word will change
and that future lexicographers will record
the meaning of a word kuth
as emerging in the late 20th and early 21st centuries
to mean propriety, ability, culture, knowledge, skill
to have kuth.
So these are examples of homonymy and polysemy
and they are the subspecies of ambiguity and limitation.
Another way in which words change their meaning
is through what is called extension in lexis
and I've used this term before.
Extension in lexis is where metaphorical meanings
or figurative senses take over
from older technical or literal meanings.
So let me give you some examples also drawn
from the information available in the Oxford English Dictionary.
The verb clog originally meant to fasten wood to something
and that first appears at the end of the 14th century.
It's only by the beginning of the 16th century
that the verb clog means to encumber by adhesion
and so you can see here extension in lexis.
That is a gradual figurative sense
from something very, very specific.
So now when pipes get clogged or something like that,
there's nothing about wood or fastening in it.
It's simply an issue of encumbrance.
The verb to clasp means to fasten in Middle English.
It means to enfold by early modern English
and by the end of the 16th century,
it means to grip with the hand.
Brazen is a beautiful word
and it's another word that illustrates extension in lexis.
Brazen simply means of brass, brass, brazen.
And this is its old English and Middle English meaning.
Now if something was made of brass,
it was invariably made in order to pass
for something else that looked like brass
and that is gold.
And Renaissance writers write frequently
of the difference between the golden age of the past
and what they called this brazen world.
That is a world not brazen in the sense of being impudent,
but of being made of brass rather than of gold.
To be brassy or to be brazen
gradually took on this social sense
as if being brazen was to try to make your brass pass for true gold.
And so it's only by the end of the 16th century
that brazen constitutes a category of social behavior
rather than a quality of metallurgy.
To bristle is to stand up stiff like the bristles of a brush.
But by the middle of the 16th century
it means to become indignant.
That is, you metaphorically bristle.
And I'll give you one more example.
To broil is to burn in Middle English
and by the time of Shakespeare it is to get angry.
So what I'm illustrating here,
through these particular examples,
are the ways in which words change meaning
by taking on figurative or metaphorical meanings
that eventually displace the older technical meaning.
And as I've repeatedly said,
this is an important problem in semantic change.
And especially when you organize a dictionary,
as Samuel Johnson did,
Johnson recognized it in the making of his dictionary.
And so what he did was he organized the definitions
so that the older primary or non-metaphorical meaning came first,
even if that meaning was no longer current.
And this is a very important principle of lexicography.
That is, that in this tradition of lexicography,
which is followed by the Oxford English Dictionary
and by several other modern dictionaries,
you are out to record not the word definitions
in order of popularity or familiarity.
You are out to record the word definitions historically
where the hierarchization, the principle of hierarchy,
is from the literal to the figurative.
Lexicography therefore creates the impression
of hierarchies of meaning,
even when those hierarchies may not actually reflect
the uses of the time.
And so, when we look at a dictionary,
we're looking at a history of words
told through the history of semantic change.
And these tiers of meaning
can be both tiers of literal and figurative
and tiers of class.
I mentioned in my previous lecture the case of ain't.
In the 18th century, it was used by polite society
frequently in the form of ant.
And the OED considers ain't, quote,
a later and more illiterate form of ant.
Yet, as I mentioned, it survived in the mouth of Lord Peter Whimsy
in the Dorothy Sayer novels of the 20s and 30s,
even though Charles Dickens, writing in the 1860s,
marked it as a low, dialect word.
And so, these matters infuse the definitions in the dictionary.
And what I'd like to do now is build on some observations
at the close of my previous lecture
to look at a set of words where we can see issues
in power and control, politics, and paper.
So when we look at a definition in a dictionary,
what we're looking at are narratives.
And this is a very important point.
That is, dictionaries are narrative phenomena.
They're narrative phenomena in several ways.
First, because the historical organization of a dictionary
tells a story.
Every word should tell a story.
And in my subsequent lecture,
I'm going to call attention to the way in which
the makers of the Oxford English Dictionary
explicitly made clear that words told stories.
They borrowed this idea from the Germanic philologists
and dictionary makers of the 19th century,
where in the words of one famous German classicist,
every word should tell what he called
the Laban's Geschichte of a language.
That is, the life history of a language.
And so dictionaries are narrative
because they record a sequence in linear form
of historical word use and word change.
Dictionaries are also narrative
because very often the definitions
or the headnotes of the explanations
tell stories of how words came into the language.
And at the close of my previous lecture,
I hinted at some ways in which the OED
offers narratives for a couple of words,
in particular protocol and quiz.
And at the end of this lecture,
I'm going to return to those in some greater detail.
So let's look at a couple of words
to see what's going on in historical narrative.
Some of these words I've talked about
in the course of my lectures,
and now I want to review some of them
systematically to go through these histories.
One of the most compelling words in such a history
is the word cheap.
Now the word cheap is a story of extension
in Lexus more than 2,000 years old
from the Germanic languages into English.
This is a word that is the product
of a period of continental borrowing.
You'll remember in my lectures on the Germanic languages.
The period of continental borrowing
was that period before the Germanic languages split up,
before the Angles and the Saxons and the Jutes
came to the British Isles,
when the Germanic peoples came in contact
with the Latin of the Roman Empire.
And many of the words that were borrowed
from Latin at that time were words for commerce
and warfare and architecture and social control.
And so all of the Germanic languages
will have these words in their modern forms.
And the word cheap comes from the Latin word cowpo,
which originally meant a small merchant.
And so in German, modern German,
it is kauffen, the verb meaning to buy,
often to sell as well.
A kauffmann is a merchant.
You have, as I've mentioned before,
the name Copenhagen of a city,
which goes back to an older Norse word,
kaupmannhauffen, that is the haven or the harbor
for the kaupmann for the person involved
in buying and selling, that is the merchant's haven.
And in the course of Old and Middle English,
the word cheap extends its lexes beyond simply
buying and selling to refer to the thing itself
or to the quality of the purchase.
And so you have idioms like good cheap,
which refers to a low price or a goodbye.
And this develops in the Middle English period.
You have a phrase like dear cheap,
which may seem to us like an oxymoron or a contradiction.
Here the phrase means something expensive,
where there is a dearth or scarcity of the product.
In place names and street names,
still in London today, there is cheap side and east cheap.
These names go back to a time when these areas
were the market or the mercantile places of congregation.
And in such places as cheap side,
where you might get good cheap,
you might also find things that were cheap or dear.
The distinction between something cheap
and something dear does not appear
in the Oxford English Dictionary
until the beginning of the 16th century.
We saw in Shakespeare's Sonnet 87
how the language of commercial exchange
can inform the language of love
and how a love relationship could be expressed
in terms of, if you like, purchase or investment.
So what is in effect the cheap of love?
By the 17th century, the word takes on its modern senses.
That is something which is inexpensive or easy to obtain
and therefore something which is most likely of low quality.
So what we see in, if you like, the narrative history
of the extension in Lexus in a word like cheap
is a history of the economy of the British Isles
and the relationship between scarcity and value
that by the 16th and 17th century controls
the market and credit economy.
Now there is a clutch of words that fascinate me
that also illustrate changes in meaning
from the specific to the general
and that also pose problems for the lexicographer.
I talked a little bit about protocol
and I want to bring into that discussion now to other words.
Diploma and Colate.
Protocol, Diploma and Colate
are all words that are ultimately about pieces of paper.
Take a word like Diploma.
Diploma is a coinage in the 16th and 17th centuries
from Greek.
That is scholars made up the word from a Greek word
meaning to fold over, Diplos.
A Diploma is quite simply a folded piece of paper.
Now in medieval Latin Diploma was a charter
or a document and important state papers
because they were private or because they were secret
would be folded over and they would be sealed with wax
and so Diplomatics became the study of
folded pieces of paper.
Diplomacy was the practice of conducting
state business through folded pieces of paper.
A Diploma was something that granted you authority
if you were diplomatic about something
you would write it on a piece of paper and fold it.
Now at this point I'm being figurative and playful
with the etymology but this etymology
of the folded piece of paper is still a living meaning
for the 18th century.
It's not until the early 18th century
that the word Diploma is first used to refer
to something that you get when you get a university degree.
Diplomatics therefore is a transference of meaning
from textual to political phenomena
that is from the material of organization
to the behavior around that material.
Let me look at another word about paper
and that's the word Colate.
Now the word Colate comes from the Latin
and in Latin you have the verbs.
There are certain kinds of verbs in Latin
whose principal parts are made up of
other parts of other verbs.
And in the case of the verb to confer
confere, confero, confere
to make two things come together
or to compare them,
the participle form of confere is colatus
and so to collate was really just to compare
or simply to confer things
and it really isn't until the 17th century
that the word collate comes to mean
to bring texts together
in order to make certain kinds of comparisons.
Colophon in Greek is the part of a document
that the scribe has written his name
or the title with the information about that document
and we still use that word to some extent today.
The thing that came before the colophon
was in Greek the proto-colophon,
the thing before,
and so proto-col comes from a Greek set of terms
to mean the first sheet
or the role of papyrus
or the first sheet in a manuscript
and so the business of proto-col
like the business of diplomatics
was the business of paper
and in my previous lecture
I noted how the Oxford English Dictionary
even to this day maintains and still reproduces
the older judgmental 19th century definitions of proto-col
as a word which was not fully part of the English vocabulary
but rather came from the formulary of etiquette in France
or that came from the language of the legal vocabulary
of Latin or French
and if we delve deeper into proto-col
we see other forms of alienation
and this is the kind of stuff that I'm suggesting to you
that you can do with a great historical dictionary
read behind the definitions
here that I pick almost at random
from the several columns of definition of proto-col
quote, in the parts of the United States acquired from Mexico
the name is used for the original record of a grant, transfer, etc. of land
under the Spanish law
this was an entry made in the book
by the official recorder of such transactions
so once again
we have a definition that is privileged
this appears very early in the narrative
this definition privileges the alien or unusual quality
of the word proto-col
now as I mentioned the Oxford English Dictionary was begun in the late 19th
and completed in the early 20th
and it's been constantly updated
and in the most recent edition of the OED
it's not until the very end
that you get the modern expected use
in extended and general use is any code
of conventional or proper conduct
formally correct behavior
and the earliest citation for this use
that the OED gives is 1952
and so what we're looking at is a narrative
what we're looking at is a story of pieces of paper
that become modes of behavior
and I talked too about quiz at the end of my last lecture
and once again I will conclude with quiz
a word of dubious origin
as I showed the OED has problems with the etymology
where it writes out that etymology
as a statement of linguistic politics
it is a word of the theatre
it is perhaps a word of Irish origin
from the theatre manager daily of Dublin
whatever is at stake here
the various forms of quiz
meaning a test or meaning the verb to inquire
whatever is going on here
we see an etymology that challenges
the lexicographical resources of the OED
and so to wrap up this particular lecture
and look forward to the next
we need to recognize that dictionaries
are not simply objective or empirical recorders of meaning
they are narrative documents
imbued with the politics of nationhood and identity
concerned very much with describing
but invariably prescribing or regulating language
and furthermore they are documents
and they are volumes that are enmeshed in their own history
and I'll begin my next lecture
with the beginnings of the Oxford English Dictionary
and then move through to conclude
this second block of lectures in this series
with some attitudes towards English
and national and cultural identity
towards the close of the 20th and the beginning of the 21st centuries
