Lecture 24 – Values, Words and Modernity
The Oxford English Dictionary remains one of the great monuments of historical lexicography.
In its collaborative production from the 1880s to the 1920s, in its many supplements and now
in its online version, it bears eloquent testimony to the researches and resources of the many
who put it all together.
The OED began with a group of amateurs and it continued through its early life by drawing
on volunteers to provide slips of paper with representative quotations of literature and
words both common and uncommon.
The history of the Oxford English Dictionary is in many ways the history not just of the
English language but the history of the discipline of historical linguistics and also the history
of so many of the political, economic and institutional developments of England in the
19th and the 20th century.
It might not be too much to say that, together with the King James Bible, the Oxford English
Dictionary is the single greatest collaborative effort in the history of the English language.
In this lecture, I want to talk a little bit about the origins of the Oxford English
Dictionary, say a few things about the people who made it, and also look at some of the
legacies of the OED in some representative writers of the 20th century on language use
and its arbitration.
The origins of the OED are to be found in the philological inquiries of mid-19th century
England.
Now you'll remember from my earlier lectures on Indo-European how the late 18th and early
19th century inquires into language, shifted the study of language from something that
was philosophical and metaphysical on the one hand to something that was empirical and
historical on the other.
And the discipline of philology by the middle of the 19th century became something of a
historical science.
It was believed on a par with the history of the earth itself, with geology, with historical
and comparative anatomy, with biology, and then after Darwin with evolutionary biology.
The philological society culminated several decades of interest among learned amateurs
in England, and it was founded in 1842 in London for the purpose of studying the history
of languages.
It institutionalized, if you like, the work in Indo-European and comparative philology,
which was coming to dominate language study in Europe by the mid-19th century.
Now let me just pause for a little bit and say something about this world of the philological
in the 19th century.
Scholars of language by the mid-19th century came increasingly to be located in schools
and universities.
Now during the 18th century and before, people who studied language were largely learned
amateurs.
They were, if you like, country house philologists.
They were journalists, poets, or there were people like Samuel Johnson, who was a professional
man of letters, who even though he had training and eventually was to receive an honorary
doctorate, was not someone who spent his life in a university.
This is beginning to change in the first decades of the 19th century.
And it seems to me that for those of you more familiar with, let's say, the history of
English literature than with the history of the English language, that a very good example
of somebody on the cusp of this change is the figure of Mr. Kazabon from George Eliot's
novel Middlemarch.
And this novel, though published in 1870 and 71, is set in the period from 1828 to 1830.
And it is precisely at this moment of transition, Mr. Kazabon claims to have discovered a key
to all mythologies.
He is an amateur.
He is a member of the church.
He is a pedant.
And Mr. Kazabon reacts strongly when characters in the novel do not understand or mock what
he's doing.
And one of the characters, Will Lattislaw, explains that as he says, quote, the Germans
have figured this all out.
The Germans have done this.
And what he's referring to by the Germans is he's referring to the Indo-European philologists,
people like Franz Bopp and the brothers Grimm, who in the early 19th century codified the
rules and the laws of Indo-European, were looking at the languages and in effect provided
the key to all mythologies, which in some sense was historical comparative philology,
rather than country house amateur antiquarianism.
This is, if you like, a fictional representation of the historical moment in the 19th century
when scholarship moves from the amateur to the professional.
So what we have in the case of the Philological Society is another move from the amateurism
of the learned to the gradual ensconcing of the professional in the university.
And so the Philological Society's foundation in 1842 was keyed to the production of a New
English Dictionary.
And as I mentioned in a previous lecture, the impress of Samuel Johnson's Dictionary
of 1755 was so profound that when the idea of another English Dictionary was mooted,
it was to be the New English Dictionary because Johnson's was the old.
Now in order to provide texts, accurate historical texts for this New English Dictionary, another
society had to be founded.
And in 1864, a society called the Early English Text Society was founded to recover, edit,
and publish editions of early English writings.
And these editions came to be used as source materials for the OED.
It is an interesting fact of British intellectual and academic life that the EETS, as it is
called, is still going strong today, and a couple of volumes are being published still
year by year to this day, testimony to the survival in many ways of 19th century historical
philology and editorial method.
Now what are the larger goals of this historical philological project?
Historical linguistics came to be pressed into the service of the nationalist ideologies
of the 19th century.
Carl von Klauswitz has a very famous statement, which is very often paraphrased, indeed parodied,
that war is politics by other means.
I would suggest that for the 19th century, philology was politics by other means.
That is, that by looking at the histories of the language, English, German, and French,
Italian, the various European, and the classical languages, competing scholars throughout Europe
made claims for the legitimacy of national vernaculars, and furthermore, for the relative
value of those national vernaculars in a larger European context.
One of the most fascinating figures in this history is a man named Max Müller, who lived
from 1823 to 1900, and while he was German in birth and training, he came to spend the
bulk of his professional career at Oxford University.
In mid-19th century England, Max Müller was the arbiter of language, and there's
a story going around among linguists and historians, perhaps it's true, perhaps it's apocryphal,
that any letter addressed to the professor of language at Oxford.
No name, no postcode, nothing else would go immediately to Max Müller.
It was the linguistic equivalent of writing to Santa Claus, Care of the North Pole.
Now, Müller's work is fascinating, largely because what he tried to do was raise questions
about the power of human language to confer identity on human beings in values and society,
and among his fascinations were, if you want to phrase it in this Kazabonian term, a key
to all mythologies.
Müller was fascinated by mythology, and he was fascinated by the idea of the sun god
in Indo-European mythology, and much of Müller's work has come in for criticism by later linguists,
but what is interesting about it is the way in which he invested words with narrative
meaning, and this goes back to a point I was making earlier.
Dictionaries tell stories, well now words tell stories, and one of Müller's most famous
and notable quotations in many of his works was the idea, as he put it, that words mean
more than they have ever meant before.
Now what does that mean?
Part of what it means is that once you know the etymology of a word, once you know its
transformation over time, then it's hard to use that word in the same way again as you
had before.
So I've given you some etymologies, protocol, colophon, quiz, diploma, cheap, silly, uncouth.
Now what I hope is that these words mean more to you than they have ever meant before.
You are aware of the linguistic history, and whether or not you use those words in their
linguistically historical context, there is another layer of meaning to them.
So what Müller recognized was that the discipline of historical philology gave each word a larger
resonance and larger context, and this contributed to a larger mid-19th century, or if you like,
Victorian attitude towards language.
What the Victorians recognized was that in many ways words really did mean more than
they had meant before, and that the stories of words became what words were about.
Now this is an interesting, if you like, almost philosophical problem.
What does a word refer to?
In other words, does the meaning of a word lie in its representational ability?
That is, if I say the word door, does the meaning of that word hinge on the thing on the hinges?
If by contrast I say the word door, and the first thing I think of is the history of the
word door, and its cognates in the Germanic languages, and the idea of the door, or the
doorway, and the notion of the portal in Indo-European.
And if I play this whole thing out on my head, then at a certain level what the word door
refers to is not primarily the object in the room, but the history of the word over time.
And this is, it seems to me, one of the most philosophically profound things about Victorian
philology, the way in which words come to refer more to their history than to their
objective status in the world.
So the idea that words meant more than they ever meant before motivated the founding of
the Philological Society and the idea of a New English Dictionary.
And so in 1857 the Philological Society proposed a New English Dictionary as a way of establishing
English etymology and usage on what they called a firm scientific basis.
The original editors were a man named Herbert Coleridge and Richard Trench, and both of
them wrote in prefaces, in letters, and in essays statements about their goals for this
century.
Richard Trench, the original editor of the OED, claimed a true idea of the dictionary.
And what he said is that a dictionary should be an inventory of the language.
And so the idea here was that the job of the dictionary maker was not to hierarchize words,
not to keep some out and privilege some in.
The idea was to inventory.
And that word inventory carries with it a profound economic and social resonance for
the mid-19th century.
The lexicographer is a historian of language, a historian of a people, but the lexicographer
is, if you like, the overseer in the great factory of language.
You are inventorying your words.
You are going, in effect, into the storehouse of words.
A lexicographer is no longer Samuel Johnson's harmless drudge.
A lexicographer is an industrial person, a person of industry, a person of industriousness.
And in the 1870s, when Sir James A. H. Murray was appointed the new overseer editor of the
Oxford English Dictionary, he set up what was called the scriptorium, the great factory.
Indeed, he called it a factory.
He called it a word factory.
And it was full of pigeonholes, and it was full of great walls and rooms.
And it was an industry of words.
And so, in the words of the great modern historian and critic of the OED, Hans Arsloff, the dictionary
of a language, in this case the OED, became a historical monument.
The history of a nation contemplated from one point of view.
In other words, it was as much a monument as any of the great edifices of industry that
were being built in the 19th century.
Now the OED provides not only lexicographical models, but social and moral ones as well.
And what I would like to do in the remainder of this lecture is look at some selected statements
by writers and editors that have been highly influential in the 20th century and that represent
earlier debates generated by the kind of linguistic inquiries of the 18th century and the linguistic
science of the 19th century.
And I want to summarize ahead of time what some of my key points will be drawing on this
arc of historical progression.
In other words, from Johnson through the makers of the OED, this notion first of a relationship
between language and society is language the reflection of social behavior?
What is the relationship between linguistic propriety and social propriety?
And how is the study of the history of the language the study of the history of the people?
All of these questions and issues are raised in the traditions of lexicography from Johnson
to the OED and all of them can be found at levels of detail in the definitions of words
and the quotations illustrating those definitions.
Next, the question of the role of authority in education in articulating the relationship
between language and society.
In other words, whose job is it to study language and to teach it?
Is it the job of the enlightened amateur?
Is it the job of the journalist?
Is it the job of the degree holding professional?
Is the institution of language study to be compared to, as Johnson did, the institution
of imperial control where Johnson's dictionary becomes in effect like an act of conquest?
Is it to be compared to a kind of Victorian industry or factory?
Is it to be compared with a university seminary?
One of the central questions adjudicated by such arbiters of language is, when do you
draw the line between style and grammar?
In other words, I can speak perfectly grammatically, but I may at times speak in a way that is idiosyncratic
and that may be by style.
Further, one may elect to speak ungrammatically for purposes of stylistic enhancement.
Where do we draw the line between grammatical correctness on the one hand and stylistic
choice on the other?
These arbiters also try to adjudicate the relationship between description and prescription.
Linguistic behavior on the one hand, linguistic standards on the other.
And one of the ways in which they did this was by becoming models of style in their own
right.
One of the things I've tried to stress throughout this course is that we read writers on language
not simply for what they say, but how they say it.
How does a writer on language exemplify language itself?
And I turn now to four extended quotations to illustrate the ways in which writing on
language is a performance on language and how the issues of grammar and style, prescription,
institution and industry, dictionary and definition come together to grant us insight,
but at times impediment into our understanding of the English language.
My first quotation is from none other than the great Henry Fowler, who is the author
of Modern English Usage.
And he's writing in the 1920s, and here is a selection from his article on grammar.
And I quote,
We took a long time to realize that there is not much sense in trying to apply the rules
of a dead synthetic language, by which Fowler means Latin, to a living analytical one.
Perhaps we have not yet quite abandoned the attempt.
It is for instance, despite the grammarians not thanks to them, that over the centuries
our language has won ease and grace by getting rid of almost all its case inflections.
Someday perhaps this good work will be complete, and we shall no longer be faced with the sometimes
puzzling task of choosing between who and whom.
But it is going too far, if we give the word grammar its proper meaning, to say, as Orwell
said, that grammar is of no importance so long as we make our meaning plain.
What are generally recognized for the time being as its conventions must be followed
by those who would write clearly and agreeably, and its elements must be taught in the schools
if only as a code of good manners.
This is a remarkable quotation, and what's remarkable about it is the way that I think
you can still hear the key idioms of the debates that we have seen at work really from the
beginning of this course.
That is, what is English?
Is English an inflected or an uninflected language?
Is the history of English, from one that was inflected to one that was uninflected, is
that history still in process?
Is that history moving towards a goal, in other words, complete lack of grammatical inflection,
where we will no longer distinguish between who and whom?
Is this a good thing?
And furthermore, what are the institutions that will teach and arbitrate?
Look at Fowler's aesthetic vocabulary.
This goes back to Johnson and even before.
The way in which he uses a phrase like ease and grace.
This is in so many ways a profoundly 18th century kind of phrase, or the way in which
he talks about writing clearly and agreeably, or the very way in which an essay on grammar
ends with a statement about good manners.
That the elements of grammar, he says, must be taught in the schools if only as a code
of good manners.
Recall Fanny Burney on propriety.
Recall the way in which the concept of propriety moved from a grammatical to a social concept.
And so what I think Fowler is doing here is he is recapitulating the central lines of debate.
That is, the question of grammaticality as a question of sociability, the question of
aesthetic judgment as your primary criterion of assessment, and furthermore, the need to
maintain a level of rule-governed behavior in linguistic performance if only as he says
as a code of good manners.
Fowler's modern English usage has become a Bible for many.
Just as dictionaries have become Bibles of many.
And one of the most popular of the modern American dictionaries is Webster's New World
Dictionary of the American Language.
I'm going to quote from the introduction to the ninth edition.
And this is called Language and the Dictionary.
And I'm going to quote a paragraph from it, and it reads as follows.
Language rests upon use.
Being used long enough by enough people will become standard.
A good dictionary can promote order in inevitable growth.
It will also promote stability in the language by preserving evidence of the past.
But it should not be treated mainly as a means to ensure linguistic atrophy.
By this point, you should know what to listen for.
And what you listen for is the discussion between prescriptivism versus descriptivism.
At one level, they're saying, language is something that changes.
And if enough people use a phrase, it will become standard.
If enough people say things like, he has no cooth, whether or not it is historically
accurate, will that become a standard?
Will cooth, in some sense, take on a new meaning?
But we see once again the old organic metaphors of the 18th century and of Samuel Johnson.
Promoting order in inevitable growth, as if a dictionary was kind of like an English country
gardener, letting things not run too wildly, but carefully trimming the hedges of language.
Promoting stability, as if the dictionary now was a political as well as a linguistic
tool preserving evidence, as if the dictionary was something like a scientist keeping specimens
in jars of formaldehyde.
And yet, language is a living thing.
And the organs of language should not be left, as the dictionary says, to atrophy.
Look also at the word good, a good dictionary.
What is the difference between a good dictionary and a bad dictionary?
A good dictionary, well, according to my 15-year-old son, a good dictionary is a dictionary that
has all the dirty words in it.
According to Webster's New World Dictionary, a good dictionary is one that promotes order
in inevitable growth.
So the mark of a dictionary is not how many words it has in it.
A mark of a dictionary is not whether it gives you good definitions or whether it enables
your prurience as a reader.
A good dictionary is something that performs a good service to society.
Go back to Fowler's quote and look at the way he uses the word good.
When he's talking about how we will eventually get rid of all these case inflections, he
says, someday perhaps this good work will be complete.
And the phrase good work must resonate with a kind of pastoral care.
As if the good work of the dictionary were like the good works of a pastor or the good
works that will get us into heaven.
The phrase good work cannot but recall a moral and a religious activity.
And now the good work will be to purge the language of its sins.
In 1972, Douglas Bush of Harvard University, one of the leading and perhaps self-appointed
arbiters of literary and linguistic taste in the United States, wrote an essay in which
he said, and here is his quotation,
We know that language is always changing and growing, but acceptance of the perpetual
process does not or should not mean blind surrender to the momentum or inertia of slovenly
and tasteless ignorance and insensitivity.
Ideally, changes should be inaugurated from above by the masters of language as they
have often been, not from below.
From the Greeks, notably Plato, and Romans onward, many men of goodwill have been concerned
about the use and abuse of language, and they did what they could to curb barbarism and
foster taste, discipline and integrity.
I'm just old enough to remember college in 1972.
And I can tell you that in 1972, I and my compiers were slovenly, tasteless and ignorant.
We were insensitive to the masters of language, and the last thing we wanted was change to
be inaugurated from above.
Thomas Bush, writing from Harvard in 1972, is in the end writing less about language
than he is writing about social and institutional upheaval, and his terms veritably bristle
with the language of political control.
Bush's notion, if you like, goes beyond linguistic prescriptivism to embrace social prescriptivism,
and we can see here Bush as a kind of modern Alexander Gill or William Loth, who raises
the notion of propriety and the origin of language change as a matter to be arbitrated
rather than to be described.
Finally, I conclude with George Orwell, whose famous essay of the late 1940s Politics in
the English Language has become a touchstone for any discussion of the history of English
and its usage.
In the course of this long quotation that I'm going to read, Orwell contrasts the Anglo-Saxon
vocabulary with an imported Latin addiction.
He signals that euphemism is not just a form of politeness, but it can be used to serve
the ends of political deceit.
And Orwell's quotation is, of course, one of the most Orwellian things he ever wrote.
In our time, he writes, political speech and writing are largely the defense of the indefensible.
Things like the continuance of British rule in India, the Russian purges and deportations,
the dropping of the atom bombs on Japan, can indeed be defended, but only by arguments
which are too brutal for most people to face, and which do not square with the professed
aims of political parties.
Thus, political language has to consist largely of euphemism, question begging, and sheer
cloudy vagueness.
Defenseless villages are bombarded from the air, the inhabitants driven out into the countryside,
the cattle machine gunned, the huts set on fire with incendiary bullets.
This is called pacification.
Millions of peasants are robbed of their farms and sent trudging along the roads with
no more than they can carry.
This is called transfer of population or rectification of frontiers.
People are imprisoned for years without trial, or shot on the back of the neck, or sent to
die of scurvy and arctic lumber camps.
This is called elimination of unreliable elements.
Such phraseology is needed if one wants to name things without calling up mental pictures
of them.
Orwell's quotation has been used so many times over the last sixty years, whether it
was for the Stalinist purges, or for the war in Korea, or for Vietnam, or for the conditions
at the close of the twentieth and the beginning of the twenty-first century, that I will not
belabor the obvious resonances.
What I simply want to call attention to is this.
The way in which Orwell, like all the writers I have read to you, is a master of style.
The way in which, like Chaucer, like Milton, like Shakespeare, he conjuncts to pose phrases
of old English origin with phrases of romance or Latinate importation.
Euphemism, question-begging, sheer, cloudy vagueness.
An apposition that enacts the very claims it makes.
How can something be both sheer and cloudy at the same time?
The way in which he shows us that rewriting the present invariably leads us into the polysyllables
of the Latinate.
As we saw for Geoffrey Chaucer, as we saw for the trial-ingual culture of medieval England,
the importation of a new society was the importation of a new world.
Castellus heeletvertian, that William the Conqueror built castles, a new thing and a new word.
And so I conclude with Orwell, as a retrospective on the way in which the history of English
has been a tension not just between prescription and description, but a tension between what
we believe to be the native and the imported.
And in the next set of lectures, the final third of this course, I'm going to look at
these discussions in the American trajectory, beginning with colonial expansion and moving
on to our present time.
