Lecture 26 American Language from Webster to Menken
For Noah Webster, the American language uniquely reflected the American experience.
In my previous lecture, I began talking about Webster, and I quoted from his writings from
the 1790s, and also from the preface to the Great American Dictionary of 1828, and I called
attention to the ways in which Webster sought to record the differences between American
and British English, but also, in effect, to prescribe changes in American spelling
and pronunciation, habits of grammar.
His claim that the American language required differences was keyed to the notion of American
politics as demanding differences.
And so the relationship between the location and the nation was central to Webster's idea.
And what I'd like to do in this lecture is build on some of those observations, return
to some of the quotations in greater detail, and trace an arc of attitude for the American
19th century.
I'm going to go back to Webster, and I'm going to end with H. L. Menken, the great
journalist and public commentator who, in 1919, published the first edition of his magisterial
work, The American Language.
And so the arc of my discussion moves from the late 18th to the beginning of the 20th
century, and it hinges on relationships of grammar and style, culture and commerce, idiom
and identity.
Now Webster began his career, as I had mentioned in my previous lecture, by publishing grammar
textbooks in the 1780s.
And as early as 1806, he published a short dictionary, and what he was trying to do was
define the characteristics of American English, what was different about American English
from British English, and, as I mentioned, the independence of America as both a political
and a linguistic phenomenon.
I want to return to that key phrase from my previous lecture, the idea of a national
language as a band of national union, the idea that the former colonies were forged
into a nation, not simply by sharing political or geographical experience, but by sharing
linguistic experience.
In this image of the band of national union, Webster is very, very aware as a lexicographer
of etymology.
And he knew that at the heart of words for law and legalism, with those old Latin terms
going back even to the Indo-European, for binding ligature, ligare, to bind things together.
And so the laws, quite literally, or quite etymologically, bound Americans into a national
union, and the job of Webster's lexicography was similarly to forge these bands, both the
legal and the linguistic.
In 1828, he published his American Dictionary, and he synthesized really three decades of
work into language.
Language is the expression of ideas, he stated, and he made it quite clear that the words
of the English language were keyed to the experiences of the speakers.
These philosophical and political implications of language use and language theory were central
to his notion.
We can see, too, how his notion of expression and how the understanding of language itself,
as he says, is an issue of preservation of identity.
I had mentioned in my previous lecture how words like Congress, Senate, Assembly and
Court are used differently in America than they were in England, and he makes it very,
very clear that it's not simply a question of Americans using words differently.
He has selected a set of examples in these words that must be distinguished by these
key high-concept terms of political identity.
In a sense, Webster is also anticipating the work of the Oxford English Dictionary, for
he's not simply going back to Johnson, he's looking ahead, and part of what he's looking
ahead to is the idea of writing national history through lexicography.
This is a dictionary of the people.
The American Dictionary had many new features, and I'd like to talk in a little bit of detail
about what specifically Webster did to the English language.
First, he was very concerned with issues of spelling.
He advocated what we might call a moderate spelling reform, and so what he was interested
in doing was he was interested in re-spelling British words into American form.
Now for American readers today, the most obvious difference between British and American spelling
is the use of O-R or O-U-R in words like honor and color.
Americans spell it H-O-N-O-R, and British writers spell it H-O-N-O-U-R.
This is a Websterian innovation, but it's also true that there are other differences
that Webster located and sought to change.
For example, he advocated dropping the C in certain kinds of words that ended in C-K.
Now in the 18th century and at the beginning of the 19th century, British writers would
have written words like music, logic, physics with a C-K, M-U-S-I-C-K, and Webster felt
that this K was useless, it was excretion.
It did not tell you anything about the pronunciation, and so he pared it away.
He wanted words like theater and center to reflect their pronunciation, and so he wanted
them spelled with E-R at the end rather than R-E, and he wanted a word like defense spelled
D-E-F-E-N-S-E rather than D-E-F-E-N-C-E.
What Webster's doing is he's arguing that spelling should be more representative of
pronunciation than British convention had it, and so he favored the elimination of certain
silent letters or letter clusters that were not pronounced.
And in this, Webster really bequeaths to generations of American students the very idea of the silent
letter.
In other words, the issue is not simply that there are certain words in which letters exist,
and we don't pronounce them.
The issue is that there is a concept in English language spelling, and that concept is the
silent letter.
In my earlier lectures, I distinguished between two kinds of silent letters.
Letters that were originally pronounced, that is, that represented sounds of earlier stages
in the language where the spelling was etymological and historical, and these are words like night
instead of knished, or knee instead of knay, and through instead of thruch.
There are other kinds of silent letters which were introduced by 17th and 18th century spelling
reformers who wanted words to reflect what they imagined to be their Latin etymologies
even if these words did not enter directly through Latin.
And so spelling doubt and debt with a B, these are learned reformations of the words that
never had the B in any historical English form because the words actually came in through
French after the B had been lost from the Latin.
So what Webster is really talking about is a concept, and the concept is that American
spelling should moderately, he's not a radical reformer, but should moderately be reformed
in order to represent the sounds of speech and also to economize, if you like, the number
of letters used in a given word.
Webster also recorded newer American pronunciations.
His dictionary of 1828 came with a pronunciation guy, and he advocated, as I mentioned earlier,
full syllable count in the words, necessary and secretary, not necessary and secretary.
Webster is in many ways like an American version of Samuel Johnson.
His job is to create a dictionary that is an arbiter of language use that ostensibly
describes but at the same time of course prescribes, and that frames itself with an
elaborate preface keyed to organicist metaphors of language and language change.
At the close of my last lecture, I read from the preface of his dictionary, and I called
attention to the way in which Webster developed these Johnsonian organic metaphors, the images
of the river or the images of the landscape that make the language into what it is, something
natural, something unchainable, something uncontrollable, and I called attention to
the way in which Webster considered language like the course of the Mississippi.
And I want to go back to that phrase now because it's a very important one, and he said, it's
quite impossible to stop the progress of language, it's like the course of the Mississippi, the
motion of which at times is scarcely perceptible, yet even then it possesses a moment quite
irresistible.
And now I will continue with the quote more than what I read last time, words and expressions,
he said, will be forced into use in spite of all the exertions of all the writers of
the world.
And so what's happening is that new words will be coming into the language, and that
the language will be changing much as a river flows.
I also want to call attention to the way in which Webster uses the image of the Mississippi
because I think this is going to be a nodal point in the American literary imagination.
The fact is not simply that the Mississippi River exists or that it is the defining geographical
feature that bifurcates the American continent.
The fact is that beginning really with the age of Webster, it is the image of the Mississippi
that stands as the exemplary figure for American identity.
And so just as Webster can talk about the course of the Mississippi, so Mark Twain can
locate the story of Huckleberry Thin on the Mississippi.
The image is not simply the image of the river journey in a kind of general or historical
sense, it's not simply a trope, it is uniquely the American river, or even go as far as T.S.
Eliot, who in one of his great poems, one of the four quartets, begins by talking about
the Mississippi River.
When he says, I don't know much about rivers, but I think the river is a great brown god.
And he talks about his imagery here, a man now writing in England, but someone who goes
back to his childhood in St. Louis on the Mississippi, the great brown god of the river.
And so for Webster and for his followers, the Mississippi is a great brown god.
Now I want to use that too as something of a segue to some of Webster's influence.
For Webster influenced not simply white but brown and black, that Webster's readers were
not simply or not only the New Englanders who bought his books, or the owners of books,
but they were also the owners of slaves.
And perhaps no more poignant moment in American literature can be found than in the autobiography
of Frederick Douglass.
Frederick Douglass, who in the 19th century recorded his experiences both literary and
cultural.
Frederick Douglass, who in so many ways represents the beginnings of codifying African American
literary culture in America, Frederick Douglass talks about how when he was a child, a slave
in Baltimore, and how as a slave boy, he surreptitiously learned to read and write.
His master's son, Tommy, had a copy of Webster's spelling book.
And Douglass talks about how he copied out the italics of Webster's spelling book.
And as he says in his autobiography, he copied them out, quote, until I could make them all
without looking in the book.
And he goes on to say how in that copy book, quote, in the ample spaces between the lines,
I wrote other lines as nearly like his as possible.
My question is this, is American literature written between Webster's lines?
For Douglass, the emergence into literacy comes after much trial, hearing his mistress
read the Bible and learning to spell a few words, watching the carpenters in the Baltimore
shipyard marking the initials on timbers for the placement of a ship.
Douglass learns to copy and soon, as he says, and I quote, with playmates for my teachers,
fences and pavements for my copy books, and chalk for my pen and ink, I learned to write.
And so Webster is at the heart of Douglass's learning of literacy, much as he is at the
heart of the American literate and literary experience.
How does Webster's afterlife work through in other 19th century writers?
Let me review some of the legacies of 19th century remarks on linguistics, and let me
focus on some of the ways in which we can trace the development from Webster to Menken.
After Webster, there is a debate on what constitutes an Americanism, and there are some very interesting
figures worth noting.
John Pickering published in 1816 a work called A Dictionary of Americanisms, which Webster
considered an attack on his position.
His argument, Pickering's argument, was that Americanisms are individual locutions rather
than the building blocks of American social and linguistic consciousness, and so this
is a radically different position from Webster's.
In 1848, a man named John Bartlett published another book of Americanisms, and here the
work is primarily about regional dialect.
What's emerging in the course of the 19th century is a recognition of Americanisms,
or the American language as, if you like, the sum of American regional dialects.
And Americanism comes to connote not just a word or a locution different from one used
in Great Britain, but rather a word or locution that is fundamentally regional or folk in
origin, that is, something that distinguishes everyday regional folk or local speech from
a learned or inherited literate standard.
James Russell Lowell, one of the great arbiters of literature and language of the late 19th
century, published in 1866, a series of what he called the Bigelow Papers, and his second
series of Bigelow Papers in these essays, he argued that many of the things that we
think of as characteristic of American speech are really holdovers of earlier British speech.
Now, I've already mentioned this idea, in other words, that American regionalism maintains
pockets of archaeism, and to some extent what Lowell is interested in is locating American
English in a larger historical trajectory.
In other words, it's not simply a matter of regional difference, it's not simply a
matter of difference from the British Isles, it rather is the sense that the American language
has a history as deep as that of the English of Britain, and that that history looks back
to earlier archaeisms and forms.
This is the group that's really leading up to the work of H. L. Menken, and his American
language, published originally in 1919, went through many revisions and expansions in the
course of the next three decades, and his work was primarily concerned with tracing the
history of American English, but he was also concerned with defining just what distinguished
American English from other forms.
So let me read to you the passage from Menken's work, in which he begins by describing what
he calls the hallmarks of American.
And he says, and I quote, the characters chiefly noted in American English are first, its general
uniformity throughout the country, second, its impatient disregard for grammatical, syntactical,
and phonological rule and precedent, and third, its large capacity, distinctly greater
than that of the English of present day England, for taking new words and phrases from outside
sources, and for manufacturing them of its own materials.
Menken's claims here are the claims going back to Witherspoon, the idea that American
English is more generally uniform than British English, largely because of patterns of movement
and migration, that even though they may be regional dialects, the differences between
dialects are not as great as those between the dialects of the regions of Great Britain.
And secondly, the way in which American speakers seem to speak, now to use Witherspoon's words
without propriety, they have improprieties, again, Witherspoon in talking about improprieties
is using the word in its 18th century, Johnsonian sense of grammatical differences, and Menken
is picking up on that when he talks about this impatient disregard for grammatical,
syntactical, and phonological rule or precedent, and third, the sort of veracity of Americans
for new words.
That is, that the American language is going to have a larger vocabulary than the English
language in England, because Americans are more willing to bring in new words or they
are more willing to coin words.
And let's now go back to the imagery.
In Witherspoon, Witherspoon talks about how he coined the word Americanism, and as he
says that it's exactly similar to the word Scottishism, that is, a form of English spoken
in Scotland, which already is a word in the 18th century.
So, corning words, he's investing in a traditional mercantile metaphor for coming up with new
vocabulary.
What Menken is doing, writing at the beginning of the 20th century, is he is responding to
the burgeoning presence of American industry, that we take new words and phrases from outside
sources, and we manufacture them of our own materials.
And so now, the American language is like an American factory, with the raw materials
of experience are shipped in to be transformed, to be manufactured into the new words of our
life.
Menken has an important impact on contemporary attitudes towards American English.
And his impact, I think, really lies less in his detailed philological scholarship than
in his attentions to what we might call the American rhetorical persona.
Now, in my following lecture, I'm going to develop some positions that Menken articulates
about the way in which Americans are a rhetorical people.
And I'm going to look at the way in which American public and literary rhetoric gives
rise to and defines a notion of selfhood, keyed to the American national experience.
But for now, I want to turn to another brilliant quotation from Menken, from the same chapter
on the hallmarks of American, where he talks about what distinguishes American language.
And he's going on and he's talking about new words coming in.
He's talking about the way in which regional words or folk etymologies can be used.
But here's what he says.
He says, more important than the sheer inventions, if only because more numerous are the extensions
of the vocabulary by the devices of rhetoric.
The American, from the beginning, has been the most ardent of recorded rhetoricians.
His politics bristles with pungent epithets.
His whole history has been bedisund with tall talk.
His fundamental institutions rest far more upon brilliant phrases than upon logical ideas.
He exercises continually an incomparable capacity for projecting hidden and often fantastic
relationships into his speech.
This is as brilliant a passage on American language as Johnson's or Webster's or Witherspoons
might be on the languages of their own time and place.
And like so many of the writers that I've read, it is also in itself a brilliant example
of great language use.
Look at his vocabulary.
Ardent.
This is a Johnsonian word.
Johnson was fascinated by the word ardent because it challenged him.
Should we define the word according to its literal historical meaning on fire?
Or should we define it according to its newer metaphorical usage, that is, sort of emotionally
a flame or burning with desire?
Menken deliberately chooses this word to remind us of exactly how Americans are not
simply ardent, but that the history of the word ardent encapsulates his history of the
language.
The move from the literal to the metaphorical.
The words are themselves, if you like, tripped out over the tongue in alliteration.
Politics bristles.
This is another great word that I talked about, where you have bristle spiking.
It's as if the language itself is now bristling.
This is again a favorite Milton word, the idea of bristling, and of course the Latin
bristle is horrid, and something is horrible, something is bristling, but now it's bristling
with what, pungent epithets, as if the words themselves had the smell and smoke of Milton's
hell about them.
His whole history alliteration has been bedisoned with tall talk.
The only place that Menken could have gotten the word bedisoned, I'm convinced, is out
of Samuel Johnson's dictionary, ornamented, tricked out, trappings, and so whole history.
Tall talk.
You have two phrases that alliterate, and you have tall talk.
You have the monosyllables of the Anglo-Saxon juxtaposed against the polysyllables of the
Latinate and the learned.
These fundamental institutions, big gun, polysyllabic, Latinate words because we're talking about
important, high concept things, rest far more about on-bree and phrases than logical ideas,
and once again, he exercises continually an incomparable capacity.
Notice how Menken is playing with the polysyllabic here, for projecting hidden and often fantastic
relationships, almost every big word here is a polysyllable into his speech.
And what is the example that Menken gives for this remarkable quality of the ardent American?
He says, such a term as Rubberneck is almost a complete treatise on American psychology.
It has precisely the boldness and contempt for ordered forms that are so characteristically
American.
Why choose the word Rubberneck?
What does Rubberneck mean?
To Rubberneck is to drive by a train wreck or to stare, to stick your neck out as if
it were made of rubber.
And Menken wants to see in it a complete treatise on American psychology, but what we see too
is it embodies a complete treatise on the American language for what better way to describe
Menken, Witherspoon, and Webster than as if you like the linguistic Rubberneckers of the
world.
They drive by, they look, they see, they notice, and they pause, and in the process they hold
up the traffic of everyday life.
As I stretch my neck out in these lectures, I want you too to think of how we've Rubbernecked
onto the language from old and middle to modern English, and how in that act of Rubbernecking
we've defined ourselves as an American public culture, a culture whose national language
is a band of national union.
