Lecture 27 American Rhetoric from Jefferson to Lincoln
The American is the most ardent of recorded rhetoricians.
His words from H. L. Menken in his great work, The American Language, first published
in 1919, summarized for me the relationship between language and public identity in American
national history.
I concluded with this quotation from Menken because I wanted to illustrate how part of
Menken's focus and a good deal of his impact on the study of the American language lay
in this attention to rhetoric more than in his attention to new words or to issues of
pronunciation or to grammar.
What Menken recognized was that the hallmarks, if you like, of American literary and linguistic
culture were rhetorical, they were performative and they were personal.
So part of what I would like to do in this lecture is to look at some selections of American
public rhetoric and see how they, if you like, bristle, how they flame, how they are beddisoned,
all the great Menken words.
But also what I'd like to do is locate them in a larger context of the teaching of rhetoric
in America.
The teaching of rhetoric was one of the central disciplinary activities in schools and colleges
and throughout the 19th and indeed well into the early 20th century, rhetorical education
was in many ways education period for the American student.
So let's begin with the late 18th century and with what many scholars have come to call
the public sphere.
That is, the way in which late 18th century culture in Europe and America went on not
only in the home and not only in the closed doors of institutions but also in the public
world, the world of the coffee house, the world of the tavern, the world of the pulpit,
and the world of the senate, the congress, the parliament.
And a good deal of rhetorical education in America was calibrated to a life in the public
sphere.
Now we've seen throughout this course how rhetorical education and rhetorical organization
governs a good deal of literary expression.
And in my lectures on Shakespeare, I called attention to the ways in which the habits
of rhetorical education developed in the Renaissance schoolroom.
That is, performance, memorization, organization, and response to the question that is to the
matter at hand on which the child would argue for and against, all of these traditions of
rhetorical education find themselves voiced in the great soliloquies, the sonnets, and
the arc of Shakespearean performance.
In the case of America, the notion of a rhetorical environment, if you like, is one that is keyed
both to public service but also to a set of philosophical positions.
Late 18th century American notions of language in many ways derived from the traditions of
British empirical philosophy.
The work of John Locke was of huge importance in 18th century America.
And part of what Locke raised was a central set of questions developed by later theorists
and reflectors on language.
For example, what is the words relationship to ideas?
You'll remember that for Noah Webster, language and ideas went hand in hand.
Did words, it was asked, really express ideas in the mind?
Did words represent things in the world?
Or was language more of a kind of self-contained system of representation?
In other words, did words really only mean what we agreed they meant?
And were they really representing only other words or only other imagined phenomena?
And so this relationship between what went on in the mind and what came out of your mouth,
and what went on in the world, and how your mind responded to that world and then spoke.
This if you like triangulation was central to the philosophical underpinnings behind
the teaching of rhetoric.
For central to this teaching of rhetoric was precisely this notion of what was natural.
The new interest in the state of nature at the end of the 18th century also focused on
language's relationship to nature.
And one of the things that all Europeans and Americans noticed certainly about the American
landscape was its great natural beauty.
American rhetoricians and scholars of the 18th century noticed this landscape and used
it to create metaphors for language.
But they also used it to talk about language's relationship to the world in the large.
Now in many ways rhetoric is an ornamental way of speaking.
That is, it catalogs and codifies and teaches figures of speech, schemes, tropes, metaphors,
and the like.
But rhetoric is also in so many ways a principle of organization.
And one of the central questions for American readers and writers at the end of the 18th
century was, is it possible to be naturally rhetorical?
In other words, should our way of speaking and writing reflect the ornaments of learning?
Or should they reflect something about our self?
What is character?
And you'll remember that the word character has a double edge, for it comes from the word
originally meaning the shapes of letters, the handwriting of an individual, and it of course
also refers to that individual's inner position or inner quality or inner life.
And so the character, a word we will see again and again in this course, the character is
both an inner condition and a form of linguistic expression.
Now among the many authors of textbooks, pedagogues, and arbiters of language who had influence
in America at the end of the 18th century was the Scotsman Hugh Blair, who whose work
on what he called belette, the act of reading and writing well or beautifully, ways of reading
literature, his writings on rhetoric and literature of the 1780s had a vast impact on American
education and American attitudes towards language.
And Blair was interested in language and literature as matters of class and matters
of aesthetics.
We saw in Johnson, for example, how issues of aesthetics settled linguistic discussion,
in other words that the arbiter of usage was in the end issues of simplicity, elegance,
or beauty.
Literary criticism infused linguistic criticism, and Johnson had developed the principle of
lexicography of using literary works to illustrate words and their histories.
So what's going on with Blair, what's going on with the bellatrist tradition, if you like,
is that the teaching of language in American homes and schools came to be instruction in
class-based patterns of behavior.
Education became both a mode of class identification, but it could also be a mode of class advancement.
And a large part of what we're looking at in American universities and colleges is less
an issue of content than an issue of social indoctrination.
The Harvard, Yale, and Princeton of the 19th century, the small liberal arts colleges of
that time, these were the places where gentlemanly or, gradually in the course of the 19th century,
little womanly values were taught, and it is in these contexts that the teaching of language
becomes the expression of a particularly natural state, man or woman, in a state of nature,
or the natural class to which you belong.
Now in an earlier lecture I talked about the medieval notion of the fall into language,
and the way in which medieval theologians saw the fall in Eden as a fall away from the
essentialist notion of the word, that is, that words had in them a unique and essential
meaning.
Adam names the animals, and there is only one word for each thing.
After the fall, language is arbitrary and conventional, it is not essential.
And then of course, with Babel, you have the multiplicity of languages that alienate human
beings from human beings.
In the course of the 18th century, scholars got a new fascination with this earlier notion
of the Adamic language.
What is the origin of language?
There are many famous stories about kings, aristocrats, and scholars who would take children
and place them in isolation to see what words or utterances they might speak.
There was a fascination with the so-called wild child.
The idea that a child raised in the wild, abandoned, could come up with a form of linguistic
expression which might represent the original language of humankind.
These were fantasies of a romantic imagination that were gradually dispelled by William Jones
and his successors as the discovery and codification of Indo-European linguistics and the discipline
of historical linguistics generally displaced any interest or any focused attention to looking
for an origin of language in the large.
In other words, to be a scholar of language by the end of the 18th and beginning of the
19th centuries was not to ask questions about how did language originate, it was rather
to ask questions about the relationships among languages and the reconstruction of earlier
forms.
And so the study of the history of language at this time was the study of humankind and
the study of the origin of humankind was the idea of getting back to an Adamic language
and the state of nature.
And Thomas Jefferson, the great scholar, American president, founder of the University
of Virginia, author of the draft of the Declaration of Independence, Jefferson stands if you like
on the cusp of change.
Jefferson, his theories of education, he had a lifelong fascination with language history.
All of this material came together in his work.
Jefferson is a great figure for us, for it may seem odd to us to imagine him as someone
fascinated by the history of the English language, but we know that he was.
He studied old English.
He studied Homer.
He read ancient Greek.
He studied rhetoric.
He was fascinated with the figure of Ossian.
Ossian was a made up poet in the 18th century.
The Scottish poet James McPherson made up this character of Ossian.
He imagined him as an ancient Celtic bard.
It was a complete forgery.
It was a fabrication.
But even when the forgery was exposed, the impact of McPherson's Ossian remained because
it spoke directly to the idea of a bardic nationalism.
To use the title of a recent work by the scholar, Katie Trumpiner, a bardic nationalism that
saw national identity as in hearing in the oral poetry of the past.
Some like Cadman, about whom I spoke in my lectures on old English, came to be seen in
the 18th and 19th centuries as a kind of bardic figure for the English past.
And so the fascination with Ossian, but also with other earlier works of literature, came
to sort of provoke in the minds of late 18th and early 19th century figures a sense of
poetic language, a sense of voice.
And so this is, it seems to me, the context in the history of the English language and
the study of the history of the English language in which we can approach the Declaration of
Independence.
You see, what I want to stress is that the Declaration of Independence is not simply
a political document.
It is a document of language.
It is a document informed by Jefferson's understanding of the history of English.
It is a document informed by Jefferson's education in and engagement with rhetoric
and rhetorical education.
It is a document informed by the legacy of British empiricism.
And it is a document informed by a fascination with a bardic nationalism, with the articulation
of a sense of self.
And having set it up in this way, I want to read to you the opening of the original draft
of the Declaration as reported to Congress in 1776.
When in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve political
bans which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of the earth
the separate and equal station to which the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle
them.
A decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes
which impel them to the separation.
We hold these truths to be self-evident that all men are created equal, for they are endowed
by the Creator with inherent and certain inalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty,
and the pursuit of happiness, that to secure these rights governments are instituted among
men deriving the just powers from the consent of the governed, that whenever any form of
government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or
to abolish it, and to institute a new government, laying its foundation on such principles and
organizing its powers in such form as to them shall seem most likely to affect their safety
and happiness.
These are magnificent sentences that not only articulate American independence, but actually
declare it.
One of the things that emerges from this draft of the Declaration, and one of the things
that emerges from the recent scholarship of such American scholars as the late J. Flegelman
in his remarkable book, Declaring Independence, is the sense that declaring independence is
a verb.
We need to see how language is a vehicle for acting.
One speaks as one does, speaking and doing are inseparable actions.
And the key point I want to stress is that the Declaration of Independence is a rhetorical
performance.
In other words, the philosophy of language behind the Declaration of Independence is that
by saying you are doing, and that in the saying of these words I've read to you, the American
people are independent.
Let's look closely at the language, syntax, style, etymology, poetry.
Look at the opening, political bands which have connected them.
Now remember Webster, the bands of language union, and once again the etymology that energizes
this word, that behind law is ligature, that behind the legal structure is a bond.
And so the notion of binding is central to the discussion of language from the etymologically
sensitive.
Jefferson would have known this etymology, of course, and it is, if you like, the shadow
etymology behind the Declaration.
Other Indo-European philologists would, of course, play this out in greater detail, but
now Jefferson is aware of it.
Listen to the sound, assume among the powers of the earth.
Assume among the powers of the earth.
That is a perfect iambic pentameter line of poetry.
The Declaration of Independence is poetic, it scans, it is an oral performance, it is
almost Shakespearean, separate and equal station, nature and nature's god.
These are the phrases of scanned poetry.
But now it seems to me that it is not so much Shakespeare as it is Alexander Pope, that
early 18th century master of the iambic pentameter line.
And as I read the Declaration aloud, I can't get out of my head a couplet from Pope.
Now I read Jefferson's words, the laws of nature and nature's god.
And there's a quote, a couplet in Pope, which goes, nature and nature's laws lay
hid in night.
God said, let Newton be, and all was light.
I believe personally that this couplet stands behind Jefferson's phrasing.
And that what he's evoking is this moment in Pope when you can see the enlightenment
bringing forth a new awareness.
But when you can also see a new creation, the only figure of course for whom speech
really was action, was God.
Let there be light, and there was light.
Let Newton be, and all was light.
What Jefferson is hearkening back to is the idea that it might be possible to speak and
in the speaking cause something to come to be.
And just as God separated the light from the darkness, just as Newton in Pope's idiom
gave us the enlightenment or the illumination of the laws of nature, so too what Jefferson
is doing in the Declaration of Independence is separating out American light from British
darkness.
Behold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are endowed by the Creator with inherent
and certain inalienable rights.
One of the key words in this course has been the word alien, whether it be in St. Augustine's
Latin, that the diversity of languages alienates man from man, or in John of Trevis's comments
on the north of England, where strange people and aliens dwell, or in Shakespeare, or throughout
the history of English, alien and otherness is always there.
And so these inalienable rights means rights that are not alien to us, rights that are
natural.
And so life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness constitute a kind of memorable phrase here
for those things that are natural to us.
Listen to the power and the rhythm.
It is of course trooping on the language of John Locke, but it's also changing it because
Jefferson is adding pursuit of happiness.
And what you get in life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness is if you like a whole
history of the English language, life from old English, liberty, Latin, pursuit, Latin,
happiness, old English, you get a kind of mirroring here of the native and the imported
of the English and the Latin to which Jefferson would have been acutely sensitive.
He studied old English.
He knew the history of the language as well as anyone could in his own time.
And in this act of declaring independence, Jefferson uses the resources available to
him to tell us stories of etymologies and origins.
So not only do words have origins, but so do natures, but so do nations.
He gives us an account of American independence written on the backs, if you like, of lexicography.
Now let us turn to another great American president, master of language, historian of
culture, and great reader of the self, and that is Abraham Lincoln.
Just as the Declaration of Independence may be seen as a prose document with poetic features,
so Lincoln's great Gettysburg Address can be seen as an essay in what we might call
the Poetics of Pros.
Lincoln has long been recognized as one of the masters of American public prose, and
though largely self-educated, his writings reach back to the Shakespeare plays, to the
King James Bible, and to so many of the other works that were central to his self-education,
and in turn to the culture of American reading and writing at the beginning of the 19th century.
Now H. L. Menken in the American language has a lot to say about Lincoln, and he has
a lot to say about the Gettysburg Address, and Menken says that the Gettysburg Address
was so much esteemed not as a specimen of Lincoln's style, but as what he called evidence
of literary stage fright on a great occasion, and what Menken argues is that many of the
phrases in the Gettysburg Address go back to an earlier American rhetorical period,
to the period of Jefferson at the end of the 18th century, and to the period of Daniel
Webster in the 1830s. In other words, that Lincoln's, as it were, falling into, I might
put it in modern English, modern idiom, he's falling into the default mode of early American
public rhetoric. And as Menken goes on, he says that the Gettysburg Address really isn't
prose, but it is poetry. Let's look at the Gettysburg Address and ask ourselves, what
is its relationship to earlier American rhetoric? Is it poetic in some sense? And how does it
help us understand the place of language in the construction of the American self? And
I'm going to read the entire Gettysburg Address to you.
Four score and seven years ago, our fathers brought forth on this continent a new nation
conceived at liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.
Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation or any nation so conceived
and so dedicated can long endure. We are met on a great battlefield of that war. We have
come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting place for those who here gave
their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we
should do this. But in a larger sense, we cannot dedicate. We cannot consecrate. We cannot
hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here have consecrated
it far above our poor power to add or detract. The world will little note, no longer remember
what we say here, but it can never forget what they did here. It is for us, the living,
rather, to be dedicated here to the unfinished work, which they who fought here have thus
far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining
before us, that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for
which they gave the last full measure of devotion, that we here highly resolve that these dead
shall not have died in vain, that this nation under God shall have a new birth of freedom,
and that the government of the people, by the people, for the people shall not perish
from the earth. Much like the Declaration of Independence, the Gettysburg Address scans.
It alliterates. It assonates. It resonates. Four score and seven years ago, our fathers
brought forth why this repetition of the four sound. I think that what Lincoln is doing
here is he wants, in effect, to create the sonic background for understanding four fathers.
He doesn't say four score and seven years ago are four fathers brought forth, but there
are so many four sounds that you can't but hear it. If you like, it's the white noise
of the opening. The vocabulary looks back to earlier models of language in Shakespeare
and the King James Bible. Why is it four score and seven years ago? Well, what many people
think is that what Lincoln is alluding to is the phrasing of the Bible, that the natural
life of man is three score and ten. So that the natural life of a human being is about
seventy years, and these events happened eighty-seven years ago. So what Lincoln wants to do is he
wants to create a kind of portentiousness, a kind of biblical heightened idiom here,
but he also wants to make it clear that the events of the past are just outside of the
lifespan and the memory of a single individual. In other words, that what's happened four
score and seven years ago, nobody really remembers, and so we must evoke that remembrance.
The Gettysburg Address is as much a eulogy for the Union dead as it is a eulogy for the
Revolutionary War dead. What are the key words of the Gettysburg Address? Dedicate. Dedicated
to, so dedicate, to dedicate, not dedicate. Be dedicated, dedicated to. The word dedicate
appears six times in a text of slightly over two hundred and seventy words. The word dedicate
comes from the Latin, de, decare, to speak in the presence of, and so the Gettysburg
Address is a dedication in all senses of that word. If you like, it plays out the etymology
of dedicate. It is a speaking before, and Lincoln's repetition represents an awareness
of its resonances and its sounds. The word here appears again and again, as if what Lincoln
is doing is locating us precisely in the place where we are dedicating us. And just as Jefferson
would give us the life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, so Lincoln gives us government
of the people, by the people, for the people. There is a triune sense of rule, or to put
it another way, that at moments of great rhetorical prowess, things come in threes.
Lincoln's language is one of profound public effect. Is this really a case of stage fright,
a bit of old poetry, in a new situation, or is it something that gives us power and purpose
in the American language? I'd like to suggest that American public rhetoric is always looking
backwards. Even though Lincoln may be seen as an innovator in language, even though Lincoln
may be seen as an original, he gives us many phrases and many terms that hearken back to
an elevated tone, to the poetics of the Shakespearean iambic pentameter line, to the idioms of
the King James Bible. In my next lecture, I'm going to look at other ways of making the American
self, looking at defining works of 19th century American literature, places where individual
expression or regional variety, or even racial and ethnic difference, bring us back to Shakespeare
and the King James, where our sense of nation is invariably wrapped up with our sense of
language, and where writers are constantly rededicating themselves to the proposition
that to speak is to be, and to speak as an American is to be an American.
