Lecture 32 An Anglophone World
Is it really an Anglophone World?
Is English really the dominant language of world commerce and world culture and world
literature at the beginning of the 21st century?
One of the themes of this course has been the way in which language travels.
And we saw how, at the very beginning, the Indo-European peoples split up and traveled
across Europe and Western Asia, how the Germanic-speaking peoples moved to the British Isles, and how
the speakers of English from Britain moved to the colonies in North America.
In this lecture, I'd like to look at the impact of the move of English-speaking peoples around
the globe.
And I'd like to think of English as a world language in some different ways from what
is usually expected.
We usually think today of English as a world language because everyone drinks Coca-Cola
or everybody's on the Internet or everyone wears blue jeans, and that popular culture
or commerce or music or technology have made people, speakers and readers and writers
of English.
What I want to stress, however, is that the idea of English as a world language is a very
old one, and that the historical environments of trade and colonization from the British
Empire long before America created an environment in which English could develop in different
parts of the world.
And the development of that English has given rise not simply to different pronunciations
or different vocabulary words or different grammatical forms, but it has given rise to
different forms of imaginative expression.
And at this lecture's close, I'm going to turn to some examples of the English novel
in modern India to see just how that experience of language has become an experience of the
imagination.
So let's begin by looking at some of the earlier histories of attitudes towards English before
the conquest or colonization or in tandem with it.
Now it's very clear that as we've seen throughout the course, that one of the themes of writing
about English is that English is somehow the best language.
We saw this in 16th and 17th century discussions, and the question of whether English was more
elegant or more full of good vocabulary or clearer or more logical, this is in effect
one of the great narrative lines that brings English abroad.
In 1905, the great Danish philologist and linguist Otto Jesperson argued in his book
The Growth and Structure of the English Language that English was somehow and his phrase was
more masculine than other languages.
We may see this over a century later as vacuous and inane, yet when I was talking to a colleague
of mine at Stanford, Shoikat Majumbar, who was educated in Calcutta, and we were talking
about my interest in the history of the English language, he said, oh yes, we read Jesperson
when I was at school.
And so the legacy of these mythologies of language, the idea of English is somehow better or more
suited or more masculine or whatever it is, is still very much a part of the legacy of
English across the world.
So the argument of English linguistic superiority, vacuous though it may have been, resonates
with the colonialist argument that sees the English themselves as perhaps masculine or
even hypermasculinized figures in a soft or feminized native landscape.
In other words, when you read some of the great adventure stories of the 19th century,
when you read people like Kipling or G.A. Henty, or when you look at each writer Haggard,
you invariably find English figures of adventure, of masculinity and control, and you find a
landscape that's treated like a woman to be subjugated, or you find local inhabitants
who are invariably treated like children.
And so the dominance of the English language, which went together with the dominance of
English colonial enterprise, was further established through the institution of schools, administrative
structures, railroads, postal systems, and other forms of colonial control in the 19th
and 20th century.
And it is through these institutions that English spread around the world.
Let's look at some places to which it spread.
In the 18th century, English moved to Australia with the famous creation of penal colonies.
What are some of the characteristics of Australian English?
It was originally a regional and class-based language, and one way that people very often
casually think of Australian English is as somehow related to or similar to the language
of Cockney London.
It is true that one of the verbal characteristics of Australian English that it does share with
some of the urban dialects of Britain are certain sound patterns.
So for example, these sound patterns include the raising of certain back vowels and the
creation of certain diphthongs.
You'll remember that a diphthong is a vowel sound made up of two sounds, like dayee, aee.
Dayee is a diphthong.
Well, in Australian English, it is more extreme, and perhaps it's even a triphthong, dayee,
dayee, as in g'dayee.
That is, the way in which you have the mouth moving more across the structure of the tongue,
and the way in which the vowel comes through in ways that create the sense that you have
three sounds, and not simply two sounds.
What you also have in Australian English is the jargon or what you call the argo of
the convict and the prison.
This is known in the 18th and 19th centuries as flash language, and this flash language
gave rise to several locutions that many people think of as characteristic of Australian culture
and language.
Of course, these locutions go together with the language of the Aboriginal peoples to
synthesize, if you like, a uniqueness to the Australian experience.
If you know, for example, Waltzing Matilda, you'll know that it offers a lexicon of popular
Australian English, Swagman, Billybong, Billy, Jumbuck, Tuckerbag, and so on.
Australian English is also noteworthy for its preservation of regional terms like corker
and dustup and tootsie, but also terms of humor that many people have argued come from
the original Australian migratory experience.
The verb chunder, meaning to vomit, it has been argued.
Chunder comes from the expression on the prison ship, where seasick prisoners who would be
tiered, as it were, on different levels and different portholes, who would be getting
seasick, might wretch over the side and individuals might be under them also wretching from lower
portholes.
And so the phrase was watch under, look out, here it comes, and watch under became chunder.
And so this is a kind of example of Australian popular English that comes from the original
experience of settlement.
When we turn from Australia to South Africa, we must recognize that English speakers have
been living in South Africa since the mid 17th century, when there were English settlements
along with the Dutch.
And here, just as you had points of contact between English and Aboriginal languages in
Australia, so you had contact in South Africa with other languages.
You had the African languages, Bantu in South Africa, but you also had Afrikaans, which was
a variety of Dutch that seems to emerge in the 19th century as a language of colonial
experience.
And so the presence of a large non-European speaking population with many different African
languages together with Afrikaans or Dutch affects the idiom and tone of South African
English.
And there are some distinctive features of pronunciation that may also have to do with
region and class dialects of the original settlement populations.
For example, one of the characteristics of South African pronunciation is the A sound,
the A sound in a word like back, which is raised and fronted to a short E like back.
This is true also perhaps in the word black.
And many of you may know that sort of extreme moment in the movie Lethal Weapon 2 when Danny
Glover and Joe Pesci go to the South African Embassy and they are mockingly engaging with
the representative of South Africa.
And the sound that is designed to evoke the South African dialect is the way in which they
say the word black, black, and they go on and on and on repeating this.
This is as much a caricature perhaps as the caricature of African American English might
be in Joel Chandler Harris.
It could be an example of, if you like, I dialect were to be written down, but it's
one of these touchstones for the popular perception of what distinguishes one form of English
from another.
Consonant clusters are distinctive in South African English.
Text is very often pronounced more like ticks.
And these may be features, as I've suggested, of original dialect settlement patterns or
they may be also evidence of contact with African language speaking groups.
When we look at vocabulary, we're looking at a South African English vocabulary that
is distinctive to the South African experience.
And some words such as spore, meaning the track left by the leavings of an animal, trek,
obviously a great journey, and veldt, meaning the unique area of the topography of South
Africa.
These have passed into modern English as well as the highly charged term apartheid, which
is Dutch for apartness.
Or if you like, apartheid is the Dutch translation of the Latin term segregation to make apart.
When we move from South Africa to India, we're looking at a vast subject rich with history
and literary documentation.
And I would like to spend a fair amount of time in this lecture on Indian English and
its literary culture because of the presence of Indian writers and intellectuals in the
world and the way in which so much contemporary prose fiction, I believe, has been uniquely
shaped by writers from India and Pakistan.
The point of stress is, of course, that English has been a language in India and the English
people have been in India since about 1600.
The establishment of settlements by the East India Company created a mix of Indian and
English environments.
You had a great deal of intermarriage, you had a great deal of social stratification,
but you also had a great deal of social interpenetration, and Anglo-Indian idioms came into British
English early on.
By the end of the 18th century, you can see not simply in writings in India, in English,
but writings in England, in English, words such as Brahmin, Calico, Curry, Raja, Juggernaut,
Bungalow, Pundit, Chintz, Jungle, and Veranda.
Whatever languages these actually came from, and there is some debate as to whether or
not these words really come directly from Indian languages such as Hindi or Tamil into
English, or whether these are languages that pass through other languages.
Other European languages and creoles like Spanish and Portuguese, they were perceived
in England as words of subcontinental Indian origin.
The English presence in India too helped foster as we saw the rise of historical philology,
and so an important point for me, and I hope for this course of lectures, is that the very
discipline of historical linguistics as we see it, and the rise of Indo-European philology,
is inseparable from the British colonial presence in India, and from the contact between English
speakers such as William Jones, and the textual and literary culture of Sanskrit in the Indian
world.
The English language became the standard through which a series of political events happened
in the 19th century.
Here are some names and dates.
In 1813, the East India Company dissolved, and India was administered by the Crown.
You still had an East India Company resident or representative, but the relationship between
the Crown and the Company had changed.
In 1835, Thomas Macaulay, the great English legislator, proposed the establishment of a
class of individuals as interpreters between the Indians and the Britons, and so English
became the official language of government in the subcontinent.
Of course in 1857 is the Great Mutiny, what used to be called the Seaport Rebellion, and
what followed after it was the establishment of direct imperial rule.
Now you have an India not simply administered by the English Crown, but you have Queen Victoria
herself as Empress of India, and English language universities, colleges and schools
were established.
One of the reasons it has been argued that English became the language of Indian nationalism,
and to some extent Pakistani nationalism, is precisely because what the English administrative
colonial culture did in the course of the Mutiny and in response to it, was to disempower
the old Islamic Mughal rulers of India, and to place greater power in the hands of a gradually
newly educated English literate Hindu middle and upper middle class.
And so the legacy of that really is the legacy of people like Gandhi and Nehru, that is, the
legacy of individuals who come from and aspire to an English language form of education, and
who are by religion or who are by ethnicity associated with the Hindu peoples rather than
with the peoples descended from the older Mughal Islamic rulers.
This is a conscious choice on the part of Indian administration, and this is part of
the legacy that's still part of narrative in the contemporary Anglo-Indian novel.
Now by the late 19th century, Anglo-Indian expressions had become so great and distinctive,
maybe 25,000 words, that lexicographers developed dictionaries.
And I want to spend a few minutes with one of the best known and most fascinating of
these dictionaries, and it's known as Hobson Jobson.
Hobson Jobson is a dictionary of colloquial Anglo-Indian words and expressions, which
was published first in 1886, and it was put together by Colonel Henry Yule and a man named
A.C. Burnell.
And in their introduction, they describe what they're doing in ways that are as distinctive
as anything in the Oxford English Dictionary or in Webster's American Dictionary or in
Johnson's Dictionary.
And they note, words of Indian origin, and I'm quoting, have been insinuating themselves
into English ever since the end of the reign of Elizabeth.
And I want you to think about the phrase insinuating.
What insinuates to insinuate etymologically is to move sinuously, that is, to move like
a snake.
Is India the snake in the English garden?
And are these Indian words somehow insinuating themselves into the garden of English vocabulary?
They say that words such as calico, chintz, and gingham, quote, had already affected a
lodgement in English warehouses and shops.
And we're lying in wait for entrance into English literature.
Look at this language, a lodgement in English shops.
I mean, is this a sense that there are certain words, like perhaps parasites, that had come
on ships and lodged themselves in warehouses, lying in wait for entrance into English literature?
Such outlandish guests they continue grew more frequent 120 years ago.
And so they're very interested in this question of what is a language, what is a body of words,
and is it truly alien to English?
And words that they see as sort of coming from these alien or other languages, they want
to find them as English words.
In other words, what Hobson Jobson does is not simply offer a guide to popular expressions.
It's not simply descriptive, it is prescriptive.
What are the words that have come in?
What are the words that we've accepted as English?
And what are the words that we have not accepted as English?
I want to spend a little bit of time with curry.
Now curry is a fascinating word, and curry originally connoted not the main dish of a
meal, but the enhancements to the cereal or the rice that constituted the center of a
meal.
And you can still see this in, for example, what in Indonesia, in Dutch Indonesia was
called the rice table, or in Dutch, the restafel.
That is, where the central meal was a large portion of rice, and the rice was enhanced
with a set of condiments, relishes, or bits of meat, or other kinds of spicings that would
be added to the rice.
This is what the curry was originally.
And so what Yule and Bernel do in Hobson Jobson is they want to see curry not as something
which is uniquely Indian, they want to see it as already European.
So what they do is they write a history of the domestic culinary world of Greece and Rome,
that they want to illustrate how what we think of as Indian curry habits are really ancient
Greek and Roman, and then they go on and say that curry may have even been inspired by European
foods themselves.
They say the medieval spiced dishes of Europe, and I'm quoting, were even colored like curry.
So here, they're taking the word that for many Europeans, many English, and now many
Americans, is the most distinctive representative term of Indian culture, and what they're basically
saying is, guess what, it's not Indian at all.
In fact, it may even be European.
This is the kind of thing that Hobson Jobson does, and it's fascinating to go through
a book like this to see how its histories of words are histories of culture, and some
of the most important words to which they devote time are words for food, like curry,
and words for architecture, like veranda.
And what I would like to suggest is that their attention to these words is in many ways a
metaphor or figure for the history of language itself.
Is language like a dinner table?
In other words, when we come to a country, do we pick and choose new words that will
spice and enhance our language?
So is it a kind of curry?
There's a wonderful moment in Chaucer's tale of his partner, where he describes how he
would use a highly specialized vocabulary, and in Chaucer's Middle English the phrase
is, to saffron his tongue.
That is, to spice up his language.
But Chaucer uses the word saffron, which comes from the Arabic, as Afran, which is a new
and imported eastern and exotic spice.
So as early as the end of the 14th century, as early as the writings of Geoffrey Chaucer,
linguistic enhancement is thought of as Asian spicing.
The veranda, again, it is a place, not simply a porch, but a place of commicture.
It was the one place where, in the house, the English could meet with the Indian.
Is language like a veranda?
Is it a safe space for the mixing of cultures?
These are some of the kinds of examples that one can find in historical lexicography for
the Indian subcontinent.
Now, in addition to these vocabulary terms, what are some of the distinctive features
of English in India?
Some have argued that one of the distinctive features of Indian English may be tonal.
That is, the sound of the language, the lilt, or the rhythm, as influenced by the phonology,
or the very rhythm of Indian languages themselves.
But it may also be phrasal.
That is, that it appears in Indian English that there are more durative verbs.
In other words, not I do, but I'm doing, I'm doing it.
When I will come, there seems to be the use of the participle.
There seems to be the use of the modal will to express verbal condition and experience.
And this seems, as we will see in the selection from Salman Rushdie, with which I'll conclude
this lecture, this seems to be characteristic of perhaps the grammatical idiom of Indian
English.
Now, the use of elaborate, detailed terms and strings of clichés has also been seen
as characteristic of a certain level of Indian English.
That is, the fascination with the cliché, or the fascination with the sort of the English
idiom, the way in which an Indian English speaker may refer to an umbrella as a brawly,
and the way in which that is no longer an idiom in British English, but it becomes sort
of the word for umbrella.
That is, it represents this embracing of culture through cliché.
Let me talk about some aspects of Indian English literary culture.
I'm going to talk about, there are many, many writers one could focus on.
I'm just going to talk about a couple of them.
Vikram Seth, author of The Golden Gate, Suitable Boy, is in many ways representative of English
and American educated Indian writers of the post-war generation.
His novels demonstrate, I think above all, a playfulness with language, a sense of the
vast lexical and phrasal resources of Indian English.
And so when you look at his novels, when you look at something like A Suitable Boy, which
is a thousand plus page family history, what in many ways you're looking at is a kind of
Dickens or Anthony Trollop novel, that is a great 19th century novel that happens to
be set in India.
And of course, like all the great 19th century novels, it revolves around a marriage plot.
Seth's Golden Gate is a story, it is a novel told in verse, that is, it is a novel told
through the appropriation of a particular verse or poetic form.
In fact, it is the stanza form from the Russian writer Alexander Pushkin's novel in poetry,
Eugene Onyagin.
And so these are the kinds of tours de force that Seth is working with, and that I think
are representative of the ways in which an educated Indian English speaking group of
writers has taken the English language and used it, not simply to express Indian experience,
but has used it to revel in, to marvel in the legacy of that English experience.
Because for so many writers and readers, the act of reading, the experience of being educated
was the experience of reading Hamlet, it was the experience of reading Dickens, it was
in effect the canon of British literature transplanted to the colony.
And so I think it's no accident that so many of the novels of the Anglo-Indian experience
are novels that look back to, if you like, the Dickensian worlds of childhood, of growth,
of travel to the city and the like.
Salman Rushdie is probably the most well-known Indian writer working in English today, and
among his many works is the great novel published in 1981, Midnight's Children.
He's written the Satanic Verses, many other books.
He's representative of the ways in which Indian fiction reworks the inherited traditions
of the European novel.
And Midnight's Children is in many ways a kind of phantasmagorical reimagination, if
you like, of the world of Lauren Stern and his sentimental journey, or Voltaire's Candide,
or Dickens' David Copperfield.
It's a novel which takes as its premise the birth of a child at midnight on August 15th
of 1947, which is the date when India and Pakistan, of course, become nations when they
are separated.
And so Midnight's Children refers to not simply the group of children born at that time, but
to the idea that all people of an independent India are Midnight's Children.
What is the language of Midnight's Children, and how can we use it to illustrate some aspects
of literary Indian English?
Here is a passage that I would like to read to you and conclude this lecture with.
Please believe that I am falling apart.
I am not speaking metaphorically, nor is this the opening gambit of some melodramatic, riddling,
grubby appeal for pity.
I mean quite simply, that I have begun to crack all over like an old jug, that my poor
body, singular, unlovely, buffeted by too much history, subjected to drainage above
and drainage below, mutilated by doors, brained by spittoons, has started coming apart at
the seams.
In short, I am literally disintegrating, slowly for the moment, although there are signs of
an acceleration.
I ask you only to accept, as I have accepted, that I shall eventually crumble into approximately
630 million particles of anonymous and necessarily oblivious dust.
This is why I have resolved to confide in paper before I forget.
We are a nation of forgetters.
The lilt of Indian English is here, in those durative verbs.
I am falling apart, speaking metaphorically.
Also, notice repetition.
Throughout this course of lectures, I've called attention to the way in which literary
writers use repetition.
And here too, you can see or you can hear the repeated clauses and phrases.
You can see how part of what's going on here is also the appropriation of a high-culture
British vocabulary to express emotional distress.
So melodramatic, riddling, grubby appeal for pity.
Only someone fully conscious of the history of the English language could put those words
together and recognize that melodramatic and riddling and grubby, in effect, take us from
the top, from the Latinate, from the polysyllabic, down through the local, the vernacular, and
to the gross, melodramatic, riddling, grubby, that I crack all over like an old jug.
And the sounds themselves are the sounds, if you like, the stops in English that take
on unique pronunciation in Indian mouths, and also the way in which you can hear, as
I tried to read it, the lilt, the I ams, the up and downs, literally disintegrating, the
way in which the language is shaped by the opposition of stressed and unstressed syllables.
What we see here, it seems to me, is the rhythm of a language now placed into the service
of writing what is, on the surface, a very traditional European novel.
We can see, if you like, the language of the master, influencing and shaping the language
of the servant, but we can also see, as so many Indians did in 1857, when they dismantled
the verandas of political consciousness, we can see how, for somebody like Rushdie, the
best way to live in the house of the master, if you like, the house of language in the
master, is to dismantle it and to rebuild it with the master's tools.
