Lecture 33 – The Language of Science
If we've learned anything in this course of lectures, it is that the new world of words,
the history of the English language, is a history of travel and exploration, of intersections
between imagination and technology, of words coming in and words going out.
And what we know now, in the early 21st century, is that the new worlds of words come not
necessarily from places, but from spaces of the virtual imagination – the computer,
the internet, text messaging, all forms of digital communication – have changed and
may continue to change in the future the nature, structure, and composition of the English
language.
And yet, it has been a thesis and a theme of this course that contemporary debates have
historical antecedents.
And what I would like to do in this lecture is look at some historical issues in the relationship
between science and language, not simply as a matter of vocabulary, but as a matter
of idiom.
And I would like to conclude with some provocations and speculations about the ways in which contemporary
technology may affect the English language both in the United States and in Britain
and throughout the world.
We've seen in this course how scientific and technological vocabulary has changed English
almost from the beginning.
The scientific vocabulary is not a new thing.
We saw how dictionary makers in the 17th and 18th centuries recognized the impact that
new technologies and advancements in science had on language.
We can look in the 18th century, for example, at a word like attraction, which originally
meant something very, very specific in electrical and in magnetic theory, that is, the way in
which opposites attracted, the way in which the poles of a magnet might attract iron filings.
And this word, eventually, through extension in Lexus, came to refer to emotional or physical
attraction among people, as well as mechanical, magnetic or chemical attraction in the world.
Whole classes of words for affect and emotional response originated in scientific language.
And we can remember Samuel Johnson's preference in his dictionary of 1755 for putting literal
or physical meanings before the metaphorical or figurative ones, even when those literal
meanings were no longer the primary connotations of the words.
And the key examples for Johnson were words like ardent and flagrant.
In the course of the 19th century, new technologies created a whole new vocabulary for describing
the world, and science and technology were very early on put into literary use.
So for example, the notion of an electrical shock that was discovered in the course of
the 19th century gave rise to extension in Lexus to the idea of something shocking.
So news could be shocking, or events could be shocking, or language could be shocking.
Various words were proposed, for example, to describe death by electricity.
And at the close of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century, one of the central debates
in the technology, the science, and the economy of electrification was precisely whether it
was something moral or something legitimate to use electrocution as a, not just word,
but as a concept.
And of course, this was also wrapped up in the major debate between Thomas Alva Edison
and George Westinghouse as to the various merits of direct current and alternating current.
When we consider these different changes in language, and when we consider the way in
which figures such as Edison had an impact on American culture, we can also consider
some words that today seem perfectly transparent, but in the past were highly debatable.
And I would like to spend a little time with an example of such a word, that is, a word
that represents the nexus of invention, technology, society, and decorum, and that word is hello.
The problem with hello is this, that when the telephone was developed, in the 1870s
and 1880s, society needed, if you like, a neutral word that could be used when you answered
the phone.
You see, when you met someone on the street, or face to face, or when you engaged in a
conversation through a letter, an epistolary relationship, you knew the class, the gender,
the status of the individual to whom you were greeting or communicating.
And so the problem with the telephone was that you had no idea who was on the other
end.
You couldn't say yes, sir or yes, ma'am, that you needed something that could be neutral.
And what's very interesting is that all the European languages developed words or appropriated
words to answer the phone, that in Spanish you say bueno, which just simply means good,
or in Italian sometimes you say pronto, which is, you know, right away, or in German sometimes
you say bitter, which is just please.
So what happened in the 1870s and 1880s was a great debate, in particular between Thomas
Edison, who developed improvements on the telephone, and Alexander Graham Bell, who
invented the telephone.
And Bell favored, if you like, a maritime metaphor for telephonic communication.
In other words, for Alexander Graham Bell talking on the phone was the equivalent to
calling down to shipmates, or talking through the horn on a ship.
And so, in fact, until the day he died in the 1920s, Alexander Graham Bell answered the
phone by saying ahoy there.
Edison, however, favored hello.
And in the 1880s, this hello became the marker of a new way of understanding human relationships.
In other words, technological innovation had an impact on language, and it had an impact
on social relationships.
And in Mark Twain's great novel of 1889, a Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court,
Twain is the first literary writer to use the word hello.
And he does so in a variety of ways.
We know that the plot of the novel concerns Hank Morgan, who imagines himself or who is
actually transported back to the sixth century to Arthur's Court.
And what he does is he quite literally and metaphorically electrifies the world of King
Arthur.
He strings wires, he offers up knowledge that trumps, if you like, the magic of the sorcerer
Merlin, and he sets up telephone communications.
And among the many things he calls attention to is hello.
And one of the things that he calls attention to was the rise of the operator as the hello
girl.
Operators in the 1880s were called hello girls.
And in Connecticut Yankee, Hank seeks to teach Princess Sandy something about female behavior.
And he says, and I'm quoting from the novel, the woman here do certainly act like all possessed.
Yes, and I mean your best too, society's very choicest brands.
The humblest hello girl among 10,000 miles of wire could teach gentleness, patience, modesty,
manners to the highest duchess in Arthur's land.
And Sandy responds, hello girl?
And Hank says, yes, but don't you ask me to explain, it's a new kind of girl.
They don't have them here.
One often speaks sharply to them when they are not the least in fault.
And he can't get over feeling sorry for it and ashamed of himself in 1300 years.
It's such shabby, mean conduct and so on provoked.
Fact is no gentleman ever does it, though I, well, I myself, I've got to confess.
Never mind her, never mind her, I tell you I couldn't ever explain her so you would understand.
The hello girl was an object not just of social, but of erotic fantasy.
And many of the hello girls became in the 1880s objects of, if you like, erotic imagination
by men.
Here is an essay from the magazine called The Electrical Review of 1891, an article
entitled, She Said, She Liked It.
And what we have here is the story about men of a certain social class who used hello girls
as private alarm clocks, leaving instructions for wake-up calls from central.
Hello girly, and I'm reading from The Electrical Review, he girdles to the sweet voiced operator
at the other end.
I want to get up at 6.30 tomorrow morning.
Will you be so good as you sound and ring me up then?
If so, there will be something in your stocking about Christmas time.
Ever go to the theater?
And then the essay goes on, that's the way it begins.
The telephone girls are an accommodating lot.
And even if they were not, there would be trouble if they failed to awake several thousand
Bostonians every morning of the summer.
For here it is a rule of the company that they accommodate patrons.
And so what I'm calling attention to is the way in which the innovation of the telephone
created a vocabulary, a social structure, and a new way of dealing with language.
And so when we think about contemporary phenomena of the late 20th and early 20th century, when
we think about the erotics of the phone call, when we think about internet and email, when
we lament the ways in which new technologies of communication have debased society, all
we are doing is we are replaying narratives of over a century before.
And so, hello, it's history, it's social imagination, the way in which it stood as
the nexus, if you like, of technology and sexuality.
Hello is a great example of a new word that comes into English to fulfill a particular
social and technological function, and then becomes, if you like, the marker of erotic.
Now to mention the erotic leads one, of course, to mention Freud.
And in the late 19th and early 20th century, the impact of Freudian psychoanalysis on English
was immense.
Now in his original German, Freud used everyday German words for psychoanalytic concepts.
And so words that, for example, we think of as ego, Freud simply called ich or I, because
ego is just Latin for I.
And what we call the id, Freud called s, which is German for it, and id is Latin for it.
What's very interesting is that in the early English translations of Freud's works in
the 20th century, Freud's vernacular German was given a Latin scientific patina or gloss.
And so words like ego and id or superego, these bequeath to English a language of psychology
as if it were a language of science.
In other words, Latinate newly coined and seemingly learned words were replacing Freud's
vernacular German.
This is the early 20th century equivalent of the old in-con terms of the Renaissance.
Just as in the 16th and 17th centuries new words were coined on Latin and Greek models
to heighten the illusion of learning, so in the 20th century you had words that were
coined out of a psychological vocabulary to mark learning or understanding of interior
conditions.
And this is another example of extension in Lexus, that is, the ways in which terms of
technical origin took on metaphorical or social contexts.
So in psychology you have words like complex, schizophrenic, egocentric, fixate, and so on.
These are words that are now used almost wholly apart from their original technical
and Freudian analytic context.
They describe general conditions, not specific disorders.
We think of somebody or we can speak of somebody as schizy or we can say, I've got a kind
of complex about this or, boy, he's a real egocentrist or I've decided to fixate on something.
And one could argue that in more recent or in contemporary language, the biologization
of psychology has taken over.
In other words, what Freudian psychology was interested in was the way in which the unconscious
informed conscious behavior and what was the relationship between dream and waking life.
And so this was not a biological vocabulary, it was a psychological vocabulary.
In the past few decades, a biological vocabulary has displaced an old psychological vocabulary.
And so we have expressions like obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Or we have ways of talking about individuals with syndromes, for example, Asperger's syndrome.
Or we talk about bipolarity.
Or we talk about issues of medication.
And one could argue that these highly technical terms of particular personality conditions
have now been applied socially.
And so we use phrases like obsessive or compulsive in ways that are extended beyond their original
technical meaning.
Now if you like, just as biology has taken over an understanding of the mind, so physics
has taken over an understanding of the world.
And the old natural philosophy of the Renaissance or the old philosophical approaches of the
18th century or the benchtop laboratory experiences and experiments of the 19th, these have in
effect been displaced by the world of nuclear physics and by the post-relativity, or if
you like, post-atomic bomb world.
And so words that originally came from nuclear physics, so for example, critical mass, meltdown,
vision, fusion, vision and fusion, by the way, were taken from biology, ground zero,
or the verb to nuke, which now I think, at least in my house, is used to mean to put
something in the microwave, these now have figurative social and emotional connotations.
So we can talk about a critical mass of something and not actually be referring to the amount
of plutonium necessary to create a nuclear device.
Or we can even use these things wrongly.
For example, I think many of us have heard the phrase ground zero, which originally
was used to refer to the site of explosion of a nuclear weapon.
Ground zero has become the place where the Twin Towers in Manhattan were destroyed, but
I have heard individuals talk about ground zero as a start, like, we've got to start
from ground zero.
Well, I've got news for you, if you start from ground zero, you're not going anywhere
because you'll be vaporized.
We start from square one, or we start from day one, but we don't start from ground zero.
Ground zero, by extension in Lexus, has come to mean not the site of explosion, but the
moment of beginning.
Just as nuclear physics, so too cosmology, has given us a range of terms that have become
metaphorized or turned into figures.
We talk about the Big Bang as the origin of the universe.
We talk about things that are cosmic.
We talk about things that are galactic.
There are light years and parsecs.
And this is the way in which the vast and the universal has come metaphorically to describe
events in the world.
Cosmic things or galactic things, one can also in this context think about the rise of a
certain word like awesome.
The way in which in so much everyday parlance, awesome is now used to mean simply good.
You can have a, how is the hamburger?
It was awesome.
I'm of an age and of a sensibility when the only thing that I think I will ever refer
to as awesome is the coming of the Messiah.
But for people of my son's generation, everyday experiences, a hamburger, a math test can
be awesome.
Now for people of that generation, the computer has in so many ways taken over.
And the word computer itself originally referred to individuals who worked for the military,
who calculated the trajectories of ballistic weapons.
You computed a trajectory so you knew where to aim things.
And in the Second World War, the computers were in fact women who were employed by the
military to do these calculations.
The earliest mechanical computers in the 1940s were in fact developed to replace such individuals,
to do calculations largely for ballistic or tactical purposes.
And eventually the computer became the autonomous object of calculation.
Only by the 1980s you had personal computers, the PC, or you had a language of the computer
that took a certain kind of vocabulary and made it metaphorical.
Input, output, software, hardware, boot up, net.
What you have here is a set of words that are formed by using individual word units.
That is, parts of words that linguists call morphemes to make up new terms.
So for example, take the morpheme where.
That is, W-A-R-E is a part of a word that is used to refer to an amount of things or
things that are bought and sold, like hardware.
Go to a hardware store.
Well, there was computer hardware, but soon there had to be the programs and there had
to be the intellectual property that went into the computer, and that became software.
Now, in Silicon Valley, where I live, there are many individuals who are thinking about
the relationship between computers and living biological elements of cybernetic units.
And the term used to describe the ways in which we will relate the individual to the
computer is wetware.
That is, something that is biological or living, wetware.
I also know individuals who market things that don't exist.
That is, they come up with plans or they come up with ideas that they sell to venture capitalists.
And such material is called vaporware.
That is, stuff that really doesn't exist.
Let me give some more examples of some more recent ways in which extension in Lexis has
come out of the computer world.
Think of Google as a verb.
That is, the way in which the company that develops the search engine becomes the verb
to Google something.
Think of Wikipedia as a medium of information access.
The verb to wiki now, which it is my understanding actually comes from Hawaiian, meaning something
like happy or engaged.
That Wikipedia, based on encyclopedia, there you have the morpheme, which gives you the
sense of the complete knowledge.
Encyclopedia is a coinage based on Greek, pedia or paideia, which means a curriculum
of study, and encyclow, which means completely or all around.
So an encyclopedia was originally something that gave you a complete cycle of study.
Wikipedia replaces encyclopedia.
We don't talk about go encyclow something, meaning go look it up in the encyclopedia,
but many people talk about go wiki it, which means go look it up on Wikipedia.
So what we see here is a set of terms that are in particular coming from named items
or from individuals, and this is known as eponomy.
Eponomy is the making of words after individual names or products, and it is a key feature
of modern English.
That is, individuals, corporations and brand names come to stand for general concepts or
actions.
Now there are older examples from the 18th and 19th century, to boycott something was
named after boycott.
The Earl of Sandwich, as we famously know, liked to have his meals while he was playing
cards, a slice of meat between two pieces of bread.
There was Brett Maverick, and there was Chauvin, who gave us chauvinism.
Many brand names have become generics.
Kleenex is a brand name.
Thermus is a brand name.
Frigidaire, Victrola, Hoover.
Aspirin is a brand name, and Zipper, in fact, is a brand name.
But Aspirin and Zipper, which are from the 1890s, are so old that I think they've lost
their association with the corporations or with the individuals that had discovered them
or manufactured them.
Go back to Menken.
You'll remember that H. L. Menken talked about the American pension for words as an issue
of manufacturing things out of materials.
And one of the things that's central to American culture at the beginning of the 21st century
is the manufacturing of new words and expressions.
But I would like to conclude this lecture with reflections not simply on the increase
in vocabulary, but rather on the ways in which, potentially, the digital world has changed
our forms of discourse.
And this has several tiers.
The most obvious, I think, for most of us is in electronic communication or email.
Email developed in the 1980s as a way of communicating among individuals on the so-called ARPANET,
that is, the military or the specialized corporate forms of communication.
Email it's been argued is actually an individual invention of the late 1970s.
But by the 80s, there were individuals who were sending messages electronically.
By the 1990s, email had become relatively commonplace among individuals.
And certainly, at the beginning of the 20th century, one could argue that email has replaced
the standard postal mail, which has been redubbed snail mail as a way of communicating.
What is it about email that has an impact on the English language?
First, it is the creation of the illusion of intimacy.
That is, sending an email is not like writing a letter.
Sending an email is not like talking on the phone.
You have a salutation, and that salutation is designed at the opening to create a structure
of intimacy, real or fake.
Dear so-and-so colon, even though that is the form of a business letter, and even though
that is the way I invariably begin my emails, this is viewed as distancing rather than
engaging.
Hi, hey, these are the forms of salutation, usually with a first name.
And what is going on in the body of an email text is, if you like, the rhetorical construction
of a natural persona.
Now we've seen throughout this course how rhetoric expresses individuality.
But it seems to me that what has happened in the past few decades is that rhetoric has
gotten a bad rap.
That is, that instead of, as in the Renaissance or in the 18th century or the 19th or early
20th century, instead of rhetoric as being a tool for public and private expression,
rhetoric has come to mean illusion or fakery or a mask.
And so to be natural is to be unrhetorical.
But to be natural, in some sense, is also to be incorrect.
We have tended, I believe, over the past three decades, to privilege the ungrammatical over
the grammatical.
In other words, that adherence to grammatical rules is seen as artificial.
That speaking, for example, in a way that does not split infinitives, which may be grammatically
or technically correct, is seen as affected or artificial.
That saying it is I, which is grammatically correct, instead of it's me, is seen as inappropriate
or artificial.
And so over the past few decades, in public culture, there has come to be a rise of naturalness
associated with ungrammaticality.
And so one of the key features of email is precisely its ungrammaticality.
I would argue that the ungrammaticality of email, or the spelling mistakes, or the lack
of capitalization, or the emoticons, that is, the use of punctuation to single visually
certain emotional states, that all of these things are not, in fact, representations of
sloppiness or of decline or of corruption in language.
These are matters of, if you like, faux simplicity.
There is, whether individuals consciously or unconsciously do it, there is a style to
email.
There is an email persona, and I think that this has had a profound impact on our understanding
of the relationship between rhetoric and grammar on the one hand, and authenticity or individuality
on the other hand.
Instant text messaging, as well as email, has had an impact on language, and I believe
that this impact has also dovetailed with certain forms of popular culture, in particular
rap and hip-hop, and this is the revival of what used to be called the rebus.
A rebus is a word puzzle, and it hinges on using pictures, letters, or abbreviations
to evoke the sounds of words and, therefore, to create, in effect, meaningful utterances.
So an example of a rebus would be something like the picture of a B to represent not the
word B-E-E, but the word B-E, or it might be the use of the number four to represent
not the word F-O-U-R, but the word F-O-R. It might be the use of an individual letter
like C to represent the word S-E-E, and so what text messaging has done is it's created
a structure of abbreviation. Things like C-U-2-D-A-T-4 can be written without words, in effect,
and I believe that this dovetails with the development in rap and hip-hop of a rebus
and phonetic vocabulary. Boys to men, that is, B-O-Y-Z, and then the Roman numeral two,
that this is, if you like, the transformation of written language into code, and it also
continues to dovetail with the belief, as I believe it, that spelling, much like rhetoric
or grammar, is affectation, and so an individual with the name ludicrous gets its spelled L-U-D-I-C-R-I-S,
and so what you see here is the way in which the traditional forms of correctness are now
associated with artificiality. Finally, there is one last bit of English that I want to
call attention to that is as much a product of the digital world as email or the internet,
even though it is a form of speech rather than a form of writing, and that is up talk.
Up talk is a form of speech in which all sentences end with a question, and it developed, it
is argued, out of the speech of teenage girls in the San Fernando Valley in the 1970s, and
the idea here is that every speech is a rising utterance, and you say things like, so I met
this new guy, and he was really nice, or, oh, that looks like a good hamburger, or so
I said to him, every sentence is a question, and I believe every sentence is a question
because every sentence now is asking for approval. It is asking for a form of nod, it is asking
for a rhetorical pat on the back. What does this have to do with technology? I think that
the emoticon is the visual equivalent of, in effect, the up talk, that is, the way in
which what you want to signal in email or in forms of written communication, that what
you want to signal is the need for approval, you need to signal a voice, that is, do you
like this? Am I saying the right thing? How can you approve? In a world where everything
is now a question, we need answers. Hamlets to be or not to be, that is the question.
This was a matter of renaissance rhetoric, with a question, with the inquiry into things,
into the world, into emotional states, came from arguing both sides of an issue. Now,
we live, I think, in an interrogative world, where every statement is a question in need
of an approving answer, and where every hello now is not hello as a statement, but hello
are you there? In my final lectures for this series, I'm going to turn from science in
language to the science of language, and I'm going to ask now not just how language is
a matter of behavior, but how language is a matter of mind, and the issues that I've
raised in technology have provoked linguists and neuroscientists to ask new questions about
what the relationship is between the ways in which we speak and the ways in which we think.
