Lecture 34 The Science of Language
I concluded my last lecture with some provocations about the relationship between language and
technology. I raised questions about the role of computers in the changing of English
language and the changing of the rhetoric of communication. And I also tried to situate
these changes in a larger historical arc. My claim throughout this course has been that
contemporary debates have historical antecedents. And our contemporary debates about technology
and culture, about changes in vocabulary, and about, if you like, the social reality
of linguistic communication, that these kinds of debates we can see at work in the 19th
and early 20th centuries. Similarly, there are many debates today about the nature of
language itself. Is language a form of social behavior? Is language a habit of mind? Is
language something that uniquely inheres in human beings? Or is language something that
can be learned or acquired by other non-human animals? What does, for example, primate signing
tell us about language? What does, for example, teaching parrots to speak tell us about language?
Is language simply the vocal production of meaningful representative sounds? Or is language
something that embraces all forms of symbolic behavior? Can dance be a language? Can gesture
be a language? How is signing a language? These are questions that have motivated scholars
and critics today at the beginning of the 21st century. But they are questions that
were raised also in the 19th century as the discipline of historical philology provoked
discussion of the nature of language itself and its place in society. Now, by the end
of the 19th century, scientific methodology had come to characterize the study of humankind
itself. It's probably no accident to say that so much of 19th century empirical and
positivist science informed a whole range of inquiries, not only into the world, but
also into the mind and into society. I looked briefly in my last lecture at the impact of
Freudian psychoanalysis on English, and Sigmund Freud represents a figure in the 19th century
who sought to understand the workings of the human mind and its relationship to linguistic
and cultural expression. Emailed Durkheim, a contemporary of Sigmund Freud's, was, if
you like, the Freud of sociology. That is, he developed the discipline of studying human
beings in groups, and he sought to understand the ways in which forms of communication brought
individuals together into meaningful shared experience. The Swiss linguist Ferdinand de
Soussure, also a contemporary of Freud and Durkheim, sought to understand human relationships
in terms of speech and language. Freud, Durkheim, and Soussure, along with other 19th century
figures such as Karl Marx or Charles Darwin, were great system builders. That is, they
were concerned not simply with explaining human nature or the experience of the world,
but they were concerned with building a system of analysis such that any subsequent or hitherto
undiscovered form of behavior, or any hitherto undiscovered creature, or any hitherto undiscovered
object or social form could be fit into and explained systematically. And so in so many
ways, 19th century science is not simply about empiricism or observation, it's about system
building. And for the work of Ferdinand de Soussure, language itself became a system. Soussure
lived from 1857 to 1913, and he is probably one of the most important figures in the history
of linguistics because he developed the study of language systematically in this way. I want
to say a little bit about Soussure's life, where he came from, what his studies were, and his impact.
Soussure was, in his youth, a student of Indo-European philology, and as a very young man in the 1870s,
he published his dissertation on the structure of sounds in Indo-European, and he claimed to have
discovered a set of sounds in Indo-European that had disappeared from modern languages. In other
words, Indo-European, as the modern languages, have sounds that were produced in various parts of
the mouth, and you'll remember from my lecture on articulatory phonetics, there are labials with
the lips, dentals with the teeth, there are alveolar sounds from the alveolar ridge, palatals,
there are velar sounds, there are glottal sounds. If you go further back in the mouth, you hit the
larynx, and there are sounds that you can produce deep in your throat called laryngeals. And Soussure
postulated that original Indo-European must have had laryngeals, because that kind of sound could
only explain certain features of sound change that were postulated by the Indo-European grammarians
of the time. And he published this remarkable speculative work, and in fact it wasn't until
the 19 teens, when Hittite was discovered and deciphered, that scholars became aware of the fact
that Hittite actually must have had these laryngeal sounds. So Soussure is in effect
doing for language what Dmitri Mendeleev did for the elements. That is, Mendeleev created a periodic
table, and when there were holes in the table, he predicted the existence of elements that hadn't yet
been discovered, and he was able to predict their properties, so that when the elements were discovered,
they could be placed into the table. Soussure created a system of sounds for the Indo-European
languages that worked in this way, and Soussure was trained by a group that was called the Neo-Grammarians,
or in German the Junggrammatiker. And what they were concerned with was the development of particular
laws, and with the historical understanding of sound change. So Soussure came out of this tradition,
and one of the things he began to question were the fundamental principles of 19th century comparative
philology. So he became very interested in understanding the relationship between individual
utterances and the system of discourse. In other words, he was asking, what is the place of a vowel
in the system of vowels? What is the place of a word in a system of representation? So Soussure
therefore felt that the thing that linguists had to do, in other words, that the thing that we had
to do first when we studied language, was we had to define what language was. We should not be
interested in the origin of language anthropologically. We should not be interested in the origin of
language, let's say, biblically, the language of Adam. We should not be interested first and foremost
in how language is acquired. So Soussure said the first thing we need to do is we need to define
language. And in order to do that, we need to understand the place of rules or conventions
within the structure of meaningful communication. In other words, language as a system. And what he
called this was a study of signs. Soussure argued that languages are made up of signs, and that's
each sign that is each way in which we verbally or gesturally or in writing represent something
meaningful is in two parts. We have a signifier and we have a thing that is signified. In other
words, we have a signifier in modern English and that is the sound produced door. And the thing
signified is the object that we use the word door to represent. And the union of the signifier and
the signified constitutes a sign. And so, he argued that language was semiotic. That is,
it was the study of signs. And this was to have a huge impact on later linguistic theory as well
as on later literary criticism. The question of whether literature itself was a system of signs
and the question of deciding what signifiers actually signified. So in the 19th century
and in the early 20th century, Soussure's work exemplified this, if you like, systematization
or this approach to the study of language as a scientific system. And by the time Soussure died
in 1913, his work had been largely uncodified. And it was his later students who put together
his lecture notes from his courses at the University of Geneva to create the famous Course
in General Linguistics, which first appeared in 1916. And the course in general linguistics
is the summation of Soussure's work. This course stands in relationship to these 19th and 20th
century developments in the systematic study of language. And they're broadly speaking for
things that emerged here. Laws. The question is, are there laws? Are there rules that explain
grammatical forms and historical changes? Grimm's law that I talked about many lectures ago,
that is, the statement about the relationship between the consonants of the Germanic languages
and the consonants of the non-Germanic Indo-European languages. Grimm's law posits a relationship
among those consonants as a law. That is, there is an inviolate relationship among these consonants
and between languages. And so the laws of Indo-European are the set of rules that determine
what sounds in one language will correspond to in another language. Laws were grounded in
empirical observations. That is, languages were objects of study and data was collected about them.
In the 19th and early 20th century, that data was historical. And the study of language to be a
linguist in the 19th century was to be a historical philologist. By the early 20th century, however,
the discovery of a range of non-European languages, not just in the old colonial
empires of Africa or the subcontinent of India or of Asia, but also the languages of Native America
and the languages of Pacific Islanders, these were the objects of early 20th century anthropological
inquiry. And so collecting data on these languages provoked changes, as we will see shortly,
in the discipline of linguistics. When you developed laws and when you developed empirical
observations, you came up with theories. In other words, the idea that languages obeyed certain
rules and that language changed to work, that language change works according to certain laws,
this is a theory about language. And along with the theory, there had to be a method of study.
In other words, you examined the features of existing languages to reconstruct earlier forms.
That is the method of comparative philology. The method of anthropological linguistics
in the early 20th century was to create inventories, lists of sounds, of words,
of signs, in order to, as it were, imagine the cultural world that these languages were
representing. So laws, empirical observation, theory, and method came to be the, as it were,
pillars of linguistic inquiry. Now by the early 20th century, especially in America,
the academic study of language came to involve the study of observable phenomena. And when I
say observable phenomena, what I mean is what early linguists thought you could observe,
what constituted data, what constituted data were the sounds of a language and the morphology of a
language. In other words, the grammatical case endings or forms that the words themselves took.
And so there was a concern less with, for example, syntax, the way in which words are ordered in
sentences, and a concern less with building vocabulary than there was the concern with
sound and form. This was, if you like, the data. This was the observable body of material that
linguists focused on. And anthropology and linguistics came together in the late 19th and
early 20th centuries in America with the work of Franz Boas and his student, Edward Sapir.
And what they discovered was that the old 19th century paradigms, the old 19th century approaches
to Indo-European philology were being confounded. That is, they encountered the languages of the
Native Americans and the languages of Pacific Islanders, which seemed radically different in
sound system, in grammatical structure, and in syntax and form, radically different from the
European languages. And so the central question was, could you have a methodology for language study
that embraced all languages and all potentially discoverable languages? This was the central
question that emerged in the course of the early 20th century. And so linguistic study took on a
variety of positions in order to understand the provocations raised by non-European languages
for European-trained linguists. Leonard Bloomfield, who was associated with Sapir and Boas and is
very often thought of in this generation, published in his book Language of 1933 a set of standards for
the study of any language according to empirical methods. And that is, his argument was, look,
if there's language, there should be a method for studying language, regardless of what languages
we're talking about. So he believed in a rigorous methodology that centered on the analysis of sound
systems and that you could describe all languages by the same process. So what you have is the origin
of what came to be called structural linguistics. And at the heart of the structural model was,
in effect, the fieldwork model, when you encountered a new language community. The first thing you were
supposed to do was not point and say, what's that? Not to get a vocabulary, not to ask questions about
what do you believe in? What is your word for God? How do you count to 15? The job was to sit there
and record the phonemic inventory of the language. In other words, record the meaningful sounds in
the language. If you were to do this in modern spoken English, what you'd say is that you have two
words, bit and pit. So this means that there are two meaningful sounds, B and P, that are pronounced
the same way, except the B is voiced. That is, your vocal chords move and the P is unvoiced,
B and P and B. You can feel the difference. And so structural linguists would say, voicing is
phonemic in modern spoken English. That is, the difference between a bilabial stop produced with
tulips, B and P. The only difference is voicing. So that is a meaningful distinction. These are the
kinds of things that you would do to build up your inventory of meaningfully different sounds.
And so the structural model, the structural linguistic model, was precisely to come up with
these inventories of sounds before you did anything else. A paradox arose in the structural model.
For if the methodology was supposed to be consistent throughout all languages,
languages came to be seen as radically different. For the problem was this, the student of language
faced not simply different details of describing the world, but apparently completely different
worlds. In other words, the issue was not, it appeared, or so it seemed, that let's say Native
Americans and Europeans saw the world in the same way and they just had different words for it.
It was that European and American linguists, when they encountered Native American languages,
came to believe that things like the system of tense, or the ways of describing color,
or the ways of organizing the vocabulary, that these were so radically different from
the European languages as they knew them, that the world of the Native American imagination,
that the world they themselves saw must be different. For example, in the European languages,
in the modern European languages, color is frequency based. That is, our words for color
are keyed to the different frequencies. And so red, orange, blue, yellow, green, mauve,
chartreuse, whatever it is, these are differences of frequency, and bright blue, and sort of not
so bright blue, or red, that's very vibrant, and a red that may be less vibrant, they're both red.
There may be different forms of red, but they're both red. We do not organize the color world
according to intensity of color. Now, what was discovered was that in languages
like those of the Hopi and the Navajo people, it appeared that their words for color were keyed
to the intensity of the color rather than to the color itself. So for example, in some of these
languages, there may have only been two or three terms that were used to discover differences,
that were used to cover differences in modern color spectra. So for example, we have, let's say,
we have seven colors in the rainbow, and it was discovered that certain colors that we make
distinctions between blue and green, let's say, these would not be distinguished in Native American
languages, that the same word would be used to refer to something that was blue, or something
that was green, so that the marker was not the color as we understood it, the marker was the
brilliance, the intensity, or the luster of the color. And so this is an example that certain
20th century students and scholars of language encountered where they said, what is language
doing? Is language describing the world as it exists, or does language create the world
as the speaker experiences it? Edward Sapir is best known for the view that there is a
relationship between language and the imagination of the world. Here is a quotation from Edward
Sapir in 1921 in his book on language. He says the following, the fact of the matter is that
the real world is to a large extent unconsciously built up on the language habits of the group.
No two languages are ever sufficiently similar to be considered as representing the same
social reality. The world in which different societies live are distinct worlds, not merely
the same world with different labels attached. This is a profoundly radical view about the
relationship between language, the world, and mind. What Sapir is arguing is that languages do not
simply describe a world that is out there for everybody, rather when individuals speak, read,
and know a language, they are in effect inhabiting different worlds. This raises problems
for translation. Is translation really simply a matter of creating inventories of words and
slotting one into another? Or is translation a matter of cultural or even cognitive displacement?
That is that when you have different worlds, moving from one world to another is different
from simply moving from one lexicon, one set of words to another. So what Sapir is arguing
is that language is not a collection of labels for the world. Language is the articulation of a
world view. Benjamin Lee Worf was an amateur linguist of the mid-20th century, and in scholarly
publications as well as in a whole clutch of writings that were published posthumously,
collected in a book called Language, Thought, and Reality, Worf developed some of Sapir's
positions, and he argued, if you like, for a more radicalized version of this. Worf spent time with
the Hopi in America, and he looked at the Hopi language as a way of trying to understand this
relationship between language, thought, and reality. And in some of his writings of the 1940s,
published in 1956 in Language, Thought, and Reality, he said the following, and here's a
paragraph of Worf. Every language is a vast pattern system, different from others, in which
are culturally ordained the forms and categories by which the personality not only communicates,
but also analyzes nature, notices or neglects types of relationship and phenomena,
channels his reasoning, and builds the house of his consciousness. Now, this is perhaps the most
extreme version of the so-called Sapir Worf hypothesis. In other words, that language shapes
thought, that an individual language community thinks differently from another language community,
and the world that they see and experience is just simply not the same as the one that another
language community experiences. So what Sapir and Worf do, in effect, is they take the idea
of the systematic study of language, that is, the old notion that the study of language involves
understanding a system of sounds and signs, and they turn it into the study of a system of cognition,
a system of mind. And if you look at the language, if you look at the metaphors in the quotations
that I've read, you can see how this works again. And once again, I stress, as I've stressed
throughout these lectures, that the images, the metaphors, the figural language that people
have used to write about language is as important as what they say. And so here, look at the way
in which Worf talks about a vast pattern system. And it seems to me that one cannot see Worf's
language of a vast pattern system without seeing it come from his experience of the Native American
peoples, and with the artistic creation of patterns and abstractions in Native American art,
textile, and pottery. He uses the phrase culturally ordained. And what does that mean? In the beginning
was the word. Think now of the Bible. Think of the way in which we go back to those old medieval
discussions about language and action, about creating through the word. What does it mean
to ordain? What Worf in effect does, if you'd like to put it in these figurative terms,
is that he imagines the language of a culture as the controlling or ordaining or even creating
thing. In other words, and now I'm speaking figuratively, but I think this figuration can
help us understand this. Language is not, as it were, a divine creation, but language is a cultural
creation, but it is a creation nonetheless. That is, that the world is created by language. A medieval
theologian might have argued that the world was created with God's utterance. For Worf, the world
is created in the language of the group. Through this, the individual builds, Worf says, the house
of his consciousness. This sense of consciousness as a house, this sense of language as a constructed
thing, this sense, if you like, of an architecture of a language gives us a way of looking at the
study of language that became the dominant mode in mid-20th century America. That is,
what came to be called structural linguistics. This is what structural linguistics was
by the mid-20th century. It proposed a methodological empiricism that focused on the
collection of data, and particularly sounds or phonemic data. Inventories of sounds and
meaningful differences were noted before you did the lexicon. I talked a little bit about this,
but what it also advocated was a theoretical model that deduced linguistic structures from the mass
of empirically collected data. So this is going to be something of great importance when we see
in my next lecture what the linguist Noam Chomsky did to linguistics. That is, do you deduce from
data or do you induce from a theory? In other words, do you collect a body of data
and then deduce from that body of data what the structure of the language must be,
or do you posit a theoretical model of what language is, and then from that you induce
what living or actual language must be. So American structural linguistics was a
discipline of description rather than a discipline of theory. And this is going to be the fulcrum
on which 20th century and 21st century study of language is going to balance. That is,
do we go out in the world and describe or do we sit in the study and imagine? Worf's house of
consciousness, this story that he tells in his works, is therefore not just a story of a linguist
inquiring languages. It is a story of an individual confronting an other. It is the story of the
European or of the Europeanized American traveling to the Southwest or traveling to the Pacific
Islands. It is the story of transference. It is the story of basically asking not just what language
is but what humanity is. And in my next lecture I'm going to illustrate how the work of Noam Chomsky
in the second half of the 20th century changed radically and irrevocably the study of language
and in turn the study of language's relationship to mind, language's relationship to society,
and language's relationship to technology in the development of artificial intelligence and
the science of digitization.
