I mean, you may notice that this talk may have different moods to it.
Some parts are very clearly worked out in detail.
Other parts have been more or less constructed over the last couple of days when I was paying
attention to the discussions that we were having here.
So towards the end of the talk, you see me going more speculative.
If you don't already think that I'm speculative at the beginning, well, I'm hyper-speculative
at the end.
So what I'm going to do then is to, first of all, raise the question of what do we mean
by the body?
I mean, what do we mean by embodiment, this buzzword that seems to be so much found everywhere
almost indiscriminately, and you sometimes have to stop and wonder and say, what are
we talking about when we talk about embodiment?
And I will give you two senses of embodiment.
I mean, for the first part of the talk, I'll give you a very rough idea of what is the
most common sense of embodiment in cognitive science today and why something like the inactive
life-on-mind approach would like to take some lessons from that kind of use of the word,
but actually move away from it and provide what I would call a deeper sense of embodiment.
And that will take me to run through the main ideas of this life-on-mind and active approach.
And I suppose I'll be talking about autonomy and sense making and transitions in the history
of life and mind.
And then towards the end, I'll just put on the table some ideas about habits, skills,
and what I call the social flesh or the social invisible.
As some of you may know, I mean, I have been over the past years working in using models,
using evolution and robotics models of computational simulations to try to ground some ideas and
essentially to also have some kind of reality check.
The models are there, and I could talk about them, and I just put them towards the end
of the talk.
I mean, I suppose that if we go into the discussion and someone is interested in saying, like,
well, but actually this idea seems too abstract, can you actually build a model of this?
Maybe we can go into that.
But if I put them in the middle of the talk, it would be just too long and we would just
lose the track.
But this is up to you as well, depending on what you want.
I mean, we can talk about the models as well.
So that's the overview.
So let's start with then this question of the body and the different perspectives and
something that I call a shallow embodiment.
But actually, I think I should find a better word because I mean shallow in all the negative
overtones of that word.
I don't really mean them.
I just want to say that this sense of embodiment doesn't go far enough.
So maybe you can help me find a better word.
So you may be familiar with this picture that describes the brain, the body, and the environment
in a mutual relation.
Each of them describes as a little system having arrows moving back and forth the other
bits of the system.
So the brain connected to the body, the body connected to the environment, and so on.
And this is like, you know, I think this was first done by Randall Beer.
It's a kind of iconic idea of embodied cognitive science, which is meant to tell us that the
whole thing matters.
At the very least, you know, we should not be looking at brains in isolation from bodies
or bodies in isolation from the environment.
But of course, there's a lot of room for interpretation or how we practically apply this idea.
So let's take the case of perception as just one example of how embodied ideas have been
moving progressively over the last few years.
So I'll just make some caricatures of perception here, and in traditional cognitivism, traditional
cognitive science, you have a picture like this.
A little brain with a man there moving levers and pushing buttons and receiving some kind
of image from the outside that is relayed from sensors such as, you know, ears and eyes
into the brain.
And of course, you know, when you show this picture to someone working in this traditional
mode, they will say, like, we don't mean that.
Of course we don't.
You know, that's such a caricature.
But if you push them hard enough and you ask them, what do you mean by distributed representations?
What do you mean by all this?
Eventually I always think it resolves into a version of this.
Someone inside making interpretations of some translation that you have made of states
of the world into internal representations.
So that's the traditional caricature of perception.
Now we've also been hearing a lot about what I call the sensory motor approach.
Alvanoe and Kevin O'Ragan idea of perception actually being a form of active engagement
with the world whereby your experience depends on your mastery of sensory motor contingencies
and so on.
So that's the other approach that you might call this, okay, so I've got here this caricature
again of, this is not necessary for you.
You've seen this before.
I mean, the softness of the sponge depends on how we grasp it and how we apply pressure
and so on.
And there's nothing in the sponge per se that you can call softness, but it's actually
the result of this particular engagement of the body, in this case, a particular body
like someone with fingers, and the sponge itself, the responsiveness of the materiality
of the world.
The sponge is not going to be soft for an ant.
So that's the idea of sensory motor contingencies.
And in this view, it's therefore not separable from action or not easily separable from action.
And you could say that the particular form of the body, its disposition, becomes crucial
in your abilities to perceive and act.
So your skills become crucial.
And I would like to then later on unpack some of these statements.
Now, you can also say that this is a more situated approach because given that what
you use in order to perceive is an engagement or even a virtual potential engagement with
the world, this engagement is likely to be the kind of engagement that is embedded into
a network of everyday practices, like, for instance, drinking coffee, and you see this
object and you don't see an abstract object that then you suddenly realize, oh, by the
way, I could actually pour some coffee and pick it up and drink it.
You see a cup and you see immediately what are the affordances of the cup.
And then this is why this, you can say that this embodied approach is getting, it's closer
to Kipsonian ideas, because perception is a form of know-how, or for Heideggerian, we
like some form of Suhandenheit, these things are ready to hunt.
And because the materiality of your perceiving experience is the action itself, of course,
it doesn't have to be added up later.
This knowledge doesn't have to be added up later, it comes with the way that you perceive
the world.
So in conclusion to this, the discussion of this approach, you can very well argue that
we're talking about the crucial significance of the body in the whole of this approach.
I mean, it's clear that the kind of perceptual experience you may have depends very much
on the kinds of sensory-motor engagements you can enact, and that depends on the body,
on the structure of the body, on the history of the body, and so on and so forth.
Now, why would I call this shallow embodiment?
Well, one thing you may notice is that this story, nothing prevents in this story some
kind of functionalist takeover and re-appropriation of these ideas, whereby you say to a traditional
functionalist theories in cognitive science for whom all that matters about cognition
is how we implement different functions and put them together in order for the system
to solve some problems.
For a functionalist like Andy Clark, this is not bad news, I mean, this is fine, because
precisely the body becomes one more element, one more information processing device available
to the cognizer and actually a very good and practical one, a very good embedded and dynamic
and convenient sensory information processing device.
So philosophers like Andy Clark, an external functionalist in general, has seen the body
as a welcome way of loading computation and so on.
So this theory, I'm not saying that Alvanoia and Eric Mayn and Kevin O'Riggum would say
that they probably wouldn't call themselves functionalists, I don't really care, what
I mean is that the theory itself can be just taken over, at least in this form, by the
traditional point of view and therefore more than a revolution, it's more like a reform,
it's just saying, okay, we extend a little bit the possibilities for our story, making
more interesting and richer, but it's the same story, right?
Now the problem with that is that we, in this way, we're still avoiding certain questions
and these are the questions that traditional cognitive science has avoided all along.
Some questions are in the blind spots, like some questions are questions that you cannot
even ask from traditional points of view, other questions are typically issues that
people don't care too much about and for, I've got a little list here, it's not exhaustive
but you have questions about the nature of agency and the nature of autonomy or the very
nature of the identity of a cognitive system, what makes this a cognitive system as opposed
to this plus environment plus everything? And crucially, I believe for a theory of cognition,
the questions of meaning and value, what do we mean when we say, when we use words like
meaning, value, et cetera? So what happens is that many or all of these questions, none
of them is really fully addressed head on. And in a way, in a functionalist approach,
what you do is to somehow assume that these questions will be answered in some way. So
the questions of value, for instance, you say, well, there must be some evolutionary
story that tells me why this particular system is interested in doing mathematics, for instance.
But that's actually like making science on credit because nobody eventually may come with
that story and what will happen to your theory when it's revealed that that story is not
there. So that's the situation and I believe a fully-fledged alternative paradigm in cognitive
science should look head on, I mean, just go and try to answer some of these questions,
try to try to provide at least provisional definitions and check whether they make sense,
whether they interlock in interesting ways and allow you to generate novel ideas or novel
hypotheses. So that's the situation in embodied cognition. In most cases, if there is a meaning
at all to the word embodiment, it tends to be this loosely functionalist meaning of
the body is important, the body is crucial in some way. And that, I want to stress things
here. I want to say that that actually has generated very interesting lessons. I mean,
it's not as if we have, I'm complaining that these people have done nothing. Actually,
I am one of those people. I mean, my work in evolutionary robotics has mostly been about
understanding how different bodily interactions with the environment can actually help you
rethink what are the necessary mechanisms for a particular cognitive performance. So
you can, some of the deep lessons from this is, for instance, that you have to stop thinking
of mind as being something that happens in the head. It's actually something that happens
in the interaction with the world. Other deep lessons have to do with considering mind not
as some kind of discrete exchange of perception and action and so on, but actually something
that happens extended over time. And if we go later to the models, I can show you very
concrete cases of this. And of course, when we start looking at social cognition, we can
also argue very concretely how mind cognition is happening not in the head of the individuals
but between them. The mind is in between people. So just clarify that that's why they don't
like the word shallowed, but I couldn't find a very one. So this is then motivating me
to start looking at the alternative. And that will take us to overview of this life and mind
inactive approach. So, of course, I will be using the word inactive in a very particular
sense, in the sense advocated by people like Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, but different
as I already said from people like Alvin Owen, for instance. It's just a clarification
that I hope it is not a big issue. So where does the inactive story begin? It begins with
experience. It begins with the realization that we are, we ourselves, you know, individually,
we are beings who have an experience of concern with our lives, with our world, and so on.
We think, you know, to say it shortly, things matter to us. That's an interesting recognition.
This is Hans Jonas, who wrote a very, very inspiring book on the phenomenon of life.
I mean, he was an existential philosopher and trying to find the roots of existence. I
mean, what is it to be a being? What is it to be something that exists? And he finds
that in life itself. In a way, he says, funnily, that the success of an evolutionary view of
the world, a Darwinian form of materialism that tells us that eventually, I mean, we
have come from a history of blind process, blind material processes that have, you know,
operated under natural selection and et cetera, et cetera, whatever version you want of evolution.
That story that presumably would tell us, hey, we are nothing but atoms. Actually, it's
a good story because it builds a bridge between the nature, a continuity between nature and
ourselves. But that bridge flows both ways, because we can also tell the story that since
we cannot deny our own experience of concern, then we must be true that for other beings,
they must have an kind of interiority, a form of life that and things they care about.
So in that sense, Hans Jonas makes a very interesting metaphysical step. It's like, well, okay,
we accept experience that leads us to believe in a material world and, you know, efficient
forms of causation, being dominant, and so on. But we have to accept experience that
we are alive. And that is the only way in which we can then understand living organisms
as real, not as a way of speaking, which is something that goes back to Kant, which is
like, organism seems to be so organized and has intrinsic teleology, et cetera. But reason,
pure reason cannot approach that. So we have to use that as kind of a regulative knowledge.
Hans Jonas says, no, this is real knowledge. And why life? I mean, why not go up to rocks
and everything? And the argument goes like this. For Hans Jonas, metabolism is a particularly
interesting sort of entity because it's a formal identity, something that is being conserved
in a material flux. So there's a flux of matter and energy that concerns a form. And that
form has a consequence, which is it acts so as to conserve itself. That would be one way
to put it, or conserve itself as a consequence of its actions. That would be another way to
put it. So the only time where you, as living organisms, coincide with the matter in your
bodies is when you're dead. That's the only time where there is a coincidence, a material
permanence of this body, this piece of matter. And that's the only time that we can consider
and life is precisely the sustainance of an entity that is not material in itself. It's
formal and dynamic. And that puts Hans Jonas in a position to start making an argument
that therefore the relations that this system has with the world are relations of, you may
call it, of interest, of concern. That it's better to get, you know, over here where there
is protection, than to go over there where there is danger. Because I'm trying to conserve
myself. It's better to get some nutrients than to get some poison into your body. Because
I am this particular form of self-conserving identity that needs this sort of food and
so on. So that's the rough philosophical argument. And the question is for the inactive approach
to try to take that into, and make it into a piece of science. And see, can we express
it scientifically? So the idea is that there have been attempts to do this, using the notion
of auto-poeses, which you've heard about and many of you already know about, which tells
the story of the defining features of a living organism being its continuation of self-production.
So you have a network of molecular components that constitute a bounded system. And the
bounded system is what allows those chemical reactions to continue, while the system is
receiving inputs and output and waste products into the environment.
So the typical example of auto-poeses is a cell, where you can draw all these arrows
and say like, look, these things depend on this. I'm going to come back to this. And
therefore there is a kind of a closed organization, not a closed system, but a closed organization
of the system. And you can see similar forms of closed organization at other levels. And
we spoke of the immune system, but I think it was over there. That's one possibility.
The nervous system also, if you see it as a network of relations of changes of activity
between neurons and so on, that itself depends on previous forms of structures that were
specifying different forms of activity and so on and so forth. So it's a kind of circular
relation within the activity of the nervous system and also in the sensory motor coupling
as well, in action perception loops. So we go a bit more and more into detail in a minute,
but this is the kind of idea that's trying to translate Hans Jonas very, you know, almost
poetic point of we are living beings, we can understand life, life is a formal form
of entity. And therefore, because it's precarious and it's under threat, it engages with the
world in what you might call mindful ways. That kind of story, can we make a translation
of that into operational concepts. And this is the starting point for one option to try
to make that story, to cash out that story. And Francisco Varela, in one of his latest
papers with Andreas Weber, he proposes that there is a kind of logical progression from
the idea of audible uses to the idea of sense making. I'm going to say what sense making
means in a second. And that that is the way in which you can articulate Hans Jonas's argument
into his scientific story. Because if you have an auto poetic system, the system will
engage with the world in ways that will either affect the auto poeticist in a good way or
in a bad way. And therefore, those engagements would be appreciated by the system itself,
not in a kind of mentalistic sense of the system looking at itself, but more like the
actual changes are themselves an appreciation of that exchange with the world. And appreciation
will be either like things are good or things are bad, you know, like minor or major breakdowns
in auto poeticists that may occur by as a consequence of certain forms of exchanges
with the world. So he said that would be a way of saying that the system is cognizing
in some very broad sense we're talking about here, cognizing about the world by itself
being affected positively or negatively in its interactions with the world. The idea
by itself doesn't quite work because you need an extra concept which is the concept of adaptivity
which is, and it's not included in auto poeticists itself, it's not included in the dynamics
of self-conservation, self-production of the auto poetic system. Anything that says that
that system will just seek out, say, conditions that will make it live a better life or avoid
conditions that will make it, sorry, avoid conditions that will make it, you know, run
some risk of time. There's no way in which a system can know that this is auto poetic
until the very moment, sorry, that it ceases to be auto poetic until the very last moment.
You know, you just throw yourself off a cliff and you're alive and you're still alive until
the very, very last second you're still alive. And so if the normativity is whether you're
alive or not, you cannot distinguish such a situation from not throwing yourself off
a cliff. So you need something else that tells you, that allows you to regulate interactions
in terms of the potential consequences for your own self-sustaining organization. So
that's the property of adaptivity. We may go into it in some detail if you want, but
I just want to keep it at a sort of a medium flight level and just going through the concepts
and then we can come back if necessary. So then sense making, which would be the appreciation
of whether an exchange with the world is valent, it has a positive or negative valence
or is something that you should seek or avoid, that is the value of those exchanges as a
consequence for your own self-sustaining organization would require first an identity that is self-sustaining,
in this case auto poetic, plus adaptivity, mechanisms that allow you to regulate your interactions
with the world and your internal organization with respect to how things are going. So I
just want them to move to the notion of autonomy. All this, I should say by the way, for some
of you this is really familiar because I end up running through these central concepts
of an active theory always during one third of a talk and so on and then move on to something
new, so I apologize if she's seen this slide. We're trying to understand autonomy, was
one of those questions that we said needed to be addressed. So we speak about cognitive
agents, cognitive systems being autonomous and what do we mean by that? We certainly
do not mean that they're independent of the world, that they are unconditioned, that's
not what we mean. What we mean is that there is a sense in which you can speak of that
system giving itself its own laws or its own norms to be even better, but how is that possible?
I mean if you have a system that you have to sign yourself, that system will follow the
laws of the designer, in this case you. So the only way in which a system could follow
a certain, you know, to have a say in its own laws would be that the system is able
to modify or change itself or better, the system is able to construct itself as an entity.
So by autonomy then what is required, what we have to have is something that is a self-sustaining
process of identity generation and I will cash this out. A self-sustaining process of
identity generation and the precarious conditions. Classical example, auto-polysis, life is self-sustaining,
is constructing itself, you may call this closed network an identity because the closed
network of processes allow you to tell you whether a particular process belongs or do
not belong or does not belong to the system and that allows you to say like, well, this
is a system, you know, and you can follow that system over time, that's why we use the
word identity here. And there may be other, and there are indeed other levels in which
this same dynamic obtains, you know, at the personal level, interpersonal level, et cetera.
Now, what is the consequence of trying to work with our operational concept of autonomy?
And I want to show you why it's an operational concept. Well, one consequence is that we make
in this case, mine or the individual cognizer, we make this into an irreducible level of inquiry.
Most of psychology, cognitive science, neuroscience, it's very comfortable discussing what happens
under the level of the individual, you know, below the individual level, at the sub-personal
level of drives and motivations or neural function, et cetera. Or it's also very comfortable
talking about what happens above that level, the evolutionary histories, relations with
your parents, et cetera, et cetera. So there is a lack of a proper thematization of the
level of the individual, the individual mind. And it's funny because it's the same situation
happens in biology. In biology, the organism itself is some kind of a vanishing entity,
you know, that may be referred to at the beginning of a paper in biology, talk about organisms,
but immediately you just stop talking about organisms, start talking about genes, or start
talking about selective pressures. But it's hard to keep this entity there as a proper
level of analysis. And that actually changes the way we can start looking at cognitive
science, because now cognitive science has been slightly, you know, widened, not just
into the science that tries to say, how does a cognitive system work, but also into the
science that says, what makes a system cognitive? What makes a system mindful? What are we talking
about? What is the difference between that and other forms of systems, you know, a car?
Why would you call this system mindful, and not that one? That is also part of the questions
that we ask in this form of inquiry and cognition. So, I said I was going to go a bit deeper
into the idea of autonomy. There is a definition of autonomy that is there, which is long and
worthy and so on. We have worked to, you know, every comma of it, of trying to just make
sure that, you know, all the cases we want are in and all the cases that we don't want
are not there and so on. But I think I can illustrate this in a different way. And again,
some of you, I hope you can see that. Well, okay. Not too well. Here, you've got an illustration.
You imagine yourself, you're in a laboratory, and you're measuring different things. You've
got different instruments, and you're observing different forms of processes. And here, I
have a picture of several blobs here, not older in any particular way, representing
those things that you're looking at. You're looking at the temperature of a machine. You're
looking at chemical reaction, whatever. So, each one of those processes that you're observing
is represented by a blob. What is not so clear because of the light here is that there are
some very tiny arrows connecting some of these blobs, going from one blob to another. It's
okay. It doesn't matter if you don't see this. There are some arrows going from some blobs
to another, meaning, meaning that you have made the following observation that whenever
something happens to one of these blobs, where you intervene, you change it, there is a
consequent event that happens in the other blob. Then you draw an arrow. There is some
relation of conditioning that says, well, you know, I seem to be changing the pressure
here, and I see the temperature rising. Okay. Draw an arrow between the blob, above pressure,
and the blob that describes temperature. So, you're observing so far things. And at some
point, typically what we do sometimes is we select a series of these observations, these
variables, and we call it a system for some convenient purpose. For instance, you're working
with a robot, and you call that collection of metal, electronics, wires, and rubber wheels.
You call that a robot. So, you as an observer are saying, this is my system. So, you work
in this way by just ascribing some kind of wholeness to a part of the world, which is
you do it in a convenient way, in a way that allows you to exchange ideas, to work with
it, and that's perfectly fine. That's what we typically do. But if you want to understand
autonomy, you cannot do this, because as I said, you cannot just take the point of view
of the designer and decide this is going to be the autonomous system. By doing that, you're
undermining the very concept of autonomy. So, you have to do something else. You have
to keep observing this world, and you may find, now you can see arrows, you may find
that a subset of these observations relate to itself in a very funny way. You may find
blobs that receive arrows from other blobs, and contribute arrows to other blobs. That
is to say, processes that are conditioned by other processes in this subset of all your
observations, and at the same time contribute to the conditioning of these processes in
the same subset. Once this subset becomes close on itself, that's when you're talking
about an autonomous system. One caveat, one additional thing that is not in the figure,
the precariousness. That is to say, you also realize, when you're observing this system,
that not only these things are organized in a close manner, all these arrows pointing
to processes that are themselves into things inside the subset, but the fact that they
are organized in this way is also necessary for each of these processes to carry on existing.
That is to say, if you're starting to intervene in this organization, suddenly you will see
that these processes just break down. They're sustained in a way, by the way, they are related
to each other. That's interesting, and I said before, that describes an operationally
close organization, but that does not imply that the system is disconnected to other things
in the world. There are still arrows that go in and out processes that belong to this
subset, but those arrows that go out go to some process that doesn't come back. You
can say, for instance, trees, plants depend on sunlight for their subsistence, so there
will be an arrow there from the sun into the plant, but the sun doesn't depend on the plants
for its own existence. There is no arrow going back. That's what these things mean. The system
is open to the world, but it's operationally closed. It's organization. It's an organization
of close networks of dependencies. This idea of autonomy, we will apply this several times
in the next part of the talk. One thing that I have to say, because I mentioned this idea
of precariousness, and this is here that actually we throw apart ways, traditional ways of doing
cognitive science. First of all, because this idea of precariousness, it's the recognition
that all these systems are operating in a far from equilibrium condition. They're not
just inert. All the elements in this system, all the processes, components, and so on,
can only be sustained if in the presence of the whole. That is to say that they are precarious.
Now, precariousness is not to be understood as a positive property of matter. It's not
to be understood as something that you can assimilate or put in a box and say, oh, I'll
make my robot a bit precarious by inserting a little component there that says how precarious
it is. Because precariousness is precisely the opposite. It's a lack of permanence of
any positive property that you could ascribe to a function. You've got a neuron, and you
describe the transfer function of that neuron by saying, okay, there's synapses, there's
activation coming in, some process inside, and then pulses thrown via the axon towards
other neurons and so on. So there's a transfer function there, and in connection with models,
you typically describe it as a sigmoid or whatever it is. That function is precarious
in the sense that it is conditioned on many other things. That's an example. And you can
only treat it as a function in a way that has limitation. It won't be the same function
always, or it won't be there always. That means in a deep sense that there is an aspect
of materiality that in this story allows systems to become autonomous, and therefore
to become cognitive. So an autonomous system is necessarily a material system. We're going
to try to explain what that means because you may find that that in a later contradicts
other things I'm going to say. I'm going to say anything there. Now, I just want to
clarify this idea of autonomous organization. By trying to move away from a style of thinking
that already happens within autopoietic theory, which is the idea that, okay, you've got a
system that is organized in such a way where all the elements are contributing to the whole
and in a way they survive thanks to their contributions to the whole. Each organ that
is fulfilling a function in your body that helps other organs survive and help the whole
survive. So this, imagine that you've got nothing. This is, okay, you've got a circle
sort of fitting back on itself, trying to signify this idea of operational closure.
Now, you've got several components in this circle. The action of each of these processes,
all of them more or less fitting back on themselves. You just start following, say, in an organism,
the function of a particular organ and say, why is this organ doing this? Well, it's providing
oxygen to the blood flow. Why? Because that's going to be transported to sort of cells, etc.
And you keep asking, what's going on? And, eventually, you close back on the beginning.
So this is the relation of closure. And you may think that this is a kind of each process
contributing, doing their best to keep the whole going. And this is a way of looking
at considering life as sustaining itself, as being life's self-maintenance. And this
is a typical way where you find in the Yotapoyotic literature. Now, I want to suggest that the
same understanding can be, I mean, the same understanding of a system that keeps going
can be made in a different way, whereby each of these processes has a natural tendency
to destroy the system. Each of these processes has a natural tendency that if you were to
leave your heart, do what it really wants to do, it will just kill you. And the thing
is that these tendencies are negated or overcome by the action of other parts of the system.
That's like, okay, no, stop hard. You're not doing this. Now, I will do something else
here to prevent you from killing us, and so on. But the same process that does that,
if you were to have its way, it will kill you. So you can understand many diseases as
precisely the misfunction of this organization, in case of autoimmune diseases, cancer, etc.
They are indeed parts that can get away with what they really would do normally. And there,
in this light, life is kind of a frustrated suicide. You have a system that is by nature
trying to, in each of these components, run away at this integrated system, but it's
organized in such a way that it cannot. And why is this an interesting alternative way
of looking at it? Because at the end, you also obtain the circular organization, and
that's it. Well, it's an interesting way of looking at it, because it implies an inherent
restlessness, an inherent motivation to move, because things are in this unstable condition
all the time. You're never in a condition where you might say, okay, everything's fine.
That condition that you might sometimes experience, in fact, has a limitation. At some point, everything
is not fine anymore. Why? Well, because there is an internal negativity, and not to mention
something I'll mention later, an external negativity as well. So, I don't know how
I'm doing with time, John.
Okay, thanks. I'm okay. I'm halfway. So, let's come back to the point that we were trying
to make. The point that we were trying to make was that it could be a way of grounding
the idea of cognition in the autonomy of living organisms, or more simply in autonomy.
Hans Jonas says, this is, there's an existential kind of argument for that. Fransisco Varela
said, yes, there's a logical progression that takes you from multiple uses to something
called sense-making. Now, I've already spoke about autonomy. Now that we have something
like a concept of autonomy and operational closure, can we now proceed and say, look,
it's obvious if you follow logically the consequences of this idea, you already have a system that
is related to the world in terms of meaning, in terms of norms. Well, as I said, having
a self-sustained identity implies already normativity, because, well, at least to the
external observer, you can say that some interactions between this system and its environment will
be good in the sense that it will keep sustaining the identity, or will be bad in the sense
that they don't. Interestingly, you have to compare that to other physical systems. You
look at the planet and say, you know, particularly two planets collide. Is it good or bad for
the planets? We don't have a way to say that there is a value attached to whatever happens,
whatever event happens in this physical system, whereas we can say that about the living organism.
The interesting thing is that if the organism has enough mechanisms to appreciate some of
these consequences by itself and act on the tendencies of a particular encounter, then
that organism itself is able to modulate its behavior, modulate its interactions with the
world, so as to, for instance, select a pathway that leads to improve autonomy or improve
auto-polysis. This is what I call sense-making. Imagine here, you have a close diagram. Sorry.
Yes, I said that there is no way to say that there is no way to say that there is no way
to say that. I said at the beginning that at least to the external observer, there is
a normative to whether this system is interacting with the world in this way or that way. Now
I'm saying that if that becomes available to the organism in some limited form, not necessarily
in a full-blown objective manner, for instance, but just mainly, you know that, for instance,
by investigating this particular form of bacteria, you know that sugar is good and medium temperatures
are good. But it may happen that that system can only detect sugar, and that the system
can ignore temperature. It doesn't really have the mechanisms to know that medium temperature
is good. Sometimes if you put sugar at a very high temperature, it would just go there
and eventually die because of the high temperature. You will say, like, aha, silly, you didn't
know. But essentially what I mean is it doesn't matter. At least there is some access of that
organism to all this multidimensional normativity that you can use to describe whether the organism
will live or not. That organism is doing some form of sense-making and, of course, will
be more sophisticated if you can tell the difference between temperature as well. So first external
observer to the point, to make the point that the normativity, that we can speak of normativity
at all, and now highlighting that the organism itself has to make that difference. And how?
I mean, I was going to say it here. Imagine this, there's a close set here that you might
describe in the space of possible states of the organism. And this close set describes
the domain of viability of the organism. That is to say, if you're inside this close space,
if the organism state is inside, you're alive, if you cross it, you're dead. For instance,
your blood pressure goes, or your body temperature goes above a certain level, you die. Now, this
domain of viability, the organism is not in a single point there, it's moving about.
So this is what the arrow represents. And if you cross that domain, that boundary, the
organism disappears. Now, a sense-making organism is an adaptive organism that is able to revert
a tendency that tends to approach, to make it approach the boundary of viability. Things
are getting dangerous, and things are getting more and more. They leave less and less options.
If there is a mechanism that allows the organisms to alter its behavior or its internal working,
as this starts to happen, and avoid the crossing of the boundary, that organism is doing sense-making.
So this implies that it's kind of an adaptive monitoring and regulation of states of the
system, and of course of states of the system environment relation. And the result is that
there is an avoidant of the crossing of the boundary, interjectors that would otherwise
cross the boundary. Now, another of these questions that we raised before, the question
of agency, derives directly from these two concepts of autonomy and sense-making. What
are the requirements for agency? Why do you call something an agent? I mean, in normal
language. Well, we worked on this and we identified that there were typically three requirements
that would be the same across the board in all possible meanings of agency, only that
sometimes some of these requirements were more important than others. And these requirements
are the idea of individuality, asymmetry, and normativity. We speak of agents as an individual
entity. So there has to be a notion of individuality. But also we speak of agents as doing things,
of being agents, you know, this kind of active element, doing things in the world. So if
they're in their coupling with the environment, there is an asymmetry, at least sometimes,
not all the times, an asymmetry between, you know, the arrows that go back from the other
agent into the environment and back. Because the agent is just, it's behaving, it's doing
something in the world. We want to capture that. And there is a normativity to it because
the agent is not doing just random things, it's doing things with certain normativity,
for instance, trying to find some food. Now, you can put all these requirements together
and it follows very simply from what we already said about autonomy and sense-making, that
if you have a sense-making system that is able to regulate its interactions with the
world, its coupling with the world, that in itself already fulfills these three requirements.
So you've got a system that is autonomous and precarious, that is able to make sense
of its interactions with the world and regulate its interactions with the world. For instance,
a cell is able to open and close ion channels, bacteria is able to move from one environment
which is low in sugar to one that is rich in sugar. So those changes of the conditions
of the interactions with the world that originate in the system itself are the actions of an
agent. And this is how we approach the question of agents. So you've got a system like an
expressive machine that is not an agent, it doesn't fulfill these requirements. You know,
a toy car is not an agent. A toy car that is supposed to run with water, you should
collect water and you make it go into the rain, approaching a kind of a gray area there,
right? We're going to discuss that. A cell, yes, a cell that is able to regulate interactions
with the environment, open and closing ion channels, that is an agent. An animal like
a dog is an agent and it could be different sizes of an agent. So agency is not manifested
necessarily by looking at the agent and seeing that it's doing what it wants. Actually,
agency often is manifested as something that the system is trying to do and not achieving
it, right? We've got a dog on a leash there. Agency may be ambiguous between moments of
acting and moments of being passive and it may imply a sort of social element as well.
An agent in the presence of others and we'll come to that. And eventually the regulations
of agency, you can reappropriate them and regulate yourself in some way, trying to signify that
with that. So the point here is that agency, you have this very minimal definition of agency
but that still allows for very different kinds of sophisticated distinctions within this
notion of agency. So, now this approach is trying to cover a lot of ground and it's trying
to have a kind of a naturalization of many of the terminologies, much of the terminology
that we use in cognitive science. And this is the story that is not over yet and you
can investigate transitions in different forms of operational forms of autonomy and agency.
And I've got two columns here, one describing of the point of activity, regulation, nervous
system, image making, blah, blah, blah. They follow some of the suggestions Hans Jonas himself
about the different transitions in value making with the history of life. And on this side
you have the, if you like, the teleological cognitive aspect of things. So Hans, you can
claim that things like actions and emotions only come when you have some form of self-movement.
I'm going to go back to that or the idea of objectivity comes when we are able to do our
first images and so on and so forth. Each of these blobs here would take a whole
lecture really. But one thing you notice is that there is a kind of axis of increasing
autonomy or increasing forms of sophisticated autonomy and increasing forms of mediacy,
increasing form of the object of cognition becomes further and further removed. Instead
of just surviving and just evaluating whatever comes into contact with the cell wall, you
can at the bottom of this have a human project and say like, well, you know, I would like
to be an academic and therefore I will plan the best way to do it and so on. I would like
to be a good father. So this whole range of increasing forms of mediacy between your actions,
your situation and if you like the cognitive target of your performance. So I don't think
I have too much time for this, but I wanted to just move into the habit thing, but this
is something I just said very briefly about how animality is about a kind of a self-movement
and a spatial know-how by which I mean that you have to have some kind of proprioceptions
and kind of knowledge that you're moving. Presumably, you know, a bacterium going up
a sugar gradient doesn't know that it's moving. It's just moving, but as far as the mechanisms
for sense-making that it has, it may as well be just turning the sugar volume up, so to
speak, instead of really moving to the source of sugar. So there's no distinction that tells
that system that it is moving. But for an animal, for instance, and I don't want to go
into the discussion where the plants are cognitive. Yes, they are, and they move and all that,
but what I want to say is that there is this qualitative jump here when you're able to
uproot yourself and move about, because then a whole spectrum of potential, intentional
possibilities open up whereby some form of life like bacteria might have some kind of
internal tension between need and satisfaction when it needs a particular nutrient. An animal
can have a much more sophisticated form of development of this intentional space, because
for instance, an animal is able to move and perceive at a distance something that hasn't
happened yet. I mean, you can say, oh, the predator is over there, and therefore I should
better run. So now I am appreciating something that hasn't happened and is about to happen,
or similarly, oh, I can see the tracks of my prey, and I know that I might just find
it if I just start running. So I can project into the future or understand the immediate
past, because I can move. And that was originally something like just some very one-dimensional
between need and satisfaction. Now it becomes much more sophisticated, something like you
may have emotions like fear, which is there is danger that is impinging on me, but not
here yet, or expectation, and so on and so forth. So Hans Jonas made this argument, very
nice argument of how emotion comes with action and perception. So this is a part of the story
when I am just giving you these vignettes. All of them would probably need a proper development
and surely need a proper development. But I am just trying to give you this overall picture
of what might look like a program, alternative to functionalist program. Hans Jonas, these
transitions that we talked about, say transitions to forms of self-movement, our transitions
whereby you get some gain in the sense of you are able to regulate your interactions with
an increased freedom and increased autonomy, but at the same time in a more precarious
manner. So he speaks about needful freedom. So for instance, you can move about and have
some freedom if you are an animal, but you have less guarantee that you are going to
get the energy resources that you need to carry on surviving, like a plan that has just
to stand there and just wait for the sunlight and the air and the earth. So there is no
net gain in these transitions. It is not that there is an evolutionary tendency towards
more and more complexity and complex forms of autonomy, but the thing is that once they
happen, they start conserving that that may then happen. That is to say, the perceiving
animal starts to conserve an identity that involves action in the world in perceiving,
in the relation of perception. So there is therefore a way in which you can say that
every time these transitions happen, it is a new form of life that is beginning to be
conserved or is being born, of course, in a continuation from previous ones. I didn't
say much about social interaction. I am just flagging here the fact that this can be applied
to social interaction as well and this is where we are done with Han and the Jagger.
You can also connect into things that John has also worked on. One of the terms that
you have not defined properly in cognition is the social. When you look for definitions
and you are lucky to find one, you find circular definitions such as the study of information
processing in a social setting is referred to as social cognition. That is why Chris
Frith, we propose something different. We propose to understand social cognition as
a mutual, co-regulated coupling between two autonomous agents. So I am using all these
words. I am using autonomy, coupling, agents, which I have already defined, which in addition
is not just a mutual co-regulated coupling but in addition that coupling acquires a sort
of autonomy of itself, of its own. This is characterized in circumstances where we are
interacting with people. Two interactors are interacting and actually they don't want
to interact and they keep on interacting, such as, for instance, in the narrow corridor
situation where you just say, oh, sorry, oh, sorry, oh, sorry, and you are still coordinating
with each other and your individual intentions actually just pass through. Well, interaction
is taking over there for a little while and having a temporary form of autonomy. The sense
making that happens in these conditions, we call participatory sense making. Again, this
is the subject of a full different talk, but I will come back to that in a minute when I
go back to the social aspects of habits. Time?
Thirty-five minutes.
Okay. Oh, we are laughing.
Okay.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. I am going to finish.
I mean, because I am sure there will be questions.
Yeah, yeah. I don't have a lot more, but this is now it is starting to move towards the
more speculative. I mean, this is close enough that this whole putting on the table all these
groups, autonomy agents, sense making, participatory sense making, transitions in forms of autonomy.
But then, of course, there is a question that you can ask immediately and say, well, isn't
this approach something that eventually says that everything is about surviving as an organism?
All these values that you speak about and say when things are good or bad, are they not
all eventually related to the otopoiesis of the organism? And isn't that not contradictory
with our experience? Because sometimes we care about things that are not necessarily our physical
survival. We care about other people. We care about things outside ourselves. We care about
the country, whatever. So what is now? There is a missing concept there that we need. And
I would like to propose that this concept should be the concept of a habit. Now, we don't speak
so much about habits in cognitive science and psychology, because the recent history of the
concept is a bit tainted by the use of this word in behaviorism and such things. But actually,
the concept of habit, it can be quite rich. And if you look backwards in time and how it has
been used, you have people who go from Aristotle first, and I forgot to mention him, and to
Hegel, Maine de Biron, Flix Ravisson, two sort of philosophical psychologists like Kurt
Goldstein, pragmatists like John Dewey, William James, and phenomenologists like Manuel Bantique.
And then psychologists in the middle of the century, last century, like Nikolai Bernstein's
understanding the self-organization of the movement of the body, or Eva Koller, who was running
experiments on disruptions to visual perception using inverting goggles and so on. They all used
this concept of a habit, not in exactly the same way, but they had that concept in some kind of
high regard, in the sense of it is the habit that actually makes the difference, and in particular
the difference, certain forms of habits make the difference between animal life and human life.
We can come back to that. But what is the habit? I mean, how should we understand it?
As you probably noticed, what I'm interested in is to, when you take a word like this, to try to
find an operational definition, a way of grounding it, such that you'd be able to then describe it
without using terminology that it hasn't been grounded in this way already. So you can describe
a habit, some kind of ecological entity, and I want to explain what I mean, that sets itself into
some kind of stable pattern, and in the case of a cognitive agent, a stable pattern of action
and perception. So the idea is like this, you have a system that is plastic, not just the
cognitive agent, but also the environment itself is plastic, in the sense that there are changes
that can happen over slow time scales that tend to be conserved, and that system is behaving.
There's kind of an underlying structure, but that structure produces certain forms of behavior,
maybe at a faster time scale. Now the thing is that the plasticity, the plastic changes will affect
behavior, but the behavior itself, because this plasticity is dependent on the processes that are
going on, this plasticity is induced by behavior. So there's a kind of circular relation between
the processes that happen at a fast time scale, and the processes that happen at a slow time scale,
like dynamics and meta-dynamics. And the slow processes are not just slow, but actually they're
altering the structure of a system. It's as if you have a set of differential equations,
and you say like, well I want to understand whether this is going to fall into a particular
attractor and so on, that's the dynamics, but the plastic process that actually changes in those
equations, changes in those parameters, adding an equation, removing another and so on, that is the plastic
meta-dynamical process. When that happens, and this circularity is not guaranteed to ever stop,
but when that, when this circularity tends to fall into some kind of meta-stable condition,
that's what you have a habit, something that is in a way already predisposed to continue
itself, some kind of autonomous ecological dynamics. And this is an example here, you see here a path
on the grass that has been, is there and regulates the walking of people, I mean we walked yesterday,
but actually this, the one that we did yesterday probably was not made like this, it was probably
man-made, I mean intentionally made, I mean let's do it like here, but this can happen naturally,
there is a path on the grass that is made by the walking, it's a path made by walking.
Now once the path is there, you tend to walk along the path, thereby reinforcing the path
and preventing the grass from re-growing, but this structure that looks very, very stable,
and it is, but it's not fixed in time, it has a certain reactivity, because if someone puts here
like an ice cream shop here, people will start deviating from the path to reach this new
destination and eventually forming a new path or a network or changing this path and so on.
So this is, this kind of dynamics is what I try to call, what I think characterizes a habit.
Now here I've got the typical map of somatosensory, in somatosensory cortex, when you have
represented all these parts of the body, you know, when you touch your finger and so on
and a neuron over here lights up, you touch your face and a neuron over there lights up,
and I want to suggest that actually this somatosensory map is actually one case of this path,
what you have is a somatosensory path making, because it is made by the activity,
the doing things actually, why Havian learning enough is enough to explain how certain things
become activated and how they leave a trace in the brain that then allow you to do things in the same way.
So these are the neural underpinnings of the plasticity required for habits,
but I must just say that actually the plasticity doesn't have to be in the organism,
it can be in the environment too, and this very nice story told by Philip Agri,
who is one pioneer of situated artificial intelligence, but he says that he has a record collection in his office
and he likes to listen to just one side of each record, he has a preferred side of each record,
so he moved into the office, he moved first time and put all the records there on a shelf,
and over a period of some weeks he noticed something interesting, that he would pick a record
and take it out of the sleeve and immediately would come out in such a way that he could just do this movement,
just take the record and directly boom, onto the record player and it was the right side, he didn't have to choose.
So he realized that the whole activity was reorganizing the way in which the records were being put back into the sleeves,
in such a way that it would be easier for him to take them out and put them back when he wanted to listen to them,
and he did this totally unconsciously and so on, I mean it just happened,
but it is a case in which the plasticity is in the record collection itself,
it has been modified by action such that now it perpetuates certain forms of action, listening to the sides that he likes.
This changes in somatosensory cortex can actually be, you can intervene with this by for instance using tools,
and you can see how your, if you're trained to use a tool to grasp something,
then you have different appreciation of your body schema,
you think actually that the distances between parts of your arm have become smaller or larger,
depending on how you do it and so on, this is recent work by Cardinale and others,
where you train someone to pick up something with a tool and then they have a sense of an enlarged arm,
but then the parts, to make it fit with the rest of the body, then parts of this enlarged arm seem to have contracted and so on,
and they can measure this.
Can you explain what's being grabbed there?
What's being grabbed?
Yeah, I don't know.
It's a little, I think it's a little cube, and it's either you grasp it with your hand like this.
What I mean is, there's this thing right here.
Yeah, sorry, these are latencies and pre and post test conditions without the tool,
so that they measure acceleration, I didn't want to go into details, but measure acceleration, velocity and so on,
showing that having been trained to grasp with the tool, therefore taking a longer arm,
then when you remove the tool, it takes you longer because you already expect to reach much before you actually reach.
The tool has given you the expectation to just get to your goal much quicker.
So when I'm using the tool, I can do this and I already touch this part of the table,
and then I'm doing this and then, oh, oh, I have to carry on.
So that's what they measure, the extra time that it takes.
So the large parts are the time measured with the tool and then they can be trained?
No, there are pre and post tests without the tool, and the middle is having been trained with the tool.
So you measure the same thing, it's actually grasped without the tool,
and there is an after effect of having been trained to use the tool.
This is latencies, this is time and time to reach a particular acceleration in the profile of movement,
time to reach a particular velocity, so they measure these points like the peak velocity or the peak acceleration and so on,
and these are significant differences, it takes you longer to reach these points after being trained by the tool
because in a way your movement has been reorganized to having a tool in your hand,
and now they've taken the tool from your hand and initially you just think that the only thing you need to do is
what you've just done with the tool, but actually that's not enough, so you need to then carry on.
It takes longer time to reach these points in the profile of velocity and acceleration.
So what if they measure velocity?
I don't want to play it down here.
It's here acceleration, velocity, here I can't tell very well, sorry.
And also what is measured here is a subjective point, they point into parts of the arm,
so they touch, they're blindfolded and they touch a bit of the arm and they touch this bit,
someone touches parts of the arm and they say, well point to where that is, roughly,
and you point like this or like that, you're blindfolded,
and their perception of the arm has in certain distances feel like the arm has shrink,
so they say that the concept, you know, I want to make a big, big point about this particular experiment,
I want to say that they use the tool, changes the habit and therefore has changes in the body schema
and in somatosensory cortex as well, you can postulate that hypothesis.
The concept of habit is very rich and you cannot see this very well,
but we've been trying to trace all the connections between all these people,
going back to Aristotle, some Arabic thinkers, back tours, through Hume, it's just too rich,
that's the problem, we started making these connections
and then we realized that we didn't have enough dimensions to connect them all,
but there are different breaks in the idea of habit,
when you say like, no, the habit is a bad word, you shouldn't use,
but different lines of thinking and connection,
like here's the main thing, you know, Hegel and so on,
leading up to the Gestalt school, connecting to phenomenology via Maloponte, et cetera, et cetera,
it's such a rich concept that it's actually quite difficult to put all this together
and to try to make a clear sense of it,
but people have said extreme things about habits such as, for instance, Hegel says,
habits is what prevents us from going mad, right?
Thanks to the fact that we had habits, we just don't go crazy,
because we can just, without a habit, the mind would just either close on itself
and become totally disconnected with the world and obsessed with itself,
or it would be just totally driven by whatever destruction it has
and be so open to the world that nothing would happen,
it would be constantly, you know, anxiously changing from one thing to the next,
and it's actually, the habit is what puts some order in that,
and so it's like, okay, you can focus on certain things,
they're not in yourself, they're connected to yourself,
but this focusing actually helps you to just keep out all the other noise,
and that's, you know, then, I haven't got it here,
well, Hume, the Lewis, it's not even there,
it says, you know, the habit, the self is a collection of habits,
so I propose that this is a very rich concept that needs to be, you know,
worked out even further, that habits themselves can generate values,
because in a sense, in a way, if you have this circularity of processes that change
and sustain themselves, they produce, they generate certain predispositions
to carry on enacting the same habits,
and for this, some things are good or some things are bad,
so the habit of smoking, you know, is in itself bad,
only with respect to a larger objective point of view,
but in itself, it's a habit for which smoking is good, you know,
and that's why it's hard to quit smoking, you know,
if you just thought, okay, it's bad for me, I just didn't do it,
it would be easy, but that is because it wouldn't be a habit,
but if it is a habit, it's actually hard, because the habit takes over
and wants to carry on, so habits generate values,
and these values are non-metabolic,
and people like Merleau-Pontier have already said that there is this concept
of motor intentionality, that it's a consequence of how we organize our actions
and how the body organizes itself,
and that puts us in a sort of relation to the world
where there are optimal distances, for instance,
to appreciate a particular object, a vision,
or the beginning of an act already just tells us very much
about what's going to happen next, you know,
the beginning of a point in gesture is already part of the point in,
and it's pointing to the point in this case.
So, but you can survive, I mean, the point here is that you can't survive
without this, organically speaking, you know, I need water,
and I can drink water in a very funny way, dangerous,
like picking up a glass like this and doing a kind of movement
and drink the water, but I don't do that.
I mean, I just have a preferred way of handling objects,
like picking up a glass,
and these preferred ways are part of habits.
So, I think I mentioned the...
Yeah, okay, I need to mention this, sorry.
This is an insect, the water boatman,
who can trap air bubbles and go underwater and breathe
by using the oxygen contained in the air bubbles
and creating a difference of partial pressures with the water
such that the oxygen from the water flows into the bubbles.
So, as long as the insect can keep the bubbles from collapsing,
they function like an artificial lung, right?
I want to say with this that habits,
you can call it a habit or something if you like,
you know, the behavior can eventually affect the lower levels,
for instance, metabolic levels,
because you can imagine this insect now looking for food underwater,
finding new kinds of nutrients,
having metabolic pathways that become atrophied,
that's the word, yeah, because they are not used and so on,
and eventually, depending for survival,
on finding these nutrients underwater.
So, something that becomes behavior can change the conditions
of life that give rise to this behavior.
So, the picture that I told you about, about this closure,
this operational closure,
I would like to now start opening up this idea a little bit
and put it in time.
So, instead of having a circle that fits back on itself,
that is perfect, you may have something that is actually quite,
not quite perfect, but at the moment,
there is a kind of relation of dependencies between these processes,
but it's not perfectly close on itself.
It's a circle with some gaps,
but that circle has a kind of permanence,
even if it's transient, you know, for a few minutes or a few hours, a few days,
and in that state,
it can still regulate and interact with the world
in such a way that you may close back whatever you have.
The behavior may actually provide the closure that is not there,
and so that's why, you know, we, well, that's what we do, actually.
We need food, so we eat, and it's not the case
that because we need food, we are actually not alive while we're not eating, right?
So, but if we don't eat, you know, if we don't behave in certain ways,
we won't survive, so we're not fully close on ourselves, you know.
We will need to do something before the end of the day
or before the end of the week if we want to carry on being where we are.
So, why is this important? Why is this interesting?
Because I think that if you were building up a picture of what I was saying
as something that goes in a kind of a layer approach,
at first you have metabolism, then you have agency,
and more sophisticated forms of agency, and animality, and social, and this, and so on, and so on,
some kind of a layer of you, like a cake when you build things on top of each other,
what I want to suggest is actually that that's not the right picture.
The picture, yes, you have to starve somewhere, you starve the bottom,
but the thing is that as soon as you move out one layer,
it starts to feed back on the original one.
For instance, by behaving, you can liberate several constraints on your metabolism,
and then you can just start feeding on something else by just being able to move about.
And so your metabolism, that had to be of a very particular kind,
now it has some freedom to change or drift in its structure.
And this is the title of the talk in the end.
We come to the title of the talk, How Mind Shapes the Body,
because the thing is habits, this idea of habits,
crossing the personal sub-personal domain both ways.
The habit is something that I do as a person,
but it's also something that has consequences for my metabolism,
my brain, and so on, so it's shaping me.
Every time I do something, it changes me a little bit.
And because they introduce their own normativity,
it may well be that my underlying levels, my metabolism,
can start to depend on these higher levels.
If you have a preference for certain kinds of food,
eventually you might have to depend on that kind of food.
Or an example that we wrote in that chapter with Marik and Hannah,
a patient needs to be given a drug that is actually quite hard
and can be poisonous for normal people,
but you give them slow doses of that drug in order to survive,
and it gets adapted to it, and eventually so much adapted to it
that it needs to carry on living.
Here you have something that a particular behaviour,
in this case very much directed towards the physiology, I admit,
a particular behaviour has changed the physiology,
where the value of an encounter taking the drug has changed
from being a poison to being some nutrient,
if you want to call it like that.
So it seems that mine can get, therefore, re-inscribed in the body,
that the habit is a mutual translation between the psychic and the somatic.
And of course this applies, of course, to the social aspect as well.
Ritually Wanton and Richard Levins in their recent book of essays,
they claim our physiology is the social physiology,
that it depends very much on the class,
the kind of work that you do, etc.
Now, in interaction you may have the same kind of situations,
there can be habits of interactions,
and I can go into that later in the discussion,
there are some examples of habits of interaction,
including music improvisation, but many others too.
Another example of how behaviour can change our physiology,
is this case of underwater vision in children in Pacific Islands,
where they dive to search for things,
and they made a study recently that these children can actually,
they have perfect vision underwater,
they can read the book underwater if they want to,
whereas Western children, you have a blurry vision underwater.
Your action changes your physiology and your anatomy,
and it turns out that actually what they have is,
they change the diameter of the crystal,
I can't remember what it is,
but the thing is the behaviour shapes the body.
And to go, I wanted to suggest that human perception,
coming back to what we said about human perception,
is not a special case when we think about perceiving an abstract object.
This seems to be the departure point of many theories of perceptions,
like imagine how do you know that you're looking at this red cube and so on.
That's actually so abstract,
in this view an animal will never perceive a shape like this in its abstractness,
it will just perceive it in its value.
Does it have any food, content, is it any dangerous?
Then otherwise, I don't care about it.
So I would like to say that what makes us perceive these objects in their abstraction,
is a very high level human capability.
It's a form of second nature,
where you pick up a baby and show him little abstract things,
and I want to highlight this part of the picture,
where the baby is actually being pushed to see certain things,
which takes me to the final speculation of the talk,
which is the idea of the social invisible.
The social invisible being interpersonal processes
that do not happen at the interpretative level,
not at the level of, oh, I realize that you're looking at me,
or I realize that you want this, not at the intentional level,
but actually below that level,
they can result in different forms of coordination
that may fit into interpretation,
but what they do is actually shape the body in this way that habits do.
I was going to say something about this already.
Well, I can come back to that, actually, it's not that central,
but the thing is that this social invisible,
it's like this network of social coordination,
it's quite alive in a metaphorical sense, perhaps,
but quite clever.
It's not necessarily something that happens attached to an author,
to someone who's doing it, but it just happens,
and you can cite the work of sociologists like Marcel Maus,
who wrote this very interesting essay on techniques of the body,
I can't remember the date, it's like the 30s, 20s, I don't know,
and more recent sociological studies like Loc-Vakuan
on a kind of embedded sociological study of becoming a boxer,
how the institution trains you to move in certain ways,
to breathe in certain ways, and so on, through institutionalized manners.
So this ties in with certain movement in phenomenology,
going from a phenomenology of experience,
an intentional structure towards the phenomenology of the invisible,
and that happens here with Merleau-Ponty first,
he has this book called The Invisible and The Invisible,
with this concept of the flesh.
These conditions that are underlying our possibilities of experiencing,
but themselves are a form of self-affection that is not intentional.
It's the kind of thing as, you know, something that bottoms out
the possibilities of experience.
A sort of...
Mane de Biran talks about the sense of effort.
The sense of effort is not about something or anything,
it's about attention.
It's an underlying aspect of experience
that is telling me that I am an experiencing being,
that I am this active self.
So, yes, okay, well, we can come back to that.
And it's a very nice study, again, of this sociological study.
Breathing like a soldier.
It speaks about the differences between normal breathing
and the breathing requirements of a soldier
that has to, you know, a soldier has to, for instance,
be able to run for miles and miles and miles and miles,
being able to stop and shoot.
And therefore, the breathing cannot be too agitated.
And at the same time, they have to be able to shout orders very loudly
and clear so that everyone will listen to them.
So, this sociologist went under this training
and noticed exactly how this training happened.
And so they would ask a cadet to lead a little platoon
and say, well, you know, give some orders.
And the orders couldn't be heard
because they didn't shout from the bottom of the stomach or something.
And then they would stop her and say, like, look, you know,
this is what you have to feel.
You know, shout now, then they push the bottom of the stomach
and say, you feel that?
That's how you have to feel when you're shouting.
So how direct that intervention is, you know,
it's a social intervention that is not telling you, like,
oh, imagine this or that.
It's like pushing your body and creating that experience directly.
And then you realize, like, oh, this is what I have to feel.
Okay, I'll do it.
So that is what I talk about, what I mean by this social invisible.
It's not an interpretation that I'm making.
It doesn't happen at the cognitive level.
It happens at the direct and body intervention level.
So the whole thing is that most of phenomenology
and most cognitive science thinks that, you know,
or has moved from this idea of me first,
I can do things to then extend that idea to the others.
Like, I can towards him, or she can towards me,
or we can, they can, all that.
But I want to suggest that actually this might be either going both ways
or more radically going just one way first.
You know, that idea, that social builds up my own experience
as a possibility of self-affection,
my own possibility of self-affection.
More examples of the social invisible,
ways in which you carry a baby about,
ways in which you expose it to different forms of contacts
with others and the world, and so on.
So we can leave this to the discussion,
the distinction between habits and skills,
because it probably will come up.
Yes, and that too.
So just wanted to say that in this view, again,
highlight the fact that mine is relational.
It's neither inside or outside.
That also has to do with it,
relation to extended mine ideas.
And I don't want to go into that,
but there is kind of, interestingly,
that there is not a layer approach from the inside outside,
but there are those flow in both ways.
So just final message, recapitulate a little bit
when we were talking about shoulder and bottom
and things like functionalism, like extended mine.
They do provide interesting ideas about the body,
but these do not focus on the blind spots that would really...
You know, if we do focus on the blind spots,
we really make a difference and progress.
And then that motivates this movement
towards the body as precarious source of significance,
which is the whole point of the inactive approach
at different levels.
It's the same point many times.
And this is why the inactive approach
can provide this...
You know, it's trying to focus on this question
and provide definitions of agency, values,
sense-making, social interaction, and so forth.
And that leads us with, you know, of course, lots of open challenges.
You know, understanding habits and skills, as you already said,
that habits is such a rich concept
that it's very hard to pin it down, but it's possible.
Understanding the subjectivity, understanding this notion
of a social flesh, of the social invisible,
as well as the typical challenges
of understanding higher forms of mediation
and higher forms of cognition.
That's also a challenge for the inactive approach.
You know, understanding what makes a human self.
But I think I'll stop there because it's too much.
And yeah, thank you.
Thank you.
