Lecture two, Alexis de Tocqueville, of Brief Biography.
As a historian, of course, I can't resist the temptation, and I don't think you want
me to resist the temptation, of providing some context for this book.
I'm going to provide two contexts in this and the next lecture.
Right now, what I want to talk about is the biography, the life of Alexis de Tocqueville.
Now, of course, I could sort of cheat on this and simply talk about his life up to the time
he wrote the book.
That would deal well with the influences that came into the book.
However, I'm going to complete the picture.
I want to carry this story through until the time he dies, in fact, because I want you
to see, among other things, how thoroughly his experience in America penetrated not just
this book, but the rest of his life, including life as a public servant in France, and as
an author of other books.
So today, right now, we're doing biography.
And then, in the next lecture, I'm going to talk about the actual journey he took.
So I'm actually going to talk about biography, except for the 10 and a half months he was
in America right now, because I want to do one whole lecture on that journey, not just
to provide a geography, but also, I think, in somewhat more fundamental ways to look
at the kinds of experiences that he had in America.
And I will preface that by looking at a little bit about America in 1831.
That is to say, what was America like during the first term of Andrew Jackson?
What was going on?
What might have been in the newspapers?
What might people have been talking about as a lecture to Tocqueville was traveling around
America?
So, as they say almost everywhere, let's start at the very beginning of his life.
He was a Norman, not one of those medieval guys with the horns in his helmet, but he
was from Normandy, and in fact, he's from a little village called Tocqueville in Normandy.
This is important because when Tocqueville travels around the United States, one of the
things he says is, I've traveled up and down the United States, and I've seen all kinds
of differences, obviously.
New Orleans is not like Boston in a lot of ways, and yet he says, I think Americans
all over the United States have more in common with one another than a Norman does with somebody
from Brittany, although Normandy and Brittany are only separated by a creek.
So he is aware of the fact that although France is a country and has been a country for a
long time by the time he is born, nevertheless, it is a large, very much divided country divided
by, if not language, at least by dialect, divided by tradition and history, divided
by very strong labels that people put on themselves as a Burgundian or a Norman or whatever.
And so we need to go back to Tocqueville's own experience as somebody from Normandy.
Although he was a Norman, he was born in Paris in 1805.
He will not actually inherit the chateau of Tocqueville until his mother dies following
his visit to America.
His father had been a sympathizer with the French Revolution.
You've got to remember that Tocqueville, born in 1805 during the time of Napoleon, didn't
himself live through those events of 1789 and the years that immediately followed, but
his parents did.
And we all know, I know from my own experience, you grow up hearing your parents' stories.
And so although he was not a witness to the Revolution, he doesn't remember Robespierre.
He wasn't born yet.
Nevertheless, those are stories, and it's a history that permeated him.
In fact, at the end of his life, he wrote a history of the French Revolution.
It clearly was a signature event in the history of France and affected Tocqueville, although
he did not live through it.
Despite the fact that his father generally sympathized with the Revolution, his father
was briefly imprisoned during the so-called reign of terror.
As Tocqueville was growing up, his father was a government official, a bureaucrat, we
would say today, and as a bureaucrat, he traveled a good deal.
And so Tocqueville lived in several different places as a boy, finally going to what we
would call high school, to the lycée, in the city of Metz, in the eastern part of France.
And in 1824, at the age of 19, he returned to Paris, the city of his birth, and there
he began to study law.
Tocqueville, among other things, we need to remember, is a lawyer.
Also in those years, he read a lot of philosophy, especially 18th century French philosophy.
He read Rousseau and Voltaire and Montesquieu, who particularly impressed him.
In his earlier education, he had gotten the general good reading of the classics.
That's Plato and Aristotle and all that crowd.
He had not been particularly well schooled in what we might call Christian classics,
although Tocqueville was a practicing Catholic throughout his entire life.
The one major exception to that was, he did read works of St. Augustine, the great fifth
century Catholic theologian in the waning days of the Roman Empire.
And Augustine had a profound effect on Tocqueville.
So it is the classics, it is Augustine.
And then as he studied law school, also the legal material and these French philosophers
that are all sort of swimming around in Tocqueville's head, we will see all of them appear directly
or indirectly as he analyzes life in America.
It's also apparently during these years in Paris studying law that he came to the realization
I mentioned in the previous lecture that eventually democracy is going to win out.
The movement toward democracy, which means for him, as I pointed out in the last lecture,
the movement toward the equality of conditions is inevitable.
To put it another way, to put it negatively, the old aristocracy with its legal privileges
and so on, and he was a member of that aristocracy, that aristocracy was dead.
And it's not going to come back to life.
There is no resuscitation.
He comes to this conclusion while he's still a young man studying law.
And we will see later on when circumstances allow it, that's going to encourage him to
think about going to America because, again, if that's the way the world is going, I want
to see the place where it's gone the farthest, not so we can imitate it directly or exactly,
but so I can see the general direction.
And so I can, I think Tocqueville is in some way saying, be a player in helping to shape
the kind of democracy that inevitably will come to France.
In 1826, again, to remind you of age, Tocqueville is 21.
He makes his first foreign voyage.
He goes to Italy.
He takes many foreign voyages during his lifetime, even though he doesn't live to be a very old
man, he is an inveterate traveler.
But one of the interesting stories that we know is that, like many people before and
after him, Tocqueville goes to Rome.
He sits on the capital line hill, from which one can still get the fabulous view and all
the picture postcards of the Roman Forum.
And he sort of dozes off thinking about the great events that have happened there.
If you go to the Roman Forum, look at it from the capital line hill and don't think those
kind of thoughts or something wrong with you, seems to me.
I was just there this summer and even though I've been to Rome many times, it's inevitably
what you do.
You look at those triumphal arches, you see those huge building and you say, my God, what
an empire.
It must have impressed everybody who came here.
Why didn't it last forever?
What happened?
This is the thought of Edward Gibbon, before he writes his famous Decline and Fall of the
Roman Empire, published in 1776.
I was recently reading the Italian journal of Frederick Douglass, the great American
ex-slave and writer, abolitionist orator.
And he goes to Rome at the age of 70.
And he says, boy, if Rome can fall, nothing lasts forever.
So Tocqueville had a fairly common kind of thought and we're told that his dream was
interrupted by hearing some monks chanting and also seeing a cowherd.
Rome now is a very big city again, but Rome had shrunk in size a great deal.
And so when he sees the monks and the cowherd, two very un-Roman kinds of figures interrupting
his thought about the grandeur of Rome, again, it makes you wonder about how do civilizations
and empires and political organizations rise and sustain themselves and what causes their
collapse?
It's interesting because up to this time, Tocqueville really hadn't studied history.
He'd studied literature and philosophy and so on, but he really hadn't studied history.
Well in 1827, he gets a job, he's now a lawyer, and he becomes what's called a mediator at
a court, sort of an unpaid apprenticeship, the start of a legal career, and he has this
in Versailles, near Paris, of course Versailles is famous, we know it today primarily for
the palace that was built by Louis XIV.
And it was in Versailles that he attended lectures on history and began to take history
seriously.
Go into Rome, we'll do that to you.
And so he begins to realize that if he's going to understand the present and the future,
he also needs to understand the past and he never studies history as sort of a disinterested
scholar, sort of interested antiquities because antiquities are interesting for their own
sake.
It's not a bad thing to do, I would want to argue, but that was not Tocqueville's approach.
He was very practical in his study of history.
I'm studying history, what can I learn that will make me better to understand today?
How am I going to get better at figuring out the world I live in by studying the past?
I'm studying the past for that purpose and I want history to be useful to me.
The reason most of my students would say they study history.
A few of them will want to do it for its own sake and its intrinsic interest and its
fascination and they don't need any other stimulation.
But Tocqueville's in many ways like most people who like reading and studying history today.
It's not just entertaining, in some ways it is useful.
And Tocqueville was interested in the usefulness of history.
As I said, he's traveled a great deal in his life.
In addition to going to Italy, he went to of course the United States and Canada, but
he went to England, to Ireland, to Germany.
He returned to Italy, he went to Switzerland and he took a trip to Algeria, which of course
at that time was under French control.
He was a very well-traveled guy by any era's standards, but especially for the first half
of the 19th century.
While he was living in Versailles, studying history, he met a couple very important people
to the rest of his life.
One of them was a guy a few years older than he, also a lawyer, also working in the court
system in Versailles, a guy named Gustave de Beaumont.
They remain lifelong friends and they travel to America together.
And each will write a very interesting book based on his experiences.
Tocqueville of course, democracy in America, but Beaumont will write a novel called Marie
or Slavery in the United States.
Although Tocqueville hated slavery and they both sought up close and personal, if you
will, it really seems to have grabbed all of Beaumont's attention toward the end of
the trip when they went to the south and spent some time in New Orleans and traveled all
the way back to Washington through slave states.
And so he wrote this novel about a woman who looked white, but when it was discovered
she had just a tiny bit of African blood, her life radically changed.
Because now she was black even though she looked white.
Probably not one of the great novels ever written and I might add that Beaumont attached
appendices and essays to this novel so it didn't just come out as a piece of fiction.
Nevertheless, it was well received, it's in print, it's in English in print in the United
States and it's an interesting book and it gives us another way of seeing what could
be produced by a young Frenchman coming to the United States in 1831.
Well the second important person Tocqueville met during these years in Versailles was an
English woman named Mary Motley and after his return from America he married Mary Motley.
He was married to an English woman, she was Protestant but converted to Catholicism when
they were married and as far as we can tell it was a reasonably happy marriage although
we know that Tocqueville, he is French after all, had a series of mistresses.
Well in some ways everything is going swimmingly for elections to Tocqueville and then in 1830
there is a kind of revolution in France, the king is deposed and a new king is brought
in in his place.
Charles X was overthrown and the house of Orléans comes to the throne of France.
Tocqueville was asked, as was everybody, to take an oath of loyalty to this new regime
and he did although he was somewhat uncomfortable.
He also was promised a job, a substitute judge job, in other words the next step on his road
into the bureaucracy of France but he and Beaumont decide they want to travel to America
and Beaumont had written a report already on the condition of prisons in France which
were apparently by any standard, really bad and since there was a new kind of prison that
had been developed in Philadelphia and in Auburn New York, two versions of a new system we
call the penitentiary system, that is to say a place where inmates are supposed to
become penitent for their sins and crimes and therefore leave not planning to do those
things again, since this new system had developed in America, Tocqueville and Beaumont came
up with this great idea, let's go to America and let's get the French government to sponsor
us, it turned out they didn't pay for, let's get the French government to sponsor us to
go to America.
We get a leave of absence from our job of 18 months and we get all kinds of letters
of introduction so that when we get to the United States we can meet pretty much whomever
we want, again Beaumont and Tocqueville met two presidents and many, many other famous
people as we will see when I document the voyage in more detail in the next lecture,
so they go off to America to study prisons and in a broader sense as Tocqueville says
in his writings at the time, what we really wanted to do was study democracy.
Now how did Tocqueville prepare for this trip?
Well the easy answer is we don't quite know, however we do know that he read a French novel
that was based on a trip to America by its author Chateaubriand and we know that he read
James Fenimore Cooper's Leather Stocking Tales.
He's going to do a lot more homework as he travels and a lot more homework when he gets
back and prepares to write democracy in America.
They arrive in the United States on the 11th of May in 1831 and they sail home on February
the 20th, 1832 and so that's the part of his life I'm now going to skip because that's
what the entire next lecture is about that time when he is in America.
When they got back they had a job to do, they had to write a report on the prison systems
in America and indeed they did, it was published in 1833 and again it's been translated into
English and it's still in print, just about everything Tocqueville has written in English
and in print and it's called, it's a good title because it reminds us what Tocqueville
is going to be doing in his later book, it's called On the Penitentiary System in the United
States and its application to France.
This is not just a descriptive piece nor is it simply an analysis of American prisons
and its application to France, that's also going to be important when Tocqueville writes
democracy in America.
Interestingly enough Tocqueville didn't write most of the book, that is say Beaumont as
Tocqueville himself said was the principal author and he really was the secondary author.
The book won a prize from the French Academy, it put Tocqueville on the radar screen.
By the way it's worth saying as we now move to the publication of great books on the part
of Alexis to Tocqueville, he was awfully young when he did this.
When Tocqueville came to America he was 25 years old, I always asked myself what was
I doing when I was 25 and the answer was not doing the research for an earth shattering
book.
I mean he's a young guy and we can see that he's a young guy at the time that he comes
to America by portraits that were painted of him about that time and even some drawings
that Beaumont made when they were traveling around the United States which appear by the
way in some of the modern English translations of democracy in America.
So I always remember the great line that Tom Lehrer had in one of his songs that he
said when Mozart was my age he'd been dead nine years, remind you how little you've accomplished
in life.
Well I know how old I am when Tocqueville went to America at the age 25 what was I doing?
I was still a graduate student.
I hadn't written a thesis yet let alone something as profound as democracy in America that intellectually
there was a kind of maturity to Tocqueville that really is stunning by almost any standard.
Between 1833 and 1840 Tocqueville was primarily focused on writing democracy in America although
he traveled to England before he wrote the first half which was published in 1835.
He went to see the results of the reform bill of 1832 and then between the first and second
volumes he in Beaumont went to England and Ireland to look at things.
He also did as I suggested some homework when he got back from his trip to America.
For example he carefully read the Federalist papers.
Again today we are used to reading a couple of them perhaps numbers 10 and 31 in a lot
of political science and history courses but he thought very carefully about the Constitution
not because the Constitution defined democracy.
Democracy is more than a set of institutions but obviously that's where you start and in
fact later on in this course I will be doing a lecture that deals with his understanding
of his interpretation of the U.S. Constitution very much influenced by the Federalist papers.
He read commentaries on the Constitution but one of the interesting things is he did not
read in preparation for writing democracy in America.
He did not read what we might call contemporary literature even though a lot of it was available
in France he didn't read the newest novel of the newest book about America he really did
focus on sort of commentaries the Federalist papers and whatever and he will cite some
of these infrequently in democracy in America but there are certain books we might have
expected him to read as a guy interested in America and living in France and a guy
who obviously could read English where it just seems that there's no evidence that he
read them or cared about them.
There are in other words we might say some holes in the way he developed his picture
intellectually speaking of America.
The first volume in 1835 was a huge success and he won another prize from the French Academy.
It took him longer to write the second volume than it did the first.
There were several reasons for this as I mentioned already Tocqueville and Beaumont went to England
and Ireland also during this period Tocqueville got married again to the English woman Mary
Motley and presumably that took a little bit of time and energy along the route.
In 1836 Tocqueville inherited the family Chateau born of a minor noble family he inherited
the family Chateau in 1836 in the village of Tocqueville about 15 kilometers from the
city of Cherbourg in Normandy and then he decided to run for office to run for a seat
in the French National Assembly that is to say the legislative body of France.
He was first unsuccessful but in 1839 just as he was finishing the second volume of democracy
in America he indeed was elected as a deputy and he remained in the legislative branch
of the French government until 1852.
In 1840 the second volume of democracy in America appeared and it was printed with the
first volume.
In other words these were not conceived as two separate works but rather the second was
kind of a completion of the first and if I could make a very gross generalization about
the two volumes the first one in the narrow sense of the word is somewhat more political
the second one somewhat more social in its look at America and American values and American
government and mores.
At the same time that the second volume came out an English translation appeared the first
volume had come out in England not long after it was published in French in 1835 the second
volume came out in translation almost immediately because the translator and Tocqueville were
working together this wasn't something that independent of Tocqueville but this was coming
out in England and very shortly after that time obviously there was need for that English
translation to be printed in America and so as I mentioned in lecture one a guy that
I'm interested in John C. Spencer of Cannondale, New York took on that job got the English
translation to be published in America with his introduction and his notes most of those
notes correcting some technical errors that Tocqueville made about the legal system in
America and a couple of the notes correcting more broad kinds of errors that Spencer detected
in Tocqueville Spencer is the earliest English commentator therefore on Tocqueville and although
brief it seems to me he's still one of the best.
Let's look for a minute now at Tocqueville's rather interesting legislative career in France
again 1839 to 1852 he is a part of the French government first of all he did not join an
existing political party he remained independent he looked at political parties in America
he knew about political parties from what Madison said in the Federalist papers and
from what other political writers had said in the past and didn't like political parties
until he remained independent he had a couple we might say specializations as a legislator
and I think we can see where these are coming from number one he was interested in prison
reform and had a lot to say about it obviously as the author of that book or at least a co-author
of that book secondly he was in favor of abolishing slavery like Beaumont he had been appalled
by slavery and what slavery did not just to the slaves but what slavery did to the slave
holders again that's something we will explore in more detail a little bit later on perhaps
because Tocqueville came to believe so much in the necessity of the freedom of the press
for a democracy Tocqueville in the 1840s bought a newspaper within a year it went bankrupt
that wasn't very successful when the king of France Louis Philippe advocated in 1848
Tocqueville was appointed as part of a committee to draw up a new constitution for France and
it's really interesting to see the contributions that he made or tried to make the French constitution
number one he fought unsuccessfully to have in the constitution a bicameral legislature
he had been convinced by his experiences in America that that was a good way to legislate
and yet the committee of which he was a part rejected that he was successful however in
other elements he was successful in getting the committee to agree to have a four year
term for an elected president of France and so Tocqueville had the chance to be a rare
chance to be a constitution maker not always successfully not always getting his way and
we see the influence of his experiences in America there in 1849 under Louis Napoleon
for a brief period Tocqueville was appointed as the minister of foreign affairs what we
would call of call in America secretary of state he didn't last very long just a few months
and as it turns out most of his time was focused on Italy and some of the things that were
going on in Rome this is the time of the beginnings of the Risorgimento and this is during the
pontificate of Pope Pius the ninth although he's regarded as someone who helped to keep
peace in Italy keep things from exploding nevertheless he tried hard by diplomatic means to influence
Pope Pius the ninth to establish democratic liberal institutions in Rome in the Papal
state and he was in that unsuccessful in 1851 Louis Napoleon pulled off a coup d'etat got rid
of the Constitution and ultimately became emperor under the name Napoleon the third he sees control
the state Tocqueville was in fact like Beaumont very briefly imprisoned and in 1852 Tocqueville
retired from an active political life he was still in his 40s his health had never been
very good he continued to travel he had begun a book called the recollections about the events
of 1848 and 1849 in France although the book was only published posthumously his principal
activity was to undertake the writing of a history of the French Revolution entitled
the old regime and the revolution which by the way is still in print in fact in a brand new
English translation it's still regarded as a great classic as I said he was not in very good health
he traveled around trying to get healthy in nice healthy places none of them worked very well
he died in 1859 at the age of 53 and is buried in the cemetery of the village of Tocqueville
in Normandy so this is the life fairly brief life and a fairly unhealthy life
physically of this man of such great profundity and insight a man who wasn't a very good public
speaker a man who seemed to have been sort of soft-spoken and and whatever and yet a person
who wrote with brilliance and with passion nobody ever reads or confined the speeches of
Alexis de Tocqueville apparently some of them were real put to sleepers but when he picked up his pen
whether he wrote about the french revolution or whether he was going on about the election of the
president of the united states or slavery or prisons in america he wrote with a passion
and a brilliance that have made him one of the most quoted people in the american experience
and one of the very very finest commentators on our nation and our lives as americans
