Let me begin with a couple technical details that we want to look at as we begin our 21
years of examination of the text of democracy of America in America. Number one is that
we're going to use obviously a translation. I'm not going to be reading to you in French.
There are several good translations of democracy in America that are available. And therefore
my choice is not quite arbitrary, but one doesn't have to buy a particular translation.
In fact, the entire 1840 translation is on the web and therefore can be accessed for
nothing. The translation I've chosen to use is by Mansfield and Winthrop published by
the University of Chicago. That's this big, thick volume that I am wielding in my very
hands as I speak. It's out in paperback as well as hardback. But again, there are several
other good translations. And since Tocqueville breaks things into a lot of hunks and sub-hunks
you will be able to follow along if you want to whatever translation you might have. That's
an important point to make at the beginning. Secondly, I'm not going to go through the
book exactly in the order in which Tocqueville wrote things. I'm going to try to follow some
themes and therefore I will be physically as well as metaphorically flipping back and
forth from time to time. So we're not going to do page one, then page two, then page three
all the way to page six hundred and sixty-eight. But rather I'm going to be selective and I'm
going to do some skipping around to put together some broad thematic talks about this great
book. This is really an important book. I can't stress it enough because first of all,
nobody would deny that it's one of the great books ever written about democracy and one
of the great books ever written about America. And one thing it seems to me we need to do
as citizens of the democracy is to be self-reflective, to think about our nation, where it is, who
we are as a people, not just the institutions of government and not just at election time,
but we really need to look at our society as a democratic society and a democratic culture.
We have to ask where we want to move on the basis of what our final goals are and our
understandings are of the purpose of a free and participatory society like ours. And therefore
it's important to have a guide for reflection. There are many guides, but this is an awfully
good guide for reflection. If you don't always like, and I don't always like, Tocqueville's
answers, you've got to love his questions. You've got to love the stimulating nature of
this book and making you think about some very hard questions that all devout small
D Democrats ought to be asking themselves constantly. But in some ways this book to
me has become even more immediately important in our society because whatever we feel about
particular American policies, we as a nation of America are trying to build democracies
in other places. And we're doing that perhaps in a more obvious and formal way than we have
in a while. We're not just advocating democracy around the world. We're trying to make it
happen through some very specific actions. And to do that, we have to ask what in America
is transferable to other cultures with other histories and what isn't? What are the most
fundamental things? And what are secondary and tertiary in importance? What kind of education
is needed to create not just democratic institutions, but what Tocqueville himself calls the habits
of the heart, which make a democracy more than a form of government, but a way of life?
I can't think of a time in American history when reading a book like Democracy America
in America has been more important than it is at the beginning of the 21st century in
the United States of America. Let me read you the beginning of this great book.
Among the new objects that attracted my attention during my stay in the United States, none
struck my eye more vividly than the equality of conditions. I discovered without difficulty
the enormous influence that this primary fact exerts on the course of society. It gives
a certain direction to public spirit, a certain turn to the laws, new maxims to those who
govern and particular habits to the governed. Wow, what a paragraph. We had to do a few
lectures just on that paragraph, perhaps, because it's so full of important things.
First of all, and Tocqueville will come back this over and over again, what is the number
one foundational pillar of democracy? It is equality. I raise that because when most Americans
I think are asked that question today, give me the bottom line of democracy. I think most
of us would almost automatically say freedom, liberty, individual freedom, some form of
that idea. And Tocqueville is going to talk about how important liberty is. Don't get
me wrong, we're not going to ignore that issue at all. But he said when you get right down
to it, and perhaps this is in part influenced by the fact he is from an aristocratic family
in a nation that has a dying aristocracy. What he says I notice first and foremost the
primary fact of democracy is equality of conditions. Now clearly he doesn't mean everybody has
the same amount of money or the same amount of land. He doesn't mean that in an economic
sense. But what I think he does mean is in America there are no formal categories at
birth. You make your own categories. You aren't given any legal privileges because of who
daddy and mommy are, or how much land you own, or where you're from, or how long your
family's been in America. That we are born in a sense equal. We might perhaps not quite
but sort of equate this idea of equality of conditions with what we often today call equality
of opportunity, not equality of result. And I think this is a fundamentally important
thing that we too often ignore. When we are looking at ourselves and especially when we
are looking to implement or encourage or develop democracy in other places. We so often ignore
or at least we reduce the importance of equality of conditions to a secondary level. Tocqueville
I believe would think that's sort of crazy. You're sort of missing the point if you think
that you can focus solely on liberty because as I'm going to point out later Tocqueville
says there can be liberty without equality. And ultimately he says we need to focus on
this principle of equality of conditions. The second thing he says in this first paragraph
is that democracy is not just a form of government. Very important thing to remember. How do you
know where democracy the answer is? Well, we all get to vote or look at our constitution.
What we all know in the world today, how many nations have democratic constitutions that
are hardly democracies. You need a democratic constitution and Tocqueville, again, is a
lawyer. He's had a lot of time writing about the constitution. But a constitution doesn't
make a democracy. A democracy is not just a form of government. Democracy is a way
of life. It affects everything. He's going to talk about the democratic family, for example.
Democracy permeates our private as well as our public selves because there's a relationship
between our public and private selves. And therefore democracy is an all-encompassing
way of life, not merely a form of government. Those are two fundamental things, equality
conditions and how democracy permeates all of our lives that are right there in paragraph
one of this great book. Paragraph two. Soon I recognize that this same fact extends its
influence well beyond political mores and laws, something I've been talking about, and
that it gains no less dominion over civil society than over government. It creates opinions,
give birth to sentiments, suggests usages and modifies everything it does not produce. Again
this emphasizes that democracy as a way of life. Let me read you paragraph three. Then
I'm going to skip some stuff. So therefore, as I studied American society more and more,
I saw in equality of conditions the generative fact from which each particular fact seemed
to issue. And I found it before me that constantly as a central point at which all of my observations
came to an end. Again, these next two paragraphs, therefore, reinforce that first paragraph,
equality of conditions, democracy as a way of life. Tocqueville then goes on just a few
pages later to make a very brief statement that also is important for us understanding
this book. A new political science is needed for a world all together in a way that is
new. Although the movement toward equality of conditions, Tocqueville can trace back
to feudal society in Europe. We've arrived at a point where the world is new. America
is new. The French Revolution has occurred. Again, by the time he writes this book, the
great piece of British legislation, the reform bill of 1832, has been passed. The world is
new. He isn't saying ignore the old stuff that's been written. He doesn't say tear up
your Aristotle, put away your Montesquieu. He doesn't say that at all. He relies on those
authors to a great extent in his analysis. What he says is the world is new enough. We
have to ask new questions, create new categories, have new ways of looking at government and
human life and the relationship between government and human life. And as I suggested in my introductory
lecture, that new political science, in real sense, starts with this book. Not only does
he say we need a new political science, he sets out, in a sense, to invent it, or at
least to be a pioneer of this new political science. It's not just another book on America.
It's not just another book on political theory. It is a new political science, he says, for
a new era. Now, democracy in America didn't come out of nowhere. And in fact, he said
some of the important bases for American democracy came from Europe. Here are a couple examples.
First of all, he says Christian teaching supports equality of conditions. But he says Christian
institutions often don't. Reading the Gospel is perhaps a kind of exercise in democracy
as he ultimately understands especially the Christian message of the New Testament. But
that doesn't mean that that's what's taught in doctrine or from the pulpit necessarily.
So, there is a kind of Christian basis to this disposition for democracy that develops
in America. Secondly, he says these British settlers in New England, the pilgrims and
the ones who followed, they came from England and England had vibrant local government at
the township level. They had their grand juries and they had their sheriffs and they had these
local institutions that existed. And Tocqueville is going to argue that democracy to work has
to have vibrant local government because that's where you participate directly. Most Americans,
I suppose, have never been to Washington and many have never been to their state capitol
or met a member of their state legislature or the congressional delegation. But if they're
going to understand democracy and participate in it other than going to the voting booth
every once in a while, they'll be doing that participation locally. We know that at school
board meetings, at town or village meetings, at planning board meetings. We know how those
things are. I live in a small town of about 5,000 when our students are not there anyway.
And therefore, I live very close to my local government. You wave to the mayor and the
town supervisor and the president of the school board on a first name basis as you
walk down the street and so does almost everybody else. So Tocqueville says this local government
vibrancy, which is so central, can be traced back especially to England. Again, he's going
to say France is going the same way as America. It's not going to take quite the same path
and it's not as far along, but it's going the same general direction. And once again,
the Americans have emphasized and will continue to emphasize, therefore, he's interested in
how can the French adapt what he learns in America? How can he provide a kind of road
map, not the American road map, but a road map informed by the American experience for
the French? Tocqueville also argues, however, that there's still, even in good old democratic
America, some aristocratic holdovers. Even in America, the job isn't complete in equality
of conditions. Here are a couple examples he gives. He says that setting bail for people
accused of crimes and for having fines as punishment, those are aristocratic holdovers.
Bail favors rich people because they can post the bail and poor people can't post the bail.
And so there are, and he will basically say inevitably, are going to be some holdovers
from the aristocratic world from which the settlers in America came. That's one example.
He also will say more generally, that the South has more aristocratic elements to it
than the North. That the real birth of the equality of conditions in America is in New
England. And even though he sees the enormous influence of New England throughout the United
States, whether it's in the South or in the West, which he explores, nevertheless, still
he can make a distinction between the South and the North, the South being somewhat more
aristocratic. Or to use his own language, the colors of aristocracy, he says, still show
through in America. Let me emphasize that Tocqueville says directly, maybe I inferred
it up to now, but the Tocqueville says directly that equality and not freedom is the number
one concern of Americans. Let me just read you a brief passage. But freedom is not the
principle and continuous object of the desire, of their desire. What they love with an eternal
love is equality. Again, it's not that they don't love, meaning we Americans, it's not
that we don't love both. We love equality, we love freedom, but ultimately equality is
first on our list of loves, he says, at that time. And it's important, again, to make that
distinction. It's the idea that rights descend to the least of citizens. The poor, slob, and
the richest, brilliantly educated person have a certain way in which they share the equality
of conditions. And that's what's essential to America. He also talks about democracy
this way. There's a belief in the United States that there is more wisdom in the collective
view of many than there is in the one. We trust ourselves more than we trust any leader, if
you will, no matter how smart that leader is. This is, Tocqueville says, the theory of equality
applied to the intellect. We really believe in America that collective judgments work, that
they lead to progress. They have a certain stability and order, even though we know how
fickle majorities can be. He's going to talk a lot about the fickleness of the majority. But
nevertheless, Americans believe in this basic equality, we can all judge together better
than any one person can judge over time, not in any particular instance, obviously, but
over time. Now, one of the obvious things for Tocqueville, or any writer about democracy
in America to do, is to talk about the relationship between those ancient societies, the Republic
of Rome, and the democracy of Athens, and how they are or are not precursors for the American
democracy. By and large, Tocqueville does not think that they are really all that important
to understanding America. He says, first of all, both Republican Rome, we're talking about
not the Roman Empire, but the Republican period, both Republican Rome and ancient Athens were
very small, homogeneous societies. And people could and did change their opinions collectively
often. Books were rare at that time, and all books were for connoisseurs. Most people, if
you will, who voted in the ancient Athenian assembly, he would say, probably never read
a book. And yet he's so impressed when he travels around America, he said, I can walk
into the rudest log cabin, and I'll find a Bible, maybe a play of Shakespeare. Very importantly,
I find newspapers. I always find newspapers. This is a nation of readers. And that in and
of itself makes the American experience very different than the Athenian and Roman experience.
So size, complexity, and many other reasons, he says, it's not that it's a bad idea to
go back and review what the Romans and the Greeks did after all. Our own founding fathers
did that, rejecting some ideas and taking others. As we know, if we read about, if we
read Madison or read some of the Federalist papers or whatever. But ultimately, he says,
they aren't a very good direct model for understanding America, nor are they the direct antecedents
of American democracy. For that, again, we look to Europe. We look to the Bible. We
look to English local government and so on. Tocqueville turns to the question, are there
really distinctions between freedom and equality? In other words, don't they go together sort
of like a horse and carriage to use that old saw? And Tocqueville argues no. Equality and
freedom are different. Let me try to illustrate that by reading a passage from Democracy in
America. Equality can be established in civil society and not reign in the political world.
One could have the right to indulge in the same pleasures, to enter the same professions,
to meet in the same places, in a word, to live in the same manner and pursue wealth by
the same means without having all take part in government. So that equality, we can have
sort of an equality in our social lives, even what we might call an economic equality of
opportunity, but it doesn't necessarily extend to equality in terms of our political rights
and our political opportunities. So once again, as he wants to focus in on equality of conditions,
he wants to say, don't just lump equality and liberty together. They're related. They're
closely related, but they're not the same thing. And we need to know what the separation,
we know what the distinctions are if we're really going to be able to analyze their relationship.
You can't get the relationship between two things right if you don't have each one right
individually. And so he makes several interesting distinctions. There can be equality that does
not penetrate, he says, into political institutions. He says there can be equality without freedom
in general. He says, for example, everyone can be equal under a despot. But there can
also be freedom without equality. Let me read you still another passage. Freedom has manifested
itself to men in different times and in different forms. It is not attached exclusively to one
social state and one encounters it elsewhere than in democracies. It therefore cannot form
the distinctive characteristic of democratic centuries. We can find times where there's
equality, but not freedom. We can find time when there's freedom, but not equality. Again,
it may sound like we're nitpicking. It may sound like we're trying to divide things that
really do seem inextricably linked. But Tocqueville says no. And if we're going to talk about American
democracy intelligently and carefully, we've got to define the terms, make the distinctions and
figure out the relationships between these things. This is a good thing to ponder. This is a good
thing to meditate upon. What is a relationship between our lives as living a kind of equality
and our lives in individual freedom? How are those related? How are they different? And again,
we obviously know we have big doses of both. Tocqueville knows we have big doses of both
in 1831. If you're looking at a society that has no experience with democracy,
where there is no history to root itself in, where do you start?
When you have to put the building blocks in one at a time, which building block do you put in
first? It seems to me that Tocqueville makes an argument that equality is even more fundamental
than personal liberty, although again, they will ultimately have to be together. I would suggest
that's an important thing for us to think about as individuals. It's an important thing for policymakers
to think about, especially as we have very self-consciously been asking ourselves as a nation,
how do we build a democracy almost from scratch? A problem that France didn't have to deal with,
a problem that America didn't have to deal with, but this kind of very careful,
detailed analysis I would argue is useful. Tocqueville also says that in some ways the
maintenance of liberty and equality and the experience of liberty and equality are somewhat
different. Equality, he says, brings small daily pleasures. We can understand that. You walk down
the street and you are equal to everybody else. There's nobody you have to bow to, nobody you
have to call by a title, nobody you have to tip your cap to. As I had to tip my cap to all the
sophomores, juniors and seniors when I was a freshman in college, we are equal in America.
Equality reminds us or brings that to the fore daily. We see that equality in the little things
of our lives. On the other hand, he says, freedom requires sacrifices. To be free and to remain
free means you have to give some stuff, means you have to work at it. It doesn't just maintain itself.
Freedom requires sacrifices. And then he goes on to say equality is about the elimination of
barriers. That's another good way to think about it. Another good phrase that he uses. It's about
the elimination of barriers between people. Tocqueville says there are no servants in America.
There are employees, but there are no servants. He also says very interestingly in one place,
do you notice he says that nobody uses the word peasant to refer to any American? We talk about
European peasants, you have French peasants, Italian peasants, whatever it is. We have people
who do the same thing back in 1831 or now for that matter that Italian or French peasants or
Cambodian peasants do for that matter. We don't call them peasants. We call them farmers. We call
them agricultural workers. We don't call them peasants. That it's breaking down that barrier
that occurs between people. He also says that equality brings about a softening of our...
He means this in a positive way. A softening of the way we define morality because it produces
greater sensitivity in us. Whoever I'm dealing with, that person is equal to me in some real,
fundamental way. May not have as much money. May not have as many degrees as I have, but I'm
dealing with equals. Nobody has to tip their cap or call me by my title. That's not required
in America. People choose to do it. That's a different thing, but it's not required.
And therefore, since everybody is my equal, I am more sensitive to a variety of human experiences,
human tragedies and whatever that I might otherwise be because I might say,
that doesn't happen to people like me, but I'm like everybody in America because we have a quality
of conditions. Tocqueville says, again, not perfectly, but to a great extent. And therefore,
our moral values are not shaped by, but influenced by that equality and the way we respond to other
people who might be our legal inferiors and other cultures who are not in America. Tocqueville says,
however, there's some ironies. We love a quality of conditions in America, and he said, everybody
in America is eager to trace their ancestors back to the Mayflower. That kind of interesting irony.
We all want to have that ancestor that stepped on the Plymouth Rock. We all want to be able to
sort of puff up our chest a little bit and say, well, you know, I belong to this organization
because, you know, my great, great, great granddaddy was a pilgrim or a revolutionary war veteran,
or whatever it might be. Tocqueville finds that somewhat ironic that everybody wants to be related
to somebody who stepped off the Mayflower. Tocqueville also asked this question. Doesn't
this equality produce a kind of revolutionary quality in Americans? Don't you constantly want
to say, damn it, not everybody's my equal. I'm better than somebody. Doesn't this make you want
to establish something where you can be sort of singled out, where you can have some privilege in
society? We all want privileges because none of us has privileges. And Tocqueville basically
says no to that. He says, first of all, this equality means everybody has something to lose
if you rearrange things a lot. We all have something to lose in terms of status and in
terms of economic wealth as well. No, Tocqueville says, if there's going to be a revolution in
America, it's not going to come from among the equal, trying to sort of up their equality,
my equality is better than your equality, if you will. It's going to come by people who have
experienced genuine inequality and in particular, he says, it's going to come by from people of
African descent because the slaves obviously aren't included in this whole notion of the equality
of conditions. It's inequality, not equality that stirs up revolution in a democratic society.
A very interesting conclusion. So when we begin to look at this book, what we are looking at is
that we should never put aside whatever the topic of equality of conditions. We should never put
that aside as a central theme. And I think if we do, if we play by Tocqueville's own rules,
if you will, as we go along, I think we're going to see the power of his argument in a number of
different contexts. And as I said before, I think making the distinction between liberty
and between equality is going to provide us with some tools of analysis and observation.
Whether we ultimately buy them or not, they're going to be useful in America and in the world
in the 21st century.
