Lecture 17, Mores and Democracy
Early in democracy in America, Alexis de Tocqueville lists three primary reasons why America
has maintained and presumably will maintain its democracy.
Number one, he talks about the accidents of the American experience.
That is to say, the particular geography and history that are the origins and setting
for democracy in America.
Secondly, he talks about American laws and in particular the Constitution, which as
we have seen, he admires a great deal.
Third, and most importantly, he says, are America's mores.
It's important to note that of these three, of course, we've already talked about the
first two.
Now we're going to talk about what he says is the most important of all, American mores.
And of course, to begin with, we have to define what he means by that.
This is one of those places where you might be interested to know what the French word
is that is always translated as more, it's M-O-E-U-R-S.
And I think that mores is the right translation, except we don't use that word all the time.
It isn't the same thing as morals, as people use that term today.
So let me see if we can figure out, if Tocqueville can help us figure out, what he is using as
his working definition of the term.
First of all, he says, it's similar to, and this is a term of Tocqueville's that's used
over and over again nowadays, habits of the heart.
We're not any longer talking about forms of government or political activities.
We're talking about deep down inside the American, the democratic spirit, are these habits of
the heart.
And before we go on, I think it's worth saying that, as I've already suggested several times,
when we look at countries in the world that are trying to form democracies, that have
very little democratic background, it is a sobering thought for people who come from
countries like America with long democratic traditions to listen to Tocqueville say what
matters most, what matters more than the constitution, more than the geography you have, are the habits
of the heart that people carry with them.
The sort of deep down inside, maybe even often unspoken principles from which they operate.
Because what we know is, it's relatively easy to provide a nation with a democratic constitution.
But obviously that constitution doesn't create, certainly not right away, it doesn't create
habits of the heart.
And again, Tocqueville says this is the most important reason why a democracy can be maintained.
Not created, but maintained.
Another way that Tocqueville uses to talk about this term, he says mores are rooted in notions
and opinions.
These are the sum of the ideas from which our habits of behavior are formed.
Often they're unspoken, they're not really very precise, they're hard to get at.
And I want to add parenthetically, parenthetically getting myself off the hook of course, that
this lecture may seem a little bit more catch as catch can, a little bit less precisely organized
than some of the others, because we're dealing with a very hard to pin down topic.
It's easy to talk about the constitution in a sense.
Let's talk about the legislature, let's talk about the judiciary, and so forth.
It is much harder to pin down what those habits of the heart are and how various habits of
the heart are related to one another.
So again, this may seem a little bit squishy compared to some of the things we've done
in other lectures.
But I think it comes from the nature of the beast that we're trying to uncover and discover
and perhaps even dissect.
Now let me also say that this lecture goes together rather closely as we'll see with
the next one, which is about religion in America, because one of the origins, probably the most
important for Tocqueville, of all the origins of habits of the heart is religion.
And of course, Christianity in its various forms in America.
I'll come back to that more than once just to mention it in this lecture, but as we'll
see in the next lecture, when we look at Christianity in America from Tocqueville's perspective,
it too will help to come back and supplement what I'm saying here.
So these two need to be seen as something of a package, just as the two were, for example,
on political and civil associations.
Tocqueville says that one of those habits of the heart in America, not all of which,
by the way, he's terribly fond of, but one of the habits of the heart is Americans prefer
specifics to generals.
They like details rather than general ideas.
He says, for example, the world gives, I'm sorry, America gives the world political examples
rather than political lessons.
It's a very interesting notion.
It also says a great deal about the book, Democracy in America.
If America gives examples rather than lessons, then Tocqueville's job in writing to the French
is to take some of those lessons and turn them, or take some of those details rather,
and turn them into lessons, turn them into principles, discover what's behind them.
If Tocqueville's right, it also is another one of those reminders that however much the
principles of democracy are exportable, the necessary practices are not exportable because
they go into places with different geographies and different histories and different sizes
and all the rest of that.
And what he says is probably that people other than Americans are better than Americans
themselves at deducing those principles.
Americans are great democratic actors, but the analysis of the activities of Americans
are something Americans themselves aren't very good at.
Again, we can understand therefore the value of a foreigner like Tocqueville coming along
and writing a book like this.
He says democratic people are suspicious of intellectual systems and like to stay close
to the facts.
I'm of the era that grew up watching dragnet on television, the original dragnet.
And of course we all remember one of the great one liners of Sergeant Joe Friday when he
would knock on the door to ask somebody some questions, he would look at her, it was always
a her who answered the door it seemed, and said, just the facts ma'am.
Well, Tocqueville says that's a very American attitude.
Give me the facts.
Don't give me broad and general opinions, give me the facts.
It's interesting that this book, Democracy in America, this 700 page book essentially,
is one of very few facts and very many generalizations.
I think perhaps we could say there are a couple reasons for that.
Number one, Tocqueville himself of course comes from an aristocratic background where
he is perhaps more comfortable.
He would say in the realm of generalities.
Secondly, again his job is to take the actions, the facts of his American tour and turn them
into broader principles and understanding.
So in a sense he is responding to this habit of the heart of the love of generalizations.
Tocqueville says by the way, there are some dangers implicit in a just the facts ma'am
kind of habit of the heart.
He says if Americans fail to pay attention to principles and only look at results they
could become incapable of change.
They could become frozen because they don't in a sense stand back far enough and view their
day to day activities in the broadest possible term.
In fact he makes a comparison, probably one he doesn't know a lot about I might add.
He said they can become incapable of change just as the Chinese in his day are.
Now he's never been to China and doesn't know a great deal about East Asia certainly.
But that's his observation of China and oddly enough he says that America although certainly
China is not democratic, America could become like China.
They could end up being the same although they came from very different directions and
got there by very different means.
So it's a warning to the Americans.
He says also the Americans filling in this same kind of way of thinking Americans prefer
the useful to the beautiful and they believe that beautiful things must be useful.
So that in a sense we like beautiful gadgets, we like well designed useful things and Americans
have more trouble having and appreciating and enjoying things that are simply beautiful
but not useful.
Art for Art's sake if you will isn't a very American and Tocqueville thinks a very democratic
idea.
That everything Tocqueville says that the Americans have need to be useful.
Now whether that is a democratic habit, whether that is a habit of a nation that's still in
a sense taming a wild land, we need to remember that after all Tocqueville went to the frontier
and that this is still a frontier society.
The westward movement has already started and it's going to go on a lot longer time.
Whether Tocqueville can say this is something that is a phase of American life or this is
something democratic, those are very hard distinctions to make when you're an observer
traveling around rather quickly.
In fact just the other day somebody who had read Tocqueville a long time ago said to me
wasn't Tocqueville in the United States at least three years, he said no, you know about
ten months and wow he must have done an awful lot of stuff and he did.
And even though these are his considered opinions this is in fact in the second volume where
he talks about some of these habits of the heart in particular not written till 1840
or at least not published until then, nine years after his trip.
Nevertheless we need to remember how difficult that trip was, how long that trip was, how
many miles, how many interviews that his first purpose was to in fact visit the prisons
of America.
We want to realize that sometimes even when he observes a phenomenon correctly he doesn't
always necessarily succeed in distinguishing between what is America due to its specific
physical and other circumstances and what is a democratic habit.
These are very hard things to do.
Now although Tocqueville says Americans don't like intellectual systems, they do like he
says facile generalizations.
It's not that Americans never speak broadly, it is that they don't speak broadly and deeply.
They make easy generalizations presumably not rooted in some sort of consistent coherent
philosophical position.
And therefore there's a certain shallowness and randomness to American generalizations.
They like to generalize, Tocqueville says, but by and large Americans aren't very profound
at generalization.
So he's concerned about the fact that Americans are uncomfortable with intellectual systems.
I think what he believes is that for Americans there's something sort of elitist and aristocratic
about broad intellectual systems that only a small and elite number of people can really
study and understand.
And I think that Tocqueville sees that as in many people's minds inimical to the equality
of conditions which is after all the great condition of democracy.
And so he somewhat worries about this and we'll come back to this a little bit more
when in a couple lectures in the future I will talk about education and culture more
specifically.
Let's turn to another way that Tocqueville sees America's habits of the heart forming.
He says there's something of a frontier crudeness and urbanity in America.
And he doesn't mean there's an urbane crowd and there's a frontier crowd, he means that
to a great extent they're the same crowd.
That he is struck by both the crudeness and the urbanity that exist in the same people
in the same times.
And from this he seems to have drawn largely from his experiences in the West, which of
course for us means Michigan and Green Bay, Wisconsin and so on.
He says in a rude cabin, a log cabin, people wear the clothes and speak the language of
the city.
They know the past, they concern themselves with the future and they argue about the present.
The setting may be crude, but nevertheless there is this kind of urbanity that he discovers.
And he says you know what you'll find in a cabin, well you'll find a hatchet, a Bible
and newspapers.
An interesting combination of things, a hatchet, a Bible and newspapers, that Americans if
you will combine certain kinds of qualities that are associated with different categories
of people.
Again, how much of that is the geography, the American experience, attaining of the wilderness?
It's hard to say, we're not into a quantifiable part of things here when we're discussing
the habits of the heart, the mores of America.
But he does find this interesting kind of American who will you know have big muscles
and go out and hack down some trees and plow a field and then come home and put on better
clothes and read a passage from the Bible and stay informed in the newspaper, go into
town and hang out in the public square and discuss the political issues of the day.
How do you think of President Jackson doing this and that and then you go home, put on
your router clothes again and go out and plow some more or hatchet some more or whatever
it might be.
This pioneer, this frontiersman who of course may do this if you recall, two or three times
in his life.
You may move from Connecticut to New York to Ohio, you may end up dying in Illinois.
In a town that you named for the town you were growing up in in New York state.
So Tocqueville is sort of fascinated by this sort of combination of factors in many Americans
whom he met.
He also, and again I will talk about this in more detail a little bit later on, he also
notes that on Sunday families go to church and commerce, which Americans love, commerce
is abandoned.
What happens in church?
I've already suggested that Tocqueville talks about the fact that in Protestant churches
in particular there's a lot more morals and doctrine preached from the pulpit.
So he says what people learn in church, the habit they develop if you will in church is
that they are to regulate their desires and they are not to covet.
Not coveting is a very important commandment if you will in America because Tocqueville
says the Americans do love material prosperity, they're rather over fond of it in fact.
They are somewhat acquisitive of material goods and things that make them comfortable
and therefore regulating desires and learning not to covet are particularly important principles
from church, from Christianity that they hear about in church, preachers in other words
recognize what their audience needs and which they take home with them.
And he said you know what Americans do when they get home from church on a Sunday?
That's really surprising to remember Tocqueville's Catholic from France.
They go home after church and they read the Bible.
So that what happens in church continues for much of Sunday and again it's the Bible that
helps to shape these habits of the heart.
Tocqueville makes another really interesting comment about language and habits of the heart.
He says Americans never refer to any other Americans as peasants.
You know even today we'll talk about going to take a vacation to southern Italy and we'll
see the peasants out in the field.
So we'll use that term for what we would today call other first world countries and of course
what we mean is small farmers.
That's really what we mean by peasants and of course we use the word a little bit differently
if we're referring to Southeast Asia.
We sort of have the stereotype of the person in the rice paddy or whatever.
But we refer to certain kinds of rural people outside the United States as peasants but
he said notice that Americans never refer to other Americans as peasants.
So let me tell you why.
Because to them the word peasant implies a simplistic way of life.
The peasant sort of goes to work in the morning, comes home at night, eats, gets up the next
morning and does the same thing.
It implies a kind of very simple, stable, every day is the same existence and that's
not America.
That's not America because that little farmer comes home and puts on nice clothes and reads
the newspaper, goes into town and talks about national politics with the other folks in
the town, in the town square.
And you know I remember when I read this or re-read this recently I sort of lost that
passage and I began to think about that and I thought that's right.
You never refer to Americans as peasants.
And it's one of those ways where America's brains, if you will, are configured differently
for ourselves than were configured for the rest of the world.
We don't understand our own small farmers the same way because they aren't the same
way as small farmers in the rest of the world and we know that because the word that we
use to refer to small peasant farmers in the rest of the world we don't use to refer
to our own peasant farmers.
I think that's interesting.
Another habit of the heart that Tocqueville talks about is that Americans understand that
experience brings enlightenment.
Americans trust experience.
They believe obviously in reading and writing that Americans are illiterate people but they
know that reading and writing aren't sufficient.
And unlike a lot of people they trust experience.
If you live in a world of big philosophical structures you might say to yourself, well
here's an experience I had, here's something that happened to me or a story I heard but
that isn't enough evidence to alter the intellectual system in which I'm living and therefore to
alter the way I think or my behavior.
But Americans since they don't trust these big systems they trust experience more and
I think Tocqueville admires and respects that in Americans.
Americans trust experience.
He also says that Americans bring the habits of politics to their private lives.
It is to say when you sit down with your family and your family has to make a decision
about something and I'm going to talk about families in a future lecture.
When your family's having a family discussion, a family decision, principles of democracy
will affect the way your family talks to one another, relates to one another and ultimately
makes a decision.
You know it's fairly common for families to say okay let's decide if we got to do pizza
or chicken wings tonight you say to the four kids put up your hands if you want chicken.
Think about that it's a very democratic habit.
We carry our democratic political ideas into our families, into our private lives.
Now Tocqueville says you know given the fact the majority changes its mind all the time
given the extraordinary individual freedom that Americans have there needs to be some
sort of acceptable framework.
There need to be some unshaken principles, some values that don't fluctuate and that
aren't up for popular vote.
Where is and we have to be careful of what we mean by this word where is the dogma?
What are the fundamental dogmatic beliefs that are unshakable and unchangeable that
allow people with the great deal of individual freedom governed by the majority not just
to live chaotic lives?
Well, he says in many people it is again great philosophical systems but that doesn't work
in America because Americans are skeptical of them.
Persuasion, Tocqueville says is the important underpinning of values and of conduct for
Americans.
Because Americans don't trust great intellectual systems they are willing in a sense to trust
God.
They know they can't understand God, people of all sorts of persuasion know that God
is not thoroughly understandable but they're willing to trust God more than they are willing
to trust a platonic world view or whatever it might be based on some set of philosophical
principles.
And so since there needs to be some anchor in a society that has personal freedom and
majoritarian rule that anchor is religion, again we're going to come back to that in
the next lecture.
Another one of the habits of the human heart that Tocqueville is particularly interested
in, fascinated by, is the belief in progress and human perfectability.
Americans always think things can get better and they're never quite satisfied with what
they have.
Let me read you an interesting passage that Tocqueville writes, I meet an American sailor
and I ask him why his country's vessels are built to last a short time and he replies
to me without hesitation that the art of navigation makes such rapid progress daily
that the most beautiful ship would soon become almost useless if its existence were prolonged
beyond a few years.
We don't build our boats to last because in a few years we're going to be able to build
such a better boat that the one we build now is going to be obsolete.
Now all of us who watch television commercials or anything else know that that's very much
an ingrained part of the American character.
You know the 2007 cars, we can already tell you in advance, are going to be new and revolutionary
compared to the 2006 cars.
I can remember I came from a middle middle class background but every year for many years
when I was a boy my dad bought a new Chevrolet and the answer was because it was better than
last year's Chevrolet.
Now I don't know much about engines, neither did he by the way, and I couldn't tell the
difference.
I chose them on the basis of color primarily and how big the fins were remember that era
but he was convinced that every year you know the 1958 Chevrolet was better than 1957 Chevrolet
so I can afford to do this, I'm going to trade in my 57 for a 58.
That is a very deeply ingrained American habit, Tocqueville says, this belief in progress and
perfectability.
Now Tocqueville also says that Americans are very attached as I suggested earlier to material
well-being.
In fact he says the love of well-being is the dominant national taste.
What do we want to be?
We want to be well off.
We want to be comfortable.
Today there are those who would say that in fact this concept of the American dream has
become in many people's minds almost entirely economic.
The American dream is to be wealthy or at least to be wealthier than my parents although
I think many people also say there has to be something broader than that in what people
usually refer to as the American dream.
But Tocqueville recognizes this tendency to say what we're really all about is being
comfortable, is being well off.
He says equality leads the poor to a desire to acquire property because after all even
though I may be equal at the ballot box I'm not really equal unless I own some property
since a lot of other people own property and this equality leads people who are rich
to fear losing their property.
So it's interesting to note that though the poor want to acquire property the rich are
afraid to lose their property.
Tocqueville says I believe there can be an honest non-corrupting materialism.
People can legitimately desire well-being, physical comfort and all the rest without
it corrupting them but then he pauses to say I'm not sure the Americans have found that
yet.
They found the materialism, I'm not sure he says they found the non-corrupting materialism.
He also says there is not just in the economic realm but beyond there is this ardor, this
feverish ardor in America of people always dreaming of possessing what they don't have.
Or as my sons would think of it, they all I think went through there I'm going to have
a poacher of a Lamborghini in my room phase, okay?
Very American quality, Tocqueville says, people are always dreaming of what they do not have.
Now again Tocqueville does not say any of this is intrinsically bad, he can imagine
a non-corrupting materialism but he worries that materialism can indeed be corrupting.
Let me read you a fairly long passage that I think helps to focus in on this.
Give democratic peoples enlightenment and freedom and leave them alone.
With no trouble they will succeed in taking all the goods from the world that it can offer.
They will perfect each of the useful arts and render life more comfortable, easier, milder
every day.
Their social state naturally pushes them in this direction, I do not fear they will stop.
Sounds pretty good.
But, he continues, while man takes pleasure in the honest and legitimate search for well
being, it is to be feared that he will finally lose the use of his most sublime faculties
and that by wishing to impress, improve rather, everything around him, he will finally degrade
himself.
The peril is there, not elsewhere.
This love of well being can turn out well or it can turn out ill.
I'll do anything, I'll grovel, I will degrade myself simply to have a better car, a better
gizmo or whatever it might be.
Tocqueville worries about the possibility that this habit of the heart will be damaging
to America.
Tocqueville then says, well, where are the voices that are going to lead America from
a damaging materialism?
And the answer is two, one, not surprisingly, is religion.
They need to hear from the pulpit.
Number two, he says, it is the job of legislatures in democracies.
Legislators need to help people have a taste for the infinite, to show people a sense of
greatness and legislators should seek to instill a love of immaterial pleasures.
So that in the way we craft our laws, as well as in the way our legislators, the crafters
of those laws behave, there needs to be not just technical skill and policy brilliance,
there needs to be a way of conveying to people through those laws that life is not about
possessions and material and power.
