Lecture 20 Individualism in America
In the last lecture, I mentioned that Tocqueville talks about the invention of new words in the English language
and the general instability of the English language and all this sort of stuff and that he's not very fond of all that.
And yet, what I'm going to talk about in this lecture is based on a word that Alexis of Tocqueville invents.
Obviously a word in French, but it's also become an English word.
He invents the word individualism.
Obviously he doesn't invent the idea of the individual,
but he does invent this word because he says it's a new and democratic phenomenon.
It's different than selfishness.
So individualism is a key product of democracy.
When left, if you will, unchecked, it can be damaging to democracy,
but there are ways for democracies to not eliminate it,
but at least to mitigate the damage that the rise of individualism can do to a participatory democratic majoritarian society.
Selfishness, Tocqueville says, is as old as humankind.
And selfishness comes from blind instinct.
I don't sit down and say, hmm, I think I'll be selfish today.
We don't operate that way.
Selfishness is sort of this gut thing, if you will.
I want the world to circle around me.
I think in some ways that he's very Augustinian in this.
In fact, he's very deeply influenced by Saint Augustine in a lot of ways,
in the sense not in the theological way of using the concept of original sin,
but the idea that inside of us is a basic human selfishness.
We like to think that, or we would like it to be reality,
that the world sort of revolves around us,
that we're in the center of thing, that things are really around to serve us
and to make us happy and to keep us comfortable.
Selfishness comes from blind instinct.
Individualism is a conscious decision in a sense.
Individualism, he says, disposes people to isolate themselves from those like themselves.
It goes back to, and I've been leading up to this in several things
that I've said in previous lectures to what we're going to talk about now,
in an egalitarian society, there is no privilege.
When I'm out in the public square, when I'm on Main Street, when I'm in the mall,
or wherever it might be, I'm just another person.
I don't wear clothes that give me certain rights.
I can't say excuse me, I have a PhD, can I get to the head of the line?
Or I'm entitled not to pay tax because I'm a member of this social class.
We're all equals.
And given the fact that we're all equals, there's no privilege.
But all of us like privilege.
The most democratic among us like privilege.
We like to be, in a sense, singled out.
Hey, there's a venerable Professor Cook walking down the street.
I'll let him get in line in front of me.
I'll, if not literally, at least metaphorically, tip my hat to kindly
Professor Cook after all he's been teaching here since the year seven.
God knows he deserves it.
Or whatever it might be.
We all like that notion of privilege.
But there is no privilege in a democratic, egalitarian society in the public square.
And therefore there is this tendency, Tocqueville says, to withdraw into the circle of family and friends.
Because there I can be treated in a special way.
I may indeed have privileges that are based on the fact that I'm a father and they are my children.
Or I think sometimes people see this when they have friends of different ages.
My younger friend will be deferential to my experience or my title or my rank.
And, you know, we even like it at the college where at least we sort of think that younger colleagues will be deferential to us a little bit.
Not necessarily calling us by his titles, but coming in and saying, you're a sage fellow.
What do you advise about a student who does such and such or doesn't do such and such as very often happened?
We withdraw into a circle of family and friends because there we can be treated in a special way.
And therefore we create our own little societies.
I can think of people whom I know who except for the people they have to deal with either at work or at the grocery store.
Never get beyond that very tiny circle, sometimes just of families.
They don't go to church suppers or go to church necessarily.
They don't go to a political rally. They may not even vote.
There's a level of comfort one has in this little private circle that we can create for ourselves.
And that's where people tend to go in democracies.
Obviously, when they do this, they abandon public life and public concerns.
How many times have we heard people say, maybe in our society right now, younger people more than older citizens?
Well, this just doesn't concern me. This being some public issue.
This being something as big as war and peace or as small as a local debate over where the firehouse should be.
This just doesn't concern me. I withdraw from that.
When I'm with my family, we don't talk about that stuff.
That it's easy to withdraw from the public square and therefore from even being concerned about public things.
Individualism, unlike selfishness, is a conscious judgment.
I have made the judgment that I'm not going to go out and be a person out there.
I'm going to spend the weekend with the family, the nights in front of the television, and that's pretty much it.
I've settled in what happens outside that, you know, okay, maybe some candidate is going to lower my taxes a little bit or raise my taxes a little bit.
But guys, it's just not worth it to get involved. I'm either going to save a few dollars or spend a few dollars.
So that just doesn't concern me as long as I get to see the kids and the grandchildren in the weekend.
And as long as I see a couple of my old pals so we can, you know, talk across the fence in the backyard, that's enough for me.
Tocqueville says this is damaging to democracy because democracy relies on participation in the public square.
Individualism dries up the source of public virtues because we simply don't want to be concerned with public things.
In fact, he says, ultimately, it dries up our public virtue and eventually it'll dry up all of our virtue and it will devolve into selfishness.
In other words, individualism is bad for two reasons.
A, in the short run, when the choice is made, essentially, it takes us out of the public square.
And B, ultimately, it just simply makes us turn in toward ourselves and we'll find ourselves after having made the decision of individualism, we simply become selfish.
We go back to that almost sort of instinctual sense of wanting the world to rotate around us rather than seeing our position in the world.
Democracy, again, leads toward this individualism and it just automatically becomes a bigger and bigger problem as the society becomes more egalitarian.
As equality increases and class distinctions fade, people become almost strangers to one another.
Human bonds of affection in a democracy are extended but weakened.
Again, I don't have any special privilege over my neighbors or the people I see at the grocery store nor do they over me.
We greet each other very often by first name.
We recognize a certain equality and so we may greet more people or know more people by name or wave.
Everybody that I've ever met who comes from Europe to America, especially small town America, which is after all largely where Tocqueville was, is surprised, sometimes put off,
but usually sort of excited by the fact that when you walk down the main street, people who don't know you sort of wave and say, how are you?
Or even if they can tell you from another place, welcome to my town.
Again, that sense of ownership rather than tenancy that Tocqueville talks about and that sense of equality.
Hi, we know how many Americans are so informal on a first name basis with each other.
You know, we walk into our doctor's office now and, you know, I go up to sign in and they don't say, well, Mr. Cook or Dr. Cook sit down.
Well, Bill, have a seat and the doctor will be with you soon.
That's in a sense that sort of easygoing relationship.
Our bonds are extended but they're also weakened.
Tocqueville said, we need to recognize, if you will, the good side and the bad side, the plus and the minus of all this.
And Tocqueville also says that democracy tends to make us somewhat present oriented, focused on now.
And listen to the consequences of that.
Let me read you a short passage.
Thus, not only does democracy make each man forget his ancestors, but it hides his descendants from him and separates him from his contemporaries.
It constantly leads him back toward himself alone and threatens finally to confine him wholly in the solitude of his own heart.
Well, why is it that democracy tends to separate us from our ancestors?
Well, because even if our ancestors, you know, were the founders of the town or there's a statue of them down the street or whatever it might be.
I discovered in doing a little bit of genealogy, there's apparently a statue of, I don't know how many greats this is, great, great, great, great, great grandfather, so and so in something or other West Virginia.
And you know, you sort of swell yourself up with pride and then you say, well, probably that and a buck and a half will buy you a cup of coffee in that town in West Virginia.
So what? What does that say about me?
So we tend to forget our ancestors because our status is not based on who our ancestors were or what they achieved.
After all, this is an egalitarian society. Who I am depends on what I do. How I'm perceived has to do with my achievement, not my ancestry.
We don't have any claim to aristocracy.
But remember, I mentioned in an earlier lecture that Tocqueville suggests somewhat ironically that everybody wants to be related to somebody who came over the Mayflower.
Everybody wants to trace their ancestry back to that. But nevertheless, in some real day-to-day sense, ancestry doesn't matter.
And in the same way, what happens is we can become closed off from our children.
Now that happens in a lot of ways in America. Again, the same principle applies.
That is to say, if my son goes to Yale and gets a degree and a Phi Beta Kappa Kee and a great job, well, of course there's going to be the tendency to brag about that a little bit.
But ultimately, that's his achievement. This is the way we think in America.
I mean, sure it's good that he had good parents, and sure I'm going to get bragging rights, and sure you managed to point out conversationally over the cantaloupes in the grocery store,
well, of course, my son in New Haven. You sort of say things like that. We all know that one.
But ultimately, that's not about you. That we have individualized achievement.
And one of the things that means is not just withdrawing into ourselves from our neighbors or whatever, but also even from the generations of our own family.
In other words, it works that we tend to withdraw this way, but we also, that is to say, within the society, among equals, we tend to draw toward a center which is ourselves.
But we also draw vertically. That is to say, we squish the generation together because ultimately we are autonomous in a real sense.
We don't depend on our status by what our children have achieved or what our ancestors have achieved.
And therefore, again, this tendency is to continue closing in.
So one is left with oneself. We find ourselves left with only ourselves.
We withdraw rather than enter a common life and create common bonds.
And Tocqueville says this. Keep this in mind.
Despotism thrives when people do not bond together.
What would a despot like in order to be able to gain more power and keep it?
I'll tell you what a despot would like. The people he's despoting, not talking to one another, not communicating with one another, not affiliating with one another, not going to church together,
not belonging to the garden club together, certainly not belonging to one of the political parties together.
If a despot can isolate people from one another, he is pretty far on the way to succeeding as being despot.
So this is not just something that ultimately harms some of the vibrancy of local life.
This is not just something that's even morally degrading in the sense that ultimately it can lead towards selfishness.
This is dangerous for democracy.
As we've seen in other contexts, one of the most important elements of democracy is talk. People need to talk.
They need to talk a lot. They need to talk over the back fence. They need to talk at the dining room table to be sure.
But they also need to talk in the public square.
They need to be involved in and knowledgeable of the affairs around them.
They need to care about local government and what's happening in their local communities because that's a place where anybody can understand the workings of government,
even if you don't quite get Albany or Washington.
So this individualism, this ultimately turning in upon yourself and at least imagining yourself self-reliant,
is ultimately something that can be damaging to democracy and can lead to freedom being reduced or even taken away.
Another thing that happens is, and this is a very important one for Tocqueville,
the more and more Americans get bound up with the fact that they're concerned about their physical well-being.
That second car, that boat on the lake, whatever it might be, the more that we get bound up with our material needs and success,
the more we withdraw from public affairs and Tocqueville says, let me tell you what can happen when people ultimately withdraw.
And here it means not just talking but voting, especially in local elections.
The tiniest powers, the tiniest group can come into electoral victory.
We've seen this in America a lot in recent years as the number of voters has declined.
You'll read all the time about some rather fringe group in some town, somewhere,
that got a small core of people who were really zealously committed to getting rid of certain books in the library
or getting one of the subjects not taught in school, and what do they rely on?
They rely on a 10% turnout or a 15% turnout in a local election,
and they know that in a town like mine, for example, this has not happened in my town,
but let me just use mine as an example for a sort of size comparison.
Here's a town of 5,000, 6,000 people.
If, of course, not all those are eligible to vote, some aren't citizens and some are under 18,
so let's just make up a number. Let's say 3,000 of those are eligible to vote.
Let's say that the turnout at the school board election is 10%.
Now we've got 300 people voting.
If I get 151 votes, I win, and what I'm going to do is I'm going to find a few personal friends
and a committed little core of people that want to get the same damn books out of the library I want to get out,
and our turnout will be 100%.
I'll get all my folks out, and everybody else says,
oh, I haven't paid attention to this election. Oh, I'm too busy. Oh, you know, I work 13 hours a day.
And so what happens is these tiny little groups can take power.
It always happens at the local level. It doesn't have a state national level,
but it happens at the local level because people withdraw from the public square.
I can't be concerned. You know, when I asked students if they voted in local elections,
which are an odd number of years usually in New York,
so not the same year they're voting for members of Congress or governor, senator, president, whatever.
When I ask them, how many of you voted? Very few hands go up.
Some are even surprised that there was a local election three days ago or whatever.
But when I ask them, those who know there was an election, why didn't you vote?
They always give the same answer. I was too busy.
Now, we know that's a crock, but people very often in a sense can convince themselves they're too busy.
They're too busy to pay attention. They're too busy to listen to the issues.
They're too busy to read the relevant articles in the newspapers,
and they're too busy to vote on election day.
And when you say you're too busy, what do you mean?
Very often you mean, well, you know, I'm really going to put in the overtime
because I need to get that second car or whatever it might be.
We'll very often use economic reasons, not always.
But Tocqueville worries about that, that people who are too concerned with their physical well-being
and with their comfort will find excuses not to be involved in public affairs,
and that will again bring the tiniest factions some time to power.
Another thing that happened is if they achieve that physical well-being,
if they achieve that level of comfort, then they might say, you know, the issues don't matter to me.
I've got mine. I know they're not going to take it away from me.
I've got this house. I've got this car. I've got this boat.
I've got enough money to send my kids to college, so I don't need to be bothered.
It isn't any of my business because I've got mine.
Comfort can lead to a sense of self-sufficiency,
and that again can lead to the practicing, the conscious choice of this individualism,
this withdrawing into a circle of family and friends.
So that if individualism leads people away from being active in public affairs,
what it means is that it leaves a few voters and it leaves the government in place.
And remember, that not only means the elected government,
it also means the bureaucracy.
There wasn't a huge bureaucracy in Tocqueville's time like there is today,
but appointed officials, it lets them have more power.
What's going to happen if in fact, remember, democracy is a majoritarian government,
what's going to happen if the majority no longer speaks?
That the majority of voters turns out to be a fairly small minority of people,
because most people have withdrawn into themselves. What's going to happen?
How is government going to act in that case?
Tocqueville says there are some real possibilities.
Number one, such activity can lead to centralization of administration.
And we know that's one of Tocqueville's great concerns.
If laws are administered exactly the same way everywhere,
from the top down with the kind of uniformity, that is a threat to freedom.
That is a great threat to freedom.
And what's going to happen if citizens become careless, if they don't care?
Hey, the easiest way to administer, right?
The easiest way to administer is for everybody to say,
OK, there's one way to do it, everybody do it this way.
Here's the formula, follow the formula.
Whether you're in Wyoming or Washington or West Virginia or Wisconsin,
just follow the formula.
And without a vigilant citizenry,
without a citizenry that's involved and listening and talking in the public square,
centralization of administration is easier to occur.
Vigilance is important in democracy when the majority is not vigilant,
because you're too busy earning that extra money for that second car,
or you just don't think things matter to you,
or you want to be treated with privilege and are not treated with privilege in the public square.
When those things happen and the vigilance of the democracy recedes,
then it's not that some ogre will come along and stand in Washington
or in your state capitol and dictate the way everything is,
but it's sort of natural that those who do run the affairs of government
are going to run them in the way that's most beneficial to themselves
and in the way that's easiest to do.
And the easiest thing to do is say,
here's the formula, everybody play by exactly the same rule.
Another thing that can happen is that,
as citizens withdraw from the public square into this individualism,
is that the state can become paternalistic.
Let me go back to an example I gave a couple lectures ago,
well, more than a couple,
and that is if there is no work in civic organizations
to beautify the downtown,
to take care of the stray cats,
to organize the town festival,
then very likely those things will be done by government.
Some level of government will step in to do this,
and the more things the government does,
the more paternalistic the government becomes,
ultimately that's damaging to freedom.
Because when governments do things,
they do them in certain ways,
and we also know that when government takes control of something,
very rarely if ever does government want to return that
to private citizens individually or collectively to do it.
It's hard to reverse that process.
And so lack of involvement, lack of concern, lack of care
lead to a kind of paternalism
that becomes something other than a free and democratic society.
Ultimately he said the citizenry will have hardly any energy left
for public life.
Tocqueville also takes up the question of elections
because he says, and he's witnessed and heard about
some pretty dirty political campaigns in America.
Stories of the Jackson Adams races,
and the second one, stories of Dady Crockett campaigning,
stories of others campaigning, no doubt.
He says, electoral competition exacerbates this tendency to withdraw.
If elections get real personal and real nasty and real bloody,
a lot of people are going to say,
I don't want my character impugned.
We can debate the issues, I don't want my character impugned.
If that's what it means to enter the public square
in the particular way of running for office,
I don't want to run for office.
And we see this a lot today.
We see a lot of offices go uncontested in local government
and very often in state legislative races.
We will find there simply is an uncontested election
because people look at elections and say elections are dirty.
I not only don't want to play dirty,
I really don't want anybody to play dirty with me.
And so elections can open up hatreds
and public hatreds lead to withdrawal from the public square.
I'm not going to play.
If those are the roles of engagement, I'm not going to engage.
Now, what is it that democracies can do
to stop this excessive individualism
and the harm that it can do to democracies?
Okay, first of all, citizens need to act together locally
so they can see how they depend on one another.
That is to say, civic organizations
and political organizations need to be there.
We talked about how they are schools for democracy.
Once you start working with folks,
you find out A, you really do need each other,
and B, something you didn't think concerns you,
maybe it really does.
It matters where the firehouse is in town.
It matters whether there is an overnight no parking ordinance,
even if you've got a driveway big enough to park your car,
that there are some implications for you.
So one of the most important things that stops individualism
from becoming corruptive of democracy and damaging
is vital political and civil associations.
By the way, remember, they also work against a tyranny of the majority.
So these organizations really are central to the functioning of democracy.
Secondly, and related to that,
general affairs of the state, Tocqueville says, the big national issues
ultimately are only understood by a few,
and there are many people who aren't really interested in, you know,
how to reform the social security system,
because it seems so complex and so distant from them.
But they are interested in where a road goes in their village.
Local governments need to matter.
Local governments need to make real decisions that affect the way people live,
because the habits of democracy are not learned in dealing with big issues.
They're learned in dealing with the little issues,
where you see the impact, you talk to the officials,
you appeal to them face to face, you go to the town board meetings,
you get the petition with 50 signatures from your street,
and you hand it to the town supervisor or the town board,
and it says to fix a damn pothole on your street.
So we need vibrant local institutions,
those that are part of the government, local government,
and those that are not, that are private associations.
Because in bonding in local matters,
people learn that there's a relationship between the individual and the common interest.
The key to fighting individualism is for communities to have vibrant local governments
that can act independently and vibrant political and civil free private associations
that show people the advantages of coming into the public square.
Thank you.
