Hello and welcome, this is Jason Kendall to one of my introductory astronomy lectures
and this time we're talking again about the nature of light.
Light is that thing that allows us to see things from here to there, there to here.
We don't emit light out of our eyes unlike certain kind of superheroes who beams of light
come out of their eyes.
No, light, it comes to us from sources.
Those sources might be hot objects that are so hot that they glow, or they're so hot
that they atoms in them emit light as they jump between orbits in their atomic shells.
There's lots of ways for light to be emitted, but let's just see what light is as a thing.
And as we've always seen from like the album cover of Pink Floyd, I look like we're looking
out here, when light passes into a from one medium to another, it changes direction and
depending on the medium, it has a frequency dependence for the speed of light inside that
new medium.
But the speed of light that we're going to care about comes up really shortly.
In any event, what is light?
Well light is electromagnetic radiation and electromagnetic radiation is a way of saying
that energy is being transported through space without there being a physical connection
between the two things.
There's no actual physical link.
So electromagnetic radiation is a transfer of energy.
Examples where the other two examples where energy gets transferred are conduction, where
you heat something up and the vibrations of the molecules and atoms inside of that
object that you're heating up, they vibrate against each other and eventually all the
atoms move very fast.
And if you happen to be heating up a skillet or a pan on sort of an open fire or a heating
element, then eventually the handle gets hot too.
So that's called conduction.
Conduction is the vibration and the collisions of atoms inside a solid object or any object
where the atoms and molecules inside of it are close enough together that their vibrations
can impact each other.
So that's physical contact.
Another way that physical contact can occur is through conduction.
Convection is where you take a hot body of some sort, a hot bubble of gas or liquid or
what have you, or even a hot solid, and you move it from here to there by some physical
process.
The heat then is transferred.
The energy is transferred because now you've got something with a greater amount of energy
and you take it from here and you put it there, presumably to a place of lower energy
or lower heat.
Or you could place it to a place where higher energy, but then it would gain more energy.
So that's not really the flow that we think of in terms of convection.
So a good example is a boiling pot.
You heat the pot, the bottom of the pot gets hot, makes a bubble of hot water.
That water then rises in the pot, releases it in steam or heat into the surrounding,
into the kitchen, and then that cooler liquid then sinks back down.
It makes a boiling pot.
So there's actually a flow of water, a flow of water inside the pot as it goes.
So that's convection.
It also happens with air, that's how we get storms because there's convective cells in
storms and so we've seen that happen all over the earth with the creation of hurricanes
and so forth.
But with electromagnetic radiation, radiative transfer of energy does not require the physical
contact.
Convection means you transfer objects that are physically moving through each other.
This bubble that's high moves through a region until it gets to a region where it's cool.
Conduction is where electrons bounce against other electrons right next to each other.
But if it's radiative transfer, electrons and protons don't go on and touch you and
move along.
No, it's light.
Light actually transfers its energy from here to there.
So there is no physical contact that the photon does.
It's just the thing that it transmits energy.
And so light is something, but let's get to it in just a little bit.
That's a very complex question.
But light's everywhere.
The reason you could see me now is because light's bouncing off of me, getting recorded
by the camera.
The camera then holds it as an electromagnetic impulse and then I transfer it to the computer.
After I transfer the computer, I play around with it on the computer, manipulating the
electric and magnetic fields on the computer and then I upload it using electromagnetic
fields to YouTube.
And after I have transferred to YouTube, you then turn on your computer and using more
electromagnetic energy, that creates light that comes out of the screen, which you then
see.
Interesting.
But what is this light thing?
This thing that is transmitting energy from me through the magic of YouTube to you?
Anyway, there are characteristics to light that we should discuss before we say what
light is because we can't discuss what it is without discussing its characteristics.
And one of them is its wave motion.
The light has a wave property, meaning that there's wavelength to light.
And light's wavelength is a very important thing.
So what do we mean by wavelength?
Wave lengths, if we take some sort of medium, and we have a regular disturbance in it, we
get waves that go up and down, like water waves.
Water waves are a perfect example of wave activity.
In water waves, we see the distance between the crests and water waves, and those distances
are the wavelength.
So the wavelength is the distance between crests or troughs in a wave, as it traverses.
And so it's a cyclic pattern, it's just not one wave, there are many waves in a train
of waves.
And the train of waves has a speed with which they move through the medium, say the water
waves move at whatever speed they do through water.
And that speed is important because the speed of the wave is equal to the frequency, or
how many waves go by you per second, times the wavelength of it.
So if you have a high frequency, then if you have wavelengths of the same type, same length,
and one of them is high frequency, then of course the waves are moving faster by you.
If the same frequency is occurring, but one of the wavelengths is much shorter than the
other, then the smaller wavelength at the same frequency has a much slower wave speed.
Now we're going to see something interesting about the nature.
We call the period of the wave is what the time is between individual cycles.
So in terms of the speed of light, the speed of light is a constant in vacuum.
It only has one speed.
There is no other speed to light.
Maybe there is not existing, meaning there is no light, or it's going this speed, which
is very interesting.
There's no acceleration or deceleration to light.
Light just simply goes at this speed, the speed of light, which is just shy of 300,000
kilometers per second, or just shy of 186,000 miles per second.
But specifically, it's 299,792.458 kilometers per second, which is a very fast speed.
That means it gets to the moon and back in two seconds.
That's why those pings in the Apollo missions, where they have that little ping sound, because
it's rude to talk over people and you actually want to know, so you send the ping, they say,
I'm done with transmission, because it takes a second for the light transmission to get
from the earth to the moon.
And that's why they had the ping sound at the end of the Apollo mission transmissions
when they were talking back and forth between the moon and Houston.
So what does that mean?
If you have the speed of light being a constant, then the product of the frequency times the
wavelength gives you the speed.
All right, so if the speed's always the same, then if you have a long wavelength, you have
a short frequency.
And if you have a short wavelength, you have a high frequency.
And so they're inversely related.
Because the speed of light is a constant.
So once again, if you have a very small wavelength, lambda, which is typically what we use for
wavelength, then you must have a very, very, very high frequency in order to maintain that
speed.
And if you have a very low frequency, then you must have a very long wavelength, and
those are radio waves.
The other one are gamma rays.
So light goes in all sorts of flavors, but it all travels at exactly the same speed.
All right, so how do we know what the speed of light is?
Well, the speed of light, as we discussed in a previous lecture, was first investigated
or at least investigated in many ways.
But Oli Romer looked about it by looking at the timing, the timing, the transits of Iowa
across Jupiter over a long period of time, over many months, and actually noticing that
the times that it was expected to be were wrong.
But another more direct way to do it is with Fissot, who actually used mirrors on tops
of mountains, and actually bounced light all the way across and through a rotating tooth
wheel.
The tooth wheel spun and spun and spun, and as the light passed through the wheel and
bounced off the mirror and came back, it had to make that trip while the wheel was rotating,
and the light had to come back through the same tooth it left or else it would be blurred.
So Fissot made it a pulsing beam, and that pulsed beam had to have the same speed as
the light going through it or else it would get blocked.
And so you either get blocked light or you would let it through, and how you determined
the speed of light was how fast was the gear, how fast was the rotary wheel turning, what's
the length of space between the teeth, and so you could say, well, how long did it take
for light to go all the way down and back such that you don't get a distortion, you
don't get a blurred view, and that's one way of determining it, how fast the wheel is rotating
and the size that it's rotating through.
In any event, the wave nature of light was determined because you can actually say, well,
what are some features of wave light, is that light diffracts around boundaries, just like
water waves do.
So when water hits a boundary like a jetty, it curves around that jetty, it doesn't actually
stop, it doesn't go around it, when it goes past it, it doesn't not go around it.
You don't see waves not propagating.
Waves have a way of actually spreading out, and so they don't stay trained on one place,
they just spread out until they thin out across their breath, if it's a water wave, but in
terms of like a jetty going around, as soon as it passes the jetty, it starts to spread
back out around the jetty.
In any event, you can have multiple, you can have interferences of waves where waves can
constructively interfere and destructively interfere, and if the waves constructively
interfere, that means the two waves merge together, and if their peaks match at a given
place in space, then they add together.
If their peaks are counter, if one wave's peak matches another, the same wavelength's
waves trough, then they cancel out.
So you can either have what's called interfering constructively, meaning they add together,
or they can destructively interfere and subtract from each other.
The waves superimpose and add to each other, and the trough acts like a negative number,
and the peak acts like a positive number, so if it's a wave height of two, and the other
wave height is two, and they happen to be at the same place, that the peaks are at the
same place at the same time, then the wave height is not four, but if the trough is at
the same place as a peak, then the wave height is zero and it's flat.
So you can't have waves passing through each other and not make a noise.
It's kind of a weird thought, but it can happen.
So constructive and destructive wave interference can be seen pretty easily.
If you look at it trough two stones in a puddle of water, you can see two outbound ripples.
It helps to have some nice sunshine, so you can actually point out the troughs in the
water and the peaks in the water, and it's pretty easy to see as you dry it out at home,
because it's like, what the heck?
Everybody's got puddles of water around them, maybe something deep, and you can see the
reflection of water on it and see the constructive and destructive interference.
Another thing to look at is back in 1901 or so, or the early part of the 20th century.
Young did a, what is it, famous double slit experiment where he put a slit inside a barrier
to make an image of a slit as a single, as a single sort of, as a single source, and then
allowed that image of that slit then to spread out, because light spreads out from a source,
diffractively, to impact on two other slits.
And those two other slits then, they each act as sources, but those sources, then the,
what we see on the far side, are a constructive and destructive interference pattern on the,
on the far side of it.
So you have a source, a continuous source, going through a slit, that slit then goes
through a double slit, and that double slit then makes constructive and destructive interference
patterns, which can only occur if light is doing a, is light has wave properties.
So Young's experiment actually proved that light actually did have wave properties.
So what are some effects of wave properties?
Well, let's say you were moving towards or away from something.
We've always heard of the nature of the, the nature of wave properties.
So let's say you're going to see a Doppler effect, and Doppler effects occur, because
let's say you see a car driving towards you, and it's honking its horn, the pitch will
be slightly increased as the car is driving towards you.
And if it's driving away from you, the pitch will be slightly decreased.
And I had the benefit of going to the Indy 500 a long time ago with my good friend and
best man for my wedding, Ralph Hater.
And Ralph got tickets for us to go see it.
And you could really hear the effect of the Doppler effect as the cars went, flew by you.
You know, okay.
So just to say it, when cars in the Indy 500 are driving, they're these little things,
and they're extremely loud.
They go, oh, right.
They're driving like that.
They're really fast.
Really fast.
Now that sound, is what you hear if you're inside the car.
Now what do you hear when you're seeing them go by in the track?
What you hear is, that's what you hear.
Now inside the car, it's, because that's the sound of the engine.
They're really whining.
But outside you hear, as it approaches you, and then as it goes by you and the pitch changes.
So the wavelength of the sound changes to the observer.
So I'm the observer, sitting on the stands in the fourth row above, the little finish
line going, yay, there's the cars.
And I hear this sound, and everybody who's ever watched these kind of things has seen
and heard this sound.
It's a really cool sound.
In any event, that's the Doppler effect, which is the change in wavelength or frequency
as a result of a movement of the source towards you or away from you.
So the Doppler effect is just that.
You have the true wavelength, which is all inside the car, the sound of the engine.
But then there is the perceived wavelength or the apparent wavelength, which depends
on the relative motion of the source.
So the faster something goes by you or towards you or away from you, the greater the Doppler
effect is.
So that's all dependent upon both the speed with which it's moving and the speed with
which the wave travels, the sound wave.
So for light, we have a slightly different thing, but it works the same way because light
has a wavelength.
So if it has a wavelength, then we can see if there's a Doppler shift and there is.
So light has a wavelength, and there's a certain wavelength at which the light is emitted,
and there's a certain wavelength at which the light is received.
So if I were to actually take a red light, maybe it's 6,500 nanometers in wavelength,
maybe that's the wavelength I'm looking at.
And that wavelength source of light, which by the way would be a cloud of hydrogen gas,
if that wavelength of light is traveling towards me, or actually, let's say it's moving away,
if it's going away from me at, say, 90% the speed of light or maybe 80% just to keep it
easy.
If the light was going away from us at 80% the speed of light, then the total wavelength
change would actually change the wavelength to almost twice its wavelength, almost twice.
So it would be well into the infrared, roughly about 1200 nanometers, as opposed to about
600 nanometers.
So it would be well into the infrared, and you wouldn't be able to see it.
So if something's emitting, if it's a hydrogen class gas, and it's rushing away from you,
whatever reasons, hot hydrogen rushing away from you at 80% the speed of light, normally,
if we're still, you could see it.
But if it's rushing away from you that fast, then the light gets redshifted down to the
infrared, and you have to use infrared to see it.
That would be important when we're talking about the big bang, but in any event, Doppler
shift is important in light because if the source is moving, then there is a Doppler shift.
And that occurs in every direction, you can have a slightly change of a version away from
it.
If you're looking at it from the side, there's a part of the motion that's towards you changes
it.
So effectively, the light bunches up in the direction of it that it's going, changing
the frequency to a higher frequency, and gets stretched out away from the source, as if
from things behind it.
In any event, there are four wavelengths of light, like it shifts up.
But the important thing about the Doppler shift with respect to, let's say, that cloud
of hydrogen gas I was talking about, is that all the wavelengths get shifted by the exact
same proportion.
So the spacing between the wavelengths, that is not dependent on the speed.
So the pattern stays the same.
It just gets shifted by the same amount, either blue shifted, meaning if it's going to shorter
wavelength, or redshifted, it's going to a longer wavelength.
And if something's receding at, like, say, 1% the speed of light, if it's receding, then
it'll be slightly redshifted.
If it's if it's running towards you, approaching at a much faster rate, maybe twice, 2% the
speed of light, then it'll be much greater.
But on every case, all of the emission is simply just shifted by that same amount to
the left or to the right.
By the same amount.
And they don't get stretched out or pulled out in any direction.
All right.
Where can we measure this?
I just said gas cloud, hydrogen, rushing away.
Well, you know, what if it's rotating?
Let's say you've got some rotating glowing object.
If it's rotating and glowing, then the side that's rotating, maybe a big, hot, glowing
ball.
That's kind of weird.
Big, hot, glowing ball rotating really fast.
When it's rotating really fast, the side that's approaching you would be blue shifted.
And the side that's retreating away from you would be redshifted.
And so you can have a Doppler shift on a big, hot, rotating ball of gas, maybe a superfast
rotating star or something, or even a moderately rotating star can do, can show a Doppler shift.
In fact, the sun shows a slight Doppler shift from at physical wavelengths, but you got
to be really sensitive to see it.
If you have two stars that are orbiting each other and they're part of a binary system,
then those two stars then also show this Doppler shift because, hey, maybe one of them is approaching
and one of them is receding.
So all of the spectral features of the star that's approaching you get shifted to the
blue, and all the star features of the spectral features of the star that's receding away
from you get shifted to the red, and then they swap back and forth as one's retreating
and one's retreating, and the other's retreating and the other's receding.
So that's another thing.
Look for binaries that do this.
And finally, as the earth goes around the sun.
What's even very interesting is that there's a slight Doppler shift as the earth goes around
the sun with respect to all of the stars in the sky.
So that's a very small amount, and that has to be taken into account if you're being very
sensitive with respect to spectroscopy.
So the earth's motion around the sun can cause a Doppler shift in stars.
All right, so is it real?
What's real speed?
So what's the real speed?
I mean, I know I'm going fast with respect to you, but what's the real speed?
What's my real speed?
Well, there is no real speed.
There's only relative speed.
The Doppler shift only carries about relative speed.
There is no absolute speed, meaning, okay, if I could find my reference frame such that
I'm going the absolute speed, then everything is going to be fine.
That sounds like something you might hear about in a comic book, maybe.
It's like, oh, I'm going the absolute speed, kind of a flash thing or something.
So you're going at absolute speed, but there is no absolute speed.
That's an odd thought, but there is one absolute speed, the speed of light, but that's the
speed that the light's going, and it only goes that speed.
So that's kind of a weird thing.
So there's really no such thing as a true speed, meaning the speed with respect to the
space and time, because all space and time is relative.
So you have to measure Doppler shift with respect to your speed with respect to the
source or the observer, and if one's moving, the other one could be moving in exactly the
same way.
In the same sense that the Doppler shift would occur if in the Indy 500, everybody in the
Indy 500 stands were simply moving by the car, and the car was standing still.
The Doppler shift would still occur for the people in the stands.
That would be very jarring to realize that the car is standing still in the entire city
of Indianapolis is moving, but it would have the same effect in terms of the Doppler effect.
All right.
So we're moving by the wave nature of light, and what do we get out of it?
And one of the nice things that we see is that you get pretty rainbows, and pretty rainbows
are part of the wave nature of light, because as light enters a prism, the speed of light
changes, and in a prism, in glass, the speed of light is a function of wavelength and frequency.
So the blue light is bent more than the red light, and so there is a frequency dependence,
and so the light spreads out as it passes from air into glass, and then from glass back
into air, the change in medium, actually, because it goes through the glass, it actually
gets spread out by the glass.
Anyway, our most important thing is the pretty rainbows that are caused by water droplets
in the air, or by pretty prisms hanging in your window, is that the visible spectrum,
the visible spectrum, that which we can see is called the visible electromagnetic spectrum,
and the visible electromagnetic spectrum is roughly between about 4,000 angstroms and
about 7,000 angstroms, or 400 nanometers to 700 nanometers, and it spans from the violet
all the way through the deep, deep red.
And if it's shorter wavelength than violet, we call it ultraviolet, and if it's longer
wavelength than red, we call it infrared, and their frequencies are very high, they're
on the order of 10 to the 14th cycles per second.
But the wavelengths, let's look at it with the wavelengths for just a second, 400 to 700
nanometers.
We already know that there's wave properties that about light, and since light has wave
properties, it does diffraction.
So why don't we see diffraction everywhere?
Why isn't everything fuzzy, because waves of light are, which should make things fuzzy?
I mean, we have eyes, and as light enters our eyes, it's an aperture, and the aperture
then means that inside your eye, the light must spread out, so why isn't everything
all fuzzy?
Well, because the wavelength is very small with respect to the aperture of your iris
of your eyeball.
So your iris of your eyeball is a couple of millimeters, right, it's a few millimeters.
That's really big compared to nanometers.
So there's an order of tens of thousands of them, so if you're looking at 700 nanometers
or 500 nanometers, let's keep it simple, and that's many thousands of times smaller
than the aperture size of your iris.
And so waves don't really notice the diffraction, so the diffraction effects are not very noticeable.
However, if you wish to see them, take this little experiment, take two of your fingers
together like this, and just barely close them, so there's just a tiny bit of light
between them, hold them close together, so there's just a little bit of light, and bring
it close to your eye and look at some bright light source, and you'll see in between your
fingers dark and light bands, that's some diffraction patterns happening because of
the diffraction around the edges of your fingers, so it's really kind of pretty, you can see
that with just your fingers.
Alright, so the fun thing is that the light comes in frequencies and wavelengths, and
packets of light called photons do that, and that's what we call light.
Now, here's the funny thing, because individual packets of light called photons have individual
frequencies, then there's really no such thing as color.
Color is a construct, it's a biological construct in your brain.
What does that mean?
Well it means that there are cells in your eye which are receptive to certain ranges
of color, and if they're receptive to say maybe 50 nanometers from say 500 nanometers
to 550 nanometers, maybe that's the sensitivity of that cell in your retina, in your eye,
and the rods and cones in your eye are receptive to many wavelength bands, and so if you can
see many, many colors, and you are gifted to see many colors, then you have lots of
different sensors, and they're very fine, and they can see lots of different things,
and you have lots of ways that the very narrow bands of frequencies to which these cells
are sensitive.
So your brain then takes this information as the cells are fired off by the light, and
they say, oh I can see this, I get a photon, I get a photon, I get a photon, but then your
brain then says, ooh, that's the cell that makes purple, that's the cell that makes green,
that's the cell that makes red, and where'd you get those words from?
Those words came from what everybody called that thing that we call red, and that redness
is what we culturally call red, isn't that interesting?
So color is in your brain, you construct it because you add photons inside of a filtered
frequency receptor, and that receptor is called a cell, and the cells can see lots of different
bands, and it's the difference in brightness between your yellow receptors and your blue
receptors, or your blue receptors and your red receptors that tells you what the color
is.
If your red receptors are really firing off and your blue receptors are not, then you'll
call it red.
If your green receptors are firing off and neither of the other two are, then you'll call
it green.
That's how color works, and we call that thing green.
Now people who are colorblind, their blue receptors and green receptors are fired equally,
so you can't tell the difference, and that's kind of a sad thing for them because they
go, what the heck is that?
I don't see green, I don't see blue.
I just see kind of a gray, and that's what people who've got with their colorblindness,
they can't tell the difference between the colors.
All right, so that's pretty good.
We'll see you next time.
Hi, this is Jason Kendall, and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
We're still talking about light.
Light, what the heck is that stuff, light?
Light is, well, the thing that we see things with, so we want to know exactly how light
does what it does.
Last time we reviewed the concept of the speed of light, we reviewed the concept of Doppler
shift, we reviewed the concept of what the electromagnetic spectrum is and how it varies
with wavelength and what visible light is, we didn't say what it was, and how it's
creative.
It's kind of weird.
We know that it has these wave properties and it acts like a wave, but what makes it
act like a wave, and exactly what is it?
Well, to understand that, we need to know how light is created.
So let's take an example.
How does matter create light?
Hmm, that's an interesting question.
Let's start and go back and say, well, we've talked about Maxwell's laws and the nature
of electromagnetic interactions, but we also talked about the nature of fundamental particles,
like electrons and protons, and electron and proton has a charge, like an electric charge.
A proton is how the electric charge is distributed inside it, it has quarks inside it, but really
from the outside far enough away, meaning about 10 to the minus 10th meters, it looks
like a point charge with a plus sign, and that's pluses by convention.
We just call it a plus.
It could be a minus, it could be a plus.
It doesn't really matter.
It's just what we call it.
But then the electron has the exact opposite charge, the same exact amount, but exactly
this different, exactly opposite sign.
So two like charges, plus plus, will repel each other, and two opposite charges will
attract each other, and that's the nature of it.
But what do we mean by charges, and why do they retell each other, and what's going on?
Well, let's think about this concept, an incredibly important concept to all of physics, and in
fact, the incredibly important concept to the element of what we call electromagnetism
is the idea of an electric field.
An electric field is the influence in space by an electric charge to everything around
it, and it doesn't have a limit.
It just keeps going.
There's no limit.
It's just its intensity drops off as the distance squared, but there's no real like limit where
it says, well, now I'm done, and it stops, and it's the end of the line.
So really, this picture of an atom that is out there, or a plus charge that sits there,
and that plus charge just has these, what we call field lines.
And if you place something, say another plus charge at a location on a field line, the total
number or density of field lines at that location determines how much it's getting pushed away.
So the field says, give me a test charge, I'll tell you what force I'm going to exert
on another due to the charge at the source.
So I placed a little test charge at the field line, and we can place another test charge,
maybe one's plus, one's minus, but if it's plus, it gets pushed away, and if it's minus,
it gets attracted towards it.
So the field lines also determine the direction of motion that the test charge will go.
And from a plus charge, we can think of it as being outbound, and a minus charge, you
can be considered inbound, and by convention, it doesn't really matter what direction, but
we can just do it that way.
So a plus charge, if you place another plus charge on a field in an electric field next
to a plus charge, and the test charge is very tiny, so incredibly tiny or positive to be
tiny, that it actually is the thing that's moved and not the source because they're pushing
against it.
Remember Newton's equal and opposite forces, one of them just has to be a big enough charge
that it doesn't get affected by the other charges much.
So the test charge can be infinitesimally small.
And then it just gets rocketed out on those field lines, and it goes very, very far away.
But if you place it closer, then the field lines are denser, and that means it gets a
harder push.
And if it's an electric, if it's a negative charge, then it'll be attracted in the same
way.
Not as much if it's far, and the closer you put it, the more attraction it shall be.
So it gains energy as they fall towards each other because they're pulling on each other,
and the closer they are, the harder they pull each other because the force of attraction
is increased as their distance is made small, and the force of attraction or repulsion is
decreased as they're farther and farther apart.
And so at some point, they can be so far apart that the electrostatic or electromagnetic
force between them, the electrostatic force between them, can be minuscule and not taken
into account.
However, if you have loose charges around there, they really true, the electric force
is very strong, and it's going to really try to actually make it so that they charges
get neutral.
In any event, opposites attract, light charges repel.
And if you've got one, you've got the other.
So that's really what we're talking about.
So plus charges repel against plus charges, and minus charges repel against minus charges.
Protons have a plus charge, electrons have a negative charge, they have exactly the same
amount of charge, they're just opposite and equal magnitude.
The electron has a much smaller mass, the proton has a much larger mass than the electron.
So the proton tends to stay still where the electron tends to whizz about.
All right, so distant charges feel the effect of other charges.
So all charges feel the effect of the other charges through the electric field that they
generate.
So really space is permeated by the electric field due to charges.
And if they're all standing still, all these electric fields don't move, they're just kind
of sitting there.
If everybody's held in place, they're all pinned down, let's say all the charges in
the universe are pinned to one place.
To wherever they're at, doesn't matter where they're at, they're just pinned.
Then everything will be pushing on it, but then they're pinned down so they can't move,
but they're pushing with the electric field, or they're pulling depending on their charges
or the signs of their charges, and that tells us how they're going to move.
All right, now let's do something very strange.
We then jiggle one of them.
If we jiggle them, then the field must change, and how does the field change?
The field may change in a regular way.
Let's say you instead somehow take an electron and put it between, let's say you staple it
between two springs, and if it's between two springs, it might go up and down between
the two springs, or it's stapled between two boards on two springs, and so it can go up
and down.
And as long as you don't touch it, it's not going to vibrate, just like anything that's
held by two strings between two boards, right?
But if you come along and flick it, then the electron will bounce up and down, right?
Now if the electron has an electric field that's associated with it, and the electric
field is inbound by convention, and the field lines are drawing towards it, so let's use
a proton.
So this outbound, I like the outbound errors.
So a proton is stapled, and it's held between these two springs, between the two boards,
and you kick it.
Now it's going up and down.
And if it's just going up and down, bouncing up and down like this, what do we notice?
The field doesn't stay fixed in space, the field follows the proton.
So the proton was here, and the field radiates out from wherever the proton is at that moment.
So then the way, some of the field lines, aren't fixed in space.
They're moving.
They have to be moving up and down.
Wait a second.
If you make something move up and down, then you've got a wave.
Now what happens to that?
Well then there's a disturbance in, or disturbance, or a wave motion of up and down of the proton.
So now the electric field is going up and down.
Now how long does it take for something very far away, a distant charge to feel it?
Huh.
Well, those changes in the electric field propagate at a particular speed, the speed
of light.
So really, what is light?
Light is a disturbance in the electric field of a charge particle that makes a disturbance.
It vibrates, it moves, it accelerates, it changes.
And as it changes, the electric field disturbs and that disturbance propagates along.
That disturbance is called a photon.
That's light.
Light is that disturbance.
Now why doesn't it propagate forever, like these vibrating strings that we see, or like
you can pluck a string and have a standing wave?
Well photons propagate from here to there in the same way that if you take a jump rope
and you flick the jump rope, when you flick the jump rope, it bounces.
And if the jump rope bounces, then you see the pulse go up down the jump rope and the
pulse comes back from the jump rope.
Now you can make it so there's a nice regular pattern to it.
You can do double dutch by having two of the jump ropes go around.
You can make it have a nice even string where you have wave patterns in the rope.
But really, if you flick the rope, then the disturbance goes down the rope and back the
rope.
And that disturbance in the electric field line, as it propagates due to the previous
motion of the proton, is what the photon is.
It's a disturbance in that electromagnetic field.
That's really something.
So a photon is a disturbed magnetic field that was disturbed, say some time ago, by
a very distant thing, and then that distant thing that propagation of that electric field
from there to here gets to us eventually.
Isn't that weird?
If that's what light is, if that's what light is, and that's probably a very close analogy
to what we call it from deep studies of what the nature of space and time are, then light,
when you look at some distant galaxy, maybe millions of light years away, there was some
electron that shook, just a tiny electron or a tiny proton, a very, very, very lightweight
object shook, created a disturbance by its shaking that made a disturbance in its electric
field.
And that electric field disturbance propagated out through space on the electric field of
the proton, and eventually reached your eye three million light years away.
Wow, that's interesting.
So it propagates through space radiatively, carrying the energy of the disturbance that
created it across space, vast to areas of space, as a packet of a disturbance, as a wave
packet, a disturbed wave packet in the electric field lines as it propagates through space.
That's an interesting picture of a photon, and that's what we call that, so that packet
of waves, that disturbance is called a photon.
And electrons don't vibrate forever, protons don't vibrate forever, they take a certain
amount of time and then they stop vibrating, and when it's done vibrating, then guess what?
That's the end of the wave packet train, and there it goes, the photons on its way.
Alright, now that's essentially a very meat and potatoes sort of elementary way of talking
about photons.
Photons have a certain amount of energy, that amount of energy is related to the frequency
or the wavelength, whichever you like to use, in order to say how much energy the photon
has.
So the wavelength of the photon determines its energy.
The short wavelength photons have high energy, the long wavelength photons have low energy.
The light has long wavelengths, it's low energy.
Gamma ray light has short wavelengths, so it has high energy.
Next because it's a wave motion, and if you do something really interesting, if you take,
because we learn this through electromagnetism, if you go take an electrostatics class, you
learn about Faraday's Law, you learn about the nature of the Beelzebub Art Law, you learn
all these interesting things where if you take a current, take a current of electrons,
which is now an electric flow, a flow of charges, in a circle, make a circular charge
flow, you create a magnetic field, and a magnetic field flows through the charge.
So if you want to start your car, you use what's called a selenoid, and a selenoid is
a many, many, many turns of an electric coil.
You then put a charge back and forth, you change an electric current back and forth
through that selenoid, and it moves a piston that then starts the engine running, and that
forces gasoline into the engine, and then starts the engine up.
So you can take an electric force from the battery and do an alternating current through
it that then shakes the selenoid, and shakes it, and it creates an alternating magnetic
field and starts a car.
So an electric field, going in a circular motion, creates a magnetic field.
Likewise, if you take a magnetic field, a fixed magnet, a fixed magnet that has a magnetic
field, like an iron magnet or a bar magnet, and then you spin it, it will create an electric
field.
That's part of the way that we get electricity out of hydroelectric dams.
You create fixed, large bar magnets that then as the water goes over the waterfall, it turns
turbines, and the turbines then spin magnets which wrap around coils of wire, and those
wires then have an electric current that is created out of them by the twisting, by
the spinning magnetic field.
Wow.
So there's a link between the electric, the motion of an electric field, and the creation
of a magnetic field, and the motion of a magnetic field, and the creation of an electric field.
We've just learned that when you vibrate an atom, you create an electric field.
You always have an electric field, but if you vibrate an atom, then it creates a disturbance
in the electric field that disturbance is called a photon.
But if you have it, but remember you're accelerating it, and you then have, if you have any kind
of motion that can be determined to be cyclic with respect to an electric field, then there
is a perpendicular magnetic field to that.
So it is predicted that the photon has a magnetic field that runs perpendicular to the electric
field in the direction of propagation.
And as the magnetic, as the photon propagates maybe with a direction, with a wavelength
like that going in that direction, it will also have a magnetic field that goes this
way as it propagates in that direction.
So electromagnetic fields, magnetic fields are linked to electric fields.
For the earth, that is another example, the earth has a liquid metal iron core, and as
the earth spins, that magnetic, that liquid iron core has a strong magnetic property because
of ferromagnetism, and that creates an electric field, which then creates a magnetic field,
and we have a dynamo effect, and thus the earth has a protective magnetic field around
it.
Really quite interesting.
So magnetic fields are created by the movement of current, and the movement of current creates
magnetic fields, and they're linked.
Alright, and that's the nature of a photon is that oscillating electric fields create
magnetic fields, and the same thing, oscillating magnetic fields creates an electric field.
And as that propagates through time, we call that a photon as well.
So the wave packet of a photon isn't just an electric field, there's also a magnetic
field component to it as well.
So the direction that we call that magnetic field is called polarization.
So the photon might be oriented up and down, the electric field, the vibration might be
like this because of how we shook the proton, it might be going like this.
And so the orientation, the polarization of the light might be in that direction, might
be up and down.
This is also a reason why when you wish to have good sunglasses for the summertime, and
you wish to see the road while you're driving, you use polarized sunglasses, because when
light reflects off the road, it reflects off of a flat surface, and when it reflects off
of a flat surface, it bounces off that flat surface, and all the vertical components of
the polarization are gone from the scattered or randomly oriented light in its polarizations
to only having the ones that are parallel to the road.
So all you need to do to have good glasses to drive with, which are called polarizing
sunglasses, is to have something that blocks out the light that goes like this.
And how can you do that?
Not too difficult, you think of a picket fence.
Picket fences, you can throw a Frisbee through on its edge, because the slats are vertical,
and so there's a hole that's vertical between the slats, and you can't throw a Frisbee between
the slats of a picket fence.
However, you can throw it on the angle, throw it on the side through the picket fence, but
not flat through the picket fence.
Well, if you wanted to take that principle aside, so polarizing sunglasses are simply
very small slats that are printed inside the glass that then block the light, and how can
you see it through it?
Because the size of the slats is on the order of the size of the wavelength of light, and
so the polarized light that's coming up and down, that's going side to side, is blocked
because all the slats are vertical.
So you get to see only the vertically oriented light, which is minimized because of the reflective
property of the asphalt.
So light comes as polarized as well as being electromagnetic, and it has an orientation
to the electric field, an orientation to the magnetic field 90 degrees to the electric
field, it has a direction of motion at the speed of light that we talked about.
So what is light?
Light gets emitted in copious quantities by hot objects, by electric fields that are being
made by vibrating electrons and protons inside of atoms and molecules, inside of dense objects
or inside of hot objects or inside of things that are simply energy, and we see that energy
coming off of them.
So the light's really there, and it's all sorts of different frequencies, and it's
all sorts of different wavelengths from very, very high energy to very low energy, and
how it propagates from one medium to another, whether it can penetrate a wall or penetrate
only air, or whether it gets absorbed by water, or whether it gets absorbed by nothing and
passes through everything, is all dependent on the properties of the material through
which it passes.
So light is everywhere, it bounces around the room, knocking about, and as it hits
a wall, it reflects off.
How does it reflect off a wall?
It goes a little bit in, and it shakes the electron inside of there, and the electron
says, no, I don't think I'll need that sandwich today, and shakes back, and the photon comes
back out.
So really what happens in a reflection is it goes in and gets turned around.
You can think of it as getting trapped in a turn style, the light gets pulled in and
swung around.
It doesn't actually, it gets absorbed very briefly, and then re-radiated back out the
same direction it came.
And these kind of ray tracings were done by Newton a long time ago, so we have predictions,
and in fact quantum electrodynamics actually accurately predicts by some really interesting
arguments that I'll leave to Richard Feynman if you go look up at his videos about this,
exactly how that works, which is really fascinating.
You can look that stuff up.
This is not really for an introductory level thing, but you look up at quantum electrodynamics
and it'll tell you exactly how the nature of the phase shift of the frequency of light
interacts with the phasing, with how the electrons move inside of a material.
So it's a very, I won't be able to do it justice in a short video, so I'll just leave it to
others who have done that.
I'll go to Richard Feynman videos, go look his stuff up, it'll be fantastic, you'll love
it.
But be that as it may, the study of how light actually interacts with material is an incredibly
important element to all of astronomy and all of physics.
In fact, it's central because one of our more key ways to understanding the nature of materials
in physics is actually through spectroscopy.
All right, so let's finish with the electromagnetic spectrum.
The electromagnetic spectrum is all the possible wavelengths of light.
There are many different wavelength regions from radio to infrared to microwave to visible
to ultraviolet to x-ray to gamma ray and they span an enormous number of wavelengths and
frequencies.
The total number of wavelengths that we call infrared is as I think about almost a thousand
times bigger than what we call visible light and radio light is pretty much everything
shorter and longer than like a centimeter or so.
That light is shorter than 300 nanometers and goes down to a few tens of nanometers
when we get into soft x-rays and soft x-rays go up to angstrom level, go up to single angstrom
sizes and even harder when you talk to gamma rays which are on the size scale of 10 to
the minus 12 meters in terms of wavelength.
So the higher the energy of the light, the shorter the wavelength and the higher the
frequency and there's no real theoretical limit to the lower limit to the wavelength
of light but there is kind of a theoretical upper limit to the total energy of light that
can occur in terms of energy because at a certain point the light becomes so energetic
that it can actually fall apart and become other particles like it actually can just
turn into matter if the energy is great enough and that's a study for nuclear physics.
So the electromagnetic spectrum is simply all the different forms of light in all their
different wavelengths but the total amount of light and different kinds of light that
exist in the electromagnetic spectrum is vast and the best way to, the best analogy
for it is look at the keys on a grand piano and if we could only look at the sky in visible
light like we had for centuries all the way up through the early 1960s when we finally
got the technology to look at radio light and when we finally launched satellites actually
to look at ultraviolet and gamma ray and x-ray and infrared the analogy is almost completely
accurate that looking at the light, looking at the universe with only one in the visible
range is like playing a piano concerto by only listening to one middle C, one note middle
C on the piano and that's what it's like.
So imagine hearing a gorgeous symphony and somebody, some crazy composer says well this
is a symphony, this is so and so symphony but I've removed all of the notes except for
middle C and so you might hear this 25 minute cacop, you might hear this wonderful piano
concerto that lasts for half an hour and all you ever hear is when they play middle C.
That's what it's like.
Almost you're missing the whole thing if you don't see in these other wavelengths of light.
So the electromagnetic spectrum looks at so many things and we get to see so many more
things, so many different processes that occur as a result of it and what are those processes?
That's what we'll talk about next time.
Hello this is Jason Kendall welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
Great to have you back.
We're now going to start diving deeply into technical aspects of astronomy and how they
relate to the physics of astrophysics.
So to this time we're going to be talking about the nature of stellar brightness and
luminosity and luminosity distances.
So let's start with the concept of what we mean when we say the words how bright is the
star.
Usually when I take people outside to go to a telescope they're going to say wow look
at that bright star.
What they won't say look how bright that star is, they'll say look how big that star is.
And people mean big but they really mean bright and so what do we actually mean by the word
bright?
And so brightness is a thing that we actually try to quantify.
Brightness is an amount of energy we receive in terms of photons per second and given what
brightness is and so that can over in a detector such as an eye or a camera or something like
that.
So when we talk about that we're really talking about the nature of brightness is a perception.
But really if we want to know about the nature of the object itself we need to talk about
luminosity.
And luminosity is the intrinsic amount of energy the object such as a star is putting
out every second over whatever wavelength band we wish to care about.
So how bright is a luminous a source?
How bright is it?
Well that's the number of photons that arrive at a detector and so that's what we call the
apparent brightness.
And frequently in the literature we call that B. Capital big B is the apparent brightness.
And what we measure that in is some really odd units but strictly speaking everything
that we ever measure brightness in is essentially either photons per second in a surface area
or energy per second in a surface area.
Photons per second we already know what the energy of the photons is so we can just deal
with that.
So our real question is we want to know the energy that we're receiving per second over
a surface area and that's what we call the apparent brightness.
The thing we're trying to hunt for though is what we call the luminosity.
That's how bright something really is.
So we're getting these two words brightness and luminosity a little mixed up but we're
going to resolve that shortly.
Luminosity is the entire luminous output of the star when we say luminous output that's
where it comes from luminous means light.
So luminous output is the total amount of energy output by a star in the form of light
per second.
Now we can measure that in energy per second or more commonly we use the word watts such
as light bulbs, light bulbs have a 100 watt light bulb or a 500 watt light bulb etc etc.
The sun's a lot brighter than the average light bulb.
So the energy we met, the units we measure luminosity in are energy per second and that's
what the production amount of energy is happening by that object.
So these two things are of course related because brightness is how bright you see it
to be and luminosity is what it's actually putting out and how bright it appears to you
is actually the depends on the luminosity divided by 4 pi times the distance to the
object squared because let's assume that the light is being spread out uniformly across
a sphere such as like a bulb light.
So if it's a bulb light we expect it to be going across a sphere and so it spreads out
evenly and so the brightness drops off as the distance squared to the object.
So luminosity gets dimmed by the distance squared so that's where we get the units of
energy per second per square meter or watts per square meter if we're using SI standard
units.
And when we're talking about that that's where that 4 pi comes in from it's not just
the distance squared it's the 4 pi because it gets spread out over a surface area and
it drops as it goes.
So if something's twice as far it's 4 times as dim, if it's 3 times as far it's 9 times
as dim, if it's 5 times as far it's 25 times as dim, if it's 11 times as far it's 121
times as dim and so on.
So the 4 pi comes from the fact that we're assuming it spreads out evenly over the surface
of a sphere.
So what do we mean?
Does the star look bright simply because it is intrinsically very luminous or is it faint
but nearby?
So we have to measure the distances to things so distances become a very important thing.
Luminosity is not distance dependent is a distance independent property it's a property
of the object itself whereas brightness is dependent upon our perception of it.
So we need to be able to know how to measure brightness and that science is the thing we
call photometry and we express it.
Photometry is really the measuring of photons, photometry, the measuring of photons.
So we're counting the total number of photons we receive and there's a couple of ways we
talk about it we can express it in terms of the old familiar thing that we learned from
Parkus a long time ago in stellar magnitudes or we can express it in absolute fluxes meaning
the energy that we receive in detector per second on top of the surface area.
And in astronomy we use both of them interchangeably.
So the magnitude system is something that you'll hear very commonly if you go outside
with a bunch of amateurs, astronomers say oh up in the sky that's a 5th magnitude star
hour.
This is a great night we can see down to 6th magnitude and you'll hear things like that
or wow the brightest star in the sky is a 0th magnitude star and you'll hear such things.
Well the tradition of magnitudes dates a very long time ago.
It comes from Parkus which was a Greek philosopher and he actually of Nicaea and he lived roughly
about roughly roughly in the 2nd century B.C.
He lived about 70 years, about 190 B.C. to 120 and he classified stars and ranked them
into magnitudes.
He said the first magnitude star is the brightest, the second magnitude star is the second brightest
and the other ones are dimmer than that so he ranked them into three groups.
Later on Ptolemy of the Almagast who gave us the Ptolemaic system of the cosmos which
is the sun centered, Ptolemy came along and made it more qualitative and added them into
six separate buckets so that the magnitudes could be divided into the first magnitude
degree all the way down to the sixth brightest stars, sixth magnitude being the sixth brightest
type of stars.
So these were all relative brightnesses and they were done by eye.
There's no detectors, there's no photometric detectors, no cameras in 100 B.C.
So that was kind of a tricky thing.
So you had to say well this one's a little bit brighter than that one, this one's brighter
than that one, that one's brighter than this one, this one's brighter than that one.
So they ranked them in terms of their parent brightness and that was called their magnitude
system and magnitude simply meant to them it looked bigger because magnitude means size.
So my goodness, it's actually not a size thing, stars are so far away that we can't
actually perceive their size from Earth very easily, only a few stars have actually been
measured in such a way.
But the point is that magnitude means size but here we're using it as a word for brightness
and magnitudes are a measure of relative brightnesses between stars.
Now the modern magnitude system was developed in 1856 by Norman Pogson and Norman Pogson
at Oxford who was considered to be, he's also from, he went to India, I believe he was from
India originally and he developed what we call the modern system magnitudes and he codified
this ancient idea of Hipparchus into a separate set of definitions.
He said, well every five steps of the stars, every five magnitudes is a set of 100 brightness
in times.
Now he actually was able to quantify this because it's very close to the truth in terms
of the old idea.
So Hipparchus' idea, modified by Ptolemy, was actually very close to the eye and the
eye acts logarithmically in terms of their brightnesses that we can measure and so he
said that if a difference in five magnitudes is 100 times brightness.
And so he also said the standard star of brightness was Vega which is 0th magnitude.
So for example a 9th magnitude star is 100 times brighter than a 4th magnitude star and
a 0th magnitude star is 100 times brighter than a 5th magnitude star and so forth and
so on.
So the faintest stars that we can possibly discover with any aspect aren't really necessarily
stars, they're probably galaxies or quasars, that's about 30th magnitude and those have
been detected by the Hubble Space Telescope.
Ground based equipment, the best ground based equipment by amateurs is roughly 15, 16, maybe
18th or 19th magnitude on the ground.
So you can get some pretty faint stuff.
Remember every difference of five is 100 times.
So zero magnitude is 100 times brighter than five which is 100 times brighter than 10 which
is 100 times brighter than 15 which is 100 times brighter than 20.
So a difference between 0th magnitude and 20th magnitude is 100 times 100 times 100
or 10 to the 8th, that's 100 million times brighter.
A 0th magnitude star such as Sirius in the sky is 100 million times brighter than a 20th
magnitude star and there are 20th magnitude stars that have been observed in the Milky
Way, they're just really dim and really far.
Alright, so Poxton's definition can be codified numerically by saying the ratio of the brightness
is equals 100 to the difference in magnitudes divided by five and so the difference in five
magnitudes gives us 100 times brightness and that allows us to define the magnitude system
but still it's a relative magnitude system, it's always relative.
What's nice though is that it actually allows us to codify, if we can get the brightness
in energy per second on a surface area we get the brightness of one star and then we
can actually translate brightnesses between each other.
This also allows us to roughly guess by eye the brightness of something and then allow
us to get very close to what we actually get with some sort of formal detector.
Nicely enough, the standard star is Vega and Vega is prominent to most people in the sky
and the standard for Vega is a little tweaky because Vega is a variable star but in terms
of things Vega was defined in many magnitude systems to be zero and so you can basically
start from Vega and go everywhere and you compare and compare and compare, oh how am
I to compare to Vega, I'm brighter, I'm dimmer, I'm brighter, I'm dimmer.
Vega is useful because it goes across the zenith for most of, for many North American
and Northern European and Northern Hemisphere observers, doesn't go across the zenith for
people in the South Hemisphere so they got to use secondary standards of some kind because
the entire system has been centered around Northern Hemisphere so we can codify that
and so basically we can say the star compared to Vega's brightness could be 100 to the stellar
magnitude divided by five and that allows us to actually compare a star's brightness
with respect to Vega and give us a numeric value.
If somehow you can get the energy received per second at Vega, from Vega as you can perceive
the energy per second on top of the surface area, that gives you that thing.
Now you can do that both ways because your detector detects in energy per second, that's
how it detects so you're going to translate this into magnitude so magnitudes tend to
be a pretty handy system because they're something visual, also they're logarithmic.
So therefore the apparent magnitude system ranges from negative 30 which is, well negative
30 which is roughly around the sun, the sun's a little bit dimmer than negative 30 but the
apparent magnitude of the sun is negative 27, goes all the way to full moon which is
about negative 12 and a half or so.
Naked eye limit is about six, binoculars go down to about 10, the typical one meter scope
is around magnitude 18 or 20 and anything bigger than the meter class scope, that's
almost out of amateur astronomy land.
There are some amateurs who have bigger scopes than this, there's not many of them, they're
expensive equipment to use and work with but with them we're talking in terms of large
scale observational qualities and you get to four meter class scopes which can observe
down to 26 magnitude and the Hubble that can observe to about 30th magnitude.
So the science of flux photometry and what we call flux, not the flux capacitor from
back to the future, what flux photometry is the total amount of energy, meaning flux,
flux is another name for brightness, is the total flux that we perceive on top of, through
a detector.
Sometimes you wish to use fluence where fluence is the total amount of energy, not just energy
per second but total energy on a detector, so it's energy per second and that's been
integrated over time, you know what we call the fluids.
So flux photometry says I'm going to measure the brightnesses between various stars using
various standards and I'm going to use a filter wheel on top of this thing and check the differences
of brightness between various filters and then I'm going to start from Vega or whatever
standard stars I have perhaps or anything in the land ults that will send me over to
brightnesses of stars.
So the science of flux photometry then says good, I'm going to try to get these brightnesses
as accurately as I can and I'm going to difference them against known standard stars or if not
this, not Vega, then standard stars are agreed by the entire astronomical community in order
to say this is how bright a star is with respect to this.
So these standard stars have had their energy output carefully measured and repeatedly measured
for non-variability so they can be called standard stars and that's how Vega was discovered
to be a variable star, it's a slightly variable star so it's harder to use.
The sun is a slightly variable star in terms of if you were looking at it from a distance,
in fact it is a variable star.
So we have to take into many accounts when we're doing the science of flux photometry,
we have to detect whether or not there's clouds in the sky, how high the object is in the
sky, where there's a lot of things, the detector itself, how your camera works, how your telescope
works, whether or not you have, the readout of your camera is good or bad, the temperature
of your system, there's a whole bunch of things that can affect the brightness of your measurement.
So that's for another day and I'll allow you to go dig around the internet to walk down
that very deep rabbit hole to see what you have to do in order to calibrate to your telescope.
But in very general terms we can then say the luminosity of an object measured through
some brightness.
So is simply equal to 4 pi times the distance squared to the object times that brightness
and you just need two measurements in order to get the actual luminosity.
You need to know the distance and you need to know the brightness.
So if you can get one of those, you can get two of those, brightness is pretty easy, that's
just what you get at your detector, but you've got to back play it and remove all the effects
of the earth's atmosphere and many other effects in order to make sure that you actually
get really what you think is the real brightness so you can say oh there's all these things
that took away light darn it and you take that into account and then you'll get the
brightness outside your detector and outside the atmosphere and then you get a distance
measurement and guess what you'll have the luminosity.
So a lot of practical issues associated with this is a huge number.
The largest thing I describe many of them to you but one of the biggest is distance.
Distance, distance, distance.
Oh that's the worst thing in the world but a lot of distances can be measured using parallax
and so parallax gets by the Haparco satellite in the early 90s got the distances to about
100,000 stars and the Gaia mission recently got distances to over a few billion stars.
So this is a big, big, big improvement so using these distances will allow us to get secondary
things such as luminosities based upon appearances that can be seen without checking distance.
So distances are incredibly critical and once we get those things there's a lot of things
to go and luckily the Gaia mission has done a lot of that so this is fantastic.
So luminosity is either measured in watts or in this unit list thing that we will call
absolute magnitudes.
Absolute magnitudes or luminosity in watts, they don't depend on the distance.
They almost stars have different absolute and apparent magnitudes meaning the absolute
magnitude is different than what we perceive it to be or see it to be and the lower the
number the more luminous it is in magnitudes and luminous just as how much light is coming
out.
So what we'll tend to do is we'll compare two objects luminosities and we see that they're
relative to their brightness and the inverse of their distance is squared and that gives
us, that will give us what we're going for.
But we can create this concept called the luminosity distance meaning how far is it based on how
bright it is.
So let's take as our example the Sun.
We can measure the Sun to a pretty good accuracy, a very good accuracy, it's roughly 93 million
miles.
That's a good accuracy, 150 million kilometers.
So we can use that as a baseline.
So if we know the distance to the Sun and if we know the luminosity of the Sun, that's
also very well studied.
So if we got the luminosity of the Sun, we've got the distance to the Sun, we can make brightness
measurements in the Sun, then that helps us.
Strictly speaking, we want to go across all wavelengths and that would be called the
bolometric luminosity, but we'll talk about that maybe later, but I don't think that's
totally critical.
But that's a real end result, it's a total output.
So we're going to assume that we're going to, we're doing the bolometric luminosity
in any event.
So you figure out the brightness of the Sun across the entire spectrum and you know the
distance to it and you know the, then if you can somehow derive the luminosity across
the entire spectrum, then guess what?
You can use that to find the distance to other stars because if you can guess somehow,
compare luminosity by hook or crook, maybe there's a way to do that and there is, it's
called spectroscopic parallax, but we'll talk about that later.
So if you can get the luminosity of the star compared to the Sun or if you can get the
bright and get the brightness of that star compared to the Sun, then guess what?
You can get the distance to the star and that's called the luminosity distance or the distance
based on a standard object that you can calibrate against and then get the distance based on
how bright you see it to be knowing how bright it actually is.
And the, the standard way we talk about this in astronomy is using a thing called absolute
magnitudes and absolute magnitudes are a pretend concept that actually says pretend you take
every star or every object in the sky and move it close or far to a distance from the
Sun of 10 parsecs, 10 parsecs, 32.6 light years and then how bright does it appear?
Because it's magnitude, it's visual magnitude, it's V magnitude, it's I magnitude.
How bright does it appear when it's brought by magic or hook and crook or just imagination
to 10 parsecs from home?
And that's the definition of the absolute magnitude.
So how can we use this?
The brightness, we compare the brightness of the Sun and luminosity, we can rearrange
it and to get to say, well, how, if we then say, let's look at one star, just one star,
and if we think, ah, when the star is far, it's dimmer than when it's near.
And if the star, but it's the same luminosity because it's the same star, so the brightness
only depends upon the distance squared that we have.
So the farther star, it will be compared to the distance, the nearest star squared will
give us, well, that will show us the distance between them.
Remember, brightness is defined to be a difference in magnitudes.
So we're going to use the magnitude system in order to get there.
The brightness versus far is one thing, and then we can equate that to a Pogson's equation
for the magnitudes, and then we get the magnitude of the far star compared to the magnitude
of the near star, and then that gives us the brightness difference.
And we work out to this thing where we find that the difference in magnitudes is equal
to a logarithm of the brightness.
So a logarithm of the brightness gives a logarithm of the, a logarithm of the brightness, and
therefore, logarithm of the distance gives us the magnitudes.
Now if we can get the distances, we're good, but we've already established one thing.
It's the same star.
So the magic distance we're going to pretend it is is 10 parsecs.
So if we instead of saying, look at the two magnitudes, we say one of them is the absolute
magnitude, and that is the magnitude if the star, we're magically placed at 10 parsecs
away.
Then we end up with what's called the distance modulus equation, which says the apparent
magnitude subtract, and then you take the apparent magnitude, they subtract it, subtract
from it the absolute magnitude, and that is the same, that is equal to 5 times the base
log 10 logarithm, logarithm of the distance, and then minus some number 5, because remember
magnitudes have no units.
They're really strange.
They're just relative brightnesses between two stars.
So there are relative brightness, so they have no units, unlike luminosity, which does.
So absolute magnitudes is kind of a funny thing.
It's a unitless way of talking about luminosity.
But if we know the distance is something, and we can measure the measure of the brightness
and apparent magnitudes, then we have the absolute magnitude, and that's really something
we can use.
So absolute magnitudes are important.
If we know the parallax of a star, the parallax is the inverse of the distance in arc seconds.
So if we know the parallax, we can take the base 10 logarithm of the parallax, add 1 to
it, multiply that by 5, and then add the apparent magnitude to that.
We get the absolute magnitude.
So now we take two measurable things, the apparent magnitude and the parallax, and then
we do some magic, some mathematical, magic, some arithmetic on that, and we get the absolute
magnitude.
So if we can get the absolute magnitude of a star, and know how that absolute magnitude
compares to the luminosity of the star, and we have a fixed way of doing that, then measuring
the apparent magnitude and the parallax will give us the absolute luminosity.
There's a lot of trickery that goes into the last step, but it is possible, and it is doable
at the very minimum.
So as an example, if we take one of the nearest stars to us, one of the actually the approximate
of an alpha centauri, which has a parallax of 742 milli arc seconds, and it has an absolute
magnitude of just a little bit brighter than zero, it's minus 0.01, then that means it's
absolute visual magnitude, apparent visual magnitude, meaning what we see it to be.
It's a visual magnitude.
And then the absolute visual magnitude is about 4.3 plus 4.3, and that's what the math
works out to be.
So magnitudes themselves are things that also we measure inside of filters.
So a filter will actually determine it, what we use.
So we're going to have a magnitude in the Johnson B, or the Johnson V, the Johnson
I, or the Sloan I, or the Sloan U, or the Sloan V, or the Sloan B, there's all sorts
of things that you can measure them as long as you have a standard filter system.
So absolute magnitudes are a really great way to actually get a great way to actually
give us luminosities.
And roughly the solar luminosity in absolute magnitudes is about 5.
It's recently been defined by the International Astronomical Union, and so absolute magnitude
system no longer definitively relies on the sun simply because the sun is slightly variable,
so you don't want to try to tie an absolute system onto a variable thing such as the sun.
So roughly speaking, the sun is about an absolute luminosity of plus 5, give it a little bit,
and that corresponds to a solar luminosity of 1.
So if we then go up and down, if it's 100 times the solar luminosity, then it has an
absolute magnitude of 0.
If it's 10,000 solar luminosities, then it has an absolute magnitude of minus 5.
If it has a hundredth of a solar luminosity, then it is about an absolute magnitude of
about 10.
And if it is 1 110,000th of a solar luminosity, then it has an absolute magnitude of plus
15.
So this kind of helps us get around because you'll notice that the luminosity whereas
the magnitude system is linear, the luminosity of the magnitude system is exponential.
That's the nature of a logarithmic relationship.
So that's how bright we can look at it, and that's another way of thinking about it.
So brightness then becomes luminosity as long as we know the distance.
And the best thing we can get for distance is called parallax.
So parallax then gives us distances in parsecs, which is a geometric distance.
So we can play lots of games and say, oh, something's 20 parsecs away, what's the magnitude?
If you have an apparent magnitude of 4, and if it's like 5 distant parsecs away, the apparent
magnitude of 4, what's the absolute magnitude, et cetera, et cetera.
Lots of games you can play.
And so what we find is that the relationships really lead us down a lot of different places,
and we're going to use these relationships over and over and over again with respect
to luminosity and brightness and magnitudes, and the distance-modules equation will come
in many times in the future.
Hello, my name is Jason Kendall.
Welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
Today we're going to continue the idea that we did last time when we discussed the nature
of magnitudes and brightness and luminosity.
But now we're going to formulate it in terms of an important thing that we call color.
Color is an incredibly important thing to astronomy because, well, things have different
colors.
So we need to actually know how we can quantify this concept of color.
But first what we need to do is understand a little bit about where color arises and
how light interacts with matter.
So let's discuss that first before we get into the nature of what color is with magnitudes.
All right.
So light and matter interact.
And if you've ever been alive, you know that light bounces off walls, reflects off of things,
comes from light sources like light bulbs, things that are hot, glow, and so forth.
So what matter can do to light is it can allow it to pass through it, such as the glass that's
passing through the lens that I'm looking at you with.
It can also reflect light like it's reflected off of various surfaces, and it can then bounce
from one surface to the next.
Matter can gain this energy by absorbing light.
So if you go out on a hot day, the light from the sun, you get absorbed, the light, that
light in the form of infrared radiation that reflects, that goes into you and absorbs in
your skin, as also as the ultraviolet light does the same thing.
And then you absorb the energy of that light.
Third, matter can lose energy by emitting light.
So if it's warm or hot or hotter than the surroundings, then light will spontaneously
come off of matter that is warmer than its surroundings and radiate to the surrounding
environment, and that's called radiative transfer of energy.
Okay, so there are two things that are important with respect to color and temperature, and
temperature relates to the internal energy of the matter.
So the internal energy of the matter is what we would call temperature.
So the internal energy can have multiple forms.
One is the structure of the material itself, that would be the phase of the matter, and
the other is the average random motions of the material inside the matter, and that would
be the vibrations of the matter, of it, if it's a gas, how fast it's moving around the
room.
So the internal energy is a function of temperature.
All right, so let's look at how color relates to temperature.
So first and foremost, color is a funny thing.
What is color?
I mean, I'm wearing a little checkered red, white, and blue shirt.
How do you know what I'm wearing?
It's a blue shirt, blue checkers and red checkers on it with a white shirt, and some fun red
and blue and yellow things in the background here.
How do I know what color is?
Well, color is a funny thing because it's defined inside your head.
Color is actually a concept of relative brightness between sets of things that do reception of
light.
What do I mean by that?
Okay, so your eyes are filled with cells on the back.
It's called the retina, the retinal cells.
There's the cones and the rods.
The rods are for nighttime, and the cones are for color and daytime.
So the cones or the color rods have various receptor cells.
And there's maybe, let's just be over, for an oversimplification, we know that there's
maybe three.
Let's just call it three.
So you've got a set of cells inside the cones that are red receptors that receive, and a
green receptor and a blue receptor.
So a red receptor would only say fire off if red light lands on it, or what light in
a specific wavelength region.
Let's say then a green receptor only fires off if green light or this wavelengths of
light in a specific wavelength region, same with blue.
So then the relative brightnesses of these signals from the various cells, the pieces
in each cell, determine the color.
If more of the red cell got fired than the green, then we would call it red.
If the green and the blue got fired, then we would call it yellow compared to the red.
So anyway, the red color then gets constructed in your brain, and then we culturally decide
to call red, red, and blue, blue, and yellow, yellow, yellow.
But that's cultural.
We want to quantify it.
So what was done a long time ago is the Johnson filter system actually tried to mirror roughly
what your eye sees, except it extends it into the infrared and the ultraviolet.
So the primary filters that are used astronomically, or at least the easiest ones, or some of
the oldest ones to use that are still standardized, are the Johnson, UB, VR, and Eye filters.
So we've got a blue filter, which is B, we've got a V filter, which is kind of yellow-green,
and then we've got an R filter, which is red.
So the R filter covers a wavelength region about 6,000 to 7,000 angstroms.
The V filter covers roughly about 5,000 or 5,500 angstroms, and the blue filter covers
roughly about 4,000 angstroms.
So these three filters together allow light of only a certain wavelength to pass through
to the detector.
Notice how that's similar to what your eye does, but your eye doesn't automatically.
The retina has these cells that only detect the light.
Instead, now we make a nice photo detector, some sort of camera, and what we do is we
put in front of the camera a filter so it blocks out all except the blue light, or the
green light, or the red light, and therefore what falls on the camera is either blue light
or green light or red light.
That's different than what happens in your eye.
We don't have filters in our eye that filter things out.
We have cells that receive the certain things.
So we can think of the cells as kind of like inverse filters.
They absorb only specific wavelengths of light, but a filter transmits only certain wavelengths
of light, and it's the specialization of this transmission that allows us to actually determine
color.
All right.
So the Johnson's Cousins Filter Response System, which has some very specific wavelength
transmission frequency, transmission wavelength dependency.
So we don't expect to get pretty much any light that is more blue than, say, 3,000 angstroms
in the B filter, and we don't expect much light longer than 5,000 angstroms to pass
through the B filter, and that's what we mean by these transmission curves.
So the sun itself has a certain brightness in each one of these filters, and we can actually
then look at things and do relative brightnesses of the filters.
Typically astronomy is done with relative brightnesses, so you say, oh, this thing is
brighter than that thing, and that thing's brighter than this thing, and this thing's
brighter than that thing.
And the filter system like this makes it very easy because then you can use the magnitude
system, which itself is a relative brightness concept.
So the visible light bands are only covered by the B, V, and R sections of the Johnson's
Cousins Filter System.
The U section, you're going to have to go way up in altitude in order to use it, and
same with the I section, you need to be at high altitude in order to use these because
the Earth's atmosphere strongly absorbs ultraviolet infrared light.
So what we got is we have these wavelength regions, which the filter system allows through.
Once again, just like we defined with Pogson's system, last time Pogson originally said that
every filter system, in any filter system, including the Johnson's Cousins, the definition
of zero magnitude is the star Vega.
So we start with that idea and then say, oh, how bright or dim is the object with respect
to Vega.
And the reason we use Vega, again, is because Vega goes across the zenith for many observers
in the Northern Hemisphere.
All right.
So what do we really mean by color?
In your eye, it is the difference in brightness that you perceive in the red cells versus
the green cells versus the blue cells in your retina of your eye.
Likewise, in an astronomical sense, what we have is three filters.
So the filters then say, well, what is the, we can then make, we can determine the magnitude
of the object.
And that's our brightness.
Remember, magnitude here is brightnesses.
The apparent brightness in the U filter, the apparent brightness in the B filter, the
apparent brightness in the VR and eye.
And so what we do is it's kind of funny.
Like we've defined magnitudes before where we have the distance modus, little m and big
m for absolute magnitude.
Here we define the apparent magnitude of an object to be the capital letter of the filter
that you're using.
So here we say the magnitude in the U filter and the magnitude in the B filter and the
magnitude in the V in the R, those are just the letters.
So we take those values of the magnitudes, the brightness in magnitudes on these six.
Not brightness in terms of watts per meter squared or that's not how we do it.
We use magnitude system because we can easily do differential brightnesses between them.
So the magnitudes become our reference point in astronomy, not necessarily flux.
We will translate that eventually into flux, but we start with magnitudes.
Alright, so color then is defined in astronomy to be the difference in brightness between
two filters that are adjacent.
And you always take the short wavelength filter minus the long wavelength filter, the magnitude
in the shorter wavelength minus the magnitude in the longer wavelength.
And it's typical that you only, that you look at adjacent filters and not necessarily
span across, but there might be a science reason why you would actually do that.
So typically you might take the difference in brightness between say the U and the B
and the B and the V and the V and the R and the R and the I and then call those the colors.
So a standard color that is used frequently throughout all astronomy is an observation
in the B filter and an observation in the V filter.
And then you take the difference in those observations, meaning the magnitude difference
between B and V, meaning what is the, what is the, if you take the magnitude of B and
subtract from it the magnitude of V, that is the color.
Kind of a funny thing.
So there's lots of different ways we can call color.
And so therefore we can quantify color.
It's not just calling it magenta or red or pews or aquamarine or any of the names that
you would find in a crayon box from Crayola, on those 64 colors with all those pretty names.
We don't care about those names.
Those names are really nice and everything and they're very fun to have.
But really what we want to do is we want to use the definition of color in order to get
us data and understanding.
All right.
So the blue star, the blue color of say the star Sirius.
So Sirius is by definition, well not by definition but by your eye, you can see in the sky as
being a blue star.
So therefore it must be brighter in the blue magnitude, in blue magnitudes than in V magnitudes.
And in fact it is.
So if you take and likewise it must be brighter in the V than the R. So if you look at these
numbers, the B number, the B magnitude of Sirius must be closer, must be lower in value
than the V magnitude.
Because remember, magnitudes, the larger the magnitude, the dimmer it is.
So the more negative it is, the closer towards negative infinity it is, the larger negative
number or the smaller positive number, the brighter it is.
So if you compare a tenth magnitude star to a fifth magnitude star, the fifth magnitude
star is brighter than the tenth magnitude.
So let's say that a star like Sirius might happen to be in the B magnitude.
It's pretty bright.
So I'm just going to make up a number here and the number I'm going to make up is that
it is a B magnitude of say one, let's call it a B magnitude of one.
But because it's dimmer in the V magnitude, maybe it would have a V magnitude of two.
So the color two, C2, which is the color two in the Johnson's filter system, B minus
V is minus one.
So there's the color of Sirius in the B minus V. B minus V color equals minus one.
And let's say the R magnitude is four because it's a very strongly blue thing.
So then V minus R is minus three, so C sub three, which is another color definition in
the Johnson's system, that would be a minus three.
So B minus V color is minus one, and V minus R color is minus three.
Now I pulled all these numbers out of thin air, so don't bother looking them up.
They're wrong.
So, but anyway, I invite you to actually go look up what the B minus V magnitude colors
are of Sirius and the V minus R that are standard.
And if you look at the American Association of Variable Star Observers, you should be
able to actually see that.
All right, so let's take a different star.
So in, say, in the winter sky, Betelgeuse, which is in the constellation Orion, very
beautiful red star, so therefore the B magnitude would have to be dimmer than the V magnitude.
So, and we also know that Betelgeuse is also roughly a magnitude one-ish sort of star in
visual.
So let's say the B magnitude is, say, three, because it's much dimmer in B than in V, and
we'll say that V is, say, a one.
All right?
So that makes sense.
So B minus V, for Betelgeuse, would be three minus one is plus two.
So now we see that a color that is in B minus V, if it's positive, it's red.
If it's negative, the star is blue.
So a positive C2 color, B minus V, means the star is pretty much red.
If the, if the B minus V color is negative, it's probably blue.
And if it's zero, it's probably kind of whiteish-yellow, like the sun, which just makes sense.
Anyway, so with the same thing with V minus R, maybe the V minus R color is more significant
for Betelgeuse, but our magnitudes tend to be a little bit tweaky for a lot of reasons.
And we tend to see V minus V as a pretty big standard in the American Association Variable
Star Observation.
All right.
So the B minus V color will be more positive.
The V minus R color will be more positive for a red star.
So we can construct all of these colors, and this is like an extraordinarily low-resolution
spectroscopy.
What is spectroscopy?
Spectroscopy is where you take the light from a star, say, and you pass it through a prism.
And when you pass it through that prism, the light then gets broken out into a rainbow,
and you see how bright it is to get various frequencies.
So you really care about how bright it is at various frequencies.
That's what you really care about when you're doing spectroscopy.
But the nice thing about doing filters like this, filter photometry, is that pretty much
everything you look at is pretty bright.
So spectroscopy can be pretty dim.
You need a lot of light in order to make a decent spectrum.
But you can do pretty well at lower resolution spectroscopy with Johnson's filters, with
such B minus, B, V, R, I, and filters, U, B, V, R, filters.
All right.
This color is important because it does relate to temperature.
So let's find out how that is.
In general, if we look at the types of stars and we break out their spectra, remember that's
what Annie Jump Cannon did at Harvard back in the 1910s and 1920s with her team of computers
underpickering, the spectra of stars were classified according to their temperature.
And their temperature was guided by the prominence of hydrogen lines.
So okay.
So if we look at the nature of how spectral lines look, we see that O stars in general
are much brighter.
Well, in general, always, O stars are by definition brighter in the blue than they are in the
red, and M stars are brighter in the red than they are in the blue.
Sometimes when we look at stellar spectral classification, we forget that O stars are
inherently much, much, much, much brighter than M stars.
But we'll talk about why that is shortly.
In any event right now, what we can do is look at the temperature of a star, and we
see that as the temperature decreases, it goes from being bright in the blue to bright
in the red.
And that's why we can say that a blue hot object is much hotter than a red hot object.
Red is pretty hot to eyes if you're thinking about flame, but don't want to get close to
a blue hot flame.
That's very, very, very hot in any event.
So real spectra of real stars show that hot stars look blue because they're brighter in
blue than they are in red.
So let's say we put fake BV filters on top of some spectra and see what the impact of
that would be.
We can easily see that the brightness in B filter for an O star, that's kind of BVO,
the brightness in the blue filter for an O star, the B magnitude is much greater than
the V magnitude for the O star.
So therefore the color will be negative.
And if we look at an M type star, the B magnitude will be dimmer and therefore larger than the
V magnitude, where the V magnitude will be brighter and therefore a smaller value.
So a big value minus a small value equals a positive value.
So the color, the B minus V color for M stars is positive and the B minus V color for O
stars is negative.
So that's kind of what we were talking about, the O and B stars are all over the place.
And in general a star like the sun, the G stars right in the middle, their B minus V colors
tend to be roughly about zero because the magnitude difference between the two filters
is roughly nothing, there's almost nothing.
So there is a transition point and that is roughly around the middle of the spectral
sequence and roughly at the G's.
So let's say we instead, instead of looking at it from like a pretty picture rainbow type
of things, we decided to look at it from a spectral sequence where we actually measure
the total brightness of a star numerically instead of using like our eyeballs or magnitudes
but we start with say flux, which is watts per square centimeter.
That's flux falling upon a per square, yeah, watts per square meter, well you know I could
say a meter sized detector but anyway, we then say what's the absolute flux or the amount
of light that is the luminosity falling on our detector and count the real energy that
was being deposited by that light and we get what we call a spectrum.
So that spectrum can be numerically related to the Johnson color system and we can say
well what is the B minus V colors for the various objects and then we see that O stars
are of course brighter in exactly the same way that we discussed with them when we looked
at simple spectra.
So the next question that we have is a rather interesting one and so we see that stars are
organized by their temperatures and O stars are hot and M stars are cool.
How do we know this, why do we know this and the answer is in the spectra themselves.
So the spectrum itself determines the temperature of the star and we just are lucky enough to
be able to use the Johnson's filter system to actually determine that much more easily.
Alright, so when we're looking at the spectra of a star, notice the shapes of the spectra.
In general the shapes of the spectrum of a star, the blue one looks kind of nice and
slopey, it starts off in the visible part of the way of electromagnetic radiation.
It is bright in the blue and the ultraviolet and dim by the time it gets to red and infrared
and the situation is reversed for the M stars.
So what do these curves mean?
What do these plots of intensity as a function of wavelength mean?
Well they just mean that what we're seeing is if we look at a star it's really far away.
So we're not taking the image of a particular patch of a star, we're looking at it averaged
over the entire star.
So we're looking at the average say temperature and the average spectrum of all the regions
of the star.
Some might be a little hotter, some might be a little cooler, that's what sunspots are
in the sun, sunspots are slightly cooler areas, prominences are a little bit cooler,
the sun radiates in X-rays but if we took the sun and put it really far away, maybe
tens of parsecs away, then we wouldn't be able to resolve the sun, but we would still
be able to get the average spectrum of all the light that comes to us from the sun.
Most important thing though about a star is that no matter how far away it is, no matter
how tiny it seems in the sky, it is a big thing.
Stars are enormous objects, they're much bigger than planets, even little M dwarf stars are
bigger than the planet Jupiter.
So if we take something like the size of the sun, the sun itself is 100 earths could fit
across it and a million earths could fit inside it, so these are enormous objects.
And an enormous hot dense body is opaque, and an enormous hot dense body that is opaque
means the light bounces around inside it if light is being generated inside of there,
and it bounces around inside it until everything becomes the same temperature.
Once everything is the same temperature inside the star, then it's at the same temperature
and what we see at the surface of the star is that average temperature of all the light
then all the material being all the same temperature at the surface.
So that's interesting because it's opaque, everything gets to the same temperature.
So temperature is a funny thing because it's measurement, it is a measurement of the internal
energy of the object, when the solid it's just the things vibrating in place and how
much vibrational motion it has inside of the structure of the solid.
If you give it enough heat then there are bonds that must be broken down in order to
churn it from a solid to say a liquid or a solid to a gas, but we'll ignore that for
just a second because that's a different kind of change in heat latency and heat latency.
But if you have a gas that's much easier, and stars are gases, they're not solids,
so a gaseous ball, a starry gaseous ball, the higher the temperature, the higher the
average motion of the molecules, the atoms that make up the star, so they move faster.
So temperature itself in a gas is related to how fast the atoms are moving inside it
or ions if it's too hot.
The way we can then relate temperature itself as a measurement to the speeds and therefore
energy because speed is like kinetic energy, it's the energy of going fast.
So therefore the temperature must be an average measurement of all of the speeds, of all of
the objects in it.
It's not everything going exactly the same speed, that would be kind of weird.
But what we see is that it's an average speed over the entire set of molecules and atoms.
So we can relate it to the average kinetic energy of an atom inside of there.
And that thing that we call its movement is what we call heat.
And heat has a lot of different things that we can talk about, and that would be a thermodynamic
course.
But let's just start with a relatively easy concept and begin from there.
And so heat is something that you measure, temperature is something you measure with
a thermometer, and heat is a measurement of how much wiggling there is occurring inside
of the atoms.
A little bit loose definition there, I know, but off we go, we'll just kind of keep with
it for now.
But cold can be defined as the lack of motion.
So in absolute temperature scale, we might want to say, absolutely cold, we want nothing
moving, but we'll call that temperature equals zero.
And so as you give it more and more heat, the things move faster and faster, so therefore
there the temperature gets higher and higher.
Because not everything's at the same motion, it's the average speeds of the object that
determine the temperature.
So the Kelvin temperature scale was defined a long time ago by Lord Kelvin.
And it's related to zero is the absolute zero of it, and at that time there is no motion
whatsoever on the part of anything that's inside an object that is at absolute zero.
The cosmic microwave background is at three degrees above absolute zero, which means it
is very cold, but still there's some, actually an incredible amount of energy associated with
that, but we'll let that go for a second.
The pure water boils at 277, it freezes, at least if you cool water below 273 degrees Kelvin,
it becomes a solid.
If you warm it above 273 Kelvin, then as it first does, it was a funny thing.
First when it becomes, it's a solid, and then there is heat as you can apply heat to ice
and it'll change phase from solid to liquid at the same temperature until you've given
it enough heat to break down the bonds that make it go from a solid to a liquid.
And then once it becomes a liquid, then the temperature again begins to rise because when
you apply heat to a phase that is in the phase transition mode, you actually, that's what
phase transition means is that you could have the same temperature, but yet there you don't
change the relative, the relative average motion of it.
A phase change simply changes the arrangement or the fundamental arrangement of the atoms
and molecules inside of it.
So that's a pretty loose definition too.
But once we get to 373 Kelvin, then it boils, which then the bonds that make up a liquid
that are broken down and you add heat into the liquid to make it become a vapor.
It stays at that temperature 373 until you've given it so much heat that all of a sudden
nothing's left in the liquid state and it's all a vapor state and then the temperature
can increase again and temperature then becomes, and it still is in all of these cases, a measurement
of the average motion of the objects.
But heat is, as you can see, slightly different because heat can be applied to something and
it doesn't necessarily raise the temperature, which is interesting and that's about phase
transitions and that should be done within a separate video.
But for our purposes for this, all we really want to say is that the Kelvin temperature
scale for gases, which make up stars, that is in measurement of their average speed.
And the Kelvin temperature scale has some basic things.
We already talked about water boiling and so forth, but then fusion of hydrogen occurs
when the temperature is approximately 13, approximately 10 million degrees or about 10
million Kelvin.
So we don't say degrees Kelvin, we say degrees centigrade, we say degrees Fahrenheit, we just
say 10 million Kelvin because it's units like watts or meters.
We don't say 10 million lengths meters, we don't say oh that's 10 million times seconds
right?
Because we don't say seconds are a time, we know it's a time, we know Kelvin is a unit
of temperature, so we just say that's 10 million Kelvin, that's the temperature of that star.
So light and heat is therefore a different thing, but yet they're all, but they're related.
So you may receive light from the sun in the form of infrared photons and those infrared
photons can go to doing one of two things that can go to changing the internal heat of your
body and the internal heat then can be manifested in numerous ways.
The most common way is to make the atoms and molecules in your body vibrate or move more
quickly.
You also can change the state from a liquid to a gas or a solid to a liquid depending
on the intensity and the wavelength of the light, so that all depends on how it absorbs
and emits it.
But from our perspective what we really care about is that when light falls upon a gas
we can treat it as a heat input and as it inputs that heat into the system then what
occurs is the temperature rises.
Now if it's an average, if it's completely opaque and everything inside there is at thermal
equilibrium, meaning that there isn't a place inside the star that is significantly different
compared to another place inside the star, well it's kind of a tricky thing because
stars have to be a little bit out of thermal equilibrium because they emit light and emit
heat so they have to have a source coming in there, but if the source of energy inside
of the star equals the amount of energy that's coming out of the star then it can be said
to be in thermal equilibrium.
So as long as the star is in thermal equilibrium, meaning in general it's not getting a lot
hotter and in general it's not getting a lot cooler and in general there's no big areas
where there's motion of heat going from one place to another, then we call thermal equilibrium.
If an object is hot at the same temperature throughout and opaque then it would be called
the black body.
A black body is even a stranger object, it's kind of a theoretical, in fact it is a theoretical
object that absorbs all light that falls upon it and since it absorbs all the light that
falls upon it, it doesn't reflect anything, it reflects no light, it absorbs all light
that's kind of a stretch, there's nothing that does not absorb all light.
So any light that falls on a black body gets absorbed and therefore it gets mixed around
inside the black body until then it thermalizes with all the other light inside of that, all
the other matter inside of that and then the black body then because it can perfectly absorb,
it can perfectly emit and it doesn't hold back certain wavelengths of light.
If a black body held back certain wavelengths of light then it would also reflect those
certain wavelengths of light which is interesting to say.
So a black body is a perfect absorber of light and a perfect emitter which means everything
inside of it gets to the same temperature, that's what we care about.
So things that are very close to black bodies in mostly everyday parlance, molten steel
at a foundry, the ingots of steel, those are most certainly black body objects, they're
hot, they're very hot, they're glowing, they're all at the same temperature and in fact if
you look inside the foundry it's hard to tell the color of the sides of the walls of
the foundry from the actual molten steel itself, in fact when they put it in there you can't
see the difference because the steel and the walls and the gas inside of there are all
glowing at the same exact temperature and since they're glowing at the same exact temperature
they have the same exact spectrum because it's a black body spectrum.
The next thing we can look at that's a very familiar thing is the coals of a fire, look
deep inside the coals of a fire and on some camping night that you might go out to and
the coals of a fire, not the fire flame above but deep inside the coals below the wood you
can't tell where the fire begins and where the coals end if you look carefully.
In fact they all have the same temperature, they all have the same color.
The only reason something has a slightly different temperature is if it's darker it's cooler
but if it has the same exact temperature it'll have the same exact color.
The cool, the hot area that's being shielded inside of the cavity of the fire deep down
in there, that's a black body too.
Now a welder's arc is a very very hot object but what actually is the thing that might happen
to be a black body?
Remember the welder melts something, melts the steel at very high temperature and so
not the sparking stuff because that would be an emission spectrum, it would be a gaseous
form of it but the sparks coming off, the actual sparks themselves they're reddish but
if you look at the center of a welding arc's light the light itself is where the metal
has been turned to blue hot and now blue hot that area is very small, remember the foundry
look is this enormous thing and you can still look at it, it's bright but you can still
look at it but the intensity of light goes up here either rapidly as the temperature
goes up.
So the melted iron that is being focused on by the arc welder that's the thing that's
incredibly hot and incredibly blue and incredibly bright so there's something about it getting
hot that means also getting bright too.
Alright, oh no now I get to throw equations at you so equations are a funny thing so the
entire shape doesn't matter if it's a black body, any black body, every black body has
a theoretical curve that has the shape that kind of looks like an off kilter normal curve
or a bell curve, take a bell curve and like stretch one side long and that's kind of
what the black body curve looks like.
The only thing that can be different from one black body to another is the temperature
and so it just basically scales everything up by a factor of the temperature.
So as if it's hotter the area of the black body curve scales up by a factor of the temperature
of the third power and so as you get hotter and hotter the area gets hot, the temperature
gets higher and higher.
So it's a very, well it's actually the temperature of the fourth power is really what it comes
down to but still.
So the point is that every black body has the same shape, doesn't matter what its temperature
is, the same shape but yet whether it's brighter at one frequency or another that's a different
thing.
So different black bodies at different temperatures have peak wavelengths at different wavelengths.
When they're very, very cool black bodies as we saw in say the iron foundry or even
a very cool star like Beetlejuice, it peaks in the red or even in the infrared and then
as it gets hotter and hotter it starts peaking in the visible light like say yellow or green
but if you were to see such a thing that's like 6,000 or 6,000 Kelvin, to your eye it
would look white because it's roughly evenly balanced across the visible spectrum.
But it peaks at specific wavelengths that we would call green if it was peaking roughly
on 6,000 Kelvin and once you get above 7,000 Kelvin the peak temperature, the peak location
starts going into the ultraviolet.
So it starts from the red and infrared moves through the center of the visible spectrum
and all the way up to ultraviolet.
It just so happens that stellar temperatures, stellar surface temperatures range in their
peak brightnesses for most stars in the visible light range all the way up through the blue
light and all the way up through infrared, so infrared to ultraviolet.
That's where stars seem to peak in their black body radiation.
So when we take the curves for black bodies and we isolate only the sections that are
visible light, if we isolate only those sections it just so happens that the actual spectra
of stars very closely match the theoretical predictions of what a black body curve of
that temperature looks like.
They're really, really, really close.
It's not perfect and the reason it's not perfect is because stars have atmospheres and the
atmosphere of the star acts to absorb light from that star and when it absorbs the light
from the star it takes the light away from the star and then we don't see it and we
see an absorption feature.
Maybe we see even emission features, but typically it'll absorb it in one wavelength
and then those atoms and molecules will re-radiate it in some other location and it'll escape
in a different way.
It doesn't hang on to it, it just re-radiates in another direction, in other wavelengths.
The sun itself, specifically the black body for it would peak right around 5,000, roughly
right in the middle of the spectrum, but yet the actual curve because of this redistribution
is a little bit more blue.
So that's kind of interesting, but even so, the curve for the solar spectrum is really
close to a black body spectrum.
So what are some other astronomical objects that we see that have a black body spectrum?
Remember, it has to be dense and it has to be thermalized, it has to be all at the same
temperature and it has to be one object that's at the same temperature.
Alright, that's cool and we'll see what kind of things we have.
So if we look at dark, dark dust clouds deep in interstellar space, the places where stars
are being born, dense enough so that they barely collapse under their gravity, they
might be a parsec or two across, they're very, very cold objects.
They might be 60 degrees above absolute zero.
And so even if it's 60 degrees above absolute zero, it can still have a black body curve
because that's the average temperature, so if it's an average temperature of that, what's
the peak wavelength?
Well, the peak wavelength is deep in the infrared, deep in the infrared if not even in the radio
wavelengths.
So when you have something at 60 degrees Kelvin, if you look in infrared light, you'll see
it glowing.
So therefore, that's why the Spitzer space, infrared space telescope has been built and
why space telescope has been built to look at objects that glow in the infrared and
things that are cool objects, very cool objects.
A dark dust cloud does not glow in any light, in the visible light and therefore we see
it to be dark.
If we then look at say something like a protostellar object, like let's say now a star is formed
inside this dark dust cloud.
Once it's formed inside there, the star itself is pretty warm.
But yet it's not hot enough to call itself a star.
Maybe it's a bit warmer than the surface, maybe it's much warmer than the surface of
Jupiter and it might be a few hundred Kelvin.
Therefore it seems to be a dull red, but it peaks in the infrared, in the near infrared.
Near infrared means just a little bit further red than the about 7,000 angstroms or 700 nanometers.
And you'll notice also that something that is 600 Kelvin is a thousand times brighter
at the peak than something that's 60 Kelvin.
So the warmer it is, the much brighter it is.
So by multiplying by a factor of 10 gives you a lot, lot, lot larger factor of luminosity
in terms of temperature, in luminosity.
So we go to the sun now and the sun is about 6,000 Kelvin and so it's about a thousand
times again brighter than say some dust cloud that's at 600 Kelvin.
And it peaks roughly in the visible wavelength region, but it has significant output in infrared
radio, well not really a lot of radio, but significant infrared output and significant
ultraviolet output.
The sun's spectrum is pretty close to a black body and we can use that as a measurement.
And what we feel as warmth on a summer day is the infrared light that passes from the
sun through the atmosphere to us as part of the black body spectrum.
The sunscreen you wear is for the intense ultraviolet light that drops off rapidly at
a shorter wavelength.
So then the next thing we can look at is something even hotter.
Say the accretion disc around a black hole, so there's material falling into a black hole
and as it falls into that black hole, it gets hotter and hotter and hotter and just before
it falls into the center of a black hole.
It gets to be tens of thousands of Kelvin.
Actually it gets much hotter than that, but we're talking about the outskirts or maybe
we're even looking at an extraordinarily hot O-star.
So an extraordinarily hot O-star might be tens of thousands of Kelvin.
And those things are even more luminous than the sun, thousands of times more luminous
than the sun.
And their peak wavelength is way out in the ultraviolet and they emit even more visible
light than the sun does.
They emit even more infrared light than the sun does, but they emit even more ultraviolet
light.
So in general, the hotter something is if it's a black body, which is mostly a star,
stars are mostly black bodies or really close to black bodies in terms of their spectra,
then it's brighter overall wavelength and the peak of the brightness moves to be shorter
and shorter and shorter wavelengths.
All right, so the law for black body says the wavelength maximum, the maximum wavelength
of the peak of the curve just depends on some little number B, which is a measurable number.
And then you divide, it's the inverse of the temperature.
So the hotter it is, the shorter the wavelength is where the peak exists.
And finally, how much energy gets dumped out of an object that has a particular temperature
in Kelvin if it's a black body?
The temperature of an object goes as the temperature, the energy output per surface area on the
surface of the object goes like the temperature of the fourth power.
So we take a standard sized patch and we take that patch, maybe it's the size of your hand
or something, we put it on various things that are hot or cool and we measure the total
energy output through a standard patch, say, you know, it's like 10 centimeters by centimeters
or five centimeters by five centimeters, whatever it happens to be.
The energy output through that standard patch will go like the temperature of the fourth
power.
So something that's twice as hot as something else will emit 16 times as much energy.
Something that's 10 times as hot will emit 10,000 times as much energy.
And something that's 100 times as hot will emit 100 million times as much energy.
So the hotter it is, the more energy it puts out and it's a very fast function of temperature.
So these are our basic concepts of stellar, of stars, and it makes them pretty easy.
Stars are pretty close to black bodies.
If it's hotter, it's brighter.
If it's hotter, it's bluer.
That's really what we really care about.
So when we take about these, when we look at all the stars that we see in the sky and
then we look at their stellar spectra, we now have a pretty good firm foundation of what
we can look at.
And we take the spectra of a star and we see that O stars are bluer compared to M stars
so we know what that means.
And now then we can use the Johnson's filter system to uniquely determine the temperature
of a star.
All we have to do is calibrate using the spectra on high level calibration.
What the spectrum of a star is, like an O star and M star, G star, whatever.
And we learn what the average spectrum of those are with their temperatures are according
to spectra.
And then we can step it down and you do it easier by saying, well, look at the colors
and the B minus V. The B minus V color uniquely determines the temperature of a star.
So all we have to do in order to learn about something very important about the star, meaning
how fast the atoms are moving on average at the surface of the star or right at the
inside of the star, is take a picture with two filters in front of it, say the B filter
of Johnson and the V filter of Johnson, put pictures in front of those things and difference
the brightness between the two.
And once we do that, we know the color index.
The color index is uniquely determined by the temperature.
So this is an amazing consequence.
And those colors, the B minus V colors, transition relatively smoothly from the hot to the cold.
There's some lumps along the way.
But in general, the more negative the color, the bluer, the more positive the B minus V
color, the redder and cooler.
B minus V negative, hotter, hotter, hotter, bluer.
B minus V positive, cooler, cooler, cooler, redder.
So we can go on and on with those kind of stuff and we will.
So this is a really interesting thing where you take the concept of the magnitude system
and apply it to some deep physics about the nature of how atoms move inside an object.
And we'll talk more about that next time.
Hello, this is Jason Kendall.
Welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
Today we're going to be talking about spectroscopy.
Spectroscopy is the study of how light interacts with matter and how the interaction of matter
with light betrays itself and gets transmitted through space to us so we can receive it.
Spectroscopy is simply the way we take the light that's coming from a distance source
and use some method by which we can break it apart into a spectrum to see how the intensity
of the light varies with wavelength or frequency.
So an easy way to think about this is allow normal white light to pass through a prism
and then you'll see a rainbow effect.
Well typically a rainbow effect is pretty hard to see unless of course there's a very
narrow opening through which that passes the light in a very narrow beam and that narrow
beam then goes through the prism.
If it's a general wave of light that goes through it or an ambient then the prism will
not necessarily be a create a spectrum.
Well it will create a spectrum but it will be harder to see.
So for us to make it better we usually take the source, whatever it is, send it through
a narrow slit so that it becomes a ray or a beam.
We don't care about losing all that light because we're just going to analyze the light
that comes to us from there.
We pass it through a prism, the prism breaks apart the light because the inside of glass,
the speed of light is different for different wavelengths and so it spreads the light apart
into its constituent wavelengths or frequencies and then we take a picture of the incident
light after it goes through the prism and that is the study of spectroscopy.
Then divides the light up so that we can see the intensity at given wavelengths or frequencies
and that we know exactly how that thing is interacting with the light, meaning the prism.
So we don't have to worry about the prism's interaction of the light, we just worry about
the origin of the source.
So if we then look at more common things like if we take a prism, just a garden household
variety prism or a crystal, you notice that there's always a pretty rainbow that comes
off of the sunlight.
Well pretty rainbows from the sunlight are indicated here in this image from the McMath
Solar Observatory down in Tucson, Arizona run by NOAO and this rainbow that we always
see has actually some darker spots in it and those darker spots are the shadows of the
slit through which we passed the sunlight.
So that's what we call the absorption lines because we make a vertical line slit through
which we pass the sunlight and that sunlight then passes into our spectroscope and that
spectroscope might just simply be a prism or it might be some other device like in a
shell spectrograph or something like that or reflecting off of the surface.
But at the angle what we see is we see a series of dark lines on the spectrum and those are
places where it simply is dimmer than the surrounding continuum.
So the rainbow itself we call it the continuum or the continuous spectrum and there are
absorption features which are darker than the surrounding continuum.
So the sun's spectrum is actually what we call an absorption spectrum.
There is light that's been absorbed from the continuum.
Alright so there's a different kind of spectrum as well where there's bright emission on top
of a dark background.
So perhaps the material is not emitting light at all frequencies maybe it's emitting light
at specific frequencies and if the material is emitting it only at specific frequencies
not with a rainbow but with specific wavelengths of light then if we pass it through a spectroscope
we see the lines of emission that we put here.
What's funny we call them lines and that's simply because when we talk about emission
lines or absorption lines that's simply because we're using a slit type opening and so we're
actually seeing the image of the slit.
So in an absorption spectrum or I'm sorry in an emission spectrum such as these the
emission spectrum themselves that's the image of the slit through which the light is going.
And so you'll see that the image of the slit the appearance of the line is the same for
each one.
It's just the color is different and the wavelength is different.
So that's interesting and we also notice that they're kind of distinct.
Well emission spectra are fascinating because what you can where you can get them is if
you take say sodium, sodium chloride, table salt and you hold it in a Bunsen burner and
you hold it like a bit of table salt in like a metal piece of metal and you put it over
a Bunsen burner and heat it up till it glows then the flame that comes off the Bunsen burner
will have a particular wavelength and if you look at the lights that is coming off of the
burning salt that comes off of there you get a specific set of wavelengths and those are
emission spectra.
Now you'll get a sodium spectrum and of course since it's table salt you'll also get a chlorine
spectrum as well.
What really we care about like the sodium spectrum but you see that a noble gas such
as neon will have a different spectrum and mercury vapor has a different spectrum and
ubiquitous hydrogen throughout the cosmos has a specific spectrum.
So what's funny about all these emission spectra is that it doesn't matter where you get the
material from say hydrogen or helium or neon or sodium chloride or something or when you
get it or from whom you get it it doesn't matter.
All you have to do is heat it up such that it becomes vaporous and it will emit the same
exact emission spectrum and so therefore everything has its own fingerprint.
Hydrogen is the same thing no matter where you get your hydrogen from.
Hydrogen has the same fingerprint no matter what and we call these things fingerprints
because the emission spectra is it exactly the same wavelengths or frequencies every
single time you measure it which is very interesting which tells you something about the nature
of the matter.
So what what emission lines can be done and specifically we're going to be talking about
what are called Kirchhoff's laws of spectroscopy and Kirchhoff was his full name is Gustav Kirchhoff
and in the mid 19th century he was doing a whole bunch of experimental physics and he
worked with the guy who invented the Bunsen burner Mr. Bunsen and they did a bunch of
spectroscopy and what he found were the following three laws.
Kirchhoff's laws first say that emission lines are produced at single frequencies up behind
in front of a dark background if you're looking at a hot rarefied gas that has no bright emission
source or no bright continuum behind it it's just a gas that you see with nothing right
behind it.
So you get specific wavelengths appearing at specific brightness at specific wavelengths
and that comes from a hot gas and that is one of Kirchhoff's laws of spectroscopy.
The next one is if you take a continuous source like a light bulb like an incandescent light
bulb which gives a black body type of radiation and that is in front and that is behind a
cool gas maybe it's the same gas maybe it's hydrogen gas that's cooler than the bulb.
Well as the light from the hot hot bulb passes through the cooler gas the cool gas absorbs
the light and the absorption then dims the light at specific frequencies and those specific
frequencies where it gets dimmed then get passed through we see it as a spectrum and
we see something like the solar spectrum but when we look carefully we actually see
something more interesting deeper in just a bit and so we can actually relate Kirchhoff's
laws to as a trio of things because a hot opaque body such as a light bulb emits a continuous
spectrum something hot and opaque emits a continuous spectrum something hot and opaque
that is behind a cloud of cooler gas that emits that we see if we look through the cooler
gas to the hot source we will see an absorption spectrum.
Now if we look at a quarter to that and just look at the gas that did the absorbing of
the light we will see an emission spectrum.
So really Kirchhoff's laws are three sides of the same situation you can either look
straight at the continuous the straight at the hot dense object and you'll see a continuous
object a continuous source you'll look at the cloud that's sitting off to the side of
the absorption of the hot object and look through the cloud at the hot body and you'll
see an absorption spectrum or you'll look off to the side of just the emission light
just the hot cloud that will cooler cloud compared to the hot body and you'll see an
emission spectrum so they're all part of the same thing and that means that as we look
at these objects that the emission lines and the absorption lines are at exactly the same
wavelengths and that makes sense because let's say it's a hydrogen cloud gas and hydrogen
will absorb and emit at exactly the same wavelengths it's not like it absorbs at one wavelength
and emits at another you know it emits at the same exact wavelength that it absorbs that's
interesting so that's telling you something about the nature of matter the nature of matter
itself and Gustav Kirchhoff did all the work in spectroscopy well before the advent of quantum
mechanics and the model of the the Bohr model of the atom so as we look at the nature of what
matter is he didn't know about all this stuff so he derived these laws empirically and these
observations then had to be accounted for with the advent of quantum mechanics which they were
so most importantly is that the setup of the spectroscope tells us an enormous amount
about the nature of the material so we can tip it depends on what you how you wish to view things
or what is possible for you to view you can set up an experimental apparatus in many many ways
in order to do spectroscopy but it's typically pretty easy and dirt well not easy typically
it's helpful to start with an emission spectrum in order to identify exactly what material you're
looking at and then hopefully through some chemistry you can determine really what you're
looking at but spectroscopy itself is considered to be probably one of the most prevalently used
science device scientific tools at our disposal to understand exactly what makes up an some kind
of object so Kirchhoff's laws were were were developed in the mid early 19th mid 19th century
and refined until the early we're not understood of why they behaved until the mid 20th century
now what can you get out of spectroscopy well the first thing is because every chemical element
has its own particular fingerprint or signature every single element that must be present in there
must emit light or absorb light so you can tell the composition of what's in the what's in the gas
that you're absorbing or what the nature of the cool gas in front of the hot body is in addition
the spectrum changes a little bit if you're looking at ionized gas so if you ionize a gas
meaning the electron gets blown out of the atom and if it's blown out of the atom then the electric
field changes a little bit which changes the spectrum just slightly and so not only do you
have to make all these fingerprint catalogues of emission spectrum but you also have to try to get
the emission spectrum of ionized gases as well which really becomes kind of a pain because the
more you ionize a heavy element the the actual the spectrum itself changes considerably and then
if you then take it and we were just talking simple atomic spectra atomic elements if molecules
are involved like such as water or carbon dioxide or carbon monoxide or deoxyribonucleic acid or
RNA or anything if you used to do spectroscopy on complex molecules or even simple molecules
every single molecule has its own individual spectrum and some of them can be incredibly complex
and then we know that poly aromatic poly aromatic cyclic hydrocarbons are actually present in space
and can be observed because of their spectrum in fact ethyl alcohol has been found in space and some
extraordinarily simple amino acids have been found in space so this is really interesting we can know
something about the nature of which molecules are present not even having to go there it's really
fascinating now the other thing that's interesting about the nature of spectroscopy is that because
it takes energy in order to we had a hot remember in a hot bulb in front of a cool gas
that hot bulb provides energy into the gas and that gas then reacts to it well if the temperature
of the gas is not hot enough then it might not react or it might not absorb certain that we
pray it might not it might not get the wavelengths of light it needs in or it doesn't get the energy
it needs in order to hop up and down or we can also then determine that by looking at how the
gas is absorbing or emitting at different wavelengths or frequencies we can actually
determine the temperature of that gas so if you have a gas full of hydrogen and it's in front
it's above a star if that gas is above right above a star maybe it's the atmosphere of the star
and the atmosphere is cooler than the star then we might see a big absorption feature for say hydrogen
but let's say the star is extremely extremely hot and the electrons are ionized off of the hydrogen
atom then you won't get any absorption at all even though hydrogen is present or maybe the star is
very very very cool and you don't get any absorption of hydrogen because the star doesn't have enough
energy to kick the electrons out of the lower orbits of the of hydrogen into higher orbits
well this could also and spectroscopy the spectroscopy can tell you something about the
temperature of it if you then look at the nature of the lines themselves we can find that sometimes
the lines are not exactly as narrow as we think so maybe you in a laboratory you measure the
frequency of hydrogen the emission lines of hydrogen and then what you do is you take that
hot gas and put it under extraordinary pressure if it's under extraordinary pressure you're going
to find that the lines themselves these emission lines will be broader because as it's under pressure
the atoms the hydrogen atoms are moving at a higher speed which means that some some of them
are Doppler shifted towards you away from you from your emission which means that as the energy
goes into and out of the the energy as the small as the atoms of hydrogen are moving fast
as they're emitting then that can Doppler shift it either towards you away from you and thus
broaden the lines when it's called pressure broadening and the same thing happens with density
so if you have a high dense atmosphere you can get different kinds of broadening so each of these
things can be studied inside of the spectrum of the star and different kinds of broadening
or different profiles to the line meaning not just that the line is like okay it's totally
dark and then bank i've got this one bright thing like a spike maybe it's shaped like a like a like
a funnel and we have funnel type shapes maybe you've got wings and then a funnel there's all
sorts of ways that this that matter can interact with light and the proof the profile of the line
meaning exactly how does it vary around that particular wavelength can tell you a lot about
the nature of the star itself or whatever you're looking at and there's an incredible amount of
information that gets carried along with it and that gives us the physical data about what's
happening at the conditions of the matter when the light was emitted and because now we can
understand the elements of such as pressure and density and temperature and composition now we
can do physics and the physics then allows us to understand what's really going on and that's
what we that's what so spectroscopy and the invention of the spectroscope and if the the
invention of Gustavs laws as they began introduced the concept of astrophysics to astronomy because
up until the concept of astrophysics up until the concept of spectroscopy really took hold
we could never really know anything about what was going on in the stars all we could learn
is that this thing's moving it's going across the sky it's bright but we didn't really understand
the spectrum so it took some time before we said well look if there must be an absorption spectrum
coming from that star well stars are very dim so it took a long time for the technology to come
around such as you could actually make a spectrum of a star photographically at least but once we
understood the nature of the spectrum of a star we now then could transform astronomy
into astrophysics and that allows us to learn exactly how something is happening even though
it's hundreds of light years away or thousands of light years away or millions of light years away
because we trust that all of the physics that happens here in the laboratory and this is a
really big assumption this is one of the most important underlying assumptions about all astrophysics
due to spectroscopy is that since all the laws of the physics are the same everywhere in the
universe at all times of the universe is existence meaning from all the way ago to all the way today
that the laws of physics themselves are the same then we can trust spectroscopy because we only get
a messenger of light so that's a really interesting assumption that all of light and all of matter is
the same here as it was there and as we measure the laboratory wavelengths of hydrogen and then
we look at some distant quasar and that distant quasar emits light and it absorbs light and
there's absorption of light as it travels to us through the intergalactic medium then we can trust
that we can actually understand what's happening between us and the quasar and even at the quasar
that emitted the light say 10 billion years ago and the light traveled for 10 billion years so
the universality of the laws of physics is what we trust because we've never been to the stars
we probably never will be to the stars but the physics of light interact with matter
allows us to reach with our imagination out to the stars and learn about what is happening over
there and we'll see the effect of spectroscopy everywhere throughout all of these courses
and that's how we actually know what's going on over there
hello this is jason kendall and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures today
we're going to be talking about the nature of matter itself what is the matter with matter
matter is that stuff that makes up the universe in fact let's even make a more interesting definition
for matter matter has mass and as mass it must be pushed around by forces so anything that can
accelerate a mass through a force is how matter interacts with other matter kind of a weird way
of thinking about it but that's old newton's laws so we just go all the way back to newton's
laws and say there's some stuff that we'll call matter and matter may be accelerated or decelerated
and the thing that does that accelerating or deceleration is called a force and so there are
four different ways the universe has of pushing things around and they're called the four fundamental
forces of nature one of them is gravity and gravity obviously attracts every mass attracts
every other mass and causes it to accelerate that's the nature of gravity well we also we know by
by einstein now and just newton's laws work very well but we know einstein's law einstein's
version of gravity says that matter curves spacetime and it falls inside of that curved
spacetime but what we can think about let's go back to newton's laws newton's version of gravity
we have two pieces of matter that then gravitate to each other and they accelerate towards each other
that's what we really care about is the acceleration of matter well what's the other thing well we
could put a pair of charges on top of it we could have a plus charge and a minus charge an electric
charge and they can if they're the same type of charge they repel if they have the opposites then
they'll attract each other and that will cause the matter to accelerate the electromagnetic
force causes an acceleration and the thing that we call the electromagnetic force that which
transmits the force in the case of gravity it's the curvature of spacetime but with the electromagnetic
force it's the transmission of light photo photons back and forth between the charge particles as
they move and vibrate they change the electric field and that vibrating moving electric field
then indicates how that thing should be pushed or pulled by the charges that as the light is
receiving them all right so the electromagnetic force is another way that matter can be accelerated
or moved and the next one is the strong and weak nuclear forces the strong nuclear force holds
holds protons together inside of the nucleus of an atom and holds neutrons and protons all
inside a nucleus as well as holding the constituent quarks of an atom but we'll talk about that
shortly so the strong and weak nuclear forces only really come into play when we talk about
nuclear particles or the centers of atoms all right so what do we mean by matter all right so
I just said it's the thing that gets pushed around when their force is acted upon it all right so you
have to have some way of interacting well gravity says that if it's got mass it will you have something
to do with the gravitational force if it also has charge then the mass that has the charge will
then be accelerated if it has it if it interacts via the weak nuclear force by the exchange of
w or z bosons or it exchanges or interacts by the by the strong nuclear force the interchange of
blue odds then the matter then will accelerate because of these interactions but what makes
up matter well matter in the universe is comes in from very big things to very small things and
we'll start with the tiniest like quarks and leptons which are fundamental particles you can't
break them apart any further when there are subatomic particles like protons and neutrons
which are composed of quarks and then you think about electrons which are fundamental park
particles themselves the fundamental particle called a lepton is an electron and it can't
be broken apart and then you can take protons and neutrons and smash put them together and
then you get a nucleus of an atom and if you put some electrons around it you've got an atom if you
put atoms together with next to each other and you've got molecules if you have multi huge molecules
you can have a bucky ball or a bucky chain or carbon nanotube or you can have a crystal of iron
or a nice little quartz crystal of amethyst or something or you can have deoxyribonucleic acid
or just water H2O any many of these things complex molecules and simple molecules and then you can
take all sorts of molecules and pump them together make crystals out of there make glomerations on
and put some over here and some over there and pack them together and you might get a person
or an elephant or a giraffe or a car or a planet or a star or a galaxy you know all sorts of stuff
you can make out of atoms and just think of atoms as your building blocks of everything and that's
what you can make it out of so the ordinary matter in the universe is what we call atoms and it makes
up all the stuff that we know so what's an atom all right so an atom has a nucleus and a nucleus
has some electrons swarming around it and the cartoon thing that we always see and always have
seen for a long time that's a really helpful visualization but it really doesn't look like
that and we'll talk about what we mean by that next time but we'll look at it but we'll kind of
go with this cartoon for a little bit and the cartoon says that in the center of the atom
there is a nucleus and the nucleus is composed of protons and neutrons and the neutrons are
uncharged and electrically neutral they don't do anything they're a little bit more massive than the
proton but the neutron itself just a tiny bit more massive than the proton but the proton has a positive
charge so the proton's positive charge is part of the nucleus and the neutrons positive charge
could be in a nucleus and they're surrounded by a cloud of electrons and there is if it's a neutral
atom then there's one electron for every proton that exists in the atom so you got one in one
if it's ionized then there will be fewer there will be fewer electrons than there are protons
and you can also have ions where there are more electrons that's kind of weird you'd have to have
a very strange arrangement so the electrons don't fully screen the protons or it might be a dense
environment where the electrons are being forced upon the atom but in general we can think of
that electrons and protons come one to one with respect to each other and when they go one to one
we see a cloud of electrons and we have a neutral atom i what's funny is is also that we talked
about the fundamental particles so an electron is a fundamental particle and a proton is not
it is a subatomic particle it's composed of quarks but a proton is about 1800 times the mass of an
electron and if we think about how much mass that is a typical person college students say here at
William Patterson the typical student is about if they're eating ramen on a Saturday night as they're
studying for their finals then they'll meet be like 140 150 pounds because they're losing weight
and they're all stressed out so but now you take 1800 of those and that's approximately 100 tons
so an electron let's say a normal person is the mass of an electron then the mass of the proton
would be 100 tons i'm just trying to think of what exactly would be 100 tons i mean dump trucks a
huge dump trucks well we'd have to look at earth mover dump trucks those enormous things that are
in mining operations or strip mining operations those are hundreds of tons so there's some big
things that are hundreds of tons and we can think about wow me compared to 100 tons and what is okay
so some pickup trucks or some large trucks that you might go by are about a ton so 100 pickup
trucks or 100 suvs or 100 large cars compare and compact them together and call that one object
is equivalent is the mass of one thing the best the proton compared to say you
if you are an electron kind of interesting all right so now how are they distributed in space
according to this cartoon it makes it look oh everybody's all happy and joyful and the electrons
are really big and the protons are really big and the neutrons are really big but they're not
they're incredibly tiny the typical size scale of of an atom is on the order of 10 to the minus
10th meters we're about an angstrom or so and most of the of the atom itself is empty space in fact
only one part in 10 to the 15th of an atom is actually taken up by the matter of the atom the
rest is the fields of of electromagnetism between the electron and the proton the disturbed field
that actually keeps the the electron in place and the protons where it tells the electrons where
they are in any event this is really interesting because we think well how empty is it if we were
to say take a lot a relatively decent size building or a house and a typical house might be say 30
meters across specifically if we go to the Museum of Natural History we see the Hayden sphere is
exactly 30 meters across that big glassed-in ball at the Hayden planetarium in New York City
so at the Museum of Natural History in fact there's a really fun exhibit in there that shows
the size of a proton compared to the atom and in fact the 30 meter wide which is 100 feet wide
100 feet foot wide ball compared is say the size of an atom somewhere in the surface of that ball
is where the electron is for hydrogen it's called just plain old hydrogen hydrogen atom which only
has one proton and one electron so if we're looking at that a typical atom of hydrogen we'll have one
proton and one electron the electron is somewhere on the surface of that ball and the proton is at
the center of that ball how big is the proton it's about a six point font of a printed a six
point printed font so it's the size of a moat of dust so that's how small the proton is it is a moat
of dust compared to something a hundred feet in diameter that's amazing so most of the of all atoms
is completely empty space electrons are really tiny so and the electrons are about 100 times smaller
than a proton in terms of size which is fascinating so an electron is a tiny tiny tiny tiny thing
and even still the moat of dust compared to where the electron is on the surface of an atom
anyway so well how do we distinguish atoms well we we can have multiple protons in the nucleus
so let's say we have multiple protons and these protons tend to be well they're always at the
nucleus but if you have one proton we call hydrogen you have two we call it helium three we call it
lithium four we call it beryllium and then nitrogen carbon oxygen and so on the name of the element
tells you how many protons it has in it and so the atomic number is the number of protons
and every single atom every single atom every single element which is is chemically distinct
and operates and each of the chem the chemistry is different between each one so right now we know
that there are 118 elements that have been made about 24 of them have to actually be made in
laboratories and they only live for like microseconds or nanoseconds before they fall apart
about 87 of them are metals meaning they have the capacity to to allow electrons to flow off of them
into and they the valence electrons they can easily be stripped off 11 of them in in in naturally
well like normal human circumstances not too hot not too cold good enough for a human not too high in
the atmosphere not too far below the ground that 11 of them come as gases um two of them occur like
as liquids like mercury is one of them and bromines another a bunch of them are radioactive about 25
or so uh and these are the chemical elements and only the most the most massive ones are only
formed in in um in in particle accelerators so when we look at the name we look at that we've
seen periodic tables in the past so let's look at how we read the name of the elements always the
number of protons the atomic number describes the name of the element and so if it's got one proton
it's always hydrogen if it's got 23 protons it's always vanadium if it's got 19 protons it's always
potassium if it's got 11 it's always sodium if it's got two it's always helium if it's got six it's
always carbon that's the name of it and so all of the names require are exactly what the atomic
number is now the funny thing is is that the names themselves then become abbreviated so hydrogen is
age beryllium is be lithium is li sodium of course is na gold is of course au oh my goodness
potassium is k what's going on here so basically most of them are revolutions but some of them
derive from greek and latin so we don't necessarily have a one-to-one with their with their revolutions
and the names that are common in in say english but they would be common in other languages
so but the name is always no matter what language they're spoken in the name of the thing describes
the total number of protons and so there's a whole slog of them and the periodic table of
elements is is broken up into similar chemical behavior such as hydrogen and lithium and sodium
readily readily readily give away their their electron and fluorine chlorine bromine and iodine
readily grab an electron and so they're not filled electron shells so they will take an electron
so the most reactive elements come on both sides of the periodic table so that's kind of how they
go and the farthest right ones are the noble gases and they hardly react anything because they're
like their electron shells are filled so when the the most abundant elements out of all of the
elements in the universe almost 75 percent of all the matter all the elements of the universe all
the matter of the universe is hydrogen and 25 percent of the matter in the universe is helium
and then oxygen carbon neon nitrogen silicon iron magnesium and sulfur come next and so all of the
things beyond hydrogen and helium make up only about one percent of all the matter in the universe
so if we want to say what is the matter of the universe is hydrogen and it's helium that's pretty
much it all the other stuff the things that we're made out of the things that everything else that
we encounter that's made out of that's just really rare stuff and some of it's really rare compared
to the rarity of it is so hydrogen and helium is everything in the universe and where's the
helium on earth well it's embedded inside of natural gas deposits and it comes to us as a result of
of emissions by the sun all right so remember we talked about the total number of protons to
get with the atomic number but remember we also said that neutrons can be in the core
in the in the nucleus of an atom so when neutrons are in the nucleus of an atom if they're differing
numbers we call them isotopes so they're isotope meaning isotopic meaning the the topos is the
number of protons and so the number of protons is always the same so hydrogen plain old hydrogen
has none no neutrons but if it has a neutron it's called deuterium and there's deuterium
has two objects in the core it's called tritium if it is hydrogen with two
neutrons attached to it in the nucleus so tritium though is radioactive and will readily decay
that that neutron will readily decay away but in every case there's all to make an atom with
deuterium it only takes even though there's two things in the nucleus there's only one electron
because the proton has one charge and the neutron has no charge so if we look at something a little
bit bigger say carbon carbon 12 has six neutrons and six protons carbon 13 has six protons and seven
neutrons carbon 14 has six protons and eight neutrons and once you get too many neutrons
tends to fall apart so isotopes with lots and lots and lots of neutrons tend to fall apart if they
have far and if they happen to have fewer neutrons than protons they will also fall apart fall apart
too so radioactive carbon is very familiar we call about radioactive carbon dating and carbon
falls apart and what does falling apart mean we mean that it's radioactive and radioactivity
is a decay of a subatomic particle from one type of thing to another so tritium as i said was
radioactive tritium will spontaneously decay at some random interval a random atom a random nucleus
of tritium will spontaneously one of the neutrons will go i don't think i want to be a neutron anymore
and turn into a proton and in so doing the the nucleus will spit out an electron and also spit
out a neutrino and those things will go away but now it's helium because there's two protons and one
neutron so it's light helium so that's we call light helium or or yeah see it's got one neutron
less than the number of protons that's light helium and likewise carbon 14 decays to nitrogen 14
by one of the neutrons transforming itself into a proton and so carbon then which has six protons
becomes nitrogen which has seven so now we have seven and seven and the the nitrogen is happy
and in so decaying and switching from a proton from a neutron to a proton
an electron gets spitted spot out and a neutrino gets spot out and that in if a neutron is also all
by itself it'll spontaneously decay in about 11 minutes or so so these neutrons really don't
know how to stay together because the electron the proton and electron really want to fly apart
and the the thing that's holding them together is the weak nuclear force and that's the reaction
if you have a neutrino coming out you've got the weak nuclear forces which we talked about earlier
part so these things are all called beta decays you can also have an alpha decay where a full
helium nucleus of two protons and two neutrons gets spat out by a very massive very massive
nucleus like uranium or something like that uh you can also gamma decay where the nucleus itself
is in an energized state and emits a very high energy light particle a very high energy photon
in the form of a gamma ray so wait a second that's where we get the gamma ray idea from
is gamma rays are high energy light so we have alpha beta and gammas alpha particles are heavy
nuclei beta particles are electrons and gamma particles are photons and very high energy
and these things were given their names during the early years of studying radioactivity
back in the turn of the 19th century right around the turn of the 20th century in that area
so people name them that way and sometimes you'll always be hearing alpha particles or alpha decay
or alpha this that always means a helium nucleus and we consider beta decay or beta particles
and those are always electrons and the gamma rays what we know about gamma rays they're like
and that's where that comes from so why we care about all this is because when we're looking at
astronomy we can't actually reach out to the stars and take a bucket of a distant star and bring it
home and see what's cooking in there we can't do that so we want to learn what is going on at
those distant stars and what's happening to the matter over there we wish to identify what kind
of matter it is and that's where we get Kirchhoff's laws of spectroscopy because every single element
on the periodic table has its own spectrum when it gets excited or gets collided into any
midst light if it'll absorb specific lights light energy and it'll emit those things exactly those
wavelengths so every single chemical element in existence has its own individual spectrum
and those spectra are always the same no matter what because every hydrogen atom is exactly the
same in the entire universe every carbon atom is the same in the entire universe different isotopes
but they're the same they're always the same because they're just because protons are the same
everywhere in the universe and neutrons are the same everywhere in the universe and electrons are
the same in everywhere in the universe so every atom is just like any other atom if it's the same
isotope and even if they're different isotopes they're almost the same because they just differ
by the total number of neutrons so and there's no difference between them other than the number
of neutrons but what's a neutron what's a proton what's an electron they're the same things everywhere
in the universe, and you stack them together to make atoms, and each individual atom and
all the molecules associated with them, well let's stick with atoms because we're talking
about elements for a second.
The atomic elements, each one of them has their own individual spectral signature, and
that can be discovered.
In fact, it was first discovered that these things existed as objects, spectroscopically,
because we'd have to say, oh, what do we have in this gas?
If we have some rarefied gas that we cannot see, but yet it glows because of the energy
we're putting into it.
If it glows with that characteristic pink, it must be hydrogen.
If it glows in a particular different way, it's helium, and we break apart the spectrum
and we look at the spectrum of the thing as it's glowing, or maybe it's cool and we've
got something behind it that's hot that passes through the cool gas.
The absorption lines are exactly the same as the emission lines, and that's what we talked
about with Kirchhoff's Laws of Spectroscopy.
Every single element, every single atom is the same in the cosmos in terms of what they
are, meaning one carbon-12 atom is exactly the same as every other carbon-12 atom in
the universe, and they all have exactly the same spectral fingerprint.
That fundamental statement, that the spectra of all of these are identical, says that the
light interacts with the matter, interacts with carbon-12, no matter how it interacts,
all light interacts with everything.
That is part of an incredibly important idea called the Copernican Principle, which means
the cosmological principle says that there is no special place in the cosmos and that
all laws of physics are the same everywhere, and we will rely on that idea to get us out
to the stars and learn what is out there.
What's funny is, is that this whole thing I discussed about the nature of these things,
it's not been known forever, so let's see, next time, how the history of the atom developed
through time.
Hello, this is Jason Kendall, and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
Today we're continuing on the history of the atom, where we talked last time about what
an atom is, what elements are, how they have protons and electrons and neutrons, and how
they're arranged in these orbits around them, and there's isotopes and so forth, but where
did this concept of the idea of the atom ever really come from?
So that's what we're going to talk about right now.
So the history of the atom is an interesting one, because it develops out of natural philosophy.
Natural philosophy is basically a way of talking about the world, philosophizing about the world
in a way that is consistent with how you perceive the world.
And so natural philosophy is a way of conducting science without having the tools to actually
be able to gather the evidence or analyze it, but you do it as rigorously as you can.
So let's take a couple of ideas about the nature of what we mean by matter, because stuff is
in existence and so stuff does things to other stuff, so you might want to say, well, what
exactly is matter?
Some of the earliest recorded ideas about what the nature of matter are come from
Democritus, who was a pre-Socratic philosopher in ancient Greece, and his goals around 400
A.B.C. or so thereabouts.
He came up with the concept of an indivisible unit of matter, meaning you can cut something
and keep cutting things and it doesn't divide, and that's where the word atom comes from,
a tomos, meaning not divisible, not cuttable, not sliceable.
That's what tomos meaning to cut or divide, a meaning not.
So the atom is that which cannot be cut.
Democritus himself was referenced throughout much of antiquity's literature, however a lot
of his works do not survive because he was kind of on the outs with respect to medieval theology
and he disagreed with Plato and Aristotle and some key ideas.
So his work was excluded throughout history.
But we know that he came up with the concept, that he alluded to the concept of the atom.
We also know that he alluded to the idea that the Milky Way is a series of stars that are
incredibly distant, that they're so distant that they actually look like one thing,
and that kind of goes along with this concept of the atom, and let's see what that is right now.
The concept of the atom that Democritus had is that imagine you had a block of clay or anything,
but let's just use clay for this instance.
Actually I'm going to diverge away from, I'm not going to say clay, I'm going to start with a tree.
And if we start with a tree and you cut the tree say in half, well which half of the tree is it?
Well you know, you're going to get some half, whatever it happens to be.
Let's say we cut it vertically, and so you've got a half of the tree that's vertically cut
and so it still has a big chunk of the branches, a big chunk of the root,
a big chunk of the leaves, and so forth.
But at some point as you keep cutting this tree in half, depending on how you cut it,
eventually you're going to have to get to a point where you're going to cut the tree,
and you're going to divide the bark or the wood of the tree from the leaves of the tree.
So therefore the tree was one thing, and now you're cutting into two things,
and each of those things is different from the other.
It's all right, so now you're paring away the thing that is not the same as it.
So we get rid of the leaf, and so we're left with the wood.
And so now we cut the wood away, and we say, oh there's the meat of the wood,
the wood that's below the bark, and we have the wood that's above the bark,
the bark wood, and so we cut away the bark.
And now we're left with the wood that has the grains, and it's that nice yellow tone.
As we cut further, we find that there's water inside of the bark,
we find that they're inside of the wood, we find that there's sap inside of the wood,
we find that there's dark and light little striations of the wood.
So we keep cutting those things, eliminating the bark, eliminating the sap,
eliminating the water, trying to get down to the essence of what is wood.
And so at some point you can philosophize that you would get down to the point where you say,
ah, I've cut away everything that is not wood, and I found the tiniest element of something that
is wood, and if I cut it, I will no longer have wood, I might have something else,
but then I just keep cutting until I get down to the thing that I say that this is the element of
wood. So the concept of the atomos then says there must be some fundamental building block
out of which you can no longer cut, because how can you cut anything infinitely posed,
democratist? And so this is an interesting concept.
Likewise, that's where his concept of matter comes from. It doesn't matter whether it's clay,
or water, or anything. There will eventually be some point at which you cannot cut any further,
because that is the atomos, the indivisible unit. Well, this has some ramifications,
and there was no real evidence for it, because like I said, in 400 BC, it's philosophy,
it's not science yet. So the thing is, is that other philosophers disagree, notably Plato and
Aristotle, who disagreed with him entirely, and thought that matter like space is continuous.
So you'll notice that there is no gap in space or gap in matter between, say, the tree and the air
that surrounds it, or when the tree is submerged in water, the water goes right up to the trees.
There must be a transition between tree and water. That's a very sharp transition, but we notice that
there's water in the tree, that the sap is made from tree and water, that when you burn a tree,
the fire comes out of the tree. And so it's very interesting to think that maybe a tree is made
up of fire, maybe it's made out of some sort of earthy element, maybe it's made out of some sort
of airy element, because the fire lifts, the smoke is lifted out of there, maybe it's made out of some
sort of water, well, we know that. So all of these things can combine together. And if you combine
them in just the right way alchemically, an alchemist would do this, then you would get tree.
So the proper combinations of fire, earth, water, and air, according to Plato and Aristotle, give
you tree, or gold, or iron, or what have you. All of the various things that exist, according to
Plato and Aristotle, were continuous matter. And this continuous matter can never be subdivided,
and you can't find a boundary to it. So it's kind of innately linked to the concept of space,
as well. So why did Aristotle disagree, and what happened, and where did the concept of this
continuous matter, and how did Aristotle blast democratize the idea? Well, he appealed to religion
and repealed to divinity. And divinity is definitely a part of natural philosophy, and you can actually
add it in by saying, imagine that there's a spiritual plane, a spiritual divine plane,
and this was okay in that time, because they've divided the physics of the earth,
the materia, versus the physics of the heavens, the celestial. And the two really did not behave
the same, according to anybody's observations. So the celestial realm is the divine realm,
it's the unchanging realm, it's the permanent realm. The material world is ever-changing,
and ever-fluid. And so there is a concept which arises from the four elements, and the fifth
element is then spirituality or divinity, and Aristotle said the following. So, Mr.
Democratus, you're saying that the god Zeus, who is all-powerful, who took the eight-legged beast
and ripped it apart to make man and woman, you're saying that he cannot rip apart the tiniest,
tiniest dust moat, the thing that you say is the smallest possible thing? How can a god not
break that apart? And that's kind of a valid philosophical argument if you posit the existence
of deities. So it really is a big thing, and so most of Christian thought and most of Western
thought gravitated towards the concept of the continuous matter and Aristotle's thinking,
because of the heightened element of the divine in natural philosophy. All right, so it took some
time before people would take Democratus's idea seriously, and John Dalton in about 1803 or so,
2,000 years after Democratus came up with this concept, 2,000 years, and even 200 years after
Galileo first put some dents in the armor of Aristotle with all of his work. So then we have
Dalton coming along and proposed, well, we've got some interesting things that we see. We see that
if you have water, water is always roughly 88% or 88.9% mass oxygen, and the rest is hydrogen.
So we can always have that the same, where the percentages of oxygen and hydrogen are always
the same, where mass is conserved and mass doesn't disappear or reappear. You
can say, well, imagine that there's little tiny building blocks that have certain amounts of mass,
and these things then matter, then, is the arrangement of these little tiny building blocks,
and perhaps some of those little tiny building blocks are hydrogen, some of them are oxygen,
then it's a process of discovering which they are. And so the atomic theory that Dalton revived,
he used the word atom, atomic theory, he said that atoms can either be created or they can
be destroyed, they are just there, there are pieces of matter that are permanent in existence,
and all chemistry can be defined by adding and putting together various atoms in various
arrangements. So the Dalton's theory of the atom, which is, which is a highly simplified version
of chemistry today, is that basically, well, even when you do elementary first semester chemistry,
you're going to be looking at Dalton's version of the atom. You're not going to look at quantum
mechanics just yet, but when you look at Dalton's version, you say, well, if you want to make water,
well, you take one atom of oxygen and two atoms of hydrogen, and that is water. And if you want to
make carbon dioxide, it's one carbon and two oxygens. If you wish to make methane, it's a CH4,
and if you want to make ammonia, it's NH3. So you've got all these things where they combine
together, and the combination thereof becomes the molecule. So Dalton's theory of the atom worked
up pretty good. Every element has its own particular properties. They all have the same
properties, and atoms simply combine in whole numbers. You can't break atoms apart in order to
say, no, there's no half water, which is like a half an oxygen and one and one hydrogen. That's
not half water. There's no such thing as half water. So Dalton's idea of the atom held sway for
about 100 years. And about 1903, roughly actually more like 1897, JJ Thompson's or JJ Thompson
discovered the electron, the first fundamental particle. This is the discovery of the concept
that, yes, there can actually be fundamental particles, meaning things that cannot be divided
anymore. The literal atomos of democratists back in 400 BC. So what he discovered was the electron,
which had a positive, it was a negative charge, and it must reside. He discovered it by using
cathode ray and understanding what the nature of a cathode ray is. And so what he said is that,
well, wait a second, we know these electrons must exist. And so he posited that, that perhaps
Dalton's concept of the atom can be modified, instead of being the smooth distribution of
Lego Bob's or just little things, little balls, like billiard balls that are smooth. Perhaps inside
the billiard ball of Dalton, there are electrons and they're moving around. And so therefore,
if there's an electron, which is a negative charge, there must be some positive charged
object, a proton, that's also in there, because every atom is electrically neutral. If it wasn't,
it would be quickly therefore, it would quickly neutralize itself by either acquiring electron
or losing electron. So Thompson's concept was is that inside of each of these little billiard balls,
Dalton's billiard balls, there were a plum pudding of electrons and protons in a mesh that
neutralized themselves out. So this is a good little model of the of the of the atom. And the
thing is, is that it took the concept of the electron said, oh, it's a piece of the atom,
and inside the atom, there's this thing. All right, so this also led him to learn that electrons
were about 2000 times smaller mass than the proton, whatever it was, these tiny, tiny, tiny things
were there. Anyway, so it didn't take long for people to say, well, okay, got it. What Thompson
is saying is that the electrons and protons are arranged inside the atom. All right, how exactly
are they arranged? That's a really key question. It's like, okay, fine. Are they moving randomly?
Do they have structure? Are they set up like little bricks? How are they set up inside of Dalton's
little atom? And how is the plum pudding mixed? Are the plums evenly distributed in the pudding?
Or are the plums tiny little bits going through? So what Sir Ernest Rutherford in 1911 sought to
understand this, the interior of Thompson's plum pudding model. And what he decided to do is to say,
I'm going to take a very, very, very heavy atom that I can make into a very, very, very flat sheet,
an extraordinarily thin, flat sheet. And the goal of this extraordinarily thin, flat sheet
is that if I throw something at a thin, flat sheet, things should go through it or bounce off of it.
And you know that if you take an object that is not flat and you throw something at it,
it can, things can reflect off of it in all sorts of ways. So if you take a flat surface,
then you bounce a ball off of the flat surface, the angle of incidence equals the angle of
reflection off of a flat surface. However, if the surface is all jagged or regular in some way,
then if you throw balls at that surface at different angles, the angle of incidence at the
moment at the location where the ball hit the surface, let's say the basketball, let's say you
do this off a basketball court, which is flat. And now you play a game where it's on a curved
surface like this, maybe it's got humps. And so as it reflects, you can actually see where it
reflects from and where it goes to after it reflects. And that gives you a map by looking
back where the things came from is to the shape of the object. And now that's one way of looking
at things. But Tom, but, but sir Ernest Rutherford, why do I keep saying sir? I forget if he is a
sir. In any event, Ernest Rutherford in 1911 said, I'm going to take gold, which I can hammer down
and make into gold foil. And this gold foil can be literally only a few atoms thick,
just just the thinnest thing. And this is an amazing property of gold, by the way. And gold
itself can be can be made into very, very thin foils. And it's so thin that if a gold atom
is one of Thompson's plum pudding models, then the electrons in there have to be distributed in
some way. And if I throw something at it, and it goes through the atom, it might deflect it
as it goes through. So if you throw something through something, you throw, go through something,
and you interact with it gently, it'll diverge the path of the thing that you threw through it.
So it assumes that Thompson's plum pudding model is is porous, or at least maybe not necessarily
porous, but at least kind of some material, some thing. And we don't know exactly how it's structured.
But let's take a helium nucleus called an alpha particle, and we'll take that alpha particle
and send it through the gold nucleus. Now here was the expectation. The expectation was that as
the gold as the helium nuclei went through, they'll be gently redirected by the distribution of
electrons inside of there. Because it's been known that by cathode ray by the interactions of cathode
rays, and again, alpha particles that they actually interact, and they can redirect each other's
paths. So what happens is that you send the elect send the alpha particle through the gold foil,
and see how it gets bent around. And that gives you the structure of the electrons inside there,
because the gold must be the gold, right? It just must be whatever it is. And nicely enough,
gold does not do much reaction. It's very not heavily reactive. And it's very, very thin.
So here's what what Rutherford found. He found that most of the of the alpha particles went
straight through the gold foil, and were detected on a silver iodide screen on the far side.
But just to be careful, Rutherford put a screen all the way around it. And he found that a
significant number and a non a pre and significant number actually bounced back. So that's kind of
weird. So you throw something at something very, very thin, that's supposed to allow things to
pass through. But instead, it bounces off of something. So that meant that if if with Rutherford's
concept, then he had to reconfigure what he meant by the atom. And he said, wait, there must be some
dense, heavy thing that the alpha particles knocking off of. Because if you then say, let's say you
have the protons, or the alpha particles are part of the gold nucleus. If you send one alpha
particle into the other, they're going to hit off of each other, but they won't necessarily
bounce straight off of each other. They have to be a perfect alignment for them to do that.
But what happened is, is that the gold foil reflected off of the alpha particles reflected
off of the gold foil coming back towards the, towards the emitter. And that, as Rutherford
said, was like taking a 15 inch shell, an artillery shell, such as might have been used in, say,
the First World War, right around 1911, which we're talking about. 1911, I, and the 15 inch shell
going through a piece of tissue paper, and the tissue paper bounces the artillery shell off of it.
Now that would be surprising. And that's a surprise. In fact, that the energetics of that are about as
surprising as what Rutherford discovered with this experiment, which meant that there must be some
massive object in the atom that can reflect off of, can reflect something, can push something back,
that's coming into it at high speed, that has some, that has some decent mass to it. So he reconfigured
the concept to say that at the center of the atom was the, was a positively charged nucleus,
and that positively charged nucleus has mass, as most of the mass of the atom, and the electrons
are somehow spiraling around it. So the, that is the difference between, between the plum pudding
model and Rutherford's swarm of electrons around a nucleus, and this was put to bed Thompson's
model of the, of the, of the plum pudding. So now we have this concept that there must be a dense
nucleus. This led to some problems though, because the, if it's smoothly distributed, then it can be
electrically neutral. But if Rutherford's concept is right, now you've got this positive charged
thing, and you've got these negative charged things flying around it, and observationally,
experimentally, they exist, they, there is some large positive charged thing, and the electrons
are negatively charged, and they're clearly not on top of it. They're near it, but not on top of it.
So the question then becomes, why doesn't the electron spiral down from its orbit around this
nucleus, and fall into the nucleus, and become Thompson's plum pudding? What is the thing that
makes the plum pudding not true? Meaning it should just spiral together, so it's all neutral, and
everybody's on top of each other. Why do the electrons stay away from the nucleus, which is
positively charged? We get why it should be near, because there's an attractive force. But why should
all of a sudden it stop? And nobody knew why that would be. So no matter what, when you did this
experiment, you found that the nucleus had to be there, separate from the electrons. And this became
the topic for an enormous amount of research, and it spurred the entire idea, because Rutherford's
atom has a very difficult time explaining the spectra of light. Because now we have to say,
Rutherford's atom says, if you have an electron spiraling around, as it spirals, it should emit
a continuous spectrum of light, not a discrete spectrum. So Rutherford's atom cannot predict
the spectrum. However, it does predict the event of collisions into it, and it does disprove the
plum pudding model. So there's a bit of a problem. And that problem is, one experiment shows one
thing, but other experiments demand that that's not the full story. And the full story of what
happens to Rutherford's atom comes up next time, when we talk about the Bohr model of the atom.
Hello, this is Jason Kendall, and welcome to the next of my introductory astronomy lectures.
Today, we're going to be finishing out the nature of what the hydrogen atom is,
and the models of the atom through history. So let's take a step back. Last time we looked at
Rutherford's version of the atom, which has kind of like little stars orbiting a little planet,
a little planet orbiting a little star. That's the kind of basic assumption that Rutherford came
about when he did his gold foil experiment. But if we go back just a little bit further back in
time, we find that there's a very interesting hint to things to come. The Swedish physicist Johannes
Rydberg in 1888 looked at the nature of the hydrogen spectrum and tried to create an empirical
formula. This empirical formula had a goal, and the goal was to actually simply model the actual
lines that are seen, the transitions that are seen, or at least the spectral lines that are seen
in the hydrogen spectrum. So what he did is he found a periodic pattern to them, and he was able
to determine that the reciprocal of the wavelength is equal to some constant, some full constant,
and then multiply it by the reciprocal of the inverse of two squared integers. Now,
this is really interesting because it highlights a concept that what you sometimes do in science
is you just try to create some sort of empirical formula for what you're observing in nature.
And after you do that empirical formula, you then try to see if you can understand the underlying
science below it. Well, so that's what Rydberg did. He made an empirical formula that is only
based off of the data, but he had no underlying reason as to why it would be this way. He just
made a formula that worked. Fascinatingly enough, the Rydberg formula for the hydrogen atom is
extraordinarily simple. So what it should tell us is that we are looking for underlying physics
that actually works to tell us something deeper. And that was in 1888. So many things were happening
right around the turn of the 20th century, 19th and the 20th century in terms of modern physics.
It's astonishing. But Rydberg's hint gives us a little bit of a clue. All right, so let's go
forward in time from 1888 to 1911. And 1911 is when Rutherford came up with his concept for the atom,
and it was necessitated, it was needed to be done because the Thompson's plum pudding model doesn't
work. Well, Rutherford's model of the atom also cannot work. And it can't be the last answer to
things. Because if you have an electron orbiting a proton, and you would be very active at going
around in a circle is an accelerated motion. If you have an accelerated motion, you're going to
emit energy. And by emitting energy, the thing will eventually spiral in the electron will spiral in
emitting electromagnetic radiation, as it spirals in, and it'll crash into the proton
and become Thompson's plum pudding. So the Rutherford's model of the atom could not
actually be the final answer because well established extraordinarily well established
electromagnetic theory demanded that they would eventually collide together. So something else
had to be there in order to make this work. Well, that came along because in very shortly
thereafter in 1913 by Niels Bohr. So what Niels Bohr did is he said, okay, fine, we don't want
this thing spiraling. Fine, imagine that the angular momentum of the of the objects was fixed.
And so what he did is he said, okay, every one of these little planets that orbits this little
sun, they can only orbit at specific radii. So if he said that's his pot, that's his positive,
his basic assumption. The basic concept is, is that they can only orbit at specific radii and
they can't spiral in. Well, why can't they spiral in? That's the essence of the Bohr model of the
atom. The Bohr model of the atom said basically that the angular momentum had to have fixed values.
And these fixed values were multiples, integer multiples of some value. So that's his idea is
that Bohr's model of the atom said we can have quantized angular momentum. And what is angular
momentum? Well, if you take a little planet orbiting a little star, the angular momentum of
the little planet orbiting the little star is the mass times the speed with which it's going around,
times the radius at which it's going around. So if the angular momentum is quantized, then,
well, you know the mass, fine, you can determine the speed, sure, but then the radius must then
be fixed. There must be only stepwise distances that the electron can live from the proton.
So the Bohr model of the atom says let's now take this concept of quantized angular momentum.
And what we'll do is we'll say what is the force that is required to keep something going in a
circular orbit and then equate that to the force due to the electromagnetic attraction between the
electron and the proton, make those two things equal, slide in the concept that that the product
of the mass times the speed of the electron going around in that circular orbit at the radius of
the circular orbit is some integer multiple of some number. And that number is the Planck's constant,
the reduced Pollock's constant h bar. And you get out of that by doing some hooks and some crooks
and looking and playing around with it. You eventually discover that the energy at a given
level that you would have. So if you have a potential energy between the electron and the proton,
so they're trying to pull on each other. So that gives an energy that is a position and that we
call a potential energy. So the potential energy between them is fixed and we can determine what
it is and it's dependent on the radius and how far apart they are. And we say, okay, what is the
energy at a particular location? And it works out to be a very small amount which is in the
electron volts. About 13.6 electron volts is the amount of negative energy or energy that's
different from when the electron is free. So it loses a bit of energy getting close to it,
close to the proton. So we can only have energy at fixed orbital radii. And these orbital radii
have our integer multiples are product of the orbital number squared. So the ground state,
which is the lowest possible state, which is n equals one, that is the lowest possible state.
And then you can have larger and larger and larger ends, but they just get bigger and bigger,
which means that the energy approaches zero as you have greater and greater distance from the
from the from the proton. So Naboor model of the atom, but by having quantized angular momentum
and using the definition of the potential energy between an electron and a proton and the definition
of a force that's taking some keeping something in a circular orbit at a particular quantized
angular momentum utilizing the four of the Coulomb relationship, which is the force of
attraction between two charged particles, we can then derive with with Bohr's concept
that they that these the angular momentum is quantized. We get a very interesting set of results.
So first, the electron can only live in fixed orbital radii from the proton. And the nearest one
is when the number this fixed number is one, or this quantum number is one. And if it's at
quantum number one, we call it the ground state. If it's quantum number two, we call it the first
excited state. If it's quantum number three, we call it the second excited state. So an electron
can only jump up and can move between energy levels. So these are levels of energy fixed radii
from the proton. And so we have an electron either at the ground state at the nearest radius,
or at the first excited state, which is at the next radius up. Now, something could come along
and smack the electron. So let's let's pause it now, as we will, how we can use the Bohr model
of the atom. So let's have an electron orbiting a proton, it's a nice little hydrogen atom,
it's sitting out there somewhere in space, not doing anything, it's minding its own business.
And another proton comes along, or another hydrogen atom comes along,
smacks into it, and gives it a little bit of energy, just like a billiard ball,
by smacking another billiard ball. It makes a little clicking sound, but instead of clicking,
what happens is a little bit of that collision goes to making the electron go up an orbital.
It kicks it up to the next orbit. So a collision can do that, gives it a little bit of energy.
When it gives it a little bit of energy, it can jump a little bit further away from the proton.
So now it's gotten some energy, it's pushed away from the proton, which is trying to pull it home.
And it says, eventually, the state can't live for very long. And what happens is the electron then
says, I'm going to go back down to the lower level from the second, from the first excited state,
down to the second, and in so doing, emits energy. Now, it can do this emission of energy by, say,
colliding into something else, but probably the most efficient way, and the most common way,
is for it to emit light. So when it drops from an higher energy level than the ground state,
down to ground state, it'll emit a light, it'll emit photon. And that photon will have exactly
the energy of the difference between two levels. So let's see what that actually works out to be.
At the ground state, the energy that you have is about 13.6 electron volts. And we're going to call
that a negative energy, because if it's at, let's say the electron and proton are not bound
together. If they're not bound together, we would have, we would say they have no energy with respect
to each other. So they're free. So a free bound, a free electron free from its proton would have
zero energy. And we call bound states negative states. So you can think of them as at the bottom
of a well or the bottom of a hill or something like that. So they have to fall into this potential
well. Once that's where we get the negative state from. So the energy we're going to call it is a
negative 13.6 electron volts. And I'll let you Google what an electron volt is, because that's
a really interesting subject all of itself. So that is n equals one. And that has an energy
of 13.6 electron volts. So now something comes along, it collides into it, the electron jumps
up to the next orbit. So this is n equals two. And that works out to have an energy of minus
3.4 electron volts. It then emits an electron, it emits a photon as it drops from the first
excited state back down to the ground state. And you subtract the two minus 3.4 minus a minus 13.6
that ends up to be 10.2 electron volts. That's a very small amount of energy. It's on the order
of 10 to the minus 19th joules. So it's a tiny amount of energy. You'd have to have a whole
bunch of these happen in order to even see it. So it's a single photon emitted by a single
electron dropping down from the first excited state to the second. So what does that energy
correspond to in terms of light? Because we know that light has frequencies, right? So
what does the energy of light correspond to? Well, here's the thing. Now we're going to
drop back in time again. So Niels Bohr is working on this thing in 1913, Ryd Bertbert in 1888, but
smack in between them. Albert Einstein brought us a very, very interesting thing by studying what's
called the photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect shows how electrons are liberated from
a metal if light shines upon them. And it was found that if the light, no matter how intense it was,
if it was infrared light, it did not liberate the electrons. But as soon as the frequency was large
enough, then the electrons would be liberated away from the metal and then they could move.
So what this meant is that photons were acting like a particle, just an and a wave. Uh-oh,
that brings us back all the way to Newton's corpuscles of light again. Oh my goodness. Well,
light has a duality of waves and particles. So here is now proof by Einstein in 1905,
which got him the Nobel Prize, by the way, that the energy of a photon is proportional to the
frequency or inversely proportional to the wavelength of the light. And the different,
the transmogrification of frequency or wavelength into this particle concept of like how much
billiard ball type particle is in the photon is by the Planck constant h. So energy of a light of
the light is equal to h, which is Planck's constant times the speed of light divided by the wavelength.
And that gives you these, the energy of the photon. Ha! But we just saw that the energy
difference between the photon that the energy dropping from the first excited state down to
the ground state is 10.2 electron volts. And if we say that's the energy and then we see what the
wavelength works out to be, the wavelength works out to be 122 nanometers. Wow, okay. So when the
electron drops from the first excited state down to the ground state, the wave, the energy is 10.2
electron volts. And that's converted into 1.22 times 122 nanometers, or approximately a point,
yeah, well, 12, yeah, 1200, 1200 angstroms. So now that we can plug in and look at that and see what
the Rydberg number is, and we say, well, wait a second, what's the Rydberg value? Well, Rydberg
value says that what's the wavelength? And we say, oh, n1, n2 squared. Wow, is this interesting?
It matches Rydberg's formula exactly if you put in n1 equals 1 and n2 equals 2, which is just really
amazing. So Rydberg's formula predicted it, or at least was empirical. Now we've got something that
actually shows it. So the wavelengths that are predicted by Bohr's model of the atom are matched,
matched directly what Rydberg found in 1888. Just as another example, and a more pertinent one
that we're going to talk about later, electrons can jump up multiple orbital levels and drop
back down multiple orbital levels, or it can go up and down and up and up and down and up,
depending on what's happening in the environment in which it lives. So let's say that the electron,
instead of going up only one level, jumped up two from the ground state to the second excited state,
or n equals 3. So now it's an n equals 3. And let's say it's going to drop twice. So it's going to
step down each level of the ladder on its way home to ground state. So it's going to drop from 3
to 2, and then from 2 to 1. And we just did 2 to 1, which gives you an energy of about 10 electron
volts. But let's look specifically at the one where it drops from 3 down to 2. All right,
so 3 down to 2, we can calculate the energy of the two of them. And it starts for the third,
it is n equals 3, is the second excited state. I know, 3 is second, 2 is first, ground is zero,
right? Kind of really annoying, but let's work with it. So if we're going to start from n equals 3,
the second excited state, and it's going to be a little bit higher, a little bit closer to zero
energy, about one and a half electron volts in the hole. And the second excited, the first excited
state is three and a half electron volts, 3.4 electron volts in the hole. And we take the
difference of those. It's an energy difference of just under two electron volts or 1.89 electron
volts. We convert that using the formula that Einstein discovered in 1905, that got in the
Nobel Prize. And we find that 656.3 nanometers. And if we look at that, that is Rydberg's formula
for the transition between 3 and 2 in the Rydberg formula. And that is exactly the wavelength of
light that is predicted. That's exactly the wavelength of light that you observe in a spectroscope.
That is the transition in the red area of the spectrum. That is H alpha, one of the most common
wavelengths of light to look at for all astronomical species, because most of the universe is made of
hydrogen. And so when you look out at the Orion nebula, which has this characteristic pink glow,
and that characteristic pink glow comes from radiation, light being emitted specifically
at 656.3 nanometers. We now know that's due, according to the Bohr model, to an electron
dropping from the third excited state down to the second excited state and then on its way back
to the ground state. But it's actually gotten some energy from somewhere and it's falling and
cascading back through and it emits this form of light. And there it goes, it's emitting this light.
So now we know we have a model for a very important thing, which is we're now can model the spectrum
of light. But let's take, before we go there, let's go into a little weird place because
we've had a very strange set of things and Bohr's model of the atom assumes a little
dot orbiting another little dot in a circular motion. But we've already seen that there's a
certain way, but physics kind of went a little awry for us and that model works extremely well
for us, the Bohr model. But let's take it forward just a little bit to determine that that's not
still the end of the story because electrons are not pure particles. Well, what was found in 1924
is Louis de Broglie in his PhD thesis. He's a French physicist and in his PhD thesis,
he postulated, he postulated that every subatomic particle, or more specifically,
every particle has a wavelength. So he said that every particle, an electron, a proton, you, me,
the chair, a building, a whole planet, the galaxy, it has a wavelength. And that wavelength will
call the de Broglie wavelength. And we can take the concept of the energy of a photon,
we convert like just from Einstein's discovery and we convert that into a momentum
because light, even though it has no mass, still carries momentum. So if it can carry momentum
and matter does carry momentum, this is where de Broglie kind of made the leap, he said, well,
if light carries momentum and matter carries momentum, then we should be able to equate the two.
So de Broglie said, well, what is the, what is the momentum of light given its wavelength? And so
he said, fine, there it is. And so now you actually then put the weight and you establish then that
there's also a momentum associated with, with an electron. And so combining his concept with
general relativity says that there is a speed with which it's going and if it's not, if it's
going greater than the speed of zero, then it'll have some sort of wavelength associated with it.
In any event, de Broglie said that there's a, as electrons travel through space,
they are not just particles, they're a packet of waves. And what's fascinating about this
is this concept that every element and every subatomic particle or every particle in existence
has a wavelength and we call it the de Broglie wavelength, then as this concept is experimentally
verifiable. And in fact, in 1927, it was experimentally verified that electrons do diffraction
just in the same way that light does. So electrons do diffraction, protons do diffraction,
even large molecules do diffraction. This concept of the de Broglie wavelength is ubiquitous
throughout. And apparently there's macromolecules that can even be shown with their de Broglie
wavelength and actually measure it. So we can measure the spread of a particle that means it's
not all in one place. It means it's not a pinpoint particle that you can say at the head of this pin,
at the point of this pin, that is exactly where the electron is. You can't do that because it has
a wavelength. Really weird. All right. So what does that mean for our model of the atom? We're
going to kind of diverge away into it. We're going to say de Broglie said that wavelengths of light,
wavelengths of electrons, if they're trapped, then they have a standing wave. And so he said,
okay, fine, what's a standing wave? A standing wave is just like if you tie a rope into a doorknob
and you flick your wrist up and down, you hold it, you can make various waves against it,
because your wrist is fixed and the doorknob is fixed. So you can make a standing wave,
even though the waves are moving, they're in there, they're moving up and down like a jump rope,
or you're doing all sorts of rope tricks, but the ends are fixed, they're not flapping around,
the ends are fixed. So you can have standing waves and the more energy you give to the standing wave,
the more nodes there are to the wave. So we can then reformulate the Bohr model as having a pit.
And so think of the Bohr model of the atom, and this is de Broglie's sort of version of it,
or at least one way of thinking about it using waves of electrons. So the bottom lowest energy
is where it's only one wavelength, and the next wavelength, next energy level is two wavelengths,
the third wavelength is three wavelengths, and so on, and so on, and so on. So the lowest possible
energy state in an atom, it must have only one wavelength in a standing wave at the bottom of
the pit. And so each one of these locations of the radius at which it is, it's not an electron
circling like a little dot, a little planet circling a little sun, it's a standing wave
surrounding the dot, which is itself kind of a wiggly thing too. So now we can think of it
instead of having it fixed on the doors, the ends must connect together, and so we have a circular
standing wave, not a linear standing wave, but just take the end of the door and your wrist and
put them together, and now you've got a circle. And at the bottom of the, and they must be circular
waves, otherwise it's not going to be in the box. So only at these fixed locations where you
have one wavelength doesn't work, and then we can equate the radius to the wavelength of the,
using the de Broglie relationship, and we get the same exact result as, as, as Bohr did with his
concept of the little planet, orbiting the little sun. Now we say that the electron is not actually
a point particle, it is a standing matter wave surrounding the proton, which means where the
heck is the electron inside the atom? That's a really interesting question. We can't find it,
because it's a wave. So it's a wave inside of there. And the, the de Broglie relationship then
then gives a very good explanation as to why this quantization must occur, because electrons have
wave properties, and they must have fixed standing length wave properties inside of the atom,
in order for it to actually be bound inside of an atom. If it does not have these standing,
if it's not a standing wave inside of the, inside there, then it's not going to be,
it simply will not be a bound state. So unbound states are states that have more energy than
is, well, they're more energy than being in the bound state, plus they don't have the right number
of wavelengths. So you can't, you must have the circular standing wave inside the atom of some
kind. So this concept, these two concepts where we have the Bohr's relatively simple model of
electron spinning around as a ball, that works. But then we have de Broglie's relationship,
which tells us something even new about the nature of matter. Both of them work and tell us
everything we want to know about the spectrum of light from the Lyman series and the ultraviolet
showing the transitions up and down the Balmer series in the visible light, showing transitions
up and down the Pashen series, which is an infrared, which starts at level three or ends at level three,
or yeah, n equals three. And then if we then, we can then explain all of Kirchhoff's laws
using the Bohr model of the atom. The lines that you see in Kirchhoff's spectra, an emission spectrum
is due to the huge numbers of atoms jumping up and down electrons jumping up and down in orbits
and sending light out from those in various directions in random directions. There's no one
direction that sends the light out. So it might as well go to you. And so the photons that you
receive, you receive them at specific, specific wavelengths. And therefore that's where we get
the emission spectrum of Kirchhoff, which was an empirically derived idea. Likewise, absorption
does the same thing because as the light goes into the cloud of atoms, they absorb specific
wavelengths. It makes it a little darker at those wavelengths and because that light's going someplace
else. And so if you look through a cloud of gas, you're going to see that it's darker at those
locations because some of that light has been absorbed and re-radiated in other directions.
And that gives the emission spectrum from the side. So the Bohr model of the atom and even
De Broglie's model of the atom explains Kirchhoff's empirically derived laws about the nature of what
spectra are. So we have lots of different ways of talking about emission lines, absorption lines,
and this leads us to the incredibly important idea that spectroscopy is the most key thing that we
have in all of astrophysics. It is everything. Basically, we will be able to determine huge
numbers of things about a location because of its spectrum. First and foremost, we can determine what
elements there are by modeling the spectrum of it, by looking at exactly what we see in the light.
We've got all this light here. We've got coming in and out, emission, absorption, and so forth.
But we can also determine temperatures and pressures because of the widths of the lines,
because of the Doppler shifts. We can determine huge numbers of things from spectra, but it all
comes from the very simple concept of the nature of the model of the atom. So let's actually just
back this up a little bit and we're going to take it away from the spectroscopy for just a second
and go address something that I was looking at and kind of dodged around, but now I'm going to come
at it full force. Okay, so where is the electron inside of the atom? So I alluded that there's
some really odd ideas and let's see what we get out of them. De Broglie's concept of a matter wave
and having electrons be standing waves inside of the atom changes a lot of things about the
nature of what we think about the atoms and matter in general. So De Broglie's hypothesis
that matter is a wave fundamentally changed a lot of ways the way we think about things.
So if the electron is in a standing wave inside of the atom, then where is it? Because just in
the same way that we said, okay, we're going to hook the string up to a doorknob and to my wrist,
we can easily make it so it's a nice standing wave. We can say, oh, what's the wavelength? Okay, we
can get the wavelength of it and if we flick it harder, we can have more nodes on that thing and
we can say it's a shorter wavelength, but if we then ask, we ask where actually is the wave
on the string, we wouldn't have a good answer. We'd say, well, I know that it's on the string.
I know that it makes up the entire length of the string, but where exactly is it? Can I pinpoint
it on the string? And the answer is no, you cannot. So in the same sense, we now have a very strange
thing where we cannot pin the electron's location inside of a bound atom. So once it's in there,
it's in a standing wave setup. The standing wave does not permit us to actually find the
location of the electron and it gets worse from there. De Broglie's concept actually still kept
Neal's Bohr's idea of the little planet orbiting the little sun, but now we don't even do that.
So now De Broglie said, okay, make a standing wave that's orbiting a little sun. Fine, but that's
a circular pattern. And we now know by actually then taking De Broglie's concept and accelerating it
a bit more and looking at it in 3D space. And actually that's the only way to actually look at
it is that we don't see it as a circular standing wave, but a spherical standing wave with spherical
harmonics. And that's a very, very, very weird thing. And the solution to the equations of what
the hydrogen atom really looks like had to wait until Schrodinger made his famous equation,
the Schrodinger equation, which codified completely the concept that matter does behave as a wave.
And so when we take this concept of the wave nature of all particles, then and filter this through
the Schrodinger equation, we find that not only is the electron a standing wave going around it,
but somehow it's somewhere on the surface of a sphere that's as a certain radius. And so the
Bohr radius is not just the radius of the orbit, it's the radius of the sphere that the electron
seems to be it. And the actual radius itself is fuzzy. And where the electron is on there is fuzzy.
In fact, it's not determined. We know it's orbit, we know with the most probable location of it,
most probable location. And then we can actually say, well, where should it be in this place?
Still applies the same thing, though, if you actually give the electron a little bit more
energy, it'll go up a level, it'll change its standing way properties, it'll change its
harmonic standing waves, but you won't be able to find the electron. And why won't you be able
to find the electron? Well, take the proton and the electron and break them apart and turn them
into an atom, not an atom, not a bound atom, but have them be free particles. The proton itself is
an extraordinarily small object. If you were to say that the if we were to take the proton,
which is on the order of 10 to the minus 12 meters, it's on that size. So it's a micromete,
it's a million times smaller than a micromete, or a billion times smaller than a millimeter.
They're really tiny things. So if you take a proton, and it's on the order of 10 to the minus
12 meters, and let's say we want to see how big the electron is compared to that, well, let's blow
up the proton not from 10 to the minus 12 meters, but now let's make it the size of a moat of cigarette
dust, a cigarette smoke, a moat of dust, a single moat of cigarette smoke. That's a really tiny
thing. It's just visible to your eye. And if we put that somewhere in a box, how far would the
electron be in a bound orbit? We'll come back to the size in a second. So the electron is about,
would live on the ground state on the surface of a sphere. That's about 25 or 30 meters in diameter.
So you've got this tiny, tiny, tiny, tiny thing. And on somewhere on the surface of a sphere that's
25 meters in diameter, that's where the electron would live. And the electron would live somewhere
on that surface. It would have a fuzzy radius, so it wouldn't necessarily be right at that surface.
So it'd be somewhere maybe between 20 meters and 30, 40 meters. It'll be in between there. And so it'd
be a wave type property throughout there. And you can't pin down where it is. In fact, saying where
it is when it's bound as an atom, it doesn't really have a lot of meaning. It has a loose meaning.
But really, we know the energy level of the electron, but even that is not well known.
So the electron itself is a fuzzy object. And so is the proton, too. So the actual orbital radii
are fuzzy, but it shows you the size scales. Think about the Museum of Natural History. Go to the
Museum of Natural History in New York City. You find this enormous, huge sphere. Google the Hayden
Planetarium to see the size of the sphere. It's really big. So there's a model inside the Museum
that says, here's the size of a proton, and here's the size of an electron. It tries to show you the
size of an atom. And basically, put the proton, this mode of dust in the center of that sphere,
and put the electron somewhere on the surface of that sphere. And that gives you the concept of how
big it is. The electron itself is about 1,000 times, 2,000 times less massive than the proton.
But its size is determined kind of by its interaction. So it actually has kind of a very
strange, it's very, very small. Its characteristic interaction is a little bit bigger, so its actual
physical size is kind of an oddly ill-defined term. There are some definitions. There are ways
to define how big an electron is, but it's a much smaller object than the proton. So the electrons
orbit around the proton is fuzzy. However, we can approximate it with de Broglie's concept,
which means it's to a circular orbit. And we can approximate de Broglie's idea to a little tiny
planet around a little tiny sun. That's Bohr's model of the atom. And Bohr's model of the atom
had a quantized set of, as a quantized angular momentum. And we still maintain this concept
of the quantum mechanics. I mean, that's what we mean. The mechanics simply is, how do things move
under the influences of forces when they're given energies and speeds, and what are their locations,
how fast do they go, how fast do they accelerate, how fast do they decelerate, etc.
What are their directions change? That is mechanics. And it depends on their masses,
it depends on their inertia, it depends on their momenta, it depends on all these things. And those
are the study of mechanics. So quantum mechanics says, what happens when you take classical
mechanics, which is just how things move, but apply quantum principles to it, such as quantized
angular momenta, like Niels Bohr suggested, or matter wave concepts, such as de Broglie came up with.
Now, this idea of the fuzziness arose, of course, from the Schrdinger equation, which is a
relationship that just demonstrates how all of matter demonstrates wave-like properties. Even
large-scale matter displays wave-like properties, although the wavelengths are incredibly short.
When you're talking electrons, the wavelengths are roughly the same size as the particle itself,
so now you've got a matter and a wavelength that are roughly the same size, and you have to deal
with these quantum mechanical effects. We don't, in our daily lives, don't have to deal with
quantum mechanical effects because our sizes are much larger than our characteristic de Broglie
wavelengths. So this is kind of an important set of things. In fact, the quantum mechanical
universe that we're talking about, the quantum mechanical model of the universe, is extraordinarily
well supported by experiment. It is considered to be one of the triumphs of 20th century physics,
and it had the evidence for this model that matter behaves in wave-like properties. That's
enormous, enormous evidence for it, such as the nature of the black body radiation. Einstein's
photoelectric effect demonstrates it. There's wave-particle duality, meaning the dual nature
of both wave-like properties and particle-like properties using, say, Young's double-slit
experiment, but you can use Young's double-slit experiment for photons and apply it to electrons,
and you get the same thing. So this was done in 1927, and this was characteristic proof of
de Broglie's concept in 1924. Further and foremost, you get out of electron scanning microscopes,
which must do quantum mechanical behavior, but even more bizarrely is that every electronic
device that is used today must take into account quantum mechanical effects in order to actually
operate, and we'll even see that quantum mechanical effects are critical for our understanding of how
the sun works. Without quantum mechanics, we would actually not have any idea how the sun actually
shines as long as it does for the rate of energy that it puts out. Quantum mechanics is a requirement
for us to understand the way that the sun works, and the predictions associated with it tell us
how the sun works, which is a really fascinating thing. And so when we dig deeper into the nature
of what quantum mechanics tells us, we uncover what we would call a bedrock principle, and some
textbooks on quantum mechanics start with the concept of the non-commutativity of the various
parameters or various measurements, but we can summarize that with the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle, which says you simply can't measure paired measurements, there are certain sets of
paired measurements that you cannot measure infinitely accurately at the same time.
Specifically, two of the most famous are you can't measure the momentum of a particle
and the position of a particle with infinite precision. So if you know exactly where the
electron is, you have no idea what its momentum is, and momentum, according to the Broglie principle,
is the wavelength. So if you knew exactly what the Broglie wavelength was, you don't know where its
position is, and that's exactly what we meant by the whole string wave on a string thing, is that
if now the electron is a wave on a string between a doorknob and your wrist, and that's the electron,
where is the electron? It's there, but where, so you can't find it, and that's a fundamental basis
of quantum mechanics, is that you can't have these measurements, you can't have infinitely precise
measurements of two things, of paired sets of measurements. So another one is the energy
difference between states, and the time at which they live at that state, or the knowledge of the
energy level of that state, and that's actually why the second one is actually why the lines
have a breadth to them in spectroscopy, and that's one of the bases of the lines, there's
many reasons for the line's breadth, but the width of the lines can be attributed to the fact that
we really can't actually know the energy level inside of the atom, so we see how it's three
energy level three and energy level two, well those energy levels are fuzzy, and so the very
act of the fuzziness itself creates a width to the line, so the frequency at which we observe it
and is proportion, cannot be, you can't actually measure the, you can't measure both the energy
of the output and how long it lives at that location in that state, which is really fascinating.
So the concept of quantum mechanics, the basis of it, is that there's these fundamental bedrock
principles, and one of them is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle that says there are,
there are two separate measurements or paired measurements that cannot be measured with equal
or infinite precision, you can't measure one of them without having complete lack of knowledge
of both with the other one, so you basically get fuzzy on these things, it's like I kind of know
it to this well, and I kind of know that one to that well, and that's all I'm never going to get,
and there's no thing you can do to circumvent that, that is a fundamental axiom of quantum
mechanics, people say well if technology gets better then they'll figure it out, well this is
having been figured out, and this is how nature works, which really is weird, it's not something
overcome by somebody building a new widget or something like that, no this will never be
overcome because it's a fact of nature, it's the way nature works, which makes it even more
interesting, so if we think about the nature of what nature works, we find that the solution
for the Schrodinger equation for the hydrogen atom has all sorts of funny waveforms, and they're
based on spherical harmonics and the appearance of the thing, so it's not these simple spherical
orbits, these circular orbits, it depends on, there's actually three quantum numbers, there's
the primary quantum number, we also have what was called the azimuthal quantum number, the magnetic
quantum number, and they're kind of weird, but they're all interrelated, and yet these three
quantum numbers which are associated with electrons and matter waves, or waves of matter,
because now we're looking at three dimensions, we have three quantum numbers, I guess you can do it
that way, but let's just keep it that for simplicity, but there are three quantum numbers
that determine the appearance of the, that determine the appearance of the waveform of the
electron as it orbits the proton at various energy levels, which is interesting, and some of those
quantum numbers don't change the energy, the magnetic quantum number does not change the energy,
they're degenerate, it was called because of the same energy, but they have different configurations,
so we can have the same configuration at, different configurations of the same energy.
In any event, the hydrogen wave equation is the only atom for which we can solve the Schrodinger
equation to actually give us the appearance, to analytically show with an equation what it is.
Everything else is too complicated and must be done numerically. Finally, what's very strange,
remember I mentioned, it's like, well, what's your, what is your quantum wavelength? Well,
it's true, is that if you could somehow over an extraordinarily long period of time live,
let's say you could potentially live for 10 to the 70th years, let's just say you could do that,
that's a long time to live, if you could live for 10 to the 70th years, and every day you cut,
you punched your hand at a wall, you just went pop, pop, pop, punch your hand through a wall,
at some point your hand would go through the wall, not because you're punching a hole in the wall,
but because the probability for you to do that, maybe you punched your hand at the wall
10 to the 12th times a second for 10 to the 60th years, it's a lot of times to punch a hand
on the wall and you're going to be doing like a super hummingbird, and so whatever, in any event,
if you could do that, eventually your hand would go through the wall and come back,
because you're pulling your hand back through, and it will be okay, so the quantum mechanical world
says that you can't necessarily know the position of things, and when we talk about macroscopic
objects like people, their wavelengths are incredibly small, so the probability that they
go through things like that is catastrophically tiny, and so therefore you don't have to worry
about tunneling through walls and things like that, but if we lived in a quantum mechanical world,
then cows could go visit dolphins, so long as they, as they dolphin jumped out, a cow could then
drop back, as soon as it got back to the ocean, that's okay, so long as the cow lands on the ground,
remember the concept of quantum mechanics says you can't know the position and the momentum of
something with equal accuracy, if we lived in a quantum mechanical world, things would be appearing
and disappearing all around us, trucks, buses, buildings, everything, other people, friends,
would just simply appear and disappear, we would have no idea where they came from or where they're
going next, and that's the quantum mechanical world, it's like, well what's the probability that
you're going to see your friend over here downtown, you would not say, hey meet me downtown at six o'clock,
you'd say, well what's your best chance you'll be downtown at six o'clock, you'll get, you'll
calculate the joint probability of you and your friend being downtown at the same time,
in any event, quantum mechanics is how we actually discuss the nature of the world,
but when we talk astronomically, we tend to use the Bohr model of the atom because it's really
simple to understand, and that kind of gives a really good visualization, it's very hard to
visualize all these other things, so what we do is we try to think that we know that there's,
that basically electrons must live in fixed orbital radii away from their nuclei of their atoms,
and that concept that leads us to the nature of what spectroscopy does and helps us to understand
how Kirchhoff's laws arise, and so when we look at, we look at distant astronomical objects,
as we will in the future, then we will see that we can model an atomic process to the light that
gets emitted to what happens when it arrives at our telescope and our detector, so next time
we'll talk about telescopes and how they work.
