If you remember, in the allegory of the cave, which is in the Republic,
the philosopher not only ascends to see the sun, the philosopher then descends back into the cave,
and Plato takes great pains to emphasize that is as important as the ascent out.
And so this is one of the new things that's happening, is a reorientation to not just the
ascent up, but the return back. Why is tracing out that whole line up and down important?
I think what we're dealing with there are the kinds of knowing
that ultimately ground our ability to make sense, to participate in the intelligibility
of reality. Reality makes sense to us, and that is not properly or exclusively being
done by your propositional knowing. Welcome back to the transmission, my friends,
when it comes to grappling with what's been called the meaning crisis, or just wrestling
with the inevitable philosophical and spiritual goblins that life is going to throw at you.
To stretch this metaphor, there's no shortage of voices claiming to offer techniques by which you
can subdue said goblins. And I'll just be blunt about it, I do not think many of those voices
are offering you something real. I think many of them have ulterior motives. I think some of them
are downright delusional, and I think the majority overstep their philosophical and intellectual
firepower. Then there's Professor John Vervacki, I remember encountering his awakening from the
meaning crisis series a few years ago now probably, and thinking to myself, that's quite a title.
But I was floored by what was contained within an overview of everything from ancient Greek
philosophy and mysticism to modern cognitive science. And what honestly might be even more
impressive about it is it's not just a scattershot, it's all aimed at one target,
becoming a fully philosophically self-sufficient being. This is not a way of thinking that tells you
how to think, what to be, what to believe. It's equipping you with the tools to actually
be a philosopher. You know, approaching big questions and life in a way that is truly
concerned with truth. Truly concerned with getting closer to whatever that transcendent truth is,
even though we can never fully arrive there. And in addition to awakening from the meaning crisis,
John has another fantastic and deep diving series that's more recent, it's called After Socrates.
And it is also just brimming with wonder nuggets. And John also has dozens of other fabulous lectures,
podcasts, and more to check out on his YouTube channel. It shall all be linked in the description
as initiated listeners would expect the topics in this mind meld are wide ranging. There are some
through lines, the immortal value of Platonic philosophy, the value of mystical experiences,
and what John calls non propositional, knowing that sort of knowledge you can only gain by actually
doing, by actually experiencing. Of course, there's a little dash of examining the nature of reality,
what it actually means to live a good life, and how a lot of that or at least much of that flows
into modern cognitive science. And with that, my fellow sentient sacks of stardust. As mentioned,
everything you will need for John Vervacki is in the description. Do tickle that algorithm with a
like, a sub, a comment, a share. It is immensely important. And if you're digging the content,
my friends, I have great news because we have over 300 podcasts, just like this one, including one
with Professor John Vervacki that exists only on podcast platforms. So do subscribe to third
eyedrops wherever you listen to podcasts. And if you would like to go deeper, riff with me,
and about 200 other wonder dippers now, and also get rewards like stickers, pins,
shirts, and more, and support the show, join us over at patreon.com forward slash third eyedrops,
so much love to all of you members of the wonder lodge over there. And without further ado,
let's meld minds with the wise John Vervacki. It is so, I'm really overjoyed to have you back
in the mind meld. It's been a long time coming, at least from, from my perspective, and the listener's
perspective, you're continuously one of the most requested guests. And for good reason, because
every time I approach your work, I'm both very impressed and honestly somewhat intimidated.
I'm always like, man, like, you're, you're coming at, you know, the meaning crisis.
What meaning even is what, you know, some of the biggest questions you can possibly come at,
and you're coming at them in really sophisticated, multi-layered ways. So it almost makes entering
into conversation with you at all intimidating, but, but also very exciting. So I'm just really
looking forward to it in general. Well, I'm going to ask you, because I need help at trying to be
true to those levels, but make them all mutually accessible to as many people who are might be
possibly interested or find value in them. I sometimes get a little too monological in,
in my own vocabulary. It's important to have a specialized vocabulary to make thought precise,
but there's that's in a trade-off with making sure that people have access to what you're doing.
And so I'm going to ask for your help to, to keep me true to that.
Sure, sure. I'll do my best. I'll do my best. Though, though, I feel like I would regret if I,
if I tried to keep, keep your, your brain on a leash, because man, your, your, your, your brain's
a lot of fun and, and everything that you're doing with it is tremendously fun. But I do
comment a lot of this stuff from a more mythopoetic angle. And that's one of the,
there's so many reasons why Platonism is throbbingly relevant and interesting to this day.
But for me, that, that's one of them is that it really provides a satisfying template for both
meaning-making, you know, in a, in a direct sense, in a direct subjective sense. But also it's,
it's really one of the only schools of philosophy that I can think of that both satisfies that
and seems to, as you've argued in the, in the talk I just mentioned, for instance, seems to be
an indispensably important template for explaining the underlying ontological
reality that we existed. And it's only been around 2,500 years and it's, you know, still,
still relevant now, seemingly. And that's just mind blowing to me. And it's also kind of mind
blowing that for whatever reason, it doesn't quite get the shine that, you know, like a shine,
the shine of like a Gnosticism or the Hermeticism, like everybody likes to talk about those,
but they're like, hey, or I'm like, hey, those are really out of context without Platonism's
existence. In fact, both of those are, are highly Platonizing in a lot of senses. But
what, what initially drew you to Platonism, John?
So what initially drew me to Platonism is when I had left my fundamentalist Christian upbringing
and was sort of drifting, overwhelmed, overturned by my own personal
meaning crisis, which at that time I thought was, you know, the narcissism of adolescents.
I thought was particular and specific and special to me. And of course, it was one way in which I
was special and all that kind of bullshit that was wrapped up in whatever truth was there.
But of course, I was seeking. And I encountered the figure of Socrates in a first year course
on philosophy when we did the Republic, which I still find, I can't tell if the Republic or the
Symposium are my two favorite, which one is my most favorite Platonic dialogue, but definitely
the Republic. And I encountered the figure of Socrates and I saw in the figure of Socrates
what I had been seeking. A development cultivation of a profoundly existential,
even spiritual rationality that had been denied to me in my fundamentalist Christianity, wedded to
the cultivation of the love, a profound love for wisdom, and a kind of self-trendant,
self-transcendence and connectedness to what's ultimate thereby. And that was like, wow. And also,
part of it, again, was the young adults. Wow, Socrates wins every argument. And I would love
to win every argument. But of course, as you read more deeply, you realize Socrates doesn't win every
argument. Right. And he even undermines. Amenities. Yeah. Amenities. And Socrates will also undermine
his own arguments that seem to be victorious. And then Plato is continually reminding us not to be
seeking victory, but to be seeking wisdom. And so that that was part of it. At the same time,
as that was happening, I was still, this was the final year or so, I was living with my parents.
And so still living under that shadow of fundamentalism. So I would, but I had become deeply
influenced by, you know, exposures to Hinduism and Buddhism. And so I was doing some very basic
meditation late at night, when everybody was asleep, sitting in my balcony bed. My sister
below me, we were very poor. She asleep. So I'd have to wait till all of that. And I was sitting
there meditating in the dark. And that really sort of artificially elevated position, which, you know,
who knows how that was conducive or not. And I had my first mystical experience.
Oh, well, like many mystical experiences, I can't quite fully explain it. But
I, and it wasn't, it wasn't, it's hard to say it was something more than visualization.
But it had a sensual quality to it. And it was sort of trans geometrical, it wasn't
geometrical, it was more multi dimensional and vibrant. But I had a mystical experience of the
forms of Plato's. Oh, wow. The idea of Plato's concept of the Eidos profound. And, you know,
in your first mystical experiences, like your first girlfriend, right? It's the one that has a huge
impact on what happens thereafter. That combination of the profound portrayal of that existential,
you know, drama around Socrates that the sage, and then there's this platonic mystical experience,
that combination of the profoundly existential and mystical really got me profoundly interested
in Platonism. And that has stayed with me throughout. Now, I had to go outside of Western
philosophy to learn a lot of a lot and to learn a lot from I should say, I want to give proper
respect, learn a lot from Buddhism and Taoism, specifically, before I could return to Platonism
and see more profoundly into it via the help of some important bridging thinkers like Pierre Hado.
Yeah, that's one of those things, man. If I had a time machine, and I could
experience directly whatever was going on at Plato's Academy in terms of the actual
practices, because they seem to, I mean, clearly, we know later Platonists like
Platonists were absolutely doing practices, akin to some kind of meditation. He doesn't exactly
give a step by step, but he talks about withdrawing inward, cutting yourself off from
the senses, and that sort of being the beginning of the path of realizing your true nature and
ascending through the various levels of reality. But we don't know, there's a lot of smoke in terms
of there's probably, there's low hanging esoteric hermeneutics you can do in a lot of the platonic
dialogues, but there's also some more exotic ones. And we also know that they highly prized
the apophatic experience in general. And Plato himself is quoted as talking about how
wonderful the mysteries of Elucis are, for instance, and yet another thing that we don't
know what they were, but we know that this was a way of knowing and pursuing wisdom
that seemed to span every possible domain of the human experience. It was intellectually rigorous,
but also hinged on direct experience. And speaking of the Republic, one of the most famous,
you know, enduring pieces from that is the divided line. And what kind of wisdom is that
at the top of the divided line, it's direct wisdom of the forms. It's no noesis, right? It's this
kind of knowing that is far above the sensory, but it's above even like the intellectual and the
critical thinking faculty, which I think most people would think is probably the pinnacle.
But they place it above that, you know, they place that kind of experience you had sitting
up in your bed that I'm sure at the time you had probably very little context for
above all of that. And for me, those kinds of experiences that I've had, what's amazing about
them is they're strangely backwards compatible with, like they make new levels of sense as you
learn more strangely. Even though you can never fully explain them, it's just like, oh, wow,
that, you know, that, you know, you know, who like for instance, in your case, you know, where
geometry features very heavily, Platonism, what's written above the door of Plato's Academy,
let none ignorant of geometry enter here, you know, it's like, yeah, so there's, oh, you know,
that's, that's something that's highly intriguing. I guess while we're talking about this, I'll pose
the question to you. Why do you think it is that that's the highest form of knowledge, this like
direct experience that can't even be captured by critical thinking? Well, I, I don't, I,
I need to slightly alter what you're saying. And if you don't like it, please interject.
But the thing that people need to remember, and this is one of the things that third way
Neoplatonic scholarship has been emphasizing people like Gonzales and Highland, which is the
non propositional, right, non propositional knowing being really, really important. And,
and of course, we're talking about confronting the non propositional. I talk about this in the
four kinds of knowing. We could go into that later if you'd like. But the thing to remember,
which is also emphasized is, and I, I, I wanted to, I specifically mentioned that in my mystical
experience, although it is in some sense above the intellectual, it also reaches deeply into
the ground of the sensual. The divided line is still aligned. There's still a continuum there
that has to be remembered. And that, that was the thing that was so intriguing. Now,
like many people, I was so originally intoxicated from, from that view from above,
that I thought that was the essence. But if you remember in the allegory of the cave,
which is in the Republic, the philosopher not only ascends to see the sun, the philosopher
then descends back into the cave and Plato takes great pains to emphasize that is as important
as the ascent out, right? And so this is one of the new things that's happening is a reorientation
to not just the ascent up, but the return back, which is in, which is properly in Neoplatonism,
although it's still skewed in favor of the ascent, the flight of the alone to the alone in
Plotinus. And that's sort of right. And I think that's important if we, if we now to answer your
question, why is, why is tracing out that whole line up and down important? And why is it important
that it be non propositional is because I think what we're dealing with there are the kinds of
knowing that ultimately ground our ability to make sense to, to, to participate in the
intelligibility of reality, reality makes sense to us. And that is not properly, this is part of
the argument of 40 cog side. That's not properly being done by or, yeah, properly or exclusively
being done by your propositional knowing, your ability to affirm propositions, it's being
even more importantly carried by your skills. If I left you with just your propositions and
without your skills, you would be radically cut off from reality. Yeah. But if all you had was
your skills, and you didn't have the conscious ability to have to take perspectives on reality
and be in perspective, perspectival knowing and be present that way, you'd even be more,
you'd still be cut off from reality, right, in a profound way. And then underneath that
perspectival knowing is, is knowing by being you and the world have both been shaped by profound
principles of physics and chemistry and biology and technology and society and culture. And so
you're part of, and so that knowing by being, and if, and if I cut that off from you, that's like,
that would be like the most profound sense of loneliness and culture shock, you'd be feel
radically alienated and disconnected from reality. So the argument I'm making is the non propositional
knowing really carry most of our connectedness to our realization in both senses of the word of
becoming aware and making actual, our realization of reality. And therefore, the, the education of
them in both senses, drawing out educe, and, you know, informing the platonic and the Aristotelian
sense of education, right? That's what's happening in these practice in these kinds of experiences,
these kinds of practices, you're, you're, you're tracing out, right, the, I don't know what to
call it, you're tracing out the living structure of the kind of realness that is disclosed to you
in the non propositional knowing. And then the argument I've been making is that grammar of the
non propositional is profoundly right at one with the grammar of reality, or we're in very deep,
skeptical, solipsistic trouble. And you've heard the more extended argument, I won't repeat it here.
But so not only does it get put us most in touch with our realization of reality,
it allows us to participate in the way in which reality is realizing itself. And I think that
is the most profound
contact, conformity with reality that we can experience. And that is profoundly meaningful
to us and transformative of us. Sorry, that was a long answer.
No, not at all. Yeah. And I, and we're, we're rubbing up against this idea of transjectivity.
Yes. And I would definitely like, like to return here, but there's some, there's some interesting
fare in the, in both the ascent and descent, the catabasis and anabasis. And I don't know if this
is true, but I've read that apparently the idea of the ascent originated with Plato or seems to have
originated with Plato. And any kind of motif of gaining spiritual knowledge prior to that was
actually a catabasis, a going down, like a going into the underworld, like gaining knowledge by
going and, and in many cases, this was literal, like this was going into doing a incubation ritual
at a temple where, so that you could, you know, like merge with the God in your sleep or you could,
you know, gain wisdom in your sleep or be healed in your sleep or whatever it was.
And that in and of itself is interesting, but also how that's metamorphosized over time,
you know, to broad brush it, being going down is now scary, going down is now, like the underworld
is now hell. That probably says more about human psychology than it says about any kind of
ontological reality. But even just on a practical level, that exiting the cave and then re-entering
the cave is incredibly important because the trade-off is incredible ego inflation and living
out of touch with practical reality. And we, I mean, we see this happen, you know, how many people,
you know, do the cliche thing of have their first mystical experience or go on their first retreat
and decide they want to be a shaman now or decide they want to be a monk now and, you know, only,
only to return a few months or maybe a year later, just with their life and disarray or something.
So it speaks to the fact that practically, if you're going to tread this path,
you've got to be able to somehow even practically live transjectively. You've got to be able to
balance, you know, all your shit. You got to be able to juggle the transcendent and the mundane.
And man, that is hard to do. That is, that is maybe even harder to do than just having refused
the call to the hero's journey to begin with and just staying firmly planted in the mundane.
Because it just, it opens such a never-ending can of anagogic worms, you know, you could just,
you could just keep going and keep going and keep going. But it's certainly not practical.
And it seems like the only thing that makes it practical is that strange attempt to,
I don't even know if merge the two as the right words, but live with knowledge of both.
Yeah, I want to pick up on that. I think, I want to emphasize what you emphasized,
that there was a tremendous enacted symbol of the going down associated with ancient spirituality
that we, and, you know, and there was these, even these incubation and dream factories.
But, and, you know, and Pythagoras did some kind of thunderstone ceremony in a cave for 28 days
or something like that. And so I think remembering that the way you did beautifully is really,
really important because we have tended to create a dualism of up as good and beneath as bad.
Although to be fair, we still do keep notions of profundity and a deep experience too, right?
So we carry the hint. I'm not sure about Plato being the only ascent. Plato, we know, is deeply
influenced by Parmenides and in Parmenides' home, the chariot carries him up to the goddess.
And you have Pythagoras, and Pythagoras seemed to be talking about a kind of soul flight,
shamanic soul flight that looks like, at times, like it's above rather than below.
But certainly Plato took that, that those ideas from Parmenides and Pythagoras and made them,
he articulated it and made them deeply, well, obviously, I'm punning here on what I said about
Deeperlier, profoundly attractive to us. First of all, but I do think that even if he's not the
originator, he is the beautifier. But the two, the two are really important. So one of the
third way scholars that has huge influence on me, Drew Highland, especially his book,
Penitude and Transcendence or Finite Transcendence, I always get the title wrong.
He makes the argument that the core of Plato is keeping, I almost picture it like one hand
holding our finitude and another hand open to our transcendence. Because as you said, if we only
reach for the transcendence, we will be filled with hubris. But if we only hold on to our finitude,
we will drop into despair and servitude. And so they act, and this is a very
verbatim thing to say as well, they act like opponent processing. And for me, I think coming
across Highland's argument that at the core of Plato was this profound kind of opponent processing
between staying rooted in our finitude, but branching into our transcendence. And of course,
I'm invoking the tree here. I think that tonos, I like the Greek word tonos, because our word
tension is largely negative. But tonos can be like the tension of the bow or the lyre. It can,
it holds the opposites together as Heraclitus said. And of course, we know that Plato is also
deeply influenced by Heraclitus as well, that that that that tonos. And in some ways, Highland
makes the argument, which I think is right, is if when we get opponent processing right, we get an
optimal grip Marlopanti sense. And I think platonic wisdom is an optimal grip between our
finitude and our transcendence. So we live the best kind of life possible for a human being
while remaining human. Yeah. Yeah. And, you know, that that starts to get into, you know,
what is it really? What is it all about? And I think that's a really difficult question to
answer. Like, what is Platonism? What is it all about? What is it, you know, concerned with other
than the pursuit of wisdom writ large? But that seems like sort of like a cop out answer.
And like, you know, we could obviously pull out various features and arguments that are made.
But to your point, it like, sometimes Plato, depending on like what you're reading,
will downplay arguments he's already made in other places or contradict himself in other places.
And this is one of the reasons why I think you do have to kind of use esoteric hermeneutics and
or, you know, just to put it more bluntly, kind of read between the lines that not exactly what
not exactly what he's saying, but what he's pointing to, you know, not not look at the
finger, look at the moon sort of way of reading, like trying to grasp the the point more generally
and thematically rather than tease apart logically exactly what he's saying. Though he does do
arguments like that sometimes too clearly. So it's it does that sometimes make it hard to say
what exactly it is and what exactly we're supposed to do. But it's, I'm just thinking of this now,
but it's almost more of a style. It's almost more of a style of approaching knowledge and wisdom.
And yes, there are, I think, practices that back that. But sometimes it's not the most clear,
even, you know, to, I mean, I still think I'm a complete neo fight in this topic. But, you know,
even to people like me, who, you know, I think I've dove a little deeper than the average person.
And to me, I'm still, you know, I'm like, man, I could be getting this all wrong. I, you know, I,
you know, maybe they're, maybe I'm completely obsessed with elements of this that didn't even
exist or he didn't even intend to exist to begin with. And then even within Platonism itself,
you know, it's influenced spanned so long that it's, it's hard to say like, was Platonist really
concerned with the exact same thing Plato was. It's like, I don't even know. It seems like he was,
but I don't know. And here we are still even thousands of years after Platonist, you know,
grappling with a lot of the same stuff. And but, but still, still maintaining this thing called
Platonism or still propagating this thing called Platonism as nebulous as it, as it kind of is.
How would you define it, John, like what Platonism is and what its primary concerns are?
Well, let me address what you said in order to create sort of a platform for answering your
question, what Platonism is. I think what you just pointed to is a feature, not a bug. So I was,
I was privileged to partake in the wisdom task force that became the paper that was released in,
I think, 2021 or 2020, headed by Igor Grossman, all of the main researchers, philosophers,
historians, neuroscientists, psychologists, all of them like, well, that we could get to
participate either physically or virtually. And what one of the things that we all converged on
is that a core feature of wisdom is what was called perspectival metacognition, your ability to
like take perspectives, including perspectives on your perspective taking and on your perspective,
and that this ability to be multi-perspectival and to be metacognitively multi-perspectival
is the a core ability of wisdom because it allows you to create the most multi-leveled,
multi-dimensional capacity for self-correcting, for looking for bias, for seeing through
self-deception, seeing through illusion into reality and getting a state of mind that can
handle that complexity in a dynamic manner. And I think that's the whole point of the
Platonic dialogues. And this is not just my view, this is the view of a lot of people in
third-way Platonism, that the point of the dialogues is to train this virtue. It's not just a skill,
train this virtue because it involves altering your perspectives, your state of consciousness,
altering your character. It's to cultivate this virtue of this meta-perspectival,
sorry, perspectival metacognition, it would also be meta-perspectival.
And I think that's also the point of dialogical practice for you and I to create this multi-perspectival
reflective virtue, awareness that is at the core of being able to see through the very complex
and multi-leveled ways in which we can fall prey to self-deception, be cut off from
the depths of reality. So Plato is much more interested, that's why the dialogues are often
centered on virtues, on cultivating this virtue in you. He even seems to make the argument,
I agree with Brachaus, and I think it's Brachaus and Smith, that the unity of the virtues isn't
just that the virtues form a system, it's something like each virtue is a way of being wise
in a particular situation. It's a way of doing what I've been talking about, that seeing through
and seeing into. McGee and Barbara, when they did their huge review on wisdom, they said the core
feature is seeing the ability to see through illusion and into reality. And that's what Plato
is most concerned with. And one of the things he seems to be indicating is the two things that can
cause us to fail is when we just sort of believe that our untutored common sense intuition gives
us the truth. I just know it in my gut. Or we just believe some propositional theory has given us the
complete knowledge of something. Here's the technical definition of honesty. I read it and blah, blah,
blah, blah. And so, and this Gonzales makes this point, Plato is always trying to steer us between
those so that again, we are always in tonus about our finitude and our transcendence. So this virtue
that I'm talking about is, right, it's, I'll use a pictorial metaphor, visual metaphor, like there's
the tension horizontally, right? You know, sort of, I'm holding my hands like between finitude and
transcendence. And this gives you this ability, right, to see through illusion and into reality,
especially non-propositionally. And I think the core of Platonism is that those two things
aligned with two more, which is when you do that, when you're doing that, you have the
capacity to satisfy in an integrated fashion, the two most fundamental human drives. One is,
you can call them meta desires. One is to be at peace within myself, not an empty piece.
That's why he uses the term justice, a fruitful inner peace. Like if I said, I'll give you
unlimited sex and money and power, but you will deeply at war within yourself. You go,
I don't want that. I'm not going to give up. I don't, like, I don't want to be
riven against myself in a profound way, right? And then the other one is, you want whatever it is
that's giving you pleasure or joy, right, to be real, right? We want to be, we have this meta
desire to be in contact with reality, to be in touch. Notice the metaphors, the intimacy metaphors.
We, we desire to be intimate with reality, to see through illusion. That's why you don't want to,
that's why people want to know if their partner is cheating on them, even if it would undermine
their romantic relationship that is giving them so much joy and meaning, because they don't want
it to be fake. What Plato is saying is, okay, if you can hold finitude and transcendence together
and you start to see more deeply into reality, that resonates more deeply into you. You start to see
more deeply into yourself and that allows you to more align the parts of you and get that inner
peace. And as that inner peace is realized, that inner conflict goes down and that inner conflict
is the source of how you project and distort and distract yourself from reality. So the two
desires can be satisfied in a mutually accelerating or like I call it, reciprocally opening manner.
And I think that reciprocal opening is what we take to be simultaneously the mark of
what is happening to me is most real and the best. And that would play, that's what Plato's
trying to point to with his notion of the good. So Platonism is that all of those aligned together
with one final claim. Reality is also organized in this bottom-up emergence in top-down emanation.
I think that becomes more clear, especially in Platonists and the post-Platinian Neil
Platonist. And you put that all together and you have this profound proposal about how human beings
can find an optimal in many of the ways in which we can be optimal, an optimal way of being. That's
the proposal I would argue that Platonism is making. Yeah, that's great. That's really,
really well put. There's so many different directions to go from there because I'm tempted
to get into some of the more metaphysical aspects, but I guess I want to stick with the practical
because I think that that lets people sink their teeth into why this really matters and why the
staying power is what it is, not just from a philosophical, intellectual standpoint,
but a practical standpoint. Yes, I think that's correct. Let's go there. Yeah, let's do it. Let's
do it. One of the ways, again, just to walk this back to the very beginning,
is there's a core perspective that Socrates occupies that is very, very easy to place yourself
into. And it's that sort of atopic point of view that something is off here, something about
reality, the world I'm living in, the things I'm supposed to care about. It doesn't feel like
nothing, none of this low hanging fruit, none of these easy paths for me to take really feel quite
right. They don't really feel quite satisfying. And they always just like anything I try just
feels kind of empty. And then I'm like back to square one after I've satisfied my desire or I've
learned whatever the thing is. And not only that, but then this core, the thing that's
probably associated with Socrates more than anything else, this statement that he knows
that he doesn't know anything. And I think in our heart of hearts underneath all of our
identity and ways we commonly exoterically interact with the world through the ego and
the persona, I think we all kind of feel that way. And we're all waiting for the thing that feels
real. And though we that thing is elusive, you could always return to that, to that point of
view, that, that feeling of a topos of out of placeness. And that may sound like a weird kind
of, I don't know, Taoist way of approaching knowledge of knowing something by knowing that
you don't know something. There's a lot to that. There's a lot of power in just knowing that you
don't know anything. So much power that he basically destabilized Athens by just walking around proving
that not only do I not know anything, you person who claims they don't have wisdom don't know anything
either. And it rubbed people the wrong way pretty badly to put it mildly. So badly that he died
for it. And that to me was one of the things for sure that initially drew me to Platonism is
who's the guy they celebrate most? The guy who knew that he didn't know anything? That's actually
badass. That's really cool. And of course, his wisdom extends beyond that. But just starting
there at least makes sense because it's not, you know, that's another thing with a lot of these,
especially the popular ways of approaching spirituality is they almost all start with
you just prostrating yourself to something higher than you, just because it's higher than you,
supposedly, don't ask questions, do these practices, and that's what spirituality is. And I think that's
insulting to any thinking person who wants something more. And we're better to start than that than,
hey, this guy seems to agree with me. That he doesn't know anything. And he's spiritually and
philosophically listless. And then from there, you get to go on this ride of exploring so many
ideas with that being the sort of underpinning. And that in and of itself is very useful to sort of
like destroying any, because it really sort of destroys that there is any wisdom to begin with.
And that is so helpful, like just just attaching yourself from like, let's just wipe the slate
clean and just start, start talking about ideas and, you know, occupy different perspectives
throughout the exploration of those ideas. And then everything sort of sort of follows from there.
And man, I can't think of any other philosophies that that operate that way, at least not now.
So, wow, there's a lot there. And I want to reply to it. So I think Plato is portraying
Socrates as the hero of the tonos between finitude and transcendence. Socrates seems to reliably
be steering away from hubris, but also reliably demonstrating profound existential courage. And
he doesn't fall into despair, even when confronted with failure, alcibiades, or death when he's in
prison. And so that is Plato trying to say there's something going on there. You're right.
Socrates claims to not know, we have to, we have to, we have to caveat that because there's many
things he claims to know. But these are not sort of propositional knowings. These are existential,
non propositional knowing. He knows the unexamined life is not worth living. He knows the best kind
of life is in the midst of the logos. He knows what to care about. He knows how to love well.
And he knows that virtue is essential to a good life. There's many things that Socrates does know,
but he's ignorant of any capacity to give a definitional closure on them. There's no
propositional way of grasping. What he's on about is entering into that tonic, tonos,
right relationship to reality, to virtue. But once all that is said, and the Neoplatonic tradition
makes that clear, is what you're actually doing then is you're doing this trying not to try. You're
doing this cultivation, cultivation metaphors are frequently used, right? You're cultivating the soil
so it can best receive the seed that is not found in the soil. Right? And so from which, you know,
the tree of wisdom will grow. And you have all these metaphors and these cultivation and this
notion of cultivating a profound receptivity becomes central in Neoplatonism. And you're
right, that aligns very significantly with aspects of Taoism and Zen, because of course,
Taoism goes into Zen as well. This cultivating of a profound receptivity in which you have to
have a learned ignorance. You have to, this is Nicholas of Cusa, you have to come to the place
where you have seen through all of your knowledge and seen through the distortions and you open
yourself beyond that place, not before it, because if you do it before it, all of that machinery and
all of its inherent bias and distortion will not give you, you'll be hard soil, but you have to
break all that up, right? And make the soil receptive to the seed of reality. Reality has to, if reality
isn't showing up on its own account, it's not reality, it's you, right? And so you get this
learned ignorance, this profound receptivity, all of wisdom begins in wonder, right? This
profound opening, right, that is essential. And I do think you see it in Taoism and also
in the heart of Zen, this trying not to try, this sitting, but it's not doing nothing, but it is
doing nothing, right? I do think that, this is why my next series is Walking the Philosophical
Silk Road, about trying to get the two, these two great synoptic integrations, Neoplatonism,
which is the spiritual backbone of the West and Zen, which represents sort of one of the most
comprehensive integration, you know, Taoism, Buddhism, elements of Shinto, right? Get them
to deeply talk to each other as much as possible about how can we most profoundly cultivate this
receptivity, which is found in that tonus. There's a deep connection between being in that tonus,
between your humanity and your openness to transcendence, right? That receptivity,
so that reality can face the seed. And of course, this is taken up by Eckhart, right? Eckhart's idea
that you have to somehow cultivate the manger within you, so that the Logos, the Son of God,
can be born again. Now, we translated born again into this, I think, really bad, trivial, emotional
sort of cataclysm that a person has or something like that. That's not what's being talked about.
But if you'll allow me to, if I ask people to rehear it, Platonism, yeah, this learned ignorance
is the receptivity that allows you to be born again by making you receptive to the deepest
seeding from reality. Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes, yes. Yeah, I love that metaphor of having to
break up the soil so that you're ready to receive the seed. That's so huge, and that points to so
many things. I mean, that even gets back to, I mean, I don't know if I want to divert here,
but that gets into bullshit a little bit, too, in the way that you talk about it, and that
to stretch this metaphor into, let's say, someone you're arguing with,
what condition is their soil in? Is there soil in the condition in which they want to receive
the seed of wisdom that runs counter to whatever they're talking about, or are they more interested
in preserving whatever it is they're arguing? Like, if that's the case, they're more interested in
bullshit than they're interested in whatever the truth is. They're not interested in
actually having fertile enough soil to change their mind, or even participate in D-Logos in
the way that it's intended to be, and that we're trying to mutually explore ideas here and see
if something emerges. Yes, yeah, well said. I think Socrates has a quote, or Plato has a quote,
to the effect of truth only exists when two minds collide together like Flint and create a
spark or something. It's something to that effect. To try to talk about the one, the truth,
you really can't do it, but you can get a glimpse of it. You can get a glimpse of it when multiple
minds come together in search of something, and that's such a beautiful idea. But yeah,
and it also speaks to why some of this wisdom needs to be distributed in such a way that it
appears esoteric from the outside looking in. Because if you, you know, it's pearls before swine,
it's some, you know, if you're a, if you're Plato or any yourself, John, if somebody walks up to you
and they're like, give me your deepest truths, John, and they don't have the requisite foundation
of ideas, they're soils not in the condition to receive your full, the full download from you.
And there's something sexy about it for sure about like, oh, yes, I want to be initiated.
I want to go through the grades of wisdom. I want to tell my soil to be more receptive to wisdom.
But when it comes to the practicals of it, I mean, you and I can see it, right? Like,
look at the views on Awakening from the Meaning Crisis episode one, and then look at the views on
the last one. Like, not many people stick all the way through, like they claim to want to know,
they claim, oh, this is really important, I'm ready. And then at some point they stop showing up.
And, you know, you can't, you can't get to the last part if you skip around or if you stop.
And I think that speaks to why Plato
was esoteric and why his, there clearly were secret teachings that are alluded to,
you know, by later Platonists, too, that we've, we've now lost. And I think there have even been
some fragments found that point to some of this stuff. And I mean, man, the Republic
is just a repository of esoteric knowledge. I'm sure you're aware of the, there's published work
now on some of the, the hidden features of the Republic, like, like, there's clearly Pythagorean
structuring in terms of like tonality that run through the, through the book or through the work.
Notice your indication of, notice your indication of tonus, by the way.
Yeah, right. And unintentional, but yeah, convenient, conveniently unintentional.
So yes, so much, so much good stuff there about, about actually being in a position
to receive the knowledge rather than just, you know, claiming to want the knowledge. But
I'm a, I'm spinning in circles here, forgetting what my, what my initial point was, but
Well, can I make one point from these circles?
Yeah, I mean, I'm very, I think it's very clear that there's stuff going on
outside of the dialogues, but I'm not of the opinion of some people in the esoteric tradition
who say the dialogues are irrelevant or a cover story or destruction. I don't hold that. I do
think that there's stuff going on. Plato indicates that in the seventh letter, and that you ultimately
have to sort of live with somebody a long time and the spark has to catch. So there's stuff
that's going on in the platonic community of the academy that was integral to people
learning Platonism that is not captured by just reading the dialogue. So I've been engaged with
a lot of good people, of good faith in trying to reverse engineer, not recover, notice the
difference. I'm not claiming this is what they were doing in the academy, but to try and reverse
engineer practices and ecology of practices so people can come and, you know, be in community,
commune with each other in these practices. Because I think that person-to-person relationship
is very important to Platonism. Only when we are circumambulating together around reality
did we start to get an idea, but Plato also said, the best mirror of me is to look into your eyes
as you're beholding me. And so all of this is also why we're trying to, how do you come up
with an ecology of practices? How do you situate it properly within a dialogical community? Because
all of that, well, all of that stuff that's not carried in the dialogue, but was carried by the
community, we need to reverse engineer something like that for our time in order to deeply make
Platonism a living tradition again and not just some cool ideas that people like to think about
because it gives them a little bit of a mental orgasm or something like that.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. And now I remember where I took the exit and started driving in circles,
and it was on the way to the point that I was being a little bit coy before when I said,
I don't really have an opinion or know what Platonism is about. And if I'm honest, I really
think it's about what you were pointing to a few minutes ago, which is rebirth. Like this
idea of the second birth. And not only do I think Platonism is about that, I think really
everything throughout the perennial philosophy is pointing to this idea that within this life,
you can wake up to a greater nature that is very real, both here and now. And I mean,
it seems like Platonism is arguing that after in some way. And you can sort of see this in
Socrates' candor before death. He kind of knows there's more going on, though he's sort of
waffling and not sure what happens after you die. But then he says some weird esoteric stuff
about Earth being a dodecahedron, whatever. But look into a lot of these other
ways of thinking that there are some important metaphysical disagreements, but
they're essentially laying out the exact same equation for you. In the Corpus Hermeticum,
there's a whole tract about being reborn into noose, which is the exact language of the
Platonists. Although there are, again, really important metaphysical disagreements between
Gnosticism and Platonism. Yeah, right, against the Gnostics. However, they were trying to get you
to, again, wake up to the quote unquote greater reality and that the whole Neo-Matrix proposition,
essentially. And I would argue that that's largely what you saying circumambulating made me think
this. But I think that's largely the effort in Jung's individuation as well, is to awaken to your
deeper nature. And man, when you read Seven Sermons to the Dead, where the idea of individuation
even came from, you're confronted with an extraordinarily esoteric picture of what your
true nature is or can be. That goes beyond what he published, I think, in his lifetime. You had to
wait until, you know, however many years after his death to even get a copy of the Red Book. I
think it was like 2008 or something that it originally published. So I really think throughout
the ages, there is this realization that, you know, let's dispense with all the metaphysical
sharp edges and different language used and just focus on the fact that everybody seemed to
believe or think it was worthwhile to go on this labyrinthian journey of self-discovery and not just
for mental health or not just for feeling better, but because it actually ontologically meant
something. Like it meant something for your actual existence. And if you failed to do it,
you were kind of missing out on the whole project of, you know, to sound like I'm
making an essentialist argument or something. Like you're kind of missing out on what it
really means to grow the seed that is the human. So there's a lot there. And I think, you know,
the Neoplatonic and even in the historic tradition, I think it's even part of the whole
Hellenistic transformation of the cultivation of wisdom in the Hellenistic period. But this
metaphor, these two metaphors, the philosophers, the physician of the soul, there's a kind of
healing, but it's not healing. It's a healing that returns you to normal and then heals you
beyond the normal. And then as the child is to the adult, the adult is to the sage,
that the way you have matured. And I agree with John Rusin that the core thing we're pointing to
when we're talking about somebody being mature is the ability to face reality. That's deep mark
of maturity. And of course, we are moving into an age of rampant immaturity, which is not good.
And so I think that's right. What I would say is there is something about
becoming more mature in this deeper sense, platonic sense, the rebirth sense of mature,
it goes back primordial, it's probably present in shamanism.
And I want to make something very clear, and I'm not attributing anything to you. I think
what one of the dangers is that can be sucked into a narcissism, that the point of this is
me, for me to be reborn, kind of a butterfly metaphor. So I'm all beautiful and everybody
will look at me. The point of the rebirth, and this comes out in Jesus of Nazareth, the point
of the rebirth is so that you can see, participate, belong to the kingdom of God. It's when you're
reborn, you see the world, you face reality, and reality faces you in a way that was not available
to you before. The point, that's the point of this, the point is to live in a deeper world,
live in a more real, real. David Yadon's work shows that when people confront the really real,
when they have those experiences like we were talking about at the beginning,
they will transform their lives, their identity, their relationship, because they want to be in
more continuous contact with that really real. I think often what we mean,
sorry, one of the things, I don't want to be too overbearing here, when we're invoking God,
what we're trying to say is we have found a sacredness for the ultimate, for the really real.
We are loving the really real, and that's something than just having an idea like in physics, or even
an appreciation of the really real. We've come into that, I'm conforming myself to it, being
transformed to it, I am reciprocally opening to it. It is opening up as I am opening up,
we are opening up together, there's a loving going on, and this is very clear and clear to
read this symposium. And so being born again is also the rebirth of the world. That's why the
Christian notion of being born in Christ was always tied to the apocalypse, which doesn't mean
the ending, it means the revelation or disclosure of the real world that has been plastered over
by illusion and fraud and sin and vice. And so the idea is you are not only cracked open like the
seed, the world becomes available to you, the sun shines into the plant that grows in a way it
couldn't shine into the soil. Or like I always have a frog for neoplatonism nearby, because
a frog, you start in one world, the watery world, and you make the way to the land world,
but you're an amphibian, you still return and know how to live in the watery world, it's just
really a beautiful metaphor. And so I agree with everything, and I wasn't attributing this to you,
and I want to make this idea that you have to get to this point where the self is fully
involved, but this is not a self-involved project. You're involving the whole of the self, it's
rebirth, not just a new idea, but that rebirth is also the apocalypse, the disclosure of a deeper
reality that calls you in love into a deeper and deeper relationship. Think about it when you love
somebody, you have that ongoing receptivity to the reciprocal opening between you and the other
person. The reason I bring this up is I think there's something right about calling Jung,
I don't know which to call him, a Gnostic Neoplatonist, or a Neoplatonist.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I agree, yeah. And I think people need to pay attention to all of Jung's corpus.
There is an emphasis on the beginning to the middle of Jung, which is very, and I'm sorry,
Jung is explicit about this, is very Kantian. This is all sort of inside the purely subjective world,
and it's very self-referential, even though the ego is being transcended into the self.
But as you move into the later work, the idea of the schizoid and other stuff,
I'm not totally in agreement with any of his metaphysical arguments, but I see him reaching
to try to say, wait, if this doesn't ultimately connect to the grammar of reality, this is very
dangerous solipsism. This is very dangerous narcissism, training and narcissism. And so,
I just wanted to bring that point. I recommend people, and if you're going to secondary sources
on Jung, look at people who are looking at Jung as a whole and the entire progression,
right? Because that rebirth is the rebirth of the world and you together.
Yes, that's so well said. I just am working on this pretty lengthy video on individuation
right now, and I've been using the work of Murray Stein quite a bit, because in his
collected works, he really pretty thoroughly approaches this concept of individuation from
multiple angles, and he has a great riff on why individuation and individualism are not the same
thing, and why the project of individuation is like, yes, of course, the ego is involved in it.
Of course, the persona is involved in it, but the whole point of it is to see them for what they are
as just these little features that are bobbing on the ocean, essentially, that is the deeper psyche,
get underneath them, and not just get underneath them, but not allow yourself, whatever you are,
to ever be fully captured by any of the forces that you encounter, like any of these big archetypal
forces that will, you know, like he points out after you break apart the persona, one of the
very first things that happens is some kind of archetypal temptation rises to the surface, and
you can see this in the midlife crisis, right? Like, I don't want to be this thing anymore,
I'm going to cast this aside, this old relationship, this old job, whatever it is,
and I'm going to do this new thing, and then you get possessed by some new archetypal force that
wants to give you a new persona to wear, that's like this archetypally charged persona, and that's
not individuation either, it's going through that whole chapel perilous of, you know, whatever the
psyche is, and still holding on to your individuality, now contextualized by the whole Mysterium
Tremendum, and the Mysterium Facinosum, like both the terrible and the beautiful, and then coming
out the other side, and then that ends up culminating in like this, you know, that famous
interview that Jung had toward the end of his life where he's asked about if he believes in God,
and he just smiles and says, I don't believe, I know, I know, and there's a letter he wrote.
I think there he is referring to non-propositional knowing, I think that's what he's referring to.
Oh yes, yes, yes, a hundred percent, a hundred percent, and he actually writes a letter
to the BBC publication, the listener, to clarify what he meant by that statement,
and that is what he meant, he didn't say, I'm not saying I believe in a particular God,
I'm not saying I believe in the God of this religion or the God of that religion, I'm saying,
I've been confronted by so much more than I will ever be able to explain or understand or
put words around. Yeah, sorry for the ramble, but... Well, can I ask you one question? Could I ask?
It's a request, it's not even a question. Could you tell me the author that was writing that very
good work on individuation? Oh, Murray Stein, Murray Stein, and it's in his, he has a collected works
he's a Jungian analyst, he's in his 80s now, I think, but yeah, you can you can purchase his
collected works both in some of it, I think is available in audio, it's broken up into different
parts, but one of them... I don't like audio, I would like... Yeah, I actually like going between
both, but yeah, I like to, it's sort of like, I like to listen to things and be like, okay,
this needs a deeper dive, and I like I need the text for this, and I need to go back.
The person I've read on that is John Durley, and Durley does a lot, especially in his book,
Psychius Sacrament, in comparing Jung and Tillich on this, and one of the things I found valuable
in Tillich is Tillich, it explicates the tonus again, I got this notion of tonus, ultimately,
from Tillich, between individuation and participation, and that what we constantly,
we can, and this goes back to the platonic thing, we can get lost in either one, we can do the,
we can get sort of caught up in individuation, and lose the degree to which we are participating
in something greater than ourselves, but when we participate, like you said, in the archetypal
things, we can lose ourselves in it, in a deleterious sense, and Tillich was about the
wise person doesn't try and resolve the tonus, the wise person tries to find the optimal grip
out of the, the wise person doesn't see the tonus as a contradiction, the wise person is able to
frame it as opponent processing, and find an optimal grip therein, and so I found Durley's
work was really, really helpful for that, and he puts Jung and Tillich in this great conversation
around it, it sounds like it would go very well with Stein. Very nice, yeah, yeah, I'm sure it would,
I'm sure it would, and I love too this, this notion like Hillman really focuses on this idea of
deepening, it's kind of interesting, because Ana, you know, Anagaga is kind of like climbing
into infinity, and Hillman brings up a similar idea, James Hillman, of like deepening, deepening
into infinity, it's just like you can never, never go deep enough, and I think he's relying
a lot on Heraclitus for that, I don't remember which fragment specifically, but I know there's
some fragment of Heraclitus where he's talking about growing roots into reality, or going deeper
into reality, and I know he also talks about the famous, you know, nature loves to hide,
sort of, you know, I think that's sort of a bastardized translation of what he's actually
saying, but nonetheless, it's very, very, very interesting, that's one I would love to ask you
about, because I do think it does fold into everything we're talking about, but that really
comes off, coon-like, and that really comes off, also Zen, I would say, this idea of nature loving
to hide, that comes from one of the Heraclitus fragments. Yeah, well yeah, I'd like to comment on that.
Yeah, please. So, Polanyi has been helpful, but I think it also lines Michael Polanyi's work,
Esther Lykap-Beak has a book called Contact with Reality that really brings this out,
and Polanyi made this explicit, but I also see this at least very close to the surface implicit in
Plato, and also you see it in Heidegger, and this is the notion that we experience something as real
when we find it has inexhaustible intelligibility for us, when we can keep learning, so the shadow
doesn't, like, I sort of can get all of what a shadow is, right, at least in one sense, compared
to the object, I'm thinking of Plato's cave analogy, of course, right, and the objects,
they are deeper and ongoing wellsprings of intelligibility, like, so compared to the
shadow of the earth, I can learn so much about the earth, right, and then compared to these objects,
there's the world above, and I can learn so much about that, and then, of course, behind that is
the source of all of this, which is a fount, an inexhaustible fount of light, of intelligibility
and life, right, and light, intelligibility means both life and light, right, and so we feel that
we are realizing reality when we come into what has this inexhaustible intelligibility, that's why
when you're deeply, profoundly in love with a person, they become more and more real to you
because you start to realize that if you ever think you've got them, you have not been in love with
them because they will always, right, they always have depths, and they always have growth beyond
your ability to sound, beyond your ability to foresee, and so they become real to you precisely
because they are always, they are simultaneously shining into you, and you, wow, that's amazing
about you, and they're always withdrawing, I think that's what nature loves to hide, because it's
more like nature lets itself be seen coyly, and then it draws us in deeper, and then it withdraws,
and we keep going deeper and deeper into the forest of reality, and so I think that that is
a profound feature of reality, and Polanyi makes that the case in Light Cap Meat in her book,
like Light Cap Meat, Contact with Reality, she says that's the central claim, and I think that's
something fundamentally right. Now, what Plato adds that I don't see as clearly in Polanyi, but I
think Light Cap Meat is trying to bring out, is that that, explicitly she's trying to bring it out,
when we properly realize that, not as an idea, but as, you know, a rebirth,
when we really realize in that way this aspect of reality, we fall in love with it,
because our sense of the sacred, and this is something I'm proposing, I'm proposing trying to
recover the notion of the sacred as the capacity to fall in love, that about reality that makes us
fall in love with it, so that we realize in rebirth, it's inexhaustableness, it's an inexhaustible
fount of intelligibility, and that acts as an arrow pointing us to this source,
the Dow is a well that can never be used up, that can never be run dry, that notion of reality,
and I think that capacity to fall in love with it is also something that Plato was deeply, deeply
constantly trying to get people to see, constantly trying to get people to see.
Absolutely, yeah, absolutely, and I mean, this also reminds me that this notion of nature loving
to hide, I mean, girdles in completeness theorem, no matter what you solve,
the implication that there's so much more that you didn't solve, or you didn't even propose,
or you didn't even know. The 20th century has been the century of learned ignorance,
which hasn't been properly taken into spirituality, it's been taken in by Wu,
but not by proper spirituality, girdles in completeness theorem, Heisenberg's uncertainty
principle, the fact that there's no computational way to go from a weaker logic to a stronger logic,
the fact that there is no final resolution to the bias variance trade-off in all of our predictions,
like we are discovering these intrinsic trade-off relations and self-limitation relations,
so the Cartesian view that we can find a universal method that will conquer all of reality and
disclose all of its information, that has been undermined, that is an impossible project.
For me, and this is perhaps where I stand against at least standard readings of Platonism,
I think we should give up the notion of sacredness as perfection, where perfection means completeness.
I don't think that is, now that's not necessarily the case, there's aspects that seem to have
been preserved in Eastern Orthodox Neoplatonism, especially the notion of Epictasis, where
the point is not to come to a final rest in God, sort of a permanent vacation,
but this point is that God is the affording field of ongoing infinite self-transcendence,
that infinitely discloses the inexhaustible depths of ultimate reality, and that's a very
different idea than completion, final rest, and I think that is something that I would like to
emphasize. There has been a strand of Platonism that seeks to understand the sacred in terms
of perfection and understand perfection in terms of completeness and a complete
absence of the affordness of change or anything like that, and I think that is a profoundly just
looking up view of Platonism and not enough of looking down view of Platonism.
Yeah, I think you're safe in doing that, John, and still being able to use the word Platonist,
because even amongst Platonists, there's so much disagreement on what the ultimate
fate of a human being is. I mean, if you go back to Plato, obviously, another one of the most famous
mythos in the Republic is the myth of Ur, and being stuck in these continuous cycles of
being reborn, but again, how much of that is purely myth and how much of it is actually meant to
talk about the metaphysical reality of what a human soul is. There's huge disagreement between
like Platonists and Iamblichus about what a human soul is capable of. To Iamblichus, you're actually
stuck in a lower slice of reality, and the human soul cannot penetrate into the noetic
complete realm, and you can do better, and you can become sort of like a Platonic bodhisattva,
according to Iamblichus, and maintain some level of wisdom and come into life in a better
circumstance so that you can continue teaching the true philosophy to other people, but you
can't get out of it. There's no getting out of it, and then there's this crazy story. Have you ever
heard this? It's a story of cosmic ascent by, I'm drawing a blank on which Platonist it is now.
It's Plutarch. It's Plutarch. He talks about, I won't go into the whole story, but it's kind of
similar to the myth of Ur, where it's a guy who basically has an NDE, his soul leaves his body,
and he sees the like the planet and the solar system in its true form, and he sees the
like the sort of quintessence and archetypal nature of each planetary body and the moon and
all this stuff, and he starts talking to his daimon, and long story short, he's told that
there's this whole process that occurs when you die, and that actually you get to become a daimon
next if you did it, if you did it right, and then you get to guide other people, and then there's
more after that, like after you're a daimon, you get to, you know, so long story short, I think
it's safe to say that you can, you can, you can fudge the numbers or play with some of these ideas
and and still maintain the the Platonistic moniker if that even matters to you. Yeah, and I do, and
I tend to read any kind of post-biological existence as purely mythological because I'm
deeply commited to Four E. Cogsci. The cognition requires, it's not happenstance, it requires
embodiment, it requires embeddedness, requires inaction, requires extendedness through other
people, and that any severance from those things would be a severance from the proper
constitutive powers, the fundamental principles and processes of cognition. And so I think
this is another area where I stand against at least some of the traditions of Platonism
in which there is a post-biological existence, there's some aspect of us that can float free of
the body. It's unclear how, again, literal that's supposed to be taken. Obviously, some Platonists
took it very literally. Other Platonists seem to take it, especially those influenced by Stoicism,
they're more sort of open to, well, maybe, maybe we just disappear, but that's okay, right? You
know, because they really constant, the Stoics seem to be really concerned with real death,
like really, really confront your mortality. You really, really are mortal, like,
but then, but there's hints in Stoicism that they might have thought of a post-biological
existence. That's another thing, I guess. And part of this I have to confess is my own
idiosyncratic bias, so please take that into account, anybody who's listening. But I do think
there I can make independent arguments that I do not want to understand. I challenge the sacredness,
it is basically a way of getting sort of metaphysical fire insurance so you can
experience perpetual vacation, which is sort of the model I was brought up with in fundamentalism.
The point of all of this is so I don't go to hell, so I can go to heaven and just be on perpetual
vacation. And I think that is one of the most narcissistic proposals I have actually ever heard.
But it is wrapped up and disguised by what looks like a complete sort of self-negation
in relationship to Jesus. Now, I have to say that that doesn't mean that everybody that I
met within fundamentalist Christianity was false. Pray to that. I'm not claiming that. In fact,
I was fortunate that some of my aunts and uncles and cousins within that extended family of fundamentalist
Christianity represented good lives to me. I think I would say, they would say because of
their fundamentalist Christianity, I would say in spite of it. But I say that with love and affection.
But there is this general thing, and it's very prevalent in certain kinds of Christianity
in the United States, where the point of Christianity is metaphysical fire insurance so that
you have a free ticket to perpetual vacation. And for me that is just narcissism projected
into the vacuum of mystery that surrounds death. And I think I've seen a lot of fundamentalists
who desperately try to propose that to cover up a barely covered up anxiety in the face
of their mortality that is not being properly recognized. I think Plato is right that all
of philosophy is a preparation for death. And in that sense, really facing, see,
mortality is an issue for us precisely because we are finite transcendence. We are finite like the
other animals and we will die. But unlike the other animals, we know that we're going to die.
We have a sense of our mortality, and we can reflect upon it and turn that reflection into a
motivating affordance for the cultivation of wisdom and virtue. And so I think that's another
area where I do challenge a lot of more traditional strands of neoplatonism.
Yeah. And I mean, we're already rubbing up at the end of our time here, but there's so many
other directions that I want to go with you because it does start to, like one of the things I loved
about your argument that you gave on neoplatonism and the path of transcendence, is that what that
video is about? Yeah, the talk I gave at the Consilience Conference run by my good friend
Greg Enriquez, whose work is very important too, by the way. I'm not really familiar with this work.
I'll have to look into it. Yeah, please do, please do. But something, I think you put together
an amazing argument on why a general picture that neoplatonism is proposing is indispensable
not only for personal meaning making, but is actually required to have a reality that makes
sense. And along the way you destroy, I think you do a great job of destroying reductionism.
One argument in particular, I really like, but again, I know we're getting closely at the time
here. I don't even think I can pose this to you in the amount of time we have left, but
it all hinges on this idea of this tonus that you're talking about, that both emergence and
transcendence, the transcendent oneness, emanationism exist together, like are required to exist
together and you can't separate one out from the other. And one of the other parts of your
argument though is that this all fits within an extended naturalistic argument, meaning like
there's nothing necessarily metaphysical or spiritual here, you just have to
wrap your mind around the idea that these are features of naturalistic reality.
I think one of the things it's hard for me to do intellectually is remove whatever that
emanating principle is from something that's beyond the reach ultimately of science and
beyond the reach of something I can prove. I mean, I could prove it like inductively,
maybe, or I could be the right, or like yeah, I could, you know, like in the same way I can
sort of inductively be like, I think it's, I think idos exist, or I think Jungian archetypes exist or
something. I think that's properly abductive inference, by the way, not inductive. It's
inference to the best explanation kind of thing, but go ahead. Yeah, no, I think that was my point
or my question is, can you naturalistically, or how do you naturalistically conceive of
what it is that's emanating, other than like you can see the effect of it? Like I can
walk back that it must logically exist, but how does that piece of it, that's a piece of it that I
couldn't understand is how is that whatever it is that's emanating, the one or the first cause
or whatever makes things animates or exists, fits within that?
So, I mean, part of the argument I would make, so first of all, just so people are clear,
extended naturalism is the proposal that we have to derive our view of reality, our ontology,
not only from what is derivable from our natural sciences, but what is also presupposed
by our natural sciences, like the intelligibility of the universe, the reality of the level at
which science is being done. I won't repeat the arguments, but that's the idea is, and then once
you are talking about what is presupposed, you're getting into this directionality towards
the source, the emanation, but I mean, here's where Erogena is important. I think it's not only
the mystery above us, but also the mystery below us, what it is all emerging from.
And I would point out to you that science, physics, which must, if there's anything that is
supposed to be the representative of naturalism, it's got to be physics, and we've already talked
about how physics is bumping up against the fact that there are aspects of reality that are properly
not knowable. But nevertheless, we can know that they're there unknowably. And then once you
understand that, you have to say, okay, what is our relationship to that? One of the temptations
we do is we can go supernatural, where supernatural doesn't mean what it originally means in
something like Dionysus, which just means sort of above nature into a two worlds idea. Well,
that whatever it is above is actually another world filled with other things, and they're just
super shiny other things. And my job is to get to that other world. And I would put it to you
that that is precisely the profound mistake we can get into. And I think filler's book, which is just
a profound book on Neoplatonism, Heidegger, and the history of being, he argues that, and this
lands up with Sunday and others, his book on the Parmentities, that especially what Plato's trying
to get us to do is to realize, and this converges with Taoism and Buddhism, not identical, but
converges, that whatever we're talking about is we're talking about something that is properly
no thing at all. It's not a secret thing. It's not a ghostly thing. It's not a super special
thing. It's not a supreme thing, right? And these are all the temptations we can fall prey to.
It is no kind of thing at all. And to give a sense of something pointing to that, think about the
no thingness of E equals MC squared. Where is that? Well, it's the right answer. And you sound like
you're saying things as in, the right answer is it's everywhere and nowhere. It's nowhere, and then
it's not happening, but it's everywhere, and then it's constraining what's possible to happen.
Now, it's not a thing, precisely because it's nowhere and everywhere. And it's not
actual in that it's not acting, but it's real because it's really constraining possibility.
And this is where the work of Alistair Urero has had a huge impact on me. This is how I think of
that which is being presupposed by physics. Like physics presupposes the reality of laws. And the
laws are not the same thing as just inductive descriptions of what has happened. They make
predictions of what could happen. The technical language of philosophy is their counterfactual
sustaining, right? They're trying to point at something in reality that has not been fully
actualized and can never be fully actualized, right? And so thinking that's again the inexhaustableness,
the inexhaustible source of intelligibility that is not itself ever directly intelligible.
But for me, I think the besetting idolatry, and I'm trying to be provocative here,
is we are tempted to think of that as another world, another thing, a supreme being, a super
substance. And all of those are to try and transplant and foist onto this how the everyday
world appears to us, which is precisely to engage in a profound kind of category mistake
that we are tempted to. And we are doing something like, this is like a viconstinian thing,
where it's like we're trying to ask what's north of the North Pole and think there's a special
place there. And if we could just find it, we would know what's north of the North Pole.
And that's the wrong way to do this. You have to dissolve that desire for two worlds,
for super thingness, for super substances. And I would put it that many common current
conceptions of God are like that. And I think therefore actually detrimental to coming into
a proper relationship with sacredness. Now, I think that is properly spiritual,
that reality, in that it can afford us, and this is what I argued, strong transcendence,
we can come into a profound relationship of co-realization, reciprocal opening with it,
that's profoundly loving, and is not just psychological improvement, it has profound
epistemological and ontological transformative impact on our lives. And that's what spirituality
is. And if it's something beyond that, I don't really care about it. And I don't know why you
would. I mean, because when it's something beyond that, what I have typically found, so this is
not a deductive argument. But what I've typically found is when some people want something beyond
that, and I'm not accusing you, but there's a hidden narcissism there. There's a secret stuff
that will show how super special I ultimately am. And it's like, that's a real deep danger.
Yeah. Yeah, yeah, I'm with you. And I think that there's this piece of this
part of, this is where aporia hits. This is where it's, you have to sort of just be,
that great argument that you make in this talk, that I'll try trying to just sum this up in five
seconds, that for anything to be intelligible, something in ontological layer higher must be
measuring the lower thing. That's right. That Wolfgang Smith's argument. But you run into
like the unmoved mover, the first mover sort of paradox, eventually with that. And that's
where the aporia hits. And you have to sort of, and I think that's perhaps why Noasis,
this kind of like direct knowing beyond intellectual knowing, is placed at the top
of the divided line. Because there's a level that you like, you can't explain it. Like you just,
you have to sort of have that experience you had in bed. And then, you know,
it may, again, it's like, it's the anagogic imperative of like, you can understand that
experience better your whole life, but you can never fully understand the whole thing.
And the important thing is to not gather that experience and put it on your ego shelf to
shine your narcissism into the world. Right. And let's remember that Noasis is associated with
theoria, what we call contemplatio. Of course, it's become our word theory. And this puts us
too much into propositional knowledge. But think what a theory does, it takes you into deeper
levels of reality and keeps taking you deeper and deeper, right? Now, the word theoria originally
meant to travel so you could behold something you couldn't see before. And this, you have to bring
in the theoria in this way into your sense of Noasis. Again, it's not a still complete vision.
It's like you said, it's this ongoing journey where as I journey, I can see more. And because I
can see more, I'm afforded to journey more. And this is how this is the journey out of the cave.
As I move into the light, I'm blinded by a poria, but eventually I accommodate. And then I can see
deeper into the path. And then I walk further into the path, come into more light, I'm blinded,
I have to be transformed, and so on. It's a traveling that affords the beholding,
that affords the traveling that affords the beholding. And that, as long as you bring that in,
as you said, into your sense of Noasis, this properly guards against the narcissistic demand
that I can comprehend it in the sense of I can fully cognitively close the hand of my mind around
and take possession of it and put it on my ego's shelf and show people how special I am
because of the special experiences that I've had that they have not had. And this is a great danger
that is besetting the spiritual but not religious movement of our time.
Yes. So true, John. So true. I could talk to you all day, but I know you got to go.
Thank you so much for doing this. I had so much fun. Hope we can do it again.
And my great pleasure, Michael. Is there anything you want to mention before I hit stop?
Well, I mean, people, please take a look at my channel. Take a look at our Wisdom Cultivation
platform where you can be put in touch with a lot of courses, a lot of workshops, a lot of people
awakening to meaning. Keep your eye out for, you know, the main series awakening from the
meaning crisis after Socrates, where you can, after Socrates is what does it properly mean
to adopt what we've been talking about as your philosophy of life? What does it mean?
What does it really deeply mean? That's what after So, and not just theory. I demonstrate
practices. I do, I demonstrate dialogical practices with other people. That's all there.
And then keep your eye open. And it's not going to come out this year, 2024, maybe at the end of
2025. But the next big series is walking the Philosophical Silk Road, which is about can we
create that opponent processing that tone us between Zen and Neoplatonism so that we can once
again open ourselves up to the possibility of a new advent of the sacred that could be transformative
for our lives. I can't wait for it. Thank you again.
