This is the Unregistered Podcast, and I'm Thaddeus Russell.
This is a show about ideas, people, and behaviors that are considered inappropriate, out of
bounds, or beyond the pale.
The things you're not supposed to talk about if you're a schoolteacher, a college professor,
a businessman, a politician, a parent, a neighbor, or even a podcast host.
These are the things you're not supposed to say or even think if you're a good liberal,
a good conservative, or a good citizen.
Each week, I'll interview a person who has something bad to say.
They might be a journalist or a professor.
They might be a porn star or a drug dealer.
They might just be an ordinary person with an ordinary job who doesn't care about the
rules of polite society.
I'm not interested in breaking the rules just to be a troublemaker.
I'm interested in people who break the rules of conventional thought and to expand the scope
of what is possible to say in our society.
I'm interested in people who make me think.
When I started college many, many years ago, I thought that college would be the smartest
people in the world arguing about the big issues.
But of course, it wasn't that.
So I left the academy and I began my own school.
At Unregistered Academy, we are interested in the big ideas being debated by the smartest
people.
And so, at our recent Unregistered Weekend in Chicago event, I brought together two of
the very smartest people, I believe, who work in the space of political theory.
Ben Burgess and Curtis Jarvan squared off in a debate on perhaps the biggest issue of
the moment, which is democracy.
Now this debate followed one-on-one interviews I had with Curtis and Ben, which you can access
by becoming a patron of Unregistered.
Just go to Patreon.com slash Unregistered and you'll see the content there.
Now here is my interview and a debate with Ben Burgess and Curtis Jarvan.
Here we are.
This is the long-awaited moment, Frasier versus Ali.
We have Curtis Jarvan and Ben Burgess here to debate or have a discussion about with
some disagreements.
Over this thing called democracy, which we've already been talking about, I talked to Ben
first for an hour about his feelings and really we're talking about feelings today.
His feelings about democracy and then I talked to Curtis about his feelings about democracy.
The funny thing is, neither one of them would tell me what their feelings were.
Did you notice that?
But I'd like to hear more about that, but first, we are going to just let Ben respond
to what Curtis said because Curtis was the last to go and Ben was listening.
The whole time I had you in my mind, I was wondering what was happening in your mind
and you told me you have a lot to say about it.
Let's hear it.
What did you hear and what would you like to say in response to it?
Sure.
My feeling is that I've never heard somebody try so hard to interpret somebody who fundamentally
disagrees with them as somehow agreeing with them.
As I heard you did with Curtis, that you might both dislike democracy, but for opposite reasons.
You dislike it for anarchist reasons.
You think you don't like too much authority over you.
Curtis thinks that the government doesn't have enough authority to get stuff done.
The part I found particularly fascinating about that was that the two were through American
history where all of the people that you seem to regard as the supervillains of American
history said we don't like democracy because democracy leads to chaos and it doesn't let
us control people as much as we want and it doesn't let us get stuff done and so they
move to less democratic things.
The move from the Articles of Confederation to the Constitution, those early capital
progressive who talked about and so all of this really seemed like Curtis giving you
the hard pitch about why Thad should love democracy because this is all look at all
this anti-democratic stuff that was done to make government less democratic by all the
people you most hate and then if it wasn't clear enough what the difference is between
an anarchist critique of democracy and a monarchist critique of democracy, got real
clear we started talking about cops.
I think if you love cops, you and an anarchist are going to have a fundamental disagreement
with each other and one thing I would point out is if you think about cops and you think
about the way we interact with cops and how those interactions could be bad, that I think
that fundamentally bespeaks this power imbalance that you know that there's a much more limited
range of what you can get away with when you're interacting with a cop.
There is what then a cop can get away with when they're interacting with you and you
know what helped with that a little bit is if you had not just like symbolic oversight
boards that can't really do anything that are toothless but ones that were really empowered
to fire people, to discipline cops in serious ways that most civilian oversight boards are,
in other words, more democracy.
So I think that Curtis was actually convincing me to like compliance, to abide by the authorities,
whether they're democratic or not because I just wanted to say this, my heroes, my greatest
heroes are American slaves.
Why?
Because we have lots of evidence of this and it's in my book and elsewhere that you know
when they were working in the field they'd be working in lines right and there would
be a driver, a slave driver overseeing them on a horse usually and looking down on them
and he'd ride his horse up and down the row looking to see if they were working and of
course, and Frederick Douglass actually reported on this, as soon as the slave driver passed
a slave and had his back to the slave, the slave would drop his head and stop working.
And this was reported on by many people.
This is a phenomenon, right?
And we have, there's a lot of examples of slaves doing the kind of thing that we have
called tacit resistance or I've called it tacit resistance, right?
Just doing just enough to not get punished, just enough to not get whipped.
And to me that seems like the healthiest maybe way to live at least from my point of view
according to my values and it sounds to me like you and I might agree on this and therefore
I'm not such an anarchist, I might be more of a monarchist or whatever that is, I'm not
sure it's monarchism that I'm advocating, but it is this kind of, it is the compliance
with authority.
So to a degree, but again without this maybe where you and I just, Curtis and I disagree
is people tend to as I said, merge their identities with authority and that can sometimes be corporations,
right?
Some people are like Apple people and they love putting the Apple logo on everything, right?
Sometimes they merge their identities with the Democratic Party or with the United States
of America and that's to me the problem.
I don't want to do that because then I feel like I've lost all autonomy.
But maybe you're counseling Curtis that that's maybe best is that we should give up on this
idea of personal autonomy and so therefore what Ben is saying about anarchists not being
okay with this, maybe it doesn't make sense.
Oh wow, there's a lot to talk about here.
I'm wondering if I should keep using my Ronald Reagan voice.
It's sort of, I think it's reflective, your perspective is reflective of how much leftism
is sort of kind of buried in the heart of libertarianism in some ways because what we
see if you can kind of step outside of the 19th and 20th century perspective and interpret
modern populations from a fundamentally pre-modern sense, you will see that they're obsessed
with autonomy and they're obsessed with essentially atomization and autonomy and atomization really
go together and are the same kind of process.
And so your sense, for example, when you're dealing with like a police officer of inherently
wanting to resist that authority, that would be seen by more traditional societies as a
very pathological kind of bias or way to approach that situation.
And I would sort of advise two things, one is that I think sort of historically it looks
bad, secondly, it was at a Dave Chappelle or a Chris Rocks get, how not to get your
ass beat by the police, I think that watching that skit should be mandatory for everyone
and we'll stop you from having bad encounters with the police and I don't believe in having
bad encounters with the police.
On the other hand, when you look at, there's a sort of use of the word democracy to mean
stuff that I like, which I think is very insidious and Orwellian and very, very wrong.
So for example, to use an opposing use of the word democracy, there was a blog that
I really loved called Second City Cop, which was a Chicago cop blog.
It was amazing, it was the true voice of people who actually work in the police, it was run
by cops, all the commenters were cops, they were very literate and funny cops.
Unfortunately, this blog had been the target of the sort of progressive media machine in
Chicago for quite some time and they came too close to the guy running it and he shut
it down.
So is that democracy in action?
Well, it's certainly the action of the same people who would be running these oversight
boards and so in practice, what you're seeing, for example, with this is that when you see,
what you'll look at when you look at a place like Chicago is you'll see massive violations
of human rights going on constantly because these are violations of the basic governmental
responsibility to maintain a monopoly of violence.
And what the maintaining the monopoly of violence means is that you are responsible for all
violence that happens.
Even if that is interpersonal violence that does not involve a cop, that violence is the
responsibility of the state.
Do you know the concept of anarcho tyranny, Ben?
You have this idea that's kind of, if you're kind of thinking of things in terms of autonomy,
you get sort of very confused because I'm against the state or for the state, should
there be more government or less government.
This concept of anarcho tyranny, which is a Sam Francis concept, I believe, tells us
is that these things are actually go quite together.
And so the principle of your life is not safe on the street really comes along with the
principle of your life is enmeshed in sort of pointless paperwork or your life is not
safe on the street comes with the principle of, for example, the real impact of these
kinds of oversight processes is de-policing because what you see is that basically you
reach a certain point where any, and I believe this is a problem in Chicago now, actually,
although I can't really follow it because the only media I trusted got shut down, but
once you reach a certain point where any kind of interaction that may result in some kind
of criminal apprehension generates a pile of paperwork, cops just don't do that anymore,
they just sit and eat donuts.
They sit and eat donuts and basically condone just this insane level of violence that goes
on.
I was reading, one of the ways I like to explore the past is by reading travelogues of European
travelers and there's a great one called Ultramar by Paul, I'm forgetting the last
name, and he travels to Chicago in the 1890s and he's really disturbed basically as a modern
Victorian European coming to America because he's heard that sometimes there are robberies
within the city limits of Chicago, even in the daytime.
This is something that is unheard of in a major Victorian city, these places were as safe
as Tokyo is now.
We see this massive decline in standards of public order and massive flight of people
from violence and to say that somehow the problem there is excessive policing is completely
cockeyed to me.
I think that the statistics certainly on police violence do tell a very different story.
I agree, by the way, I'm all for using the Reagan voice because that is a reminder because
Ronald Reagan, man, that is somebody who was committed to governing, didn't let Congress
push him around and tell him that he couldn't send arms from Iran to fund terrorists in
Nicaragua, so if you're a big fan of a strong executive, I guess that is your guy.
I think that there are two issues with policing, just to stick with that example for a second.
One is democracy and I agree, I don't think we should use democracy to mean stuff we like,
I think we should use it to mean the people having more control over the people who exercise
power over them, the people who exercise that power being more accountable to the government.
I don't think shutting down a blog particularly helps with that, I think that meaningful democracy
requires people having access to a wide variety of points of view so they can make up their
own mind, but absolutely having a real oversight board with real power I think does increase
democracy.
By the way, what has the least democratic accountability and hence the most worry about
how you're going to be treated in those interactions with cops that Thad was talking about, how
worried he was earlier is if it's like the corporation from Robocop has just gotten the
police contract and then they don't need to worry about what you think at all, any more
than like minors had to, like Pinkerton's had to worry about what minors thought about
them in the 19th century.
Now I agree with Curtis, of course, that do I think that people have a right to safety?
Yeah, absolutely.
Do I think that having a harsher regime of policing is a particularly effective way
of enforcing that?
I think if you compare different cities in the US with different levels, different criminal
justice policies, I'm not convinced of that, but hey, you know where you're really safe
on the streets, Norway, Sweden, Finland, places like that, which have vastly more lenient,
more humane, more minimalistic criminal justice systems.
What else is the difference between Chicago and Norway?
I think the difference that actually matters, you can tell yourself a just so story about
culture or race that doesn't really make any sense, but I think the difference that's
actually relevant is the reason that they can have a vastly more humane and minimalistic
criminal justice system.
Anders Brevik is getting out of prison eventually and while he's still in, it's much nicer than
American prisons and they can also have a much lower rate of street violence is that
social democracy works, that having a big expanse of welfare state, regulatory state
tied to strong unions with much more egalitarian social consequences results in much less crime
even with a vastly more lenient criminal justice system, which I do think is a win for democracy.
So another place with an unfortunately very high crime rate is Haiti and as you may know,
Haiti has been in the news lately because the State Department is proposing its nth
invasion of Haiti.
How would you propose applying your Norwegian model to Haiti?
Well, I think that Haiti makes my point, so thank you for that, as much as would be humanly
possible to do with any example of the world because if you wanted to pick the single country
in the world that was least like a Nordic social democracy, it would be Haiti which frankly
vastly more closely resembles anarcho-capitalism.
Run that last part past me again.
Sure.
That Haiti, how much of a welfare state does Haiti have?
How much of a regulatory state does Haiti have?
One of the things in the WikiLeaks cables, the State Department cables that were leaked
is that there was an effort during the first Obama term to increase the minimum wage in
Haiti to I believe the princely sum of about $5 US a day that was successfully lobbying
against among others by the American State Department on behalf of American companies.
That's about as weak a regulatory state as you could hope for.
More is widely dispersed again.
This is one of the least social democratic countries on the planet.
Do you suppose that's a cause or an effect?
Have you spent a lot of time in the third world?
When I was six or seven, I lived in the Dominican Republic which is next door to Haiti.
I'm sort of wondering why you think that this model has not been more widely applied in
the third world, given the fact that these policies can turn Haiti into Norway?
I don't think that your lived experience of being there is actually very relevant.
I think what's relevant is the trivially available public data that you yourself just recited
a minute ago.
The int intervention in Haiti that like Jean Bertrand d'Arrested, when he ran for president
of Haiti, his original campaign slogan, swear I'm not making this up, was that he wanted
to raise the Haitian people from misery to poverty.
This is a very unambitious reform program.
This is the most minimal effort at some kind of lefty reform program you could get, but
you try that shit in America's Monroe Doctrine backyard and you end up getting stuff like
Arrested being literally kidnapped and taken out of the country by U.S. Marines in 2004.
You broaden your view beyond Haiti and you start looking at the rest of the western hemisphere
south of the United States.
You see, for example, you want to talk about attempts to implement something like a Nordic
model.
You see Salvador Aende in Chile being a Democratic socialist, get a president, being killed and
removed in a coup that's very openly supported by the United States.
You see that in Guatemala in 54.
You see that versions of that in Haiti numerous times.
This is not ancient Cold War history.
I mentioned Haiti in 2004.
We could also talk about Venezuela in 2002, unsuccessful attempt.
We could also talk about Honduras in 2009.
So I think that there is a pattern that emerges here.
I understand you don't want to see it, but this isn't really clear pattern.
The pattern is one that I'm very familiar with from my experiences with Nate Reader.
My dad was a foreign service officer and worked in the State Department for many years.
His first post was the Dominican Republic, which was the site of one of these interventions.
I think it's very possible to take that view when you look at a sort of very high and blurry
level at these things, when you descend a little bit deeper into, for example, the Nelson
Rockefeller era of, you know, he was the coordinator of Inter-American Affairs, which
means he was basically the sort of pre-consult for Latin America.
You'll see, for example, let's take, for example, the example of Allende versus Pinochet in Chile.
What you'll see if you do what's called a prosypography, which is an analysis of social
network connections, is that Allende is, I would say, much, much more of an American figure
than Pinochet.
Pinochet is a very Chilean figure.
Even in Argentina, he would have been weird.
Allende is a globalist.
He's a member of basically the global Americanized elite.
You know, one time I had, in the early 2000s, before I acquired some of my political direction,
I had a boss who was Brazilian.
He was actually Brazilian, Chinese, and one day he came to me and he's like, you know,
what's really strange is that my wife is a documentary filmmaker, and so she's kind
of part of this world, and she's like very Americanized, and she hates America.
My brother-in-law runs a video store, and he loves George W. Bush, and how does this
come about?
It's very simple.
The most Americanized people in the world are the most anti-American, and you'll find
this pattern among Latin American elites everywhere, and so from my perspective, the State Department
in its Latin American policies is actually very much guided by a sort of mix between
kind of the Orthodox School of Latin American Studies kind of program that we've been hearing
from you, and reality.
And so if you take, for example, the case of Aristide in Haiti, the idea of a $5 a day
minimum wage in the country where the average wage is probably 75 cents a day would go very,
very far toward ruining what is left of the Haitian economy.
And when you look at Aristide in particular, there's a lot that reminds us of, for example,
our good friend Comanante Chavez, in that Chavez managed to take Venezuela, Chavez managed
to escape all of this alleged CIA exon-mobile plotting, and actually run his own country
in Latin America, and with great advice from the more radical wing of the School of Latin
American Studies, and the Sandalistas, if you know the term, and all those kinds of people.
And the result was that he basically took the country in Latin America with the most
resources and turned it into this incredible pit.
And so, you know, the idea of doing that same kind of maneuver in a country without oil
would have been, you know, sort of extremely remarkable, and you can bet your socks that
among the people in the State Department who sort of countenanced the withdrawal of Aristide
that there was not a Republican among them.
There are no Republicans in the State Department, zero.
Like if they exist, they spend their time deep in the closet.
Moreover, I'd be happy to point you to a link that basically, you know, far from being,
you simply don't notice all of the times that, from this perspective, that America has gone
out and evangelized the, quote, non-communist left.
You know, all of the, you know, Kennedy going down to Latin America in the 60s and supporting
opera, Alliance for Progress in Peru and saying things like the only alternative to violent
revolution is peaceful revolution.
You're going to get a revolution whether you like it or not, guys.
And you know, the sheer amount, I mean, this goes on with Wilson's intervention in Veracruz
in Mexico, where Wilson basically, you have this Porfirio Díaz, who, you know, basically
anything that works in Mexico was either created by colonialism or by what were called the
científicos of Díaz.
Díaz retires, you know, and he's like, okay, I want this guy, was it Maduro?
You know, basically this other thug to replace me.
And America is like, oh no, we must not have thugs.
And so, you know, you basically get this kind of classic Wilson-Deb split between American
candidates in Mexico, where the Wilsonites support Cardenas and the real hotheads, the
John Reed types, support Pancho Villa.
The, your heroes would definitely be all beyond the Villa side.
And the result is this incredible Mexican civil war that kills like two or three million
people and reduces the country to a state of anarchy that it has not yet escaped from.
And so, you know, when I compare, you know, the American, America's guilt in promoting
leftism in Latin America, which, by the way, goes all the way back to the original Monroe
doctrine, because the original Monroe doctrine was a policy inspired by England.
It was really an English policy that was treating us as a satellite state.
And the goal of that policy was to assure commercial dominance for English merchants,
capitalists, in Latin America.
This is why soccer is such a big thing in Buenos Aires, and it worked very well at that.
And the policy was basically no monarchs, no European monarchs in Latin America.
And then the Brazilians tried to have their own monarchy, which was actually kind of fricking
cool, being Emperor of Brazil and all that.
And then the policy was, and of course, you had the Affair of Maximilian in Mexico, which
was only possible due to the civil war.
As soon as the civil war is over, the Americans are like, hey, Louis Napoleon, like, didn't
you read the paper?
Like, we have a huge army here, and we're ready to invade Mexico if you don't get rid
of this empire.
So Mexico had to go back to, like, broken Third World government.
And so the sort of influence of basically imposing leftist systems on what was originally
the peaceful and happy empire of New Spain is, for me, basically the sort of cause of
all these troubles.
Yeah.
So most of that's wrong.
Mr. Ferreira Diaz did not retire.
He was overthrown after fixing an election to get himself reelected.
He was overthrown.
He died.
In Europe, still applauded his unsuccessful return to power.
Cardenas, you were talking about, didn't come in until the 1930s, a couple decades.
No, no, no.
You're talking about a different Cardenas.
Oh, okay.
I don't think so, but people can look into this.
I'm talking about the constitutional list that Wilson was supporting.
Certainly, the initial legitimately elected government immediately after Ferreira Diaz
was overthrown with direct result, with very direct participation from the U.S. ambassador
in Mexico, another of those famous examples of America promoting leftism in Latin America,
which is very much the opposite of what most of the track record is.
We also heard a bunch of things that I'm not quite sure how they all fit together or how
they're supposed to be relevant to the original point.
The original point being that even very mildly reformist left governments in Latin America
are very hard to keep going in the face of American state opposition.
Now, we heard that people in the State Department are Democrats instead of Republicans.
I don't know why that distinction will be relevant to anything.
Of course, this stuff is bipartisan.
LBJ, look at what he did in the Dominican Republic, for example.
I've never had the slightest doubt about American Empire being a bipartisan project.
We heard that social democratic policies would have been a disaster there, so I guess it's
good that they couldn't be implemented in these various cases.
None of this is particularly relevant to the original point, which is that if you look
at economic models, what you have in a place like Haiti is the polar opposite of something
like the Nordic countries with their strong labor unions, strong regulatory state, extremely
expansive welfare state, and the latter works a whole lot better than the former in delivering
those basic goods of a more reasonable, less authoritarian criminal justice system married
to a low crime rate.
Do you really think that nobody has ever had the idea of using the Norwegian system of
government in Haiti, like you're convinced of that?
Win on Earth, did I say that?
Did I just say that and black out?
In fact, what I said is almost literally the opposite of that, Curtis.
What I said is that attempts at doing things that fall way short of that were not allowed
to happen.
Well, I mean, if we go back to the Haitian Revolution, my God, certainly that was allowed
to happen.
That was some pretty...
You should read Lothrop Stoddard's The French Revolution in San Domingo.
It's a really amazing work.
No, I mean, this reminds me of the story of it.
The Haitian Revolution was allowed to happen, and that they were forced to pay reparations
to France up until the 20th century.
So if you want to know something about the economic origins of the distinction between
Haiti and Norway, that might be a place to start.
Right, because they were paying off their relatively small national debt.
It's true.
They don't have oil there.
They do have sugar, though.
Yeah, I mean...
They had to pay reparations to their former slave owners for the loss of property in the
slave revolution.
That's what happened.
And the genocide and the...
Yeah.
But yeah.
The number of people that we're talking about there is tiny, now in comparison to what you
mentioned.
As Stalin...
I really enjoyed what you mentioned, George W. Bush earlier, because if you want an executive
who's not going to let himself be pushed around by Congress, who's going to get stuff done,
like detaining American citizens without trial, like starting a worldwide torture regime,
like starting a drone war, that's your dude, Unitary Executive.
I hope everybody enjoys the result.
Let's go back.
Instead of debating.
I recently mentioned that for many years I drank several cups of coffee a day, and that
about a year ago, I started to experience an irregular heartbeat from it.
My doctor told me very directly that I needed to cut down on my caffeine intake.
Amazingly.
Shortly after that, the folks at Magic Mind got in touch with me.
Apparently, their CEO had had the same issue, and he started the company to address it.
He and his team of nutritionists developed a new herbal supplement that comes in a delicious
two ounce shot, which has replaced coffee in my morning routine.
It contains matcha from Japan, which gives me exactly the right kind of long lasting,
but not edgy stimulation that keeps me focused and going.
As well as several amazing adaptogens and new tropics sourced from India and British
Columbia that keep my stress in check and my mind on task.
Best of all, my irregular heartbeat is gone.
Now I start every day with my shot of Magic Mind.
And now that I've been using it for several months, I can report a significant increase
in productivity.
The book manuscript that I was having a famously difficult time finishing is now complete.
Right now, my friends at Magic Mind are offering listeners of unregistered an unprecedented
offer.
You should go to magicmind.co slash unregistered and get 40% off your subscription for the
next 10 days with my code UNREGISTERED20.
Again, to get this phenomenal deal on the best part of my morning routine, go to magicmind.co
slash unregistered and use my discount code UNREGISTERED20.
Thank you.
Let's go back instead of debating Latin American history.
Let's go back to Ben's original point, which is twofold I think here is that number one,
I think you're positing that social democracy is the vehicle for democracy, right?
But then also you then said that the, I think you said the United States state, the American
state has been hostile to social democratic movements abroad, is that right?
And it sounds like it's inherently to you that the US state is inherently hostile to
social democracy in other countries.
I think that the US state is inherently hostile to anything that's bad for American business
interests and that they certainly in what it's traditionally regarded as its backyard,
it's been very violently hostile to anything perceived as getting the way of American business
interests.
So let me give a little history, which is not Latin America, but it is US foreign policy
thinkers.
So I mean, Franklin Roosevelt's whole intention with World War II was to export the new deal
to Europe and then that's exactly what happened with the Marshall Plan, right?
And also LBJ and Eisenhower both, they had the exact same intention for Vietnam.
They said we want to bring the TVA, the Tennessee Valley Authority to the Mekong Delta.
They wanted to develop these countries in all sorts of ways and one of them was to just
simply establish new deal type social democratic political structures in those countries.
So there's, and also, I mean, the social democracies that you like so much in Northern Europe have
been the greatest allies, the staunchest allies of the United States, the United States has
loved them.
No, definitely not.
I mean, look, no, absolutely not.
They have a look at the relationship between some of the most significant social democratic
leaders in Northern Europe, look at some of what they were saying about Vietnam.
They have, there's, you know, like, I don't think the staunchest allies claim is true.
I mean, now, if you want to do the more minimal claim, right, that they have a, that's sure.
I mean, the United States may be happy to work with countries that, you know, especially
ones over which it's in a position to exert very little direct control, but for that can
benefit the United States in all sorts of ways, geopolitically as happy to work with
places that might have a variety of internal regimes, yeah, of course, right.
But I also think that really, especially if we're going to talk about social democracy,
yeah, I mean, I know of, you know, Red Robert Caro, I know that, I know that LBJ expressed
some fond, you know, thoughts about, you know, who would be great if we had the TVA in the
Mekong Delta.
I think if you actually look at the regime that we were propping up in Vietnam, it did
not do a lot of stuff like that.
But they, but I think that, you know, more broadly, when we talk about social democracy,
what we're really talking about is not just sort of any kind of reform that might include
some element of welfareism.
I mean, you certainly have that coming from all sorts of sources that are totally separate
from that.
I mean, you've got, you know, Bismarck, you know, establishing some basic social insurance.
And what we're talking about is stuff that comes out of the labor movement and the socialist
movement and expresses the aspirations of those things.
Typically, we talk about social democracy.
We're talking about reforms, you know, rather than revolution, but that's, but that, like,
I think if we're going to be historically specific, that's what we're talking about.
And certainly in those countries over which America has, you know, has expressed the most
economic and political dominance, any attempts at doing anything that would be even close
to what we have in the United States, never mind this kind of more extensive democracy
has been often met with quite a bit of hostility.
And that is a major reason why it's been so difficult to implement that in Latin America.
Can I offer an alternate reason for that?
Sure.
I would say the alternate reason for that is that the farther you go from Norway, the
more transparently insane these policies are.
I would love to make you, like, the dictator of Haiti for a year or two.
You should actually look into the 1920s and 30s occupation of Haiti, because I think that
if you read primary sources from the period, you might change your very, I hesitate to
say your very linear perspective on what was going on there.
I feel like in some ways you're sort of a prisoner of this kind of 20th century Cold
War worldview, which is itself really an American propaganda construct.
So one of the things that you see across the board within the Cold War is I would sort
of encourage you to compare the U.S. response to the Soviet Union, for example, to the response
to right-wing powers like Nazi Germany, where the idea of we're going to be at peace with
Nazi Germany and have a Cold War with them rather than starting a worldwide war and invading
Europe was not even considered an option.
Why do you think that is?
Why do I think that is?
I think that's because America, it boggles my mind how difficult it is to see as an
American that America has always been a fundamentally left-wing power.
We forget that Karl Marx praised Lincoln to the skies constantly.
We forget that Lincoln's party was the most left-wing party in the world at the time.
We forget the incredibly close and really, I would say, culpable relationship of the
U.S. with the USSR, not only during the 40s, but during the teens and 20s and 30s when
it was committing its worst atrocities, even in the Cold War period when the American
liberal establishment-
The teens, not only did the United States not recognize the Soviet Union, but Woodrow
Wilson sent troops in order to aid the White Army and the Russians of the war.
When you look more closely at what happened, you realize that, for example, I think .7 of
the 14 points is essentially hands off the Bolsheviks.
You realize that the troops that the U.S. sent to the Russian Revolution were not actually
there to suppress the Russian Revolution.
They were there to essentially sandbag certain British and French efforts to suppress the
Russian Revolution, which would have saved tens of millions of lives.
No, that's an all-true.
This is an important point to make.
This really is news from an alternate dimension here.
For example, there's a great book, which is a biography.
I'm curious as to how you feel about Wilson, but there's actually a biography of Wilson
by Herbert Hoover that I read.
It includes this wonderful detail, which is entirely consistent with what I find when
I look into the period, that in 1917, Wilson was coming back from his grand tour of Europe
in which he's received as basically the president of the world, and this insane experience.
Who happens to be coming back to him with him is David Francis, who was the U.S. ambassador
to Russia.
Francis was the former governor of Missouri, and he was essentially during this conflict,
the U.S. had two embassies to Russia.
It had an embassy to the Kerensky regime, and then it had what was called the Red Cross
Mission, which was actually basically Wall Street's embassy to the Bolsheviks.
This business of basically supporting revolution around the world had become a very big American
business and actually kind of lucrative when you looked at relationships with these revolutionary
regimes.
For example, the massive magnesium concession in Georgia that Admiral Harriman got in the
20s, that's Georgia, the other Georgia.
Francis is coming back on the same ship as Woodrow Wilson, who's appointed him the ambassador.
He's coming back for medical reasons.
Wilson won't even see him, even though they're both on the George Washington together.
Then there is an episode which I find entirely convincing, but I've never read about before,
but I don't see why Hoover would make it up.
Hoover, of course, was a big progressive of the era, where Wilson sends this cable to
Paris and London.
This cable is like, hey guys, I've just been informed that you're supporting these whites
in Russia.
They're really very bad people.
They're monarchists.
The term fascist wasn't available yet.
They're reactionaries.
They're really bad people.
What I don't understand and what I'm going to find really hard to explain to the American
public is the fact is you guys owe us a lot of money.
Instead of paying us back, you're aiding these monarchists, these reactionaries.
I don't think American public opinion is going to take to that very well.
Essentially, the cutoff of Allied aid to the whites, which is what allows the Reds to win
that war, was very much a policy of liberal internationalism in Washington.
Moreover, you keep using the term propping up.
Moreover here, because we just went over a lot of territory, and I just want to note
that all of that adds up to saying that when Wilson, yeah, what do you think I think about
Wilson?
He's somebody who...
You're more of a Debs man, right?
He's somebody who, yes, very much so, who rounded up and imprisoned all the people who
agreed with me, who were in the United States at the time.
I think exactly what you think I think.
But also, note that when we're thinking about this, USSR, Nazi Germany comparison, that
we say, well, look, all we did with the USSR was initially support the whites in the Russian
Civil War, but do it in kind of a half-hearted way, and then cut off aid.
So really, if you think about it, it's as if we were supporting them, and that's being
contrasted to Nazi Germany, where there was certainly nothing remotely like that level
of attempt to counter that system in 1933, 1934, and where the United States did slowly
get there over time in response, not to, as I'm sure you know and would recognize, not
in response to some humanitarian objection to what the Nazi Germany's internal system
was, but as a response to its global ambitions and the things that it was doing in pursuit
of those global ambitions, and ultimately to defend England against it.
I guarantee you that if the Soviet Air Force had been bombing London, that would have played
out in a very similar way.
I think that, I guess I would say, it's kind of, I sort of want you to broaden your historical
reading beyond Howard Zinn.
Like, you know.
This is so glib and silly, and there is just no trace of a real argument here.
This is just lines and insults.
There's no engagement with any ideas.
I'd like to recommend a couple of books.
I think Charles Beard's history.
He was certainly a progressive, and so his histories, and you know, you'll find a lot
of your perspective in early Beard work.
I think, you know, reading his President Roosevelt, and he was the most esteemed, he was the most
esteemed American, sorry.
I'm going to really recommend that you broaden your reading.
You know, this is the least reasonable way to engage with people.
If we want to actually talk about this stuff, you've got to cut that out.
Sure.
Well, you know, again, if you don't, I mean, like, I'm sort of hearing these kinds of arguments
from authority from you, and it's very true.
Like what?
Like for example, you're like America supported the whites in the Russian Civil War.
How is that an argument from authority?
All historical authorities will agree with you.
And my point was that when I basically read the primary sources, I find that what was
going on was in fact the reverse.
So the argument from authority is that I said something that most historians would agree
with.
Yes.
That's right.
The problem is, none of us, even me, the professional historian up here has read those primary sources,
not many of them, at least not the way that you have.
Sure.
No, no, no, no.
So you can't really test this?
Of course, of course, of course.
And it's very, it's sort of when you're basically sort of within the sort of narrative of like
most historians appears to you as sort of as broad as the world.
But for me, like this narrative that you're within, it's like, imagine if you'd grown
up in the Soviet Union, and you got everything you knew from the great Soviet encyclopedia,
which is a work that actually exists.
How would I sort of convince you that basically that narrative, which every Soviet historian
believes in, is, you know, a fairytale?
Wait, hold on.
Has the United States government been interested in exporting democracy?
Yes or no?
Oh my God.
Since the very beginning.
I mean, if you read, you know, Washington's farewell address.
The farewell address is a sort of wonderful kind of piece of isolationist rhetoric.
It's really great.
And it basically, it's doing no more than repeating basically the essential tenets of
classical international law as understood by everyone at the time.
And one of those tenets is that one thing that you don't do is support rebels in other
people's countries.
That's an act of war.
And so you sort of read, Washington is saying this, and you're like, well, this is like
the great American tradition, and then you read about Citizen Genet and so forth.
And you're like, no, actually, what you're really reading in the farewell address is
basically like a drunk swearing off alcohol.
And you know he's going to keep drinking.
And so, for example, you see the same thing, for example, in 1848 with America's just incredibly
enthusiastic reception of like Louis Cassuth when he comes to America, you know, the Cassuth
story.
You know, Garibaldi is a huge hero to like Americans everywhere.
And you know, this sense of basically like promoting Castro when he comes to the UN in
the late fifties is treated like this incredible rock star.
I mean, you know, America is very well known for its love for Fidel Castro and it's attempts
to keep him.
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
The numerous attempts to assassinate the guy.
I can point you, I can point you, almost the almost literally ended human civilization
to stop Cuba from defending itself, get stuck, get to invasion, Cuban missile crisis.
I can point you to the testimony of the last ambassador to Batista before Congress describing
how essentially everyone at state and CIA was supporting Castro, who essentially got
his job through the New York Times, as they say, by having an interview with Herbert Matthews,
where he basically presented himself as like the voice as like the John F. Kennedy of Cuba.
That was essentially widely believed by all the cool people in America, all the earnest
Hemingways.
Gosh, how long did that last?
Yeah, lasted until basically Castro declared that he was on the side of the Soviets at
that point.
At that point, basically, of course, you switch to a Cold War pattern, where what you see
over and over again, all of these patterns that you see make perfect sense if you see
the US and the Soviet Union as competing revolutionary empires.
For example, let's look for example at South Africa, at South Africa, again, you have this
sort of standard, well-worn Udney reader, you know, we supported the regime in South
Africa.
Actually, the US was trying to overthrow the regime in South Africa basically constantly
from 1945 after.
What you mean by support is essentially condone.
When you use this word prop up, what you're actually saying is that the US is not trying
hard enough to revolutionize these countries.
That's not all what I'm saying, not even close.
What I'm talking about is the United States supporting coups against Democrat-led governments
during and after the Cold War.
What I'm talking about is the armies that enforced systems like Pinochet and Chile,
who by the way, may have been less Americanized, but is definitely America's man in that situation,
that the officer corps being trained in Fort Benin, I'm talking about all sorts of military
aid to these places.
This is not not trying hard enough to overthrow it, and certainly, if you think that the United
States is acting like a revolutionary empire, I don't know what the cause of this revolution
is because to go back to Thad's original question about the United States exporting democracy,
I think very frequently the United States has used that rhetoric.
Sometimes there's been some alignment between that and what's actually happened.
Very often, it's used that rhetoric when there's been no alignment whatsoever between
that and what was actually happening.
It depends on what's convenient to American interests at any given time.
Go back to that Mexican Revolution example, those constitutionalists that Curtis is talking
about.
Caronza, Caronza.
There we go.
There we go.
Supporting.
Yeah.
Caronza, yeah.
Big Democrat there.
They have this guy who basically proceeded to govern just like Porfirio Diaz had.
And who the United States was actively helping to crush Pancho Villa and then try to crush
the Zapatistas.
You're more of a man.
How do you feel about Chavez?
Can you give us a Chavez story?
Sure, but I'm going to finish this point first.
By the way, they have, in the course of doing that, they have, I think, let's just say this,
I think that the United States, the idea of the United States has been friendly certainly
in any sort of consistent way to democracy in Mexico is going to be very hard to square
with historical record.
But sure, let's talk about Venezuela.
I think if you look at the, most of the time Chavez was actually in office.
They have like the economic effects you're talking about didn't happen yet.
Now you can say, you can tell a story where you're going to say, well, okay, but this
was just like a time bomb that they, it was all set up to do this.
So even though those first 10 years in power, extreme poverty in Venezuela was sliced in
half, this was all, this was all predestined to lead to what eventually happened mostly
in the Maduro years.
I think that they have a, and in, and I think that there's all sorts of stories you can
tell about why that happened.
I think some of them, I think multiple ones of those include some element of truth that
you can tell a story about currency mismanagement.
You can, you know, can tell certainly a lot of stories about corruption.
But one thing that I think is not going to make a tremendous amount of sense is to do
the usual lazy right wing thing and say, oh, aha, see, see what did this is socialism.
Socialism did this in Venezuela.
When you actually look at the stats on Venezuela, even at the height of Chavez's welfare state,
you know, the public sector in Venezuela was smaller than the public sector in France.
You know, it was barely bigger than the one in the United States.
And so certainly the idea, you know, whatever, whatever your preferred explanation is of
what happened there, the, the idea that this is just like an inevitable consequence of
getting a little too socialist and this is going to happen to your economy is really
hard to square with the global career of stats.
What's your best example of third world socialism?
So when you say third world, I mean, not Norway, not Norway, they have a, so, so why, why is
it, you know, tell me your story about why you think that, why you think that what, that
what's effective in Europe can't be effective outside of Europe because I've been really
unclear about this this whole time.
That's a really interesting question.
Let's take Japan and Haiti as their examples because they're both island nations and they
both, you know, one of them is very economically successful and the other one isn't.
So if we look at, we could say, well, the infrastructure in Japan is much better than
the infrastructure in Haiti.
So what would be your expectation if we, leaving the governments of both countries the same,
we transport all the Haitians to Japan and all the Japanese people?
So is there going to be an answer to the question I just asked that's like coming through
Socratic Dialogue or are we going to get to it?
Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Give me your answer first.
What's my answer?
What's your answer for, my answer, my answer, my answer is the same answer given by Joseph
Germais, you know, 200 years ago when someone talked to him about the human race and human
rights and his answer is that he had never met a human.
He had met Russians and Frenchmen and Englishmen.
But as far as these humans, he had, he had no evidence of them whatsoever.
So it's just, it's just about the innate difference between Japanese people and Haitian
people.
An innate difference or cultural difference?
Curtis?
An innate difference or cultural difference?
Well, design an experiment to separate the two and then I'll tell you.
Okay.
There we go.
That's an interesting answer.
So I think that, I think that's certainly part of the answer and by the way, useful to
this comparison to know which one of those countries is more internally democratic?
Not even close.
Right?
Japan is vastly more internally, more internally democratic.
How do you define, I'm really, I really want to get back to this definition of democracy
because in Japan, you know, has been run by, has been a one party state since 1945.
It's been run by the liberal democratic party.
And it's been run specifically by the LDP bureaucracy, which is one of the most famous
bureaucracies in the world.
And so over which the electorate seems to have absolutely no control whatsoever.
So how do you define Japan as very democratic?
I think would get into this.
Japan is much more democratic than Haiti.
I know, I know, I know.
I'm getting you to answer the question.
I didn't say very democratic and I answered your question like half an hour ago, but
I'll answer it again.
They have a, that democracy is about the empowerment of the public to have more influence over
policy, to have ways of getting their will done and the accountability of decision makers
to, to the government.
Now again, it's a spectrum.
I did not say Japan is very democratic.
I said vastly more democratic than Haiti, you know, the current government of Haiti, very
much by the way, propped up by the United States and not in some sense the United States
isn't trying hard enough to overthrow it, but like we're literally about to like send
over some, some troops to like help that government hold on to power, which absolutely
nobody in Haiti voted for the current, the current government.
And you know, in general, in Japan, one party system or not, they, I think that you wouldn't
deny that they have much more real elections.
They're much less likely to do things like ban wildly popular political parties like
lavaless and Haiti.
Like they don't have, like it's a one party state.
Like what part of one party state don't you understand?
Okay.
The part of, the part of how you're using it, I don't understand is what you mean because
it's, because the way the rest of us use this phrase, the way the rest of us use this phrase
one party state, is for a state where only one political party is allowed.
There are several political parties in Japan.
They elect people for their parliament.
They have parties in communist East Germany.
There were several political parties in communist Poland.
This problem is a problem that has been solved of having a completely non-democratic government
with a perfectly good simulacrum of government.
Here's a suggestion.
Let me, let me ask a question to sort of evaluate your belief in democracy in that sense.
So suppose that we say we're going to make America more democratic by rendering government
more accountable to the politician who America elects in the only election that Americans
still really care about.
And so we're going to put the president completely in control of the executive branch.
Would you feel that that made the US government more or less democratic?
Or would it depend on who was elected?
That's a good question.
I would say, I would say less.
I think if you look at, for example, I think it was a good thing back, you know, I've
heard you make the claim many times about FDR, a bait essentially like a king.
But you know, FDR still felt the need, even after Pearl Harbor, to get Congress's permission
to declare a war because the norm hadn't been established yet that the president could just
ignore that.
Now, maybe you think that transition was a good thing.
I think Stalin asked the Supreme Soviet for the same thing.
But you can just go to war without having to ask Congress.
I think that transition is a bad thing.
I think that when George W. Bush started setting up procedures by which people could
be held outside of any normal judicial systems, that people could be assassinated by drones
in countries that we're not at war with, et cetera, I think that was a bad thing.
I mean, if you think that's a good thing, then we have a real disagreement.
And I also point out, by the way, just in terms of the effects of democracy on current
U.S. foreign policy or the lack of democracy for U.S. foreign policy, you can look at the
Quincy Institute, they have a bunch of good information on this.
Americans, you know, 49% to 37% think the United States should be doing more to promote
diplomacy to end the war in Ukraine.
And if we all die due to the war in Ukraine, it's going to be because that doesn't count
for anything in terms of how American foreign policy is made in practice.
I'm glad.
Can we agree on that note of isolationism?
Can we find that like a really good note?
For reference, the U.S. was basically involved in a de facto war against Nazi Germany for
most of 1940 and 1941.
But that's sort of well, relatively well established.
So, you know, I think the declaration of war is a nice touch, but it came from also a rubber
stamp Congress.
But to sort of move past the historical point, you know, sort of, I'm not sure if you really
answered my question or not.
It seemed the question of whether putting the president in charge of the executive branch,
it would not make things more democratic, even though it would give the people more
power.
Well, I don't accept the premise that it would give the people more power.
But they're choosing the politician who is in power.
In fact, when you pitch this, right, at least when I've heard you pitch this before, you
know, so I've heard it's the young Turks, for example, the way that you pitch it is
precisely that in your preferred model, which sometimes you use words like monarchy, sometimes
it just sounds like you're saying, well, you know, it would still be Democrat, we just
have very strong executive.
But in your preferred model, what you see as a virtue of it is that instead of there
being public input on specific policies, the only public input is like choosing a wise
ruler whose judgment we're just going to trust for the next four years.
And that's the part that seems fundamentally at odds with democratic values.
So what do you mean by public input?
Do you mean the like notice and comment period for federal regulations?
I mean, the actual ability and practice of the public to work its will.
I see no such.
I see no examples.
Give some examples.
How does the public work its will?
Well, here's an easy example.
We were talking earlier during my one-on-one with that.
We were talking about Florida.
So, you know, my favorite, this is an extreme example, but my favorite stat about the 2020
election, my favorite factoid about the 2020 election is that Trump won Florida, but the
$15 minimum wage won by a lot more than Trump did in Florida.
Or you can look at what happened just now in Kansas, for example, with the rejection
by a high double-digit margin of attempts to make it easier to restrict abortion.
Now, those are really easy examples because those are cases where the public is actually
directly voting on things.
How do you feel about the public rejection of gay marriage?
Yeah, I think that in that case, the public has made a decision that I don't like, but
I absolutely think that's better decided democratically.
So, you believe that the Supreme Court decision...
I don't believe in judicial review.
I'm thoroughly on record about this.
I think that we want an empowered, mobilized public protecting basic rights rather than
the courts.
This idea, the popular right-wing narrative at the time, that, oh, see, the people want
marriage defined, well, the way the Bible actually doesn't, but whatever, is between
one man and one woman, but see, it's these elitists in robes who are stopping that.
Actually, whereas that had been very recently true, by the time the Supreme Court decision
happened, public opinion has shifted wildly on that in the direction of support for marriage
equality.
Probably the Supreme Court decision wouldn't have happened, if not for that, because they
wouldn't have felt that they could get away with that.
But yeah, I do think that it's better to establish these things democratically.
I think it's very healthy that, like in the Republic of Ireland, for example, abortion
rights and gay marriage came about by popular referendum and both of those, I actually trust
building a majority consensus on a topic like that, a hell of a lot more than I trust,
that somebody on the panel of nine Harvard and Yale graduates is just going to do what
I want.
Do you think that the construction of this popular consensus, and this is sort of what
I really want to get into in the difference between populism and democracy and managed
democracy, as your George Soros men will call, for example, what's going on in Hungary.
One of the things that's very clearly established by the 20th century is that essentially control
of the media allows you to control public opinion.
Public opinion is not a cause but an effect.
If you had basically all of mainstream journalism in the United States had somehow been Nazi
for the last 30 years, everybody would be a Nazi.
And so you're basically, when you basically sort of punt things like, you know, when it
happened to, you know, just personally agree with this particular decision on gay marriage,
but that's sort of neither here nor there.
When I look at basically how public opinion is changed and to borrow a nice word from
Noam Chomsky, manufactured, of course Chomsky is really going back to Lipman when he refers
to manufacturing consent.
What I see is simply a machine that could manufacture consent for really just about anything.
Yeah.
Fortunately, that's not true.
And I think we have evidence that that's not true, that in some of the very examples
that we just went over.
So I think that, for example, it's not the case that, you know, 12% more Americans support
diplomacy in Ukraine than opposed it because, you know, what the New York Times and all
those people you call the cathedral have been so relentlessly advocating peace and de-escalation
in Ukraine.
I missed that when that happened.
I think supporting diplomacy for most people means supporting the State Department, which
is not.
I think if you look at the wording of the poll questions, that was specifically even if there
were territorial concessions involved.
I think that something like, you know, the $15 minimum wage example, I think that that's,
I think that I think there are a lot of cases in which, look, does propaganda work?
Sure.
It often works for a long time.
It's variable.
It depends on the issue.
It depends on, depends on a lot of other factors.
I don't think that seeing the, the, the media and academia as being sort of omnipotent over
public opinion is particularly accurate.
I think it captures part of a complex reality, but I also think it misses a lot of it.
Ben, how many Americans do you think are capable of being democratic?
Would, would be interested in being democratic.
Would be interested or capable in participating in a real way that you would respect in government,
governance?
Yeah.
I mean, I think it's already the case that, that, you know, that Americans do have some
avenues for, for public participation.
And I think that's a good thing.
I think that there are other avenues that, you know, we could have, for example, by having
a much stronger labor union movement, this has historically been a hugely important way
for ordinary working class people to have more influence collectively over the political
process that, you know, that somebody, you know, somebody like LBJ was, that was mentioned.
Can I, can I speak, can I speak to that for a moment?
At a moment you can.
Yeah.
If they agree with the union.
In a, well, but I think that the, but I think that, that in that case, again, if you're
talking about sort of expression of widely perceived interests, that they have a, that,
that is, is there is going to be some, some collective influence, there's certainly going
to be much more collective influence with that than without that, that they, is this
going to be good for, for the, you know, for the wages of, of people who work menial jobs
is a question that politicians are going to have to spend a lot more time worrying about
if they're worried about what organized labor is going to do than if they're, than if they're
not worried about it.
And again, I think to the extent that politicians whose natural instincts may not have been at
all in those directions and go back and look at LBJ in the 40s, if you look at what some
of them have done in a political environment where workers did influence more, exercise
more political influence, yeah, that's a good thing.
I think that if people have more free time, which by the way is also something that can
be, can be a function of social democracy in the regulatory state and welfare state,
if people have, people have more free time and at least some of them, not everybody,
doesn't have to be everybody, but if some of them spend, spend that time being more politically
active, again, that's a good thing and you're going to get decisions that take their interests
into account.
Again, it's a spectrum, if you just say, do we have perfect democracy, do we have no
democracy, then sure it's easy to go with the no democracy option, but I think more
democracy is broadly speaking, a good thing and I'll appeal to the example.
I'm sorry, but I mean, but it seems very clear to me that most Americans, probably the vast
majority of Americans are not only not interested in being democratic, but they're not interested
in politics at all.
Now what do you do if you want, you want democracy and that doesn't it require them to be at
least somewhat involved in this?
And what do you do if you impose, I mean, seems to me you're in the situation that the
founding fathers were in, where they're looking at streets full of drunks and fornicators
and they're thinking, well, we're going to give these people power over, you know, governance.
That's still somewhat the case, but it's now, it's just apathy, people play games and watch
them.
And QAnon, QAnon, let's not forget QAnon.
So we're, so we're, so we're, so we're, so we're, okay, so we're back to the transitional
less democracy from the Articles of Confederation to the Constitution carried out by people
you don't like for reasons you don't like, which somehow is an anti-democracy.
I don't understand that.
No, I'm just asking what you want to do with the American people, with the Americans as
you, as they are.
I think, yeah, I think the American people as they are, if they exercise more political
influence, that would be a good thing.
No, if, but they don't want that point.
Okay.
I don't, I don't, I don't think that's true.
And I'm going to give you a couple of specific reasons to think that that's not true.
One, go back to the union example.
Look at polling on who wants to be a member of a labor union versus who actually is.
You know, who would, who says they would like that versus, versus who, who actually does
actually organize any union under current circumstances involves a tremendous amount
of risk.
People get fired for it constantly.
Look at what's happened in Starbucks last year.
They have, there are all kinds of ways that are set up to sort of pressure and blackmail
people into backing down from it when they start.
But you look at the polls say, Hey, would you like to be a member of a union?
You'll get like several times more people that are actually members to say, yes, you
get enough people voted in Florida that even though it's not what you predict for the partisan
alignment of the state, you get the $15 minimum wage through.
Again, I think if public opinion counted more even in foreign policy, I think that the,
I think that like the outlook right now for World War three would be a lot less terrifying.
I think that like, you know, Afghanistan sure if the, if the public had had more control
over, over foreign policy, I'm sure the invasion would have happened at the same time that
it did, but I also think it would have ended like 15 years earlier.
I don't think there's any question about that.
That was like wildly unpopular many, many years before finally the, the bandaid, the
bandaid was torn off.
So yeah, I think that there are, you know, I think that even more people would be willing
to, to participate more given less financial stress and more free time, which by the way,
are social democratic policy goals, but they, but even if you, if you look at right now,
people as they are, yeah, QAnon or no QAnon, I think that there are, you know, there are
sure lots of wildly irrational things that lots of Americans believe.
There are lots of wildly irrational things that members of the American elite believe.
There are lots of wildly irrational things that, you know, whoever, you know, whatever
tech CEO gets to become Caesar, if Curtis gets his way, I believe, right, that they have.
So I think that if we're looking not for perfect outcomes, but we're saying, are the outcomes
going to be better or going to be worse, right?
If the 68% of Americans who want full federal weed legalization got their way, for example,
right, is that better or worse?
I think it's better if, you know, if the large majorities of Americans who want universal
health care and higher minimum wage, you know, Curtis and I, judging by the Latin America
discussion, would have very, very different takes about whether that would be good or not.
But certainly in my book, that would be very good.
I will take a little belief in angels in exchange.
So I want to just, you know, I think that the history of labor unions is sort of a very
good way to discuss the difference between populism and progressivism, because you can
sort of often get a progressive to endorse kind of populism and broadly in general.
But when it comes out with its real populist shit, it tends to elect Trump, and people
don't really like that.
And because, you know, people find themselves concerned about all sorts of things they shouldn't
be concerned about, like their personal safety and stuff.
And so when you look at the history of the labor union movement in America, I think it's
very, there's a clear, to me, populism is basically unorganized, sort of, genuinely
grassroots, bottom-up exercise of political power, and progressivism is basically organized
farming of political power among essentially a disempowered client class.
And for me, the moment in the history of American unionism, of the American labor unions, like
the labor union is just a ridiculous anachronism in today's world.
Like it can in no way be compared to what it was 100 years ago.
And what you see is you see this transition from kind of more wildcatty labor organizations
like, for example, the Knights of Labor, which are actually led by laborers.
And when these organizations are actually led by laborers, the problem is they tend
to do, like, crazy shit.
Like, what was the time the Knights of Labor massacred a whole camp full of Chinese workers
because they were being competed with?
Right?
And basically what you see is a coordination of these supposedly independent movies, movies,
movements, until they're sort of no more than what is the SIEU, but a branch of the Democratic
Party.
Come on, let's get real.
You know?
And so you basically see them becoming essentially the kind of controlled, your, you know, establishment
controlled labor unions that you also see, by the way, in Eastern Europe between 1945
and 1989.
And so you're essentially, when you're sort of looking at these things and you're like,
you know, why doesn't Joe Sixback, who drinks, you know, Pabst Blue Ribbon, stop complaining
about illegal immigrants and imports taking his jobs away?
And why doesn't he vote to contribute 10% of his salary to some guy who was educated
at Harvard?
You know, I think it's a pretty obvious take, in a way, for Joe Sixback, and it's kind of
surprising how long he's, like, kept with this insane program.
Incredibly lazy caricature of working-class Americans.
Is it a different galaxy than what public opinion tells you about what most Americans
think?
Hang on a second.
So we're going to go to Q&A in a second, but I want to let each of you say whatever
you want to say before we do that.
Go ahead, Ben.
Sure.
I think if you actually look at Joe Sixback's immigration views as measured by actual polls,
which I think are a better way of figuring out what people think, take a broad randomized
scientific sample rather than just sort of what's Curtis' impression of Joe Sixback.
I think that you'll find out that actually, certainly by global standards, that, you know,
there is a lot more support for things like a path to citizenship and even liberalization
of legal immigration than you might think.
I would also point out that Donald Trump, when he was elected, was really underselling
the very Reaganite economics that, to a great extent, he actually implemented, and he was
going around in line about how he was going to bring the jobs back in places like West
Virginia where there were even fewer by the time he left office than when he came in.
He was going around in line about wanting a less hawkish foreign policy when he actually
tore up the Iran nuclear deal and assassinated Soleimani and, by the way, sent heavy weaponry
to Ukraine, which Obama had been unwilling to do, et cetera, et cetera.
So I don't think it's that now Joe Sixback doesn't really support any of the social democratic
stuff, whatever the polls might say about universal health care and the minimum wage.
You know, they're really Trumpians.
I also don't think it's true that the SAEIU is nothing but a branch of the Democratic
Party.
It's certainly not true that it's remotely comparable to meaningless state unions that
couldn't go on strike, et cetera, in Eastern European countries during the Cold War.
I think if you actually talk to most members of that, they're very aware of the difference
it makes for wages, the difference it makes for job security.
If you're worried about free speech or being canceled, by the way, then probably the main
thing you're worried about, America in 2022, unless you're Edward Snowden or something,
you're probably not that worried about being killed or imprisoned, you're probably worried
about losing your job.
And whereas the alleged candidate of Joe Sixback, Donald Trump, filled the National Labor Relations
Board with people who were so reluctant to undermine employers' firing abilities that
they sided with Google against James Deymore, unions actually, in real life, protect the
free speech rights of members who disagree with what union leadership thinks all the
goddamn time.
So yeah, I think that widespread unionization is a good way to make this a more democratic
country in the simple sense of giving ordinary people more power over what's going on, and
that would be a very, very, very good thing.
Curtis.
I would say, I sort of...
It's sort of difficult coping with a level of mythos this intense, because you kind
of live within a certain narrative, and it's a narrative that, of course, we all know very
well, having grown up in a world where basically Howard's Inn is everybody's high school history
textbook.
And the sort of the sense of suggesting that there are other ways to parse and understand
these realities is hard for someone, it's hard to convey to someone who doesn't seem
to have that spirit of questioning, per se.
And so I think that what I would recommend, honestly, for you as a progressive intellectual,
I guess, have you done a lot of medial labor, have you worked in factories and stuff for
anything?
I have worked in...
I have worked at jobs where I've stood in more trucks for eight hours a day, every day,
loading and unloading boxes.
That's not anything I'll bring up, because I actually don't think...
I think that much like liberals who fetishize lived experience, I think that there's all
these constant appeals to what anybody has or hasn't done, or pretty intellectually vacuous,
almost as much so as saying, well, I pity you because you're trapped in narratives,
if you only understood the truth, which I am a conveyor of, you would understand that
I'm right, which cannot possibly be mistaken for an argument.
No, it's not an argument.
It's actually sort of because we live in very different realities, we can't really argue,
and this is why basically, rather than encouraging you to read right-wing materials, I want to
encourage you to read older left-wing materials, I think that this will give you sort of a
little bit more of a perspective of simply how different the time of your sort of,
how different a thing unions were a hundred years ago from now, and you seem to be sort
of conflating that America with this America in many, many ways, and it's sort of...
If it's hard to like, that's kind of the best advice that I can give you on how to open your
mind a little bit, and I sort of welcome the reverse.
Jesus Christ, this is vacuous nonsense, I'm going to give you advice about how to open
your mind a little bit.
I welcome the reverse.
We're here to talk about this underlying issue, and Curtis is wasting all of his time grandstanding
about how he's discovered the truth, and he pities people who don't get it yet.
Sure.
When I talk about things that, to me, seem like obvious realities, they're not valid
realities within your mythos, and so we can't really have that conversation because you're
simply referring back to facts within the story.
That's why we should talk less about history.
What a silly waste of this opportunity.
Less about history and more about ideas, and so I want to turn it over to you all.
Please fire away.
Oh boy, okay, we have a lot here.
I'm trying to think about the audio.
Do you want, should I just, you can just talk, and then I will relay the question through
the microphone.
I'll restate it, so give it a beat before I, before you answer.
I have no idea who answered first.
I'm going to go with Tori first here.
Okay.
I guess the question that I felt was most relevant, I don't know, sort of, is to Ben.
It was in relation to what he was talking about, what people not being interested in
politics in a real genuine kind of way, which I agree with.
I don't think people are, there would be more people here, but I think the question is like,
do you, do you not think irrationality is a result of disinterest in reality?
Do you not think irrationality is a result of a disinterest-
Sorry, I couldn't phrase that double negative.
Do you think irrationality is a result of disinterest in reality?
Do you think irrationality is a result of disinterest in reality?
Yeah.
And for people who were watching this or listening to this later, the setup to the question was
about what that had said earlier about, you know, not enough people maybe being interested
in political involvement.
And so I do want to just quickly do both halves of that question.
So I think that, sure, you know, irrationality, you know, one source of irrationality can
certainly just be a kind of epistemic apathy that you're not, you know, that you're not
sufficiently driven to, you know, to figure out, you know, what's true if we're talking
about an empirical issue, you're not sufficiently driven to figure out how to have internally
consistent values if we're talking about normative issue, fair enough, right?
But to connect the two subjects, the reason why I'm so unpersuaded by this as an argument
against democracy, even beyond what I would see as the sort of in-principle right that
people have to govern their own lives, their own collective destinies, is that I'm not
convinced that we could avoid that problem by empowering an elite to make these decisions
because they can be plenty irrational in their own ways.
Again, I think that, you know, I think that right now we're kind of on the verge of a global
thermo-nuclear exchange because of extreme elite irrationality.
Wait, hang on.
Follow up.
Yep, go ahead.
I was just going to say, the only thing I have to say to that is I think that there are
plenty of people in power, and that's like even the powerful to have a disinterest in reality.
And that's why we can't even, you know, border.
I don't necessarily think we're that close to that, but also, like, I think a lot of that
has to do with their disinterest in engaging with reality because it might be less desirable
than, you know, just to chill life or whatever.
Yeah, yeah, so part of what you said is that people have, that it shows that they too were
disinterest in reality, and fair enough, right?
But if we agree there's irrationality all around, then what I need to hear next is a
really good reason for thinking that elite irrationality is less worrying than popular
irrationality, and then we, I think, might have at least the beginnings of an anti-democratic
argument.
Well, I think that there's fortunately, if you're looking at, it's good because I feel
like we've sort of arrived at some common ground in a way where we've basically admitted
that there are sources of oligarchic elite error, as you say, and like, I really like
the skepticism of the Ukraine thing because as far as I'm aware, your skepticism of the
Ukraine thing is not really aligned with any particular movement or any particular authority.
I think it's just your own personal opinion, and I think that that's like, and it's out
of step with what the New York Times wants you to believe, and I think that's weird.
Trust me, very few beliefs I have line up with what the New York Times thinks.
And yeah, they're normally, to the left of them I would expect, but this one is not because
you're basically more pro-Putin than the average American.
I would push back against the, that makes you, let's get to a point of agreement here.
That makes you pro-Putin.
Okay, okay, okay, that was unfair, that was unfair, that was unfair.
I don't think Bita gets the word, the war to Iraq, that was an unfair jab, and I retract
the remark.
I want to say that basically, you know, when we, I think when we look at these two systems
or, you know, forms of power, one of them which we could call oligarchical progressivism
and the other one of which we could call democratic populism, we both agree that there are significant
structural flaws with both of these ways of governing mankind.
And that's why it's so unfortunate that there are only two possible systems of government,
democracy and oligarchy.
No, for sure, as you point out, labor unions that could actually protect people's free
speech rights, actually give them a living wage, et cetera, and actually are starting
to have many of these benefits from people who are organizing them now, that's anachronistic.
We need to go with cutting edge new ideas like monarchy.
Okay, absolutely.
All right, right here, in the front.
Great, thanks, another general point of view, okay, for you Ben, you talked earlier about
universal basic income and you're talking about how if you work for an employer, your free
speech rights are restricted, certainly true, you can't say anything sometimes, and whatever
you want, sometimes you have to say exactly what they say in particular job circumstances.
But then you overlay the intersection of UBI and democracy, and you start giving everybody
money, there's no world that I can see them in, I think this is just a lack of imagination,
I think this is human nature, where those people who are controlling that money are
not also controlling behavior, and maybe that's being done democratically, it's democratic,
but just like the antitha, who ultimately wanted something for their money, the government
or whoever is controlling that money is going to want something out of those people.
If this was a year ago when we had UBI, you would not be able to get it if you were unvaccinated.
Whatever the popular democratic feeling is at the time against any particular ideology,
those people are going to be shut out.
This is very testable.
If they will be shut out, democracy will work against truly UBI, so how do those...
You're really good at restating their question.
Sure, so the question was going back, and I'm not sure when people are actually watching
or listening to this, if they'll have all seen our previous discussion, so earlier during
my solo with that, he was talking about his aunt, who gave him these very generous gifts
of money when he was whatever starting, when he was 12 or 13 or something, and he'd get
like $100 a gift from his aunt, and he was excited about it, but then he'd have to pick
up the phone when his aunt called, and then she'd start objecting to his behavior, and
you should be smoking weed and all that.
Is this a good metaphor for a more expansive welfare state, essentially, the kinds of universal
social programs that I would support, and the questioner connected that discussion up
specifically with whether if we had UBI, then that would be changed to a N-UBI, non-universal
basic income.
There would be conditions.
In the context, especially of democracy, and not a strong man who'd been like older.
The strong man would actually be able to impose conditions, it'd be much harder for democratically
elected politicians to, and I can explain why in a second, but so the suggestion from
the questioner, again, just for people watching or listening later, was that specifically
last year you would have been denied it if you weren't vaccinated.
Now, I point out a couple things about this, because I think it's much better when there
is empirical evidence that's available to go with that instead of just speculating about
what sounds to us like what would happen.
Alaska, for example, actually does have a small UBI, the Alaska Permanent Fund, which
is a just bizarrely socialistic thing that exists in Alaska of all places from their
oil drilling that everybody gets sent to check.
As far as I know, if there are Alaskans here who can correct me, that was not conditioned
on vaccination last year.
Now, you can say, well, maybe that's Alaska, maybe that's because the politics of the state.
Now we can start to ask questions about other countries that have various sorts of universal
state provision of services.
We're Canadians who didn't-
Sure?
No?
Go for it.
Just keep in mind, before you say this, that I'm going to have to repeat it before I respond
to it, because people are not going to hear you.
So I am one of those people who moved from Canada to Florida, to the glorious Republic
of Florida two years ago, in very large part, to get away from what was happening there
with the COVID lockdowns and whatnot.
There was the denial of medical service to the unvaccinated and a lot of other stuff that
went around with it.
So the popular will there was way, way, way more aligned with the pro-vax thing that was
in the U.S.
And what you saw was that manifested itself specifically in policy and in denial of service
to certain people under certain conditions.
Going directly from operations, not being done, to people who weren't able to visit
their loved ones in the hospital because they weren't vaccinated.
So there are two very different things that are being grouped together there, and I think
it's important to make a distinction.
So what the questioner said, what he came back in, is there's from Canada, and he moved
to Florida because he doesn't like the COVID policies in Canada, and there was a claim
about denial of medical services, and there was a claim about people not being able to
visit hospitals because that was seen or claimed to be unsafe because of concern about the
spread of COVID specifically when they were unvaccinated.
That was the question.
And I would say that I think we'd have to have a bigger discussion about this, but certainly
one thing, and please just correct me briefly, so I don't have to repeat a bunch of stuff.
If I'm wrong about this, but it's not the case that there was a law passed in Canada
saying you're no longer eligible for Canadian Medicare in general if you're not vaccinated.
I think what you're talking about are specific hospitals saying we've made a determination
that it's not safe to do this at this time because it's not medically urgent and there's
this risk that goes with it because we're concerned about the spread of COVID, which
is a very different thing.
And then really to connect it back up with Thad's uncle and the larger issue about welfare
states and personal freedom.
If you have a private hospital that is especially in a more laissez-faire environment, less regulation,
man, they could go way further in that direction if they wanted to.
And there's a reason why you're not getting that law saying like, oh no, Canadian Medicare
is no longer universal.
Like this social insurance only applies to people who've been vaccinated because even
in a context where those COVID policies you don't like were actually fairly popular in
the broad mass of Canadians, including by the way, the majority of Canadian truck drivers,
but even in that context, that would have been wildly unpopular.
It would have been really hard to get away with that because of the level of popular
opposition that provokes because once you've got those universal programs in place, as people
with other politics may bemoan, it's really, really, really hard politically to take them
away, which I would celebrate and I'd just say, look, if you're worried that if you're
worried that if we had the America Permanent Fund instead of the Alaska Permanent Fund
that that would be made contingent, I would just point out how much harder it is to change
a well-established social program and end its universality.
How much harder that is than your boss just saying, you know what, I'm sick of you.
You're fired.
If you're worried about that and private employers, private charity, private sources of funds
are going to be a way bigger concern about depending on people's whims and how they
can give and take away than things that you get as a universal right of citizenship.
So can I interject a little?
Yeah, you can.
Go ahead.
So there's always this equation that I see in your reasoning about democracy and especially
democracy and bureaucracy that it always seems that the things that you like are democratic
and the things that you dislike aren't.
And so when we look at these specific kinds of policies in Canada, you're absolutely right
that these policies are not carried out by these sort of symbolic elected arms anymore.
Oh no, they're done by permanent commissions and they're done nationally by permanent commissions.
And so the question of basically what sort of the cause, the kind of we must enforce
vaccination kind of hysteria over the last year or two is I think very interesting because
it certainly didn't come from popular enthusiasm.
It became a popular enthusiasm in some quarters.
It became a popular enthusiasm in quarters that are basically very NPR listening quarters,
you might say.
The way in which basically that side of the, you know, do you remember the amazing flip
in like public versus elite opinion about COVID that happened in February 2020?
No.
Do you remember how in like basically through all of February, the message was like, what
you really should be worrying about is the flu.
Don't be a bigot.
Go to Chinatown and like doorknob.
And then Donald Trump, Donald stupid fucking Trump changed his mind and was like, oh no.
If he did trade more leftists, you'd be surprised how many people were pointing that out.
Just like with the Ukraine, you'd be surprised by how many leftists think that.
And you know, you can point that out.
The meaning of that is sort of kind of extremely dark and disturbing in a way because basically
this policy effectively was left up to the whims of Donald Trump.
Because if Donald Trump had come out and instead of saying, oh no, if COVID is real, the stock
market will go down and I won't get reelected, if he'd instead come out and said, you know,
general Jack D. Ripper style, we must preserve America's precious bodily fluids, you can
guarantee that American elite opinion would have followed basically the Swedish path.
And I think that that, and it's remarkable even that Sweden's own bureaucracy followed
a path that was out of step with basically global elite opinion.
That was remarkable and sort of kind of an interesting case of sort of the exception
that proves the rule in some ways.
But the whole world, just like they went mad for George Floyd, went basically mad for
let's take the anti-Donald Trump position in early March of 2020.
And I think that there are, you know, in some ways cases to be made for both perspectives.
I'm kind of a COVID moderate, which I know is very unusual in this group.
But I think the dynamics of where that elite opinion came from tell us a lot about basically
the flaws in essentially elite governance.
And I think that agreeing with you that there are really systemic flaws in elite governance
and there are really systemic flaws in like unfettered, uncontrolled, unmanaged public
opinion is like I think an important point of agreement between us.
And I don't want to like let that form of agreement slide.
And I think that understanding sort of building more of an understanding of why elite governance
goes wrong.
I also, I don't know how you feel about the lab leak theory, but I'm a believer in that
as well.
It wouldn't surprise.
Do you believe in the lab leak or do you believe in it?
I'm not sure.
Yeah.
I'm not completely sure, but even to be not sure is great.
And the, because there are very few elite sources of opinion telling you to be not sure.
There's great articles in Vanity Fair actually about the lab leak, but most journalists
on the science beat are captive to the virology community.
And the virology community basically doesn't want people to know that like this was a gain
of function experiment that got out of control, or at least even that it was possible that
it was a gain of function experiment that got out of control.
As you know, right, again, I think that the way one of my sort of bigger picture beefs
with a lot of what you say is that the way you use terms like left and right tends to
be, I think, about cultural attitudes, often much more so than it's about what politics
I think is most fundamentally about, which is distribution of power and distribution
of material resources.
So then, you know, when it comes to something like the New York Times, because you see that
as the left, then, you know, you're surprised when I disagree with them.
But look, I mean, you know, like Noam Chomsky, who's come up a couple of times in this conversation,
there's this, there's a story you can find on YouTube, both Christopher Hitchens and
Gore Fidel tell you the story about Chomsky at the dentist, where he's, he's being, I
was told his, his dentist asked you to grind your teeth, he says, I don't think so, right?
And then he asks his wife, Mrs. Chomsky, does, does he grind his teeth like in the night
while he's asleep?
She says, no, I don't think so.
I've never noticed that.
And they can't figure it out until the next morning, she realizes that he grinds his teeth
in the morning while he reads the New York Times, because it pisses him off so much,
right?
I don't, I don't, I don't, I don't like the New York Times.
I like, and I know you read this article because you brought it up on the Young Turks, I like
current affairs, right?
Where my friend Nathan Robinson, you know, put out a big thing about this, that's one
of the reasons, you know?
Oh yeah, no, no, I really respected that Nathan Robinson piece, and he's also a very snappy
dresser.
No, no, no comment, no comment on that one.
The, I think we could all take a leaf from Nathan Robinson's page there, and he dresses
like Disraeli in fact, and, and the, it's so good.
And yeah, and, and so, you know, sort of whenever you find kind of the light of independent
thinking burning, and there are ways in which it can sort of burn in this like sort of fatally
flawed, like, kind of very historically cliched, leftist perspective, and sort of explode out
of that in beautiful ways.
And like, you know, one of the ways in which you see these kinds of beautiful explosions
of independent thought are very like Nathan Robinson being like, no, actually, I'm gonna
think for myself on this thing, and once I think for myself, it's obvious what's going
on.
And so, so, so can I, if I promise this really is a question, this is not a, this is not
a statement.
Yeah.
Can I, can I just ask a, okay, yeah, so, so a brief question, right, because you spend
all this time talking up the values of things that I also care about, about curiosity, about
independent thought, about, you know, standing outside of established narratives, all of
which would make me think that, you know, that you'd be a big fan of, of free speech,
diversity of perspectives, all that stuff.
So does it seem to you that in dictatorships, monarchies, that those tend to be things that,
in which free speech and a wide variety of views tend to flourish more than they do in
democracies?
That's an excellent question.
And I think that, that, you know, if you read Tocqueville, for example, Tocqueville,
you know, people are like, oh, cancel culture.
This is the thing that, you know, is invented in like 2012 or something.
You know, Tocqueville in democracy in America describes it almost perfectly in the 1830s.
And he describes basically democratic America as the place in the world that had the least
free speech.
And I think that's absolutely true.
If you basically look at, for example, the latitude of political opinion that you could
express in, let's say, France in 1770, it's wildly greater than, than the latitude that
you can express today.
In fact, the latitude of opinion, there are many things you could say in America in 1850
that you can no longer say.
And so, you know, to me, when I basically look at, you know, sort of democracy in the
sense that we have it today, no, I feel that the range of perspectives within the entire
Overton window is incredibly narrow on a historical perspective and the way in which it looks large
to us.
And that's sort of why I've sort of been kind of encouraging you to kind of just go wild
and go into the Google Books world and go outside the kind of the world of that bubble.
Because just read any book from the 20s.
You'll find all kinds of crazy aspects.
You know, for a minute there, you were actually having a conversation about the ideas instead
of retreating to this smug red shit where it's like, oh, open your mind and, you know,
receive the truth.
You were just talking about opening your mind.
And then when I sort of show you how to actually do it, you're like, horrified.
Oh my God, Curtis, you cannot be this fucking dumb about this.
They have a...
This is not...
I'm not horrified by reading shit on Google Books.
I am sad and disappointed that you're wasting time in what could be a useful conversation
doing this posturing about, oh, see, you're trapped in narratives.
I've realized the truth.
Which is why we're going to go to the questions.
Right here.
Okay.
So we've got two questions, one for each, if that's okay?
Sure.
Okay.
Two questions, one for each.
Go ahead.
Ben, we talk a big democracy component.
We talked about polls, but Curtis thinks polls are fake in that it's a way to manage democracy.
Do you think we live under a managed democracy?
Or I guess, like, can you kind of talk on that?
The question to Ben is, do you think we live in a managed democracy?
Right.
So that up to that question was about me talking about polls and Curtis thinking polls are
fake.
Right.
Yeah, I didn't say that exactly, but...
Not in that.
It's...
No.
I set it more crass because I'm but a simple thing.
Curtis, you know, Ben thinks we should help her...
Haiti would be improved by raising the minimum wage.
Do you think Haiti would be improved by improving the population stop through a sort of huge
experiment?
Does Curtis think...
Ben, I'm super curious about that.
Curtis should go first.
Wait a minute.
The question is, because we've got to make sure we get this recorded, the question is,
Curtis, do you think Haiti would be improved by introducing eugenics to improve the human
stock, the population stock?
I'm not really a big believer in population replacement in general.
And when I think of Haiti, when I think of a place, I think of a people, really.
And, you know, sort of the idea of like improving Haitians by making them non-Haitian doesn't
really make any sense to me.
The question I would ask instead is, you know, one of the things that you find in all
modern political thinkers is this belief that the Constitution has to be fitted to the
country and its people, especially obviously the people and not the geography, because
I think, you know, if you move the Japanese nation to Haiti, I think they do perfectly
fine.
And so the question of what sort of governance the actual people of Haiti need, I think is
somewhat unanswered.
I think it doesn't look like anything like what they have now.
And I also don't really think it looks particularly like Norway.
And I would love to see Ben be dictator of Haiti for like two or three years.
I think that would be absolutely informative.
I think if you think that, if you think that I...
You could just listen to public opinion.
That I think that that is how anything I want in Haiti could come about.
Man, you have not paid attention for the last couple of hours.
No, I don't think that that could come about, but I'd still like to see it.
But I think it would be...
I would like to hear you explain your views about this to Haitians.
I think that'd be fascinating.
No, I think that actually, if you go...
One of the things that I love doing is I love talking to immigrant Uber drivers.
And it's surprising...
Man, you're a top freeman.
It's like surprising how much they, their perspective of their own country differs from
the perspective that you get from reading The New York Times.
Oh my God, Curtis, you don't listen.
If you ask...
No, no, because the thing is, you're...
To me, your New York Times thing is you're like, no, I follow the Utney Reader instead.
Jesus Christ.
My grandparents were...
I barely know what the Utney Reader is.
My grandparents were...
Does anybody read the Utney Reader?
Is the Washington Post part of the cathedral?
They just called for US intervention in Haiti.
No, no.
I mean, my grandparents were American communists.
I recognize this line of discourse very, very well.
No idea what that's supposed to be.
They never used the word communist to me.
They would always say progressive.
So when I basically lump together, one of the things that's very irritating when you talk
to leftists is you'll basically be ascribed some policy to the popular front of Judea.
And they'll be like, no, that's a policy.
If you're gene in, popular front.
We're totally against the people's front of Judea.
And sort of that's kind of the...
Like when I use the New York Times as a metonym for sort of the whole space of intelligent
opinion, I realize that you object to being included in that.
I think you could spend the...
Yes, you're right.
It is irritating to leftists when you say things that lump together, things that are
at opposite extremes, fail to make basic distinctions because...
But they're not actually at opposite extremes.
Their world is actually so small that they look very, very different.
They're very much at opposite extremes and certainly on the question of views towards
American foreign policy.
Again, there's a reason that the New York Times makes Noam Chomsky grind his teeth.
If you read Chomsky and Herman, Manufacturing Consent, which is where everything that's
plausible and what Curtis says about the cathedral comes from.
If you read that, I think he is very on point about...
The ways in which Cold War anti-communism certainly shaped the space of political discourse
that could be allowable in the New York Times, about how certain reflexive assumptions about
American foreign policy did, and certainly about the relationship between the thing that
he never wants to talk about, which is the actual power centers in American society,
which are not journalists and academics at all.
Those are hired hands.
The actual power centers in American society are people who own that stuff.
No, what they want, I think differs just a little bit more.
I think that what corporate oligarchs who own media want is not particularly what I want.
If you think the difference between corporate oligarchs getting everything they want and
democratic socialism is a difference between the popular front for the liberation of Judea
and the Judean liberation army or whatever the hell the Monty Python line is,
I would just respectfully submit that you're not thinking about it very carefully.
Yeah, let's go into actually the ownership of journalism question or the management of
journalism question, because I think it's actually a super interesting question.
I think one of the important, you know, a lot of what you, of your narrative,
which basically strikes me as almost entirely out of touch with the way things work in this country today,
strikes me as much more resonant with the way things worked in, say, the 1920s.
And so I feel like I'm sort of, when you talk about corporate oligarchs,
I feel like we're talking about the ghost of J.P. Morgan and Henry Clay Frick and people like that.
Or gosh, Jeff Bezos.
I think if you actually, if you look at, so let's talk about Jeff Bezos for a moment,
because I would be, if Jeff Bezos owns the Washington Post, okay,
the Salzburger family has managing control of the New York Times.
There is an important difference here, and the difference is it is almost impossible for me to imagine
Jeff Bezos trying to manipulate the New York Times, the Washington Post news desk,
in order to get, for example, favorable coverage for Amazon.
That would be unbelievable to me based on the limited knowledge.
I'm not in the profession based on the limited knowledge that I have of the way journalism works.
Whereas at the times, the Salzburger family, which is the last great family of media oligarchs,
still has an influence on the managing editor and basically the choice of the news.
I was talking to not the person you would think, someone who's connected to like a media oligarch,
and they were like, from a left-wing perspective actually, not a media, like a tech oligarch,
a left-wing tech oligarch, and they were like, you know, maybe we should just buy the New York Times
and like convert it to like effective altruism or whatever.
And I'm like, you know, look at the market cap. It's like I could put on my MasterCard.
You know, and I'm like, no, you can't put it on your MasterCard because you can't,
if the Salzburgers would never sell to you, but if you could buy that,
you would find that you were just another basically sponsor of an almost entirely autonomous organization.
And that, like, but yeah, if you go back to the 20s and, you know, the golden age of, you know,
or the system that, say, Joseph Pulitzer was trying to destroy, the golden age of like,
Hearst and Yale journalism, if you look at Hearst's influence over the Hearst press,
and you compare it to Bezos' influence over the newspaper that he owns,
I would say there are probably four orders of magnitude in difference between that level of influence.
And so it's like, when I basically think of you as kind of operating in this kind of caricatured mythos,
which I can trace back to the 20s, I think one of the ways that you could have of asking yourself that question
is by going back to when these things were actually true and looking at that reality
and comparing it to the reality of today.
Yeah, how about the early 2000s? Would that be more like the 1920s? Would it be more like now?
Tell me your early 2000s story.
Well, how about MSNBC? Look at the political transformations that network, right?
That they were at one point trying to compete, you know, with Fox for the right wing space.
They fired the people who were against the Iraq war who worked there,
and then seeing a better marketing opportunity later, they dramatically transitioned into what they are now.
Which is the Lib Network. And I don't think...
Let's talk about Fox. Can we talk directly about Fox?
I mean, we can talk about Fox, too, but the point of the MSNBC examples,
that's a very direct example of ownership making decisions that dramatically change what the newsroom looks like.
So, yeah, so if you basically talk about, and I didn't know that piece of history with MSNBC,
let's talk about Fox, which is something that I know basically much better.
So, the Fox business, like Fox is not the real media.
Like, and this is something that has sort of only become clearer over time.
It's like these sort of idiots who wanted to expose, you know, the sort of Biden-Ukraine corruption
by leaking Hunter Biden's emails to the New York Post.
They might as well have been leaking them to the trash can, or to QAnon, or to 4chan.
They're probably what had done better to leak them to 4chan, actually.
And, you know, the sense in which basically journalism that is respected journalism operates by changing elite opinion.
Let me give you an example from my own, not my knowledge.
So, I, you know, have a number of DC kinds of connections,
and one of the things I like to brag about is that my mother has actually kissed Joe Biden.
And it was not a romantic kiss.
It was because she's married to my stepfather, who worked on the Hill for Biden for many years.
And he in turn got his PhD in 1965 in political science from Harvard,
and then went off to work for Democrats on the Hill, which he did for 20 years.
Now he teaches at Hopkins.
And he recounts this story. Do you know the name of George Bundy?
He was in a seminar taught by McGeorge Bundy in some time in the mid-60s at Harvard.
And there was something that happened back then when they had sort of more real unions, which they had strikes.
And there was a newspaper strike on at the time, and McGeorge Bundy comes in.
And of course, he has a DC role in addition to being at Harvard.
He comes into the room with these, like, bread-eyed, bushy-tailed, you know, 1960s suit and tie-wearing, you know, political science students.
He's like, well, you know, Washington can't function now.
We've lost our interoffice memo system, meaning the New York Times.
And, you know, the effect of essentially authorized kind of official story journalism does not go through the public before it has an impact.
It goes basically from one arm of the state to another.
And so when the Times, you know, basically writes a story about, hey, you know, EPA isn't cracking down on this abuse.
EPA gets on it tomorrow. You know, that's real power.
Fox doesn't have that power.
And Fox, so, you know, when you basically see Fox going out there and marketing to the plebes,
they've basically made a decision to make money rather than power out of journalism.
And, you know, I believe that's grass and horrifying.
And, you know, I have the negative opinion about it that you probably do.
But that's, to me, a really, really huge difference.
Okay. Let's take another question.
Let's go to John in the back.
Ben.
Yep.
What do you think?
I'm sure you would agree with the policy objectives of ESG.
Do you think that's adequate, or is that a representation of democracy in your views?
Sorry, ESG.
Oh.
Oh, and it's environmental and social governance.
It's destroying returns in the market.
Well, it's a code of conduct, I believe, for corporations that some governments are starting to impose.
And corporations are imposing it on themselves, too, right?
Yeah, environmental and social governance.
Yeah, I think that's mostly epiphenomenal and mostly meaningless.
Well, why?
I mean, because I think that the case for that having meaningful impact being most of what drives what's going to happen in corporations would have to be made.
I think the more obvious case would be that corporations are by and large interested in maximizing revenue,
and that, sure, it could be a nice public relations thing to slap some of this environmental, social governance,
rhetoric on and to occasionally generate some piece of writing where you justify what you've done in those terms.
But I think it just is very unlikely on the face of it that that would be, by and large, what would dictate actual behavior.
In fact, I think this is kind of a perfect case for, you know, Curtis has this very antiquated view about the influence of the New York Times,
but I think that the sort of broader issue here with all this stuff is who do you think actually exercises power when push comes to shove?
And I agree, Jeff Bezos would have no reason that he would need to mess with the news desk.
They're never, you know, none of those nerds are ever going to do anything that would hint at anything that would undermine his interest in any way.
In fact, if they would, they wouldn't have those jobs in the first place, right?
You know, you don't need to interfere.
You know, like the editors who are ultimately making those decisions, if they were, if they had a thought in their heads that would somehow undermine Bezos and his economic interest,
they would never have passed through any of the hoops to get those jobs in the first place.
But there's a sort of more general thing, which is this view of the world that, well, no, it's not real power is not exercised by the guy who can say,
Jeff Bezos with his ownership of newspapers, with his ability to blackmail entire, you know, not only local but state governments,
by threatening to pull out of areas who can donate vast amounts of money to politicians.
No, no, no, that's not real power.
The real power is being exercised by his well-healed, hired help who run the Washington Post for him,
or who have some sort of like diversity officer, you know, a job in, you know, somewhere in the corporate structure.
And I think that that's just fundamentally wrong.
So we have 15 minutes left, so I want to go to another question.
Right here.
Curtis has quoted the motto of the state of Missouri, which would sell its popularized supreme as Lex.
So I translate that as the quality of the people, not the health of the people, but the quality of the people is the most important thing.
And after listening to both of you and having read some of what you've each written, I think that's actually something you agree on,
that that's the most important thing.
Yeah.
So if we look at a century of progressivism, here's what county, you know, we're at the end of that.
We spend $22,500 per pupil for education.
The state has a monopoly on education, K through 12 education.
40% of the students can't correct and label the Atlantic and the Pacific Ocean on a map.
Okay.
That doesn't look like I have any value for my tax.
When I look at the defense of the country, we haven't won a war in 70 years, and the amount of money we're spending is incredible.
It looks more like a transfer for looting the public treasury and transferring the money to defense contractors and various other people involved in the war.
When I look at health, 85% of the population is obese, overweight or obese.
40% have diabetes.
And I can go down the line.
There are some things that government does well, but I don't see how anyone can avoid the conclusion that progressive government has failed utterly.
And why are we even talking about continuing more progressive government?
How do we improve the quality of the people?
And I don't know the answer to that, but neither one of you has actually touched on that.
Do you want to?
So he listed several things that have been government projects, funding of things like education and the military, and we've gotten only bad results.
And so it seems to you, you're saying, that progressive government has resulted in nothing good, nothing worth supporting.
I would say it's uneven.
There are some things.
For example, National Oceanic Administration, that did some good things.
And there are many other good things that have been done.
But if you look at the money, I would say maybe 80% of the money suffered from Social Security.
80% of the money has just been flushed down.
So why continue spending money on progressive projects, Ben?
Yeah.
So I would say that it's worth broadening your view out from the United States to the rest of the world.
And well, no, okay.
All right, all right.
Anybody didn't hear that?
He doesn't care about the rest of the world.
He's American.
Okay, let me know when you want me to respond to your question.
I have a question specifically about the United States.
It's going to be a while.
I'm not interested in the rest of the world.
Okay.
He says he's not interested in the rest of the world, which I would just, I think the gentlest way to put this is,
if you want to have a well-informed opinion or one that has any relationship with reality,
you should take an interest in the rest of the world because that's the only way to find out is to have,
you know, if you want to...
Can I answer your question?
I'm actually going to, if you shut the fuck up and let me answer at some point,
you've interrupted several times as I've tried to answer your question, but given more speeches.
But in any case, yeah.
So if you want to have an answer that bears any relationship whatsoever to reality,
you have to start looking at global comparisons to look at see,
okay, here's a problem in the United States.
What are places that are doing this differently?
What are places that are doing that differently?
How might these differences be relevant to the difference in outcome?
For example, you incorrectly stated earlier...
No, I'm going to do Finland this time.
You incorrectly stated earlier that America has a monopoly.
Public schools have a monopoly, which is not true,
that they have, that there are in fact plenty of private schools, parochial schools,
plenty of homeschooling in the United States.
Now, a country where there actually is something much closer at least to a public monopoly on education is Finland.
They essentially don't have private schools in Finland.
You know, you can have things that are sort of private schools,
you have to have the same curriculum, and it's funded ultimately same way,
and you can't charge tuition, you know, so it's like,
essentially this is a place that actually does have a public monopoly on education,
and they have what's widely regarded, including by right-wing charter school advocates,
when they're cherry-picking things about it that they like as the best education system on the world,
and the one that gets the best results.
And so I would say that there are in fact a lot of global reasons to think that the United States,
if it implemented policies that have been successful in Finland,
in Norway,
and Iceland.
Sure, you know, Iceland actually less, but yes, they have a, that's the, in plenty of other places,
these are some of the ones where it's been the most advanced,
which I understand why Curtis doesn't want to talk about them,
because if you talk about the places that have come closest to my preferences,
then you're going to get this incredibly ideologically inconvenient result for him,
that it worked out fucking awesome.
But even if you look at places that are a lot further from those sort of Nordic enclaves of social democracy,
in many ways, and much closer along the spectrum to the United States,
you look at your Canada's, you know, you look at your UK's,
and you start comparing their healthcare systems, for example,
and in every way that we can rank those things, that we know how to do them,
then, you know, I think maybe the survival rates for some cancers,
not cancer in general, is better in the United States,
but in almost every way that we know how to rank these things,
those do better than the United States.
So if you're just going to make generalizations about what he referred to as progressive governance,
footnote, I think the word progressive doesn't really shed very much light on everything,
and we probably all be much better off if we stopped using it,
because it's used to describe everything from milk toast centrist liberalism
to up through, you know, democratic socialism,
and we're talking about very different things,
and we have a more clarificatory discussion about them.
If we distinguish them, and if we distinguish them,
one of the things we'd find out very quickly is there are many countries
that have much more extensive welfare states than the United States
and much better results than the United States.
Can I, I just had a brilliant idea, which I don't know if anyone's thought of this,
but like I want Ben's, what if we put the government of Finland in charge of Haiti?
Pro or con?
Yeah, then they would get eugenics.
So I have a slight, can I answer?
You were pretty evasive about eugenics earlier,
but I don't know what the fuck you do think would be good for Haiti.
You've used it as a punchline a lot,
but I have heard you commit yourself to very little.
Oh, you know, for Haiti, I'm with John Stuart Mill,
who was, when he was talking about India said,
you know, I'm for governing India as we govern Ireland with a good stout despotism.
This is the author of Considerations on Representative Government.
I think that probably the best government that Haiti had in the 20th century
was the government of the Marines in the 20s and 30s.
And so I think colonialism is an absolutely fine process for that.
I also think that if you basically left,
if the State Department could leave Haiti alone for like a year or two,
it would come back and it would find a Haitian in charge of the entire island,
probably one of these gang leaders that they're having problems with these days.
I think that would probably work out actually considerably better
than the system that they have at present.
It's always convenient.
I think more isolationism or more colonialism,
either of those things would actually be much better for Haiti than the present.
I want to answer your question sort of briefly
because I think that in addition to considering the rest of the world,
there's a slight problem which is that the US and the USSR together
basically conquered the world in 1945.
And so we live in a kind of political monoculture that came out of these two,
the word progressive regimes that conquered the world.
And so I think that we make a very big mistake
and we're very parochial when we do not value the experience of the past
as equal to the experience of the present.
And so when we talk about, for example, the solace populi,
we go back and we look at, for example, how,
for example, Lord Burley, who governed England under Queen Elizabeth,
would have regarded that question
and I think that there are sort of answers in those kinds of directions
that would, I think that noting that we agree on that point
is like a very, very important and relevant point.
And I think that, you know, Ben's referred to, I guess, in private
of his, like, program of federal jobs guarantee.
I sort of appreciate the spirit under which that's offered.
I think it's better than UBI.
I think there are other policies that can sort of give more people
the dignity of labor in a way that's a little more dignified
than I think that that would result in.
But like understanding that basically the goal of government
is to use absolute power because all governments have absolute power
to support the health and the broadest sense of the people
is something that I think we can both agree on.
Yeah, I would like to give the dignity of labor to people
who live off of their stock ownership or inheritance.
All right, last question, and then we got to go.
I'm going to go with Kasper right here.
Okay, this is for both of y'all.
In relation to the, I guess, concept of democracy,
what do you think the interplay between rights and power is?
What do you think the interplay between rights and power is?
Yeah, I don't, you know, the sort of concept of rights,
I think rests on a kind of misunderstanding of power.
People are always looking for a power that's above power in a sense,
and then they delegate this power to the power that's above power
and they're like, oh, this is just a power.
So this, for example, is why Ben and I sort of agree on this question
of judicial review, where we're like, oh, we'll set a power that's above the power
and it will have the power to do non-democratic things
like legalized abortion or ban abortion or some weird shit, you know,
or legalized gay marriage when most Americans don't support it.
And then magically, American public opinion will swing around to support
whatever power supports, which is the way public opinion works.
And so you're sort of trying to always, there's this sort of quest
for the magic power that's above mere humanity,
and I think that that quest is sort of always going to fail.
Yeah, I hope any libertarians in the audience realize that they disagree with Curtis
way more than they disagree with me.
You know, what he's talking about, what he says,
US and USSR are both progressive and all that.
What he means is they both reflect broad enlightenment values,
which, you know, I, and so we have this...
They actually both use the word progressive.
We have this difference in opinion about the last few hundred years
and, you know, the advent of the modern world in the end of the Anshan regime,
where I think it's a good thing.
So I will leave people to contemplate that.
But just real quickly on this question about rights
and power, I'd say that...
I'd say there's a little bit of a category of confusion here, right?
One is a question about facts, one is a question about values.
I think that the goals that we may value
might involve certain people being allowed to do things
or having certain expectations, and that's what we're labeling
when we use this concept of right, which I think is just a useful way.
We've all got normative goals. You might as well admit to that, right?
Come clean and try to be internally consistent about it.
And so, yeah, I think there are various things I would refer to as rights,
like self-government, but that is the sense in which I'm using the term.
Well, this got a little testy,
but we ended on, at this moment, a beautiful agreement.
But I want to say, I think you're both brilliant,
and I learned a lot from this, and I can't wait to listen back to it
because I have more to learn when I listen to it more carefully.
And I want to thank everyone who came and all the great questions,
and I'd love for you to just give them a round of applause.
Thank you.
Thank you.
This is the Unregistered Podcast, and I'm Thaddeus Russell.
To become a patron of the show and have access to bonus episodes,
AMAs, and the unreported news analysis show,
go to patreon.com.
Thanks for listening.
We'll see you in the next video.
Bye.
