Lecture 19, Confucian Virtue
In this lecture, we're going to be talking about some of the virtues that Confucius attributes to the exemplary person.
I think I should begin by saying something about the word way.
In a previous lecture, we talked about how the word dao, meaning the way, was a word used in China to talk about the way the whole universe flows.
And that is one use of the word.
However, it's also used in the context of particular schools of thought to talk about their method for doing things.
The assumption being that there is an appropriate way to go, and that way to go is going to be the way.
Because the word way works for both contexts, we end up talking about the dao in each case.
So when Confucius talks about being committed to the way, he's particularly talking about or committed to the dao.
He's talking about being committed to this idea of becoming an exemplary person.
Really, blooming into a full, vibrant human being, participating in society with others.
Now, the last lecture, we talked a bit about one virtue, which I won't say much about directly here.
Namely, Lee, or the virtue of ritual practice.
In general, the idea being that if you develop this social vocabulary that's consistent with your society and learn how to really perform it,
that's a virtuous kind of behavior in itself, and it also has many benefits with regard to social organization.
Focusing on ritual, however, I mentioned last time, I believe, that it's important to somehow tailor it to your circumstances.
And this is where the virtue of Yi becomes important.
Yi is the virtue of appropriateness.
The idea here is that you don't just carry out the ritual, but you make it your own in some kind of way.
And what's important about this is, again, the real sense that you ought to be involved in it.
A personal presence is important to making these rituals really serve their proper function.
And there's also the danger if people don't make rituals their own, that they become fossilized over time.
If you do the same thing over and over and over again, generation after generation,
sometimes it ceases to have much meaning way down the line.
So it's important to reinitiate each ritual, and each person needs to do that for themselves, each generation as well.
Now, I think one of the easiest ways to get in touch with this idea of Yi is to think about weddings.
I kind of marvel at the number of magazines like Modern Bride, American Bride, probably there's one just called Bride,
that basically have the same kind of information month after month.
It shows lots of available wedding gowns and lots of services that provide various kinds of things that people feel that they need at weddings.
But in almost all of them, there's an article talking about personalizing your wedding.
Sort of nice things that you can do to really make it matter and seem very personal and meaningful.
Now in a way, this seems kind of ironic because to talk about personalizing something to a mass audience,
where you don't know who's reading it and give some generalized principles of doing this, does seem to be not exactly, it doesn't quite add up.
But nevertheless, the idea is that people think it's really important that their wedding really be their own.
Almost no one, I think, would be completely happy with a wedding where they felt that they just kind of showed up and went through the motions.
But instead, people want it to be to have something to do with their identification of themselves and their sense of the relationship between two people.
The term Yi has been interpreted also as authoritative.
And this translation suggests that you have to be the right person in order to be able to give a ritual its life.
You couldn't send somebody to get married for you by proxy.
That's just not how we understand the ritual.
Wedding ceremony is not something that proxies can really fulfill.
You need to have the person who has the authority to get married, namely the person themselves involved in the ritual.
Again, Yi, the sense of appropriateness, who is the right person in this situation.
And tailoring it to your actual situation in terms of the relationships with other people.
If you look at these wedding magazines, they will often say, you know, spend some time with your flower girl.
Well, there's a relationship presumably between a bride and her flower girl.
And the suggestion here is reinforcing this connection somehow, making it seem to be something that you've really communicated is important and meaningful to you.
Again, Yi includes the notion that we touched on last time, that to really participate fully in a ritual involves having your mind and body attuned to it.
So you're really fully present in the ritual.
Again, someone who, no matter what they felt inside sort of listlessly said their wedding vows, would not be someone that we would feel really happy to see get married.
There ought to be a sense that the whole person is involved here, and this too is a kind of fine tuning.
And exactly how this comes about depends on the person.
If someone thought it would be really cool to get married in a way that's very dramatic and took on a very different kind of stagey voice than they usually speak in,
again, that would seem very strange.
It's not appropriate because it's not appropriate to the person.
The details of what makes something really your own sometimes are very hard to pinpoint.
Similarly, what makes a demeanor convey real enthusiasm or convey something short of that?
Why is it one handshake better than another?
It's maybe sometimes hard to say exactly what it is, but it's something that you can feel very palpably.
And so this whole notion of ye is designed to suggest the importance of really tailoring your sense of the ritual,
participating in the rituals in a way that is fully appropriate to you, your relationships, and your circumstances.
Now in connection with relationships, one of the most important virtues is Shao, filial piety.
This is probably one of the virtues that Confucius recommends that's well known in the West,
in the sense that I think many Westerners think that if they know anything about Confucius that the Confucian tradition values respect for your elders.
Part of the point of filial piety is to direct attention to the family as the origin, the starting point, and the center of all relationships.
The family here should be understood as the extended family, I should point that out.
So talking about the family, the nuclear family that we frequently talk about in the United States would only be a part of that.
Traditionally, in fact, the extended family all live together, so there'd be daily ways of reinforcing your relationships with members of your extended family.
But here the idea is how do you learn how to become an ethical person or to participate in society?
Well, you start in your family. I mean, those are the first person that you relate to.
The family, in other words, is the center of ethical life.
Confucius actually brings this up when he is challenged by someone who asks him,
well, you know, if you're so smart, why aren't you in office? Another line from the Anilex.
Someone when talking to Master Goong said, how is it that you are not in public service?
The master said, the book says be filial. Only be filial and friendly towards your brothers and you will be contributing to government.
There are other sorts of service quite different from what you mean by service.
Now, what he means there is that just being filial with your brothers, participating in the family, participating in ethics,
in these kind of immediate circumstances is already a kind of taking a role in government.
How could that be? Well, think about cases where people don't have a very happy family life.
Oftentimes, people that don't have a happy family life tend to make problems for people outside their family.
And I think Confucius is pointing this up here that learning how to interact harmoniously with your brothers just in the context of home life
is fundamental to learning how to interact well with other people in general.
So the notion of filial piety is in the context of understanding the life of the family as being the core of ethical behavior.
It's the core, first of all, because that's where we learn. We extend what we learn in our family life to our relationships to people beyond our family.
But also, there's a sense of real reciprocity here. And I think that sometimes isn't noticed in the concept of Xiao,
Xiao meaning the care for the elder by younger people.
The notion is that, again, there's a real relationship here and there's reciprocity from the very beginning.
A parent, after all, takes care of their children. They care for their children early in life.
At one point, when talking about a funeral and how long you should mourn after the death of a parent,
Confucius suggests, well, three years seems perfectly appropriate because it's three years that the child is basically by its parent's side.
So there's a kind of balance.
And what he's concerned with here is the idea that there's, from the beginning, a notion of mutuality.
The idea isn't just that elders sort of rule by fiat.
Again, the context of the family is supposed to be a place where everyone is at home.
But nevertheless, what parents ideally do is somehow coordinate the harmony,
and each individual needs to support that harmony as well.
I think it's important to keep in mind that this isn't an ideal of just suppressing yourself.
I think that's another caricature in the West that sometimes comes about because of a sense that you really ought to defer to your parent's wishes.
Certainly, Confucius acknowledges that it's sometimes important to remonstrate with your father.
If you think your father is doing something wrong, his view is, well, it's perfectly appropriate to tell him that that's what you think.
Nevertheless, it's not appropriate to do this in public.
In other words, you have certain obligations because a person is your father, not to humiliate him in public.
At the same time, there's nothing about Confucianism that implies that you shouldn't express your true opinion of what he's doing.
In general, the idea is that the family is a context in which people mutually nurture each other.
And again, if you think about actual family life, this depends a lot in terms of the fine-tuned details on what the people are like.
Suppose you've got several siblings.
One is boisterous, another is rather shy, another one is really kind of a dreamer.
How to treat those different individuals is something that parents and other members of the family learn by means of really cultivating that particular relationship.
It isn't always exactly the same thing that you say to several children if they have different temperaments, for example.
And that sort of built into this vision of the family as the core unit of social harmony.
So, filial piety, the sense that the younger person really owes respect to their parents and to their ancestors generally,
is something that reflects this whole sense of mutual support that a family is designed to be.
Perhaps the most universal or general kind of virtue in the Confucian scheme of things is the virtue of ren.
This is another virtue that is spelled differently in the two common systems of transliteration.
It's spelled R-E-N or J-E-N, but pronounced ren.
And this term basically means something along the lines of humanity, benevolence.
Occasionally it's translated as compassion, but I think it's usually meant a bit more broadly.
And you might say, well, this does sum up virtuous behavior.
If you're really humane and you're dealing with other people, if you're really a benevolent being, that carries a lot of virtues with you, with it.
Confucius accepts a doctrine called the unity of the virtues.
And this is an answer to an issue that comes up in Western thought as well as in Chinese thought.
The question is, if a person has one virtue, is that supportive of all the other virtues or might it not conflict with some virtues?
Friedrich Nietzsche in the 19th century argued that if you cultivate one set of virtues at times, this can really contradict others.
That people have different traits and you shouldn't necessarily try to have a kind of package that brings all of these traits together.
Confucius doesn't accept that.
He, along with Aristotle in the West, contends that the virtues really ought to work hand in hand.
And you might see ren as a kind of capstone that brings them all together.
A person that you could really say is a benevolent person, a really humane person, is someone who is exemplary.
Confucius suggests this notion in part when he talks about a single unifying thread to his teachings.
Another passage from the Anilex.
Tsigun asked, saying, is there any single saying that one can act upon all day and every day?
The master said, perhaps the saying about consideration, never due to others what you would not like them to do to you.
Well, that sounds fairly familiar, I think, to most of us.
It seems, after all, a version of the Golden Rule.
Though I think it's important that it's phrased somewhat differently from the way we in the West often hear the Golden Rule.
I think the Golden Rule is usually expressed, do unto others as you would have them do unto you.
This one, this formulation says, don't do to others what you would not want them to do to you.
And I think that there are some things that are maybe implied about the relationality of interaction with people that's implicit just in this negative formulation.
If you think that you should do unto others what you would have them do unto you, in a way you're kind of projecting from your own preferences to what other peoples are.
And oftentimes this is reasonable enough.
But it isn't necessarily paying a lot of attention to what's unique about that person.
Whereas if you talk about don't do unto others what you would not want someone to do to you, in a way it's kind of suggesting that you try on their position, I think, a little bit more.
Suppose you were in their position, how would you want someone to treat them?
Discussion about how superiors and inferiors in hierarchical organizations in Iraq, for example, can take the form of trying to think this through.
Suppose you were the supervisor, how would you behave in this situation?
How would you think things ought to go?
Suppose you were the employee, if you were in that position how would you want to be treated?
These kind of questions help you to imaginatively think about the other person's position in relation to yourself.
And although it's not a huge change of emphasis, I think the emphasis is somewhat important.
Because again there's a sense that there's always a texture of relationships that you are connected with yourself.
Your own sense of self is very much bound to how you're connected with other people.
And your position in terms of social harmony and society depends very much on all of these relationships.
But they're very different relationships.
The fact is that people do have different personalities.
People have different concerns. Their positions are different.
So what this negative formulation allows you to do is try to imaginatively think about what it would be like to be in this different position.
And that's indeed something that Confucius encourages very consistently.
Always consider what the other person might want and need in this context, even if it's very foreign to your own situation.
Perhaps I should say here that Confucius is always assuming that there is a hierarchical organization.
I think in the United States where we tend to focus a lot on the principle of equality, this might seem a little bit foreign.
But he is assuming that there will always be some people in charge of other people.
He doesn't see any problem at all with having a ruler that's sort of the central head of government.
However, what he focuses on in talking about how that ought to happen well is focusing on the way the ruler ought to be nurturing society.
The ruler's real role is to cultivate social harmony.
Indeed, anyone's role ought to be in part to cultivate social harmony.
But the ruler is in a distinct position, a position that can either result in a lot of harm to society if the ruler isn't very concerned about this responsibility,
or a role that can really do a lot of good for society.
So again, it's image of the parent and child.
In this case, the ruler is visualized as somewhat like a parent whose responsibility is to take care of this large family in effect.
And even though there's more power that comes with that, nevertheless, that's what's really important.
So Confucius does spend a fair amount of time talking about what is really the right way to rule,
and this notion of trying to do it responsibly as a parent out of real concern for your society is absolutely crucial.
This brings up another term that is, I think, quite interesting, and we'll see it used somewhat differently in Taoism than in Confucianism.
But the term is Duh, spelled either D-E or T-E in transliteration.
Duh means moral force or power.
Essentially, it means force or power, but in the Confucian context, it's typically used in connection with real moral power.
Confucius believes that the person who rules with authority by virtue of being an exemplary person,
someone who has real moral authority, has a tremendous amount of effectiveness.
For example, according to the Anilex, the master said,
He who rules by moral force, or Duh, is like the pole star, which remains in its place while all the lesser stars do homage to it.
So there's a kind of tremendous power that comes from ruling out of moral authority.
In the Confucian tradition, actually, there's a considerable discussion and long-term worrying about how it is you decide
whether or not someone is a legitimate civil authority.
Confucius was convinced that there were legitimate ways that someone could come to have power,
and the warlords had basically ignored all that.
And from his point of view, the traditional legitimate ways to gain power were perfectly acceptable,
though from time to time, change needed to be made.
For example, if a person weren't really living up to their role as ruler.
But nevertheless, the tradition in terms of succession of kings didn't disturb him at all.
Later on, we'll see, and we'll talk about this a bit in the next lecture,
there's more of a tendency to acknowledge that there might be various ways that people come into power,
and maybe the focus shouldn't be so much on legitimacy, but more what one does in the role once one is there.
In any case, there's a very strong emphasis in the Confucian tradition
on trying to have a lot of impact without coercion.
Once again, we have the same theme that we saw in connection with the notion of Lee,
the idea that it's important to try to do things without resorting to force.
In fact, you're more effective if you don't resort to force.
Now, obviously in a time when warlords are sort of wreaking havoc through the nation,
talking about something that's more effective than physical force is going to be pretty impressive to people
if they take this notion on board.
And what Confucius' notion is here is that if someone really has moral authority,
Nelson Mandela say, they speak with a kind of authority that people really listen to and defer to.
And someone who simply has most of the guns and has the army in his or her pocket,
such a person is not someone that people really want to cooperate with.
They only do because they feel that they have to.
But that person hasn't really gained support in a full sense.
Whereas someone who is really an exemplary ruler that the people recognize is really concerned about the well-being of society,
that person has a kind of charisma that just comes from being good or exemplary.
The notion that good consequences will follow is something that Confucius just takes for granted.
He does think that someone who really is ruling with concern for the well-being of society,
in general, is going to manage to do some things for the well-being of society.
Though sometimes things interrupt an effort and things don't exactly work out as intended.
Confucius, however, very much emphasizes the importance of doing what's right, regardless of the consequences.
Certainly a theme we've encountered elsewhere in the world.
His notion here is that what the ruler should do is what's right.
Even if the ruler can foresee a lot of political fallout from doing it,
the ruler should be focused on the idea of doing what is good for the society.
And Confucius thinks, as a matter of fact, in general, that policy will lead to the best effects.
But focusing on effects is the wrong way to go.
Not only is this rather similar to some ideas that we were talking about in connection with Brahminism,
but also there's a notion that this is rather similar, I think, to an idea from the New Testament,
when Jesus says, seek first the kingdom of God, and all else will be given to you besides.
That it's important to focus on what's really right, how you should live, the way, as Confucius would put it,
and as a consequence to that, things will end up working out for the best.
Confucius is opposing a very particular individual actually in arguing this point over and over again.
This individual is the philosopher Moza, and his follower is the Moas,
who had a very different view from Confucius as to what would bring about a better social order than they currently had.
Moza is sometimes compared, I think, not very adequately to the utilitarians in the West.
It's not a very adequate comparison except for one thing.
Concern for consequences was pretty basic.
Moza thought what we need to do is start thinking about what the results of our various actions are.
So Moza would be quite happy to get rid of rituals because he tended to think that it encouraged certain kinds of attention to the family
as opposed to maybe a larger community that really wasn't very healthy.
Moza, on the other hand, was convinced that it was important that everybody should treat everyone exactly equally.
So very unconfusion in this regard.
Confucius is saying that you should treat people according to the way they're related to you.
In connection with this idea of doing things without regard for profit,
he's challenging Moza who claims that whatever strategy a ruler should take ought to be very much concerned with concrete results.
Confucius' claim is that's really putting your orientation in the wrong direction.
Of course, we all want good results.
But if you do things with the aim of getting good results without concern about what the methodology is, then you're going to be in real trouble.
The same sort of notion that you should do what's right in a sense, regardless of what you think the consequences might be,
is reflected in another of Confucius' notions that of Chengming, the attunement of names.
This is a theme that comes up a lot in Confucian literature.
And the idea here is that you want the names, the words that you use, to match reality.
Now, that seems, in a way, obvious enough.
If you don't have words that somehow plug into something, people aren't going to be able to use the language.
But what Confucius is suggesting is that a lot of our words are morally loaded,
and it's important that the names actually reflect the situation.
So, for instance, if you've got a ruler who isn't really doing an adequate job of ruling,
there's something wrong in a way about that person having the title.
In a very succinct formulation, Confucius says, according to the Anilex,
let the prince be a prince, the minister a minister, a father a father, and the son a son.
Now, again, you might say, well, it's kind of hard to avoid that.
But what he means by the second iteration of each of these titles is,
let the person who has this title officially actually be one who's fulfilling the title.
If someone is in a role that they're not playing the part of, that they're not carrying out,
then what we should do is remove that person, if possible,
or at least somehow encourage that person to fulfill the role adequately.
Certainly the idea of someone who is an inadequate parent,
I mean, someone might biologically be a parent and not morally be a parent,
and that's the kind of notion that Confucius is getting at here.
Indeed, I think that this notion of attunement of names might also apply to the idea of various buzzwords
that sometimes come into vogue in our society, downsizing,
which sort of ignores the fact that people are getting fired in the process.
It's a little bit too clean, I think, from the standpoint of social reality.
And that would be the sort of thing that Confucius would say,
this maybe isn't the best word to use for this.
Maybe these cuts are necessary, but somehow to deflect attention from the fact
is not making communication better in society, it's actually creating a problem.
So his view is that in order for society to function smoothly at all,
it's very important that we keep our language in sync with reality.
I think it's interesting that once again we see a philosopher reflecting on the limitations of language.
Language, according to Confucius, is a tool,
and it's a tool that is important to our ability to communicate, to cohere as a society.
But in order for it to really function as it's intended,
it's absolutely crucial that we keep the words and their meanings actually alive and connected.
So there's a danger, he thinks, that's kind of comparable to the danger of just going through the motions in ritual.
If we just get accustomed to calling things by certain names, regardless of what's actually going on,
there's a danger, once again, that will become more distant from each other.
When what language is really designed to do is to bring us together.
Thank you.
