Hello, and welcome to today's lecture, where we address the evolution of the largest animals
that have ever lived.
As you probably know, I'm not talking about dinosaurs, but whales.
In the previous lecture, in our introduction to the mammals, we learned how mammals from
the Triassic, through the Cretaceous periods, for about 185 million years, stayed relatively
small during their evolution.
As soon as the dust had settled from the mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous
period about 65 million years ago, mammals took off in an astounding burst of adaptive
radiation.
Mammals began to fill ecological niches left behind by the dinosaurs, marine reptiles,
and many other animals that had vanished from the landscapes and seascapes.
For instance, some mammals that had been insectivores before the Cretaceous extinction
turned carnivorous afterwards, as happened with the ancestors to wolves.
The ancestors to horses and other odd-toed hoofed animals also appeared, as did the ancestors
for even-toed mammals such as the hippopotamus.
But the biggest and perhaps most surprising example of the radiation of mammals was their
transition into the oceans, into the evolution of whales.
Whales, otherwise known as cetaceans, represented an amazing evolutionary transition for lineage
of mammals, and it happened during just the past 55 million years of the Cenozoic era.
In this transition, the descendants of land-dwelling mammals became supremely adapted for aquatic
environments.
Some of them reached sizes that dinosaurs would have envied.
Well, if a dinosaur were capable of envying, that is.
A recurring theme you probably picked up on in this course is how small discoveries in
paleontology can make a big difference in how an evolutionary history is interpreted.
Now in whales, we'll look at the fitting irony of how the discovery of a few small bones
in a whale's skull changed our views on the lineage of the world's largest animals.
For the evolutionary history of whales, a reigning hypothesis for a while was that
these mammals descended directly from mezzanichids, which were carnivorous land-dwelling hoofed
mammals that lived during the early Eocene.
Now except for the hoofs, you might mistake mezzanichids for hyenas.
Here's a little bit of history to help you to understand how this hypothesis came about
and stayed in vogue for well over 100 years.
For a long time, the vast majority of naturalists did not recognize cetaceans as mammals, but
instead regarded them as some sort of weird kind of fish.
This perception prevailed until all the way up to the late 18th century, when Swedish
biologists and taxonomists, Carolus Anais, put a stop to this fallacy.
Now Anais was one of the first scientists to state emphatically that cetaceans were
mammals.
This identification was based on their mammalian traits, including, most obviously, their presence
of mammary glands and the nursing of young.
After establishing that basic fact, it was then a matter of figuring out which groups
of land-dwelling mammals gave rise to cetaceans.
This was a difficult answer to come up with at first.
Even Darwin was stumped by it, and he proposed that bears were the ancestors of whales.
He had heard of these especially wide-mouthed bears that swam around vacuuming food from
the water.
Well, Darwin was so embarrassed by the negative reaction this hypothesis provoked, and let's
face it, it was pretty ridiculous, that he regretted ever bringing it up in public.
Unfortunately though, fossil discoveries that started in the mid-19th century and went well
into the 20th century provided the start of a feasible explanation for whale origins.
Some primitive fossil whales were found in rocks in the southeastern U.S., coming from
about 35 to 40 million years ago in the Aeocene Epic.
These whales were placed in a group called archaeocedes, which literally means primitive
whale.
And they had skulls similar to those of an extinct group of hoofed land-dwelling mammals
called mesonichids.
Thus a hypothesis was born that whales were descended from mesonichids, and soon it became
apparent that both mesonichids and whales were also related to ardeodactyls.
Ardeodactyls, as we mentioned in a previous lecture, are hoofed land-dwelling mammals
that include even-toed mammals such as deer, pigs, and hippopotamuses.
Based on anatomical similarities, paleontologists figure that ardeodactyls and mesonichids
probably shared a common ancestor early on in the Cenozoic era, and that whales later
became mesonichids.
Now, additional fossil discoveries seem to further support this hypothesis that whales
evolved from mesonichids.
For example, the skull of an Aeocene mammal, a Pachycetus, discovered in 53 million-year-old
rocks in Pakistan.
It was at first identified as a mesonichid, but it also has some traits that made it look
like it was a precursor to whales.
Later though, once more fossils of Pachycetus were found and studied, something remarkable
was noticed.
These specimens had tympanic bule, and these are bony structures that enclose the middle
year.
These structures are associated with hearing underwater, and most importantly, these are
in whales.
Now what's interesting about Pachycetus is that its tympanic bule and associated parts
of its skull were not very well developed.
This means although it could hear underwater, it wasn't very good at hearing, nor could
it dive too deeply and still be able to hear.
Now another anatomical clue about Pachycetus cinched its ancestry, and that came from an
ankle bone called the astragalus, which we learned about as a trait of dinosaurs they
acquired through the evolution of an upright posture.
The astragalus on Pachycetus had what mammologists call a double pulley structure, which is diagnostic
of arteodactyls, but not mesonichids.
In fact, this ankle bone was very similar to that of an eocene arteodactyl, and even
compared favorably to the astragalus of modern arteodactyls.
The link between whales and arteodactyls became even more certain when the primitive
whale rhodocetus was found.
This astragalus compares very well with that of a modern arteodactyl.
If you put it side by side with the astragalus of a prong horn antelope, it's really difficult
to tell them apart.
Now this essential piece of evidence, along with the new insight provided by those middle
ear bones of Pachycetus, not only showed Pachycetus was an ancestral whale, but that
ancestral whales were arteodactyls, not mesonichids.
And thus, a hypothesis died, and another one took its place.
This hypothesis was also backed up by modern genetics, which showed that whales were closely
related to hippopotamuses, and hippos are arteodactyls too.
Interestingly enough, they're also amphibious in their lifestyles, with adaptations suited
for both the land and water.
Hippos even make use of low-pitched sounds and water in ways that resemble echolocation
of whales.
So the cletogram for whale evolution now shows how mesonichids and whales share a common
ancestor.
But whales are definitely not descended from mesonichids.
So now the hypothesis about the evolution of whales has been amended to reflect this
new evidence, and it serves as an example of how science is self-correcting, and through
multiple lines of evidence, some of which might be very small.
As a result, we now know that whales are actually arteodactyls, analogous to how we now know
that birds are actually dinosaurs.
Indeed, the entire group of aquatic mammals that include whales called cetaceans are actually
arteodactyls.
Other cetaceans besides whales?
Well, let's think of some, narwhales, dolphins, and porpoises.
Most of these species are marine, they live in salt water, but a few species of dolphins
in South America and Asia live in freshwater rivers.
These freshwater species, though, they're descended from marine ancestors.
This odd circumstance happened through the isolation of what were once marine species
in river basins.
Now interestingly, the widely separated species of dolphins in South America and Asia underwent
a sort of parallel evolution, in which their eyes reduced and their snouts lengthened.
These are adaptations to the muddy waters of their respective river environments.
So modern cetaceans retain many vestigial traits and behaviors that reveal their evolutionary
origins from land-dwelling placental mammals.
Hind limbs and hip bones are greatly reduced, like in snakes, but are still there, and they're
especially prominent in cetacean embryos.
Whales also have homologous bones in their front flippers that match those in the forelimbs
of other mammals.
Perhaps the most overt behavioral trait demonstrating their ancestry from land-dwelling mammals
is the up-and-down motion they have while swimming.
This movement reflects the same spinal flexion of running in mammals.
Contrast this with the back-and-forth lateral motion used by fish, as well as what was very
likely used by marine reptiles during the Mesozoic Era.
Whales are aided in their swimming by their streamlined profiles, adjustment of vertebrae
behind the head that make these more flexible and horizontally oriented tail flukes.
Now of course, because whales are mammals, they breathe using lungs, but they use nostrils
that evolve to be on the top of the head as blowholes instead of in the front of the
face.
The blowhole evolved by the backward movement of two bones of the upper jaw, the premaxillary
and maxillary, and took the nostrils with them.
Now modern cetaceans are divided into two main groups, odontocetes or tooth whales
and mysticetes or bailing whales.
As can be discerned from these snapshot descriptions, tooth whales are mainly predatory.
Eating fish or even other marine mammals.
In contrast, bailing whales, they stream plankton from the water.
These cetaceans are also easily distinguished from one another by their blowholes.
tooth whales have a single blowhole, whereas the bailing whales have paired holes.
Now bailing whales, including the blue whale, a bulinotera musculos, evolved to become the
largest animal of all time.
More than 30 meters or 100 feet long and weighing more than 150 metric tons or 165 tons.
Now dolphins also evolved in another direction, but with brain size and some species have
the highest encephalization quotient of any non-primate mammals.
Encephalization quotient is the ratio of the brain to body mass, which is then compared
to the average within a group.
This is a case of convergent evolution for a certain trait, large brain size, but it
happened in marine environments rather than on the land.
So what does the fossil record show for the earliest whales or their close relatives?
It's actually a very good one, and it gets better every year with each discovery of new
species of fossil whales and their ancestors.
But let's start with endohias.
This fossil comes from Eocene rocks in Pakistan from about 48 million years ago.
This was a small hoofed mammal, similar to a deer in form, but really closer to a small
domestic dog in its size.
Now an interesting characteristic of endohias is that it had relatively dense bones.
Such bones would have been a fine adaptation for helping it stay submerged in a water body
for extended periods of time.
Why do this?
Well, if you're a small, deer-like animal living in an ecosystem filled with hungry
predators, this is an excellent strategy for avoiding land predators.
Hence denser bones and other adaptations, such as an ability to hold its breath for
several minutes, would have been selected favorably.
Fortunately, what we have around in our modern world is an example that can serve as a guide
for better understanding the behavior of this extinct animal.
Sure enough, an analogous animal living today is the mouse deer, or water chevrotane, in
its in Africa.
This small arteodactyl uses a similar strategy to that interpreted for endohias.
It runs into the water at the first sign of trouble, and it can remain under water for
several minutes at a time.
Now endohias, though, was probably not a whale or a whale ancestor.
More likely, it diverged from a common ancestor to whales.
Nonetheless, it gives us some great insights on how some EEOC mammals may have had selection
pressures that resulted in their becoming better adapted to aquatic habitats.
Now Pachyceidus is an ancestral whale from the east of Pakistan from about 53 million
years ago.
In Pachyceidus, we mentioned it previously as an ancestral whale.
It was a carnivorous hoof mammal with differentiated teeth, but it was likely amphibious.
As mentioned before, it had a well-defined astragalus, and that linked it specifically
with arteodactyls.
Rotocetus is yet another ancestral whale from the east of Pakistan, but it's about 5 million
years younger than Pachyceidus, and it comes from 47 million-year-old rocks.
Rotocetus, like Pachyceidus, had differentiated teeth and an arteodactyl-style astragalus,
but its sacral, or its hip vertebrae, differed from those of Pachyceidus, and its feet looked
more adapted for paddling rather than walking.
As you may have noticed, Pakistan is the place to be if you want to study fossil whales.
A vast indolency ran through that part of Eurasia during the Eocene, and ambulocetus,
which comes from that area, is yet another example of an ancestral whale coming from
rocks that are about 50 million years old in Pakistan.
Its name, which literally means walking whale, reveals how it represents a transitional form
from land-dwelling whales to ones more adapted to aquatic environments.
It's a great example of a transitional fossil in that.
Its front limbs were adapted for life on land, meanwhile its rear limbs were adapted for
swimming.
Its feet were more paddle-like than other ancestral whales, too.
No more hooves.
This means, though, that it probably moved more like a seal when it went out on land,
and it was about the size of a sea lion.
Now another transitional trait showing it was on its way to be more like a modern whale
was its elongated tail.
This was a trend that continued in whales as their rear limbs became smaller.
Interestingly, geochemical studies done on its teeth also indicate that it moved in between
fresh and marine water, like going from the ocean up an estuary and then up into a river.
Now myocetus is yet another ancestral whale from, well, you guessed it, the Eocene of
Pakistan.
This one, though, is about three million years younger than ambulocetus, dating at about
47 million years old.
This is a truly outstanding fossil whale, so please excuse me if I show too much enthusiasm
for it when compared to the previous ones.
Among the skeletons of this whale found thus far, one was an adult that contained the remains
of a fetal whale, hence its name, myocetus, which literally means mother whale.
This was a fantastic find, the only fossil whale with young inside its body cavity, and
it's a find with important evolutionary implications.
Think about the fossil fetus was oriented head first toward the rear of the adult, which
is a trait that's actually in land-dwelling mammals.
In contrast, modern whales, which are completely adapted to aquatic environments, give birth
so their offspring emerge tail first.
This behavioral trait is a very good one for continuing their lineage because it prevents
the drowning of their offspring, especially if giving birth takes longer than normal.
This fossil evidence thus implies that primitive whales may have returned to land to give birth.
Only later in their evolution did whales adapt to give birth in the water.
As you may recall when we discuss the evolution of marine reptiles, ichthyosaurs were an example
of reptiles that had evolved live birth, in which the offspring exited the birth canal
tail first.
So the sharing of this behavioral trait in ichthyosaurs and cetaceans is yet another
great example of convergent evolution between two very different animals.
Yet the first fully aquatic whales were separated from the first ichthyosaurs by more than
170 million years.
Yet another interesting aspect of myocetus is that it still had front and hind limbs.
That means it was still capable of moving around on land.
Its feet, though, were paddle-like, implying it spent time in the water as well.
So this, like other ancestral whales, may have been amphibious, and thus represents
a time when whales were making the transition from the land to the sea.
Now next along the evolutionary line is bacillosaurs.
This is a fossil whale from the Eocene of the U.S. and Egypt, and it comes from rocks
that are about 35 to 40 million years old.
Bacillosaurs belong to one of the ancient whales, archaeocedes, that we discussed earlier
discovered in the 1840s in Louisiana.
Other specimens found since then came from Alabama and other parts of the southeastern
U.S.
Nine species of bacillosaurus have been identified thus far.
So if all of these represent genuine biological species, this genus underwent some significant
speciation during its five to six million year evolutionary history.
Bacillosaurus was mistaken for a reptile when it was first found, hence its odd name, which
literally translates as King Lizard.
Remember that Linnaeus had only reinterpreted whales as mammals in the late 18th century,
so it's not really all that surprising that the discovery of fossil whales not long after
that would cause a little bit of confusion in their identification.
Now this mistake was even more understandable when you realize that bacillosaurus represents
yet another example of convergent evolution in whales.
Although the details of its anatomy clearly show it's a mammal and a whale, its overall
form looks like that of a mosasaur.
Mosasaur are common fossils in the same region of Alabama and the southeastern U.S., although
these are in older Cretaceous rocks.
So anyway, this was a big animal.
It was about 20 meters or more than 60 feet long, so it certainly earned the King part
of its name, as this would have been the ecological equivalent of a mosasaur.
This large size is an early sign that selection for greater size had already begun in cetacean
lineages 35 million years ago.
The hind limbs were reduced further, but they were still there, and they were externally
expressed as these tiny little flippers.
One more significant is that these rear limbs had separated from the vertebral column.
This meant its hip vertebrae became nearly indistinguishable from other vertebrae along
their spinal columns, and thus they became more whale-like.
And although nearly everything about the anatomy of bacillosaurus as whale, it had a few important
differences showing how it wouldn't have fit in very well with the whales of today.
Skull for what?
It doesn't seem to have made room in its skull for what Cetologist, that is, people who study
whales, call a melanorgan.
Now this organ is composed largely of fatty tissue.
It's located between the blowhole and the snout of modern toothed whales.
Its most probable function of those whales today is for echolocation, which toothed whales
use extensively to acquire prey.
The lack of a melanorgan in bacillosaurus implies that it may have mostly used sight
to find its food.
Now the other striking difference between bacillosaurus and modern whales is that its
brain case seems to have been significantly smaller than that of modern toothed whales.
This again makes us think that its behaviors may not have been as complex as its larger
brain modern descendants, especially in sociality.
In contrast, I think about the complicated communications used by modern killer whales
or orcas, which hunt cooperatively.
Of course, cooperative hunting has showed up as a hard-wired behavior in many large-brained
vertebrates, including primates, as we'll learn in an upcoming lecture by my colleague
Dr. Hawks.
So now that we know much more about the fossil evidence, what information do we get from
genetics?
For example, we can look at the genetic similarities between modern whales and arteodactyls.
Through such tests, if it turned out that whales and arteodactyls were clearly related
to one another, that is, they had a more recent common ancestor than other clades of mammals,
then it would be a matter of asking when.
To answer that question, then, molecular clocks could be applied to see how long ago this
divergence between whales and other arteodactyls took place.
Well, as you know, I already revealed the answer to that.
We now know that whales are actually arteodactyls or even toad hoofed mammals.
More specifically, they shared a common ancestor most recently with hippopotamuses, or hippopotamide.
I'm never quite sure which is right.
Anyway, the details of those relationships are very interesting, so let's discuss those.
Recent DNA applied to extant whales and their possible relatives showed a closer affinity
to hippopotamuses, which are arteodactyls, than to other mammals.
Molecular clocks indicate probable divergence of whales from their arteodactyl ancestors
at about 60 million years ago.
That fits very well in with the fossil evidence and its timing.
As we've discussed throughout the course, molecular clocks seem to agree much better
with the fossil evidence as we get closer to the present.
So let's get back to a question posed earlier on in this lecture.
Why was large size selected in whales?
Well, first of all, I should point out a simple fact, which is, not all whales are big.
For example, dolphins are whales, and one species is smaller than an average sized adult human.
This size range that you have in whales is analogous to how dinosaurs range from the
crow-sized micro-raptor to long-necked sauropod dinosaurs that exceeded 50 tons.
Nevertheless, the range of size differences in cetaceans is really remarkable, and is
unique among any group of animals.
Heavier bones were likely selected from the start of whale evolution.
That allows semi-aquatic animals to walk along the bottoms of water bodies.
Only a few species of whales have evolved to huge sizes, though, and most of these are
plankton feeders, such as Bailey whales.
Sperm whales are among the largest predators that have ever lived, reaching lengths of
about 20 meters, or around 65 feet, and weighing 55 to 60 tons.
Another interesting recent insight gained about the evolution of whales is that for
both blue whales and sperm whales, which represent very large whales, increased diversity
through their evolutionary history is positively correlated with increased diversity of diatoms,
which are planktonic algae.
So this is a probable example of co-evolution.
So in other words, some whales may have become huge because of their food choices, which in
many instances consisted of tiny plankton, and when those became more abundant.
Now one last important point about cetaceans is about the selection of larger brain sizes
in dolphins.
That of course is correlated with more complex intelligence.
After all, dolphin brain size, compared to body mass, is very impressive.
It's second only to humans.
This brain size is also correlated with complex behavior, including self-recognition.
Recent experiments on dolphins demonstrate that they can recognize themselves in mirrors
as individuals.
Dolphins also use complicated auditory communications, and that's an adaptation that's connected
very well to social interactions and cooperation, just like we see in humans.
When did these abilities evolve in dolphins?
Studies of fossil dolphins and their brain cases, done through CT scans or computer tomography
scans of their skulls, revealed two probable phases in dolphin intelligence happened about
39 and 15 million years ago.
Now the 39 million year transition shows an increase in brain size that corresponds with
a decrease in body size.
This very likely coincided with their development of echolocation.
The 15 million year old transition resulted in the main lineage of modern dolphins.
This transition is attributed to increased sociality and cooperation in these cetaceans.
These evolutionary transitions and cetaceans are pertinent to better understanding human
evolution and how convergent evolution could have occurred through natural selection for
larger brains in very different mammals, one in the sea and the other on land.
Oh, and speaking of human evolution, let's look backward over all that we've covered
to begin to answer one more question.
Where did humans come from?
After all, our direct ancestors figure into many of the major transitions we've seen
thus far.
Well, as we know, humans, like whales, are placental mammals.
Placental mammals diverged from marsupial mammals about 150 million years ago and from
monetary mammals about 165 million years ago.
Mammal like reptiles with synapsid skulls diverged from diapsid reptiles about 315 million years
ago.
Amniotes diverged from other tetrapods 330 to 340 million years ago, whereas tetrapods
in general diverged from other vertebrates 400 million years ago.
Vertebrates became distinguished from other coordinates nearly 520 million years ago.
Coordinates first appeared about 530 million years ago.
Metazoans with skeletons, they separated from other metazoans about 550 million years
ago.
And metazoan animals first appeared at least 635 million years ago.
These metazoans were likely in mutualistic relationships with prokaryotes.
Prokaryotes ancestors date all the way back to the beginning of life nearly 4 billion
years ago.
In fact, each of us today are placental, mammal, diapsid, tetrapod, vertebrate metazoan, eukaryotes.
We have eukaryote bodies, and we're hosting billions of prokaryotes too, which are digesting
our food and performing other ecosystem services inside the human body.
In short, every one of us embodies an astonishing accumulation of processes at work across deep
time.
And so, with that perspective of deep time in mind, I appreciate it to lay hand over
the reins of the course to my colleague, Dr. John Hawks.
For the next six lectures, Dr. Hawks will explore the major transitions in the evolution
of primates in humans.
See you again at the conclusion of the course.
