Hello, I'm Anthony Martin and welcome to our course, which I am absolutely thrilled to
be teaching.
Evolution is a favorite subject for many people, especially anyone who is interested in looking
at life and the present through the lens of deep time.
Like the notion of deep space and astronomy, deep time refers to intervals so enormously
vast as to be beyond anything we can directly experience in everyday life.
So instead of days, we talk about life in terms of hundreds of millions or even billions
of years.
Now although these numbers sound large, we also use them daily to describe the number
of people living in the US, Europe or the world.
We study deep time principally through the sciences of geology and paleontology.
Geology, which studies the Earth and its history, gives us the overall chronological framework
with lots of signposts along the way.
Paleontology, which is the study of ancient life, tells us what happened to life at different
times in the past and why.
As we move closer to the present, paleontology subdivides into various subfields such as
paleoanthropology, which is the study of ancient human life.
Oh, and perhaps you noticed earlier I said our course.
I'm including my colleague, Dr. John Hawks, in that plural possessive pronoun.
Now, Dr. Hawks, who's a paleoanthropologist, will be coming in later in the course to share
his extensive knowledge about the evolution of primates and humans.
And he's going to cover that in six lectures.
In these lectures, he's going to place special emphasis on what factors led to the evolution
of big brain humans who ponder such concepts.
I'm very grateful to Dr. Hawks for his co-teaching this course with me because he's especially
knowledgeable about the topics of primate and human evolution.
At the end, Dr. Hawks and I will come together for a meeting of the minds and we'll have
a conversation to assess what we know and what we think will happen with the future
of evolution based on what we both know about its past and its present.
And just so you know where I'm coming from, academically speaking, I'm a paleontologist
and a geologist, but with broad training and interest in biology, too.
So we'll be combining what I think are the best of the earth and life sciences to show
how all contribute to our understanding of the big picture of evolution.
We'll often focus on fossil evidence, but along with the fossils, we'll consider other
types of evidence, from, say, the earth and the biological sciences, such as plate tectonics,
environmental change, genetics, and biology in general.
All of those are going to help us to test how some of the most significant transformations
in the history of life took place.
So let's get started.
What is evolution?
Evolution is, very simply, change over time, but when referring to life, it implies there
are observable changes in life over time.
Oftentimes, too, evolution is divided into microevolution and macroevolution.
Microevolution refers to change within a species, and can be defined more precisely
as the change in the relative proportions of genes over generations within a species.
Well, you're probably asking, what's a species?
The simplest definition I've heard is that it's a closed gene pool.
This means that genes can only be exchanged within a species, and they can't be passed
on more than one generation outside of a species.
Now, macroevolution is when a species changes into another species.
We call this speciation.
Speciation normally involves greater spans of time than change within a species, but
if a species has rapid reproduction rates, a new species could easily appear within a
human lifetime.
Macroevolution is also understood more broadly as larger changes that happened over many
generations and resulted in big transitions.
That broader meaning of macroevolution brings us to the subject of this course, which is
an examination of the major transitions in evolution.
I suppose the first question that might come to your mind is what constitutes a major transition
when you're talking about evolution?
In this course, major transitions will be those that some sort of great leap happened
in evolution, such as a novel means for adapting to a radically new environment.
For some examples, think about the transitions from the sea to the land, the land to the
air, the land back to the sea, or salt water to fresh water.
Also think about how leaps and habitat forced additional leaps in reproduction.
For instance, take the development on land of both plant seeds and enclosed animal eggs
as adaptations to arid environments, or live birth, which is an adaptation to marine environments,
or think of fruit surrounding seeds, which entice hungry new animals to enhance plant
reproduction.
In turn, some major evolutionary transitions actually changed environments, thus driving
additional evolutionary transitions.
Think of how the evolution of land plants changed landscapes, the evolution of coral
reefs changed seascapes, and the evolution of flying insects, especially pollinating
insects, changed landscapes and the air.
And more than many people realize, we can see these sorts of transitions all around us.
For example, take a look at modern seals and walruses, which are better adapted to being
in the oceans most of their lives.
These animals are descended from land-dwelling ones, and they still spend a good amount of
their time on land, too.
Well, for an opposite example, take penguins, which they're in transition from terrestrial
or marine environments.
Penguins descended from birds that originally flew in the air, but they're now birds that
use their ancestral flying ability to great advantage as they swim in the water.
A list of major evolutionary transitions would certainly include all of the following.
Eukaryotic cells, for example, the first major transition, which happened more than two billion
years ago, and that starts with the earliest living cells and how they evolved to become
more complex cells with nuclei and more specialized structures.
Next you might think about how single cell eukaryotes evolved to become multi-celled
animals.
That happened between 600 and 550 million years ago.
Also think about the evolution of skeletons.
Animal life went from soft-bodied to hard-bodied with the development of skeletons and other
mineralized parts, whether these evolved as shells, bones, or teeth.
Animals with a backbone show up in the fossil record about 530 million years ago.
Life on land, now that's an interesting transition.
That happened from about 500 to 400 million years ago.
In this, plants, fungi, and animals, they all evolved to live on land, descending from
organisms that originally lived in the water.
Vertebrates also became forelegged and they started walking about on land about 400 million
years ago.
Also think about insect flight and their co-evolution with seed plants.
While vertebrates were beginning to walk on four legs, insects also began to appear
about 400 to 350 million years ago.
Moreover, the arrival of flying insects at almost the same time nearly coincided with
the transition of plants with seeds and the first forests.
Now the first eggs also, the evolution of enclosed animal eggs, that happened about
340 to 310 million years ago.
This was huge.
This freed reptiles from watery environments and led to the later evolution of mammals
and dinosaurs as well as flying and swimming reptiles.
Also think about the first flowers, the evolution of flowering plants.
That was about 130 to 125 million years ago and how that changed the world as we know
it.
Not coincidentally, this major transition happened along with an evolution of insects
into pollinated insects.
And with mammals, we might think about their evolution originally from reptiles around
230 million years ago.
Later, they underwent additional evolutionary leaps such as from egg laying to giving live
birth and from hoofed land dwellers to whales.
Primates and humans are also very interesting.
There are several important transitions involved in their overall transitions from tree-dwelling
primates to the eventual evolution of humans capable of documenting the fossil record and
understanding how it related to evolution, including that of our own lineage.
For these and all other major transitions in the course, the fossil record and other
sources of information from paleontology, geology, biology and other sciences tell us
about what took place when and how.
Ok, just to put my money where my mouth is, let's talk about a major transition in evolution
that required just that sort of combination of paleontology, geology and biology.
Our story starts about 270 million years ago in the Permian period or about 50 million
years before the first dinosaurs and mammals had evolved.
It then continues into the Cretaceous period about 110 million years ago.
We'll then fast forward to a mere 130 years ago when scientists realized they had an evolutionary
mystery on their hands and they didn't quite understand how this sort of transition happened.
Finally, I'll show how the recent discovery of a few key fossils along with modern insights
provided by geology and genetics helped to solve this mystery.
What was this particular transition?
It was the evolution of marine lobsters and freshwater crayfish.
Now for those of you who enjoy lobster dinners or crayfish, v2fay, you may have already noticed
the overall anatomical similarities between these two animals.
Both animals are arthropods which have jointed legs like insects and spiders and they share
a lot of traits with both having hard exoskeletons, eight jointed legs and two well developed
claws, antennae, tail segments and so on.
Well, here's a picture of a lobster in its natural habitat on a sea bottom instead of
on your dinner plate and here's a picture of a crayfish and not swimming in any 2fay.
Now if I didn't tell you that was a crayfish, you probably would have said it was a lobster
and that would be based on its striking resemblance to one.
But that species of crayfish, like all crayfish, lives in freshwater environments only, such
as lakes and streams.
Some crayfish even burrow down to find ground water.
So this is an example of a major evolutionary transition that's not so apparent by just
looking at anatomy, but instead it tells us a transition that happened with these animals
in their adaptations to very different habitats.
How did crayfish end up in freshwater environments?
While lobsters only live in much saltier marine environments.
Well the anatomical similarity of these two ecologically very different animals is not
coincidental, but represents relatedness.
And if you were thinking that maybe this is because marine lobsters and freshwater crayfish
evolved from a common ancestor, you would be correct.
But how, when, and where did they split from that hypothetical common ancestor?
To answer these questions, we have to look to contributions from paleontology, geology,
and biology.
Others notice the same facts you did.
And they ask the same questions in the late 19th century.
Among them was famed evolutionary scientist Thomas Huxley.
Huxley was so interested in the evolution of crayfish he wrote an entire book about
them in 1879, simply titled The Crayfish.
Huxley was a colleague and friend of Charles Darwin, and one who took up Darwin's then
new hypothesis of descent with modification and ran with it.
In fact, Huxley was nicknamed Darwin's Bulldog because of his ferocious defense of evolutionary
theory starting with the publication of Origin of Species in 1859.
Now as brilliant and as motivated as Huxley was though, he encountered a problem with
his research on crayfish.
He figured that crayfish likely shared a common ancestor with lobsters, and on that he was
correct.
But he didn't understand how present day freshwater crayfish could have dispersed so widely across
the world's oceans to northern and southern continents.
Let's look at a map that shows where all of the major crayfish groups are located today.
Now if you put a crayfish into salt water, it's going to be very unhappy with you for
doing that and in fact will not live very long because they're adapted only for freshwater
environments.
So please don't do that at home.
In other words, there's no possible way for crayfish to survive an oceanic journey from
one continent to another.
Conversely, modern lobsters can't survive in freshwater, so the evolution of each group
into their own respective groups represents some sort of habitat partitioning in which
one lineage went into one environment and the other lineage went into another environment.
Well Huxley thought that maybe crayfish evolved independently in many different places in
which certain populations of marine crustaceans led to the evolution of freshwater crayfish
in various coastal rivers of the world.
He also predicted that fossils of southern hemisphere crayfish might be found in Australia.
That's because that continent has the greatest number of modern crayfish species.
Because crayfish can't travel very far on their own, this diversity implied that they
probably evolved in Australia first.
Now wouldn't Huxley not know in 1879?
Well a lot.
For example, he didn't know about genetics.
Now we can compare lobsters and crayfish by looking at their genetic material like DNA
and RNA and test for their relatedness.
Well sure enough, they're very close to one another genetically.
Huxley also didn't know about plate tectonics and this is the process that's responsible
for moving continents apart or putting them back together.
He also didn't know about any crayfish fossils in Australia or anywhere else for that matter
because none were known at the time.
Consequently, his understanding of this major transition in evolution was based only on
the geographic distribution of modern crayfish and the anatomical similarities between crayfish
and lobsters.
So let's look at what we have more than 130 years after Huxley using a combination of
biology, geology and paleontology.
In 2005, molecular biologists proposed that crayfish and lobsters diverged from a common
ancestor about 270 million years ago.
Then crayfish split into northern and southern hemisphere groups about 180 million years
ago.
This is a map of what the world looked like 270 million years ago and that was during
the Permian period which gives you a context then for how this hypothesis makes sense geologically.
All of the continents were together at that time.
So crayfish didn't have to cross any oceans to disperse into the different continents.
Instead, they could just travel through freshwater environments within one big continent.
This was much, much easier for them than somehow getting across some wide ocean.
Well, even without fossils, these biologists figured out a possible timing for the evolutionary
transitions using a technique called molecular clocks.
And we're going to discuss those more in the next lecture.
Well, here's an evolutionary chart that shows the relationships between lobsters and crayfish,
showing how they came from a common ancestor about 270 million years ago.
And crayfish underwent their own divergence about 180 million years ago.
The group nephropoidia at the top represents lobsters and the group hastocoidia below represents
crayfish.
Now these biologists also said that northern and southern hemisphere crayfish probably became
geographically isolated from one another by about 180 million years ago.
Crayfish later diversified into lots of species about 130 million years ago.
And this was during the early part of the Cretaceous period.
Very likely then they were already dispersing throughout Australia.
And when we look at plate tectonic reconstructions of that time, this correlates very well with
the breakup of the southern continents.
You can also see that the northern and southern hemisphere continents had already split from
one another.
That's isolating those crayfish.
So what's the basis of these pretty maps anyway?
Well in the 1990s and early 2000s, geologists had started reconstructing where continents
were located throughout geologic time and made what are called paleogeographic maps.
These reconstructions showed that Australia, South America, Antarctica, Madagascar and
India were all joined together during the Cretaceous period, which was about 145 to 65
million years ago.
This meant that when these land masses split apart, all of the plants and all of the animals
wave goodbye to their fellow species, never to see one another again.
Their populations then evolved in their own respective lands after that but, and this
is important, while still retaining a genetic signature of their ancestors.
This explains why closely related crayfish are in places as far apart as Australia, New
Zealand, South America and Madagascar.
They drifted apart from their original ancestral homeland thanks to plate tectonics.
The last piece in the puzzle fell into place in 2008 in Australia when fossil crayfish
parts and fossil burrows attributed to burrowing crayfish were found in rocks from the Cretaceous
period from about 110 million years ago.
Here's one specimen which admittedly is not very glamorous looking but nonetheless is
a very important fossil for the evolutionary history of crayfish.
It turned out it was a new species, Paleoekinasticus australanus, previously unknown to science
and the oldest crayfish fossil from the southern hemisphere.
And it was in the right place as predicted by Huxley and at the right time as predicted
by the biologists.
I'm also very happy to say I was part of this discovery and the research team that reported
it which included three other paleontologists and three zoologists, two of whom also work
with the genetics of crayfish.
So this was a wonderful example of how many different scientists and scientific disciplines
are sometimes needed to answer questions related to major transitions in evolution.
And as scientists, we were especially delighted to have a chance to answer an evolutionary
question posed by Huxley 130 years ago and by using the tools we now have available for
understanding evolutionary theory, such as a vastly improved fossil record, plate tectonics,
genetics and other aspects of modern biology.
The case study we just covered also provides a great example of science answering a question
about macroevolution.
In this case, the question was where and how did freshwater crayfish evolve from marine
lobsters?
This is an example of speciation or significant changes in the lineage over time.
Think of how a donkey and a horse are two different species and they're crossbred to
make mules.
And then those mules cannot themselves reproduce.
The mule is not a new species because it can't produce offspring, but instead it produces
a sterile hybrid, which may explain the attitudes of some mules, although some might argue that
donkeys give them some good competition in being stubborn.
Well, unfortunately, we have few ways other than through fossil genetic material of knowing
directly whether some slightly different looking fossils that lived at about the same time
are different species or variations within the same species.
Well, to test this, I suppose we could try to mate fossils with one another.
And I have tried to do this, using candle lights off music, wine.
So far, I haven't been very successful.
But we do assign species names to fossils, anyway, many of which we'll continue to mention
throughout this course.
The fossil record for horses, though, that offers an excellent example of how small changes
can add up to big changes.
We have fossils showing how horses, over the course of the last 60 million years, had their
gene frequencies change enough so that they went from foretoed to singletoad, and from
small dog-sized animals to the big ones we ride today.
Now macroevolution is also evident in fossils that show clear transitions between ancestors
and descendants.
Oh, I'm thinking of archaeopteryx.
The first known bird has a beautiful blend of dinosaurian and bird traits.
This is backed up even more by recent finds of small dinosaurs with feathers that also
look like they could fly.
Here's archaeopteryx on the left from about 145 million years ago, and the dinosaur microraptor
on the right, which is from rocks about 125 million years old.
Or we can look at the fossil Ardipithecus from about 4.4 million years ago that has
ape-like traits, but also apparently walked upright like a modern human.
And macroevolution is not just about fossils.
This is a really important point.
Microevolution and macroevolution have been observed many times in living populations,
in many organisms, and in both natural and laboratory settings.
For example, speciations have been observed in many species of plants, such as primroses
and ferns, and in insects, such as fruit flies, house flies, and beetles.
This is why evolution is both a fact and a theory.
We've watched these changes happen, that's the fact part, and we have an explanation
for how it happens, that's the theory part.
So a lot of evolutionary scientists consider macroevolution as the end result of microevolution.
It's just that it took place over different timescales.
Changes in gene frequencies happen, and sometimes these changes are quick enough to cause speciation
to happen right away.
For example, in one speciation event shown in fruit flies, only five years went by before
the experimenters observed reproductive isolation within that species.
Think about that, in just five years.
In another, just eight generations of fruit flies resulted in their being unable to mate
with one another because of genetic differences.
Again, that's speciation.
These changes in gene frequencies also manifest in more obvious ways, such as when members
of a species start looking different from one another, or some species become adapted
to totally different environments from their ancestral species.
But if we really want to understand how macroevolution has happened, we can't just rely on human
time.
As will be apparent when my colleague Dr. Hawks talks about human evolution in later
lectures, we've only been around as a species for less than 200,000 years or so, or less
than one tenth of one percent of the time lobsters and crayfish have been around.
This means that most of the major transitions in evolution occurred in the pre-human past,
and we go back to the fossil record then for that evidence.
With fossils, we're not observing the actual processes of macroevolution, but the products
of major changes in lineages of organisms.
What factors were responsible for these macroevolutionary changes?
A lot, actually, but I'll mention four for now.
First as we saw with the northern and southern hemisphere crayfish is geographic isolation.
This refers to how populations of a species may become isolated from one another, either
through a physical barrier like a mountain chain, a river, or an ocean that splits the
species into different places.
With enough time, geographic isolation can result in a second factor responsible for
macroevolutionary change, which is genetic drift.
This means a species has drifted enough, genetically speaking, from its ancestral population that
it became a different species, or even diversified into many species, which we sometimes call
adaptive radiation.
That's what happened with crayfish.
A third factor contributing to macroevolution is environmental change, whether that's local
or global.
For example, a lowering of sea level during a time of global cooling would be advantageous
for those organisms adapted to cool environments, or to an expansion of land environments.
Last but not least, mass extinctions are recognized as a factor in macroevolution.
Five mass extinctions happened in the geologic past well before humans showed up, at about
440 million years ago, 360 million years ago, 250 million years ago, 200 million years ago,
and 65 million years ago.
We now suspect these extinction events, while also taking out a lot of species, also led
to the opening of habitats and resources for those species that survived these.
For example, the divergence of crayfish from lobsters followed the greatest mass extinction
about 250 million years ago, and the evolution of the dinosaurs from ancestral reptiles happened
after another mass extinction 200 million years ago.
So extinctions may have hastened some evolutionary transitions.
Now the effects of geographic isolation, genetic drift, environmental change, and mass extinctions
could be summarized by one neat little phrase coined by Charles Darwin, natural selection.
After all, as environments change or mass extinctions take place, organisms in the right place,
with the right stuff, genetically speaking, get selected to pass on those genes to the
next generation. Alternatively, we could just call this process selection, and that includes
artificial selection that we humans have done through the selective breeding and modification
of domestic animals. But I like to call it natural selection, so we'll think about this
process more as one that was around for a long time before humans were produced by it.
And although we speak of natural selection, let's take a moment to look at a little more
about how far science has progressed. For example, we would be remiss if we looked only
at the fossil record known at the time that Charles Darwin and Huxley were around. Our
understanding of how the Earth, its life, and its environments have changed through time
has improved immensely since Charles Darwin first proposed his hypothesis of descent with
modification in 1859, which later turned into evolutionary theory.
Using just dinosaurs as an example, we now know of more than 1,000 species of these fossil
animals, whereas only about a dozen were identified at the time Darwin's little book was published.
So new sciences developed since Darwin's time include plate tectonics, which as we saw helps
to explain how populations might have become geographically isolated in the geologic past.
It also helps to explain how volcanism might have altered the atmosphere, how mountain
building and other Earth processes change environments, or even influence mass extinctions.
Developmental biology examines how genes code for the development of growing organisms and
how these genes might be switched on or off during evolution. Ecology is a much more sophisticated
science than was possible for the natural history of Darwin's day. Ecology looks closely
and systematically at how organisms in communities interact with one another and how those physical
factors in their environments affect and guide their evolution.
Modern genetic studies also examine genetic similarity and even help to explain sources
of variation. In these, we use tools such as molecular clocks, and the basic idea then
in those is that we use calculated rates of change in RNA and DNA to estimate when major
transitions may have happened. So these are just some of the additional tools that are
advancing our ever more successful explorations of deep time.
Well, I look forward to seeing you at the next lecture in which we're going to discuss
the basics of paleontology and geology that are pertinent for the rest of the course.
In that lecture, we'll take a closer look at how these two sciences give us primary tools
that we might need to better interpret the who, what, when, where, and why of major evolutionary
transitions in the ancient past. See you next time.
