Greetings. In today's lecture, we get to take on one of my favorite topics in the fossil
record, and that is the transition from Australopithecus to Homo. Now, Homo is the name of our genus.
Homo sapiens, and so when you think about a creature that's similar enough to us to
be called Homo, it must be really quite like us. And indeed, in many respects, these creatures
that I'm going to describe today are very much like humans, so much so that many scientists
call them the first humans. And I'll adopt that terminology, talking about the first
humans as being some of the creatures that I'll describe today. Now, the differences
between Australopithecus and Homo are so great in many respects that it's hard to describe
them all. And so I'm going to focus on basically four issues. One issue is body size. We've
massively gotten bigger compared to Australopithecus, and the very first humans have the same range
of body sizes as today's humans. I'm going to focus on brain size. Humans have relatively
quite large brains compared to any of the earlier hominids. I'm going to focus a little
bit on genetics, because we have some interesting clues about the genetics of early humans,
including some things about their immune system. And finally, I'll talk about technology, which
is maybe one of the most important aspects that separate humans from Australopithecus,
in that it lays the groundwork for changes in diet, possibly changes in social organization,
and the advancement of technology as we proceed toward modern humans. In many ways, today's
story can be told as a story about four young boys. There are four skeletons representing
mostly different species in the fossil record that all happen to represent boys of between
about 10 and 12 years of age. So these four make a really nice comparison to talk about
the differences between these species and some of the respects in which they're changing
over time. The most famous of these is from the west side of Lake Turkana in Kenya. It's
called WT-15000, but we call him the naryocotomy boy after the site where he was found. But
just as important is another fossil, about 1.8 million years old, from Domenici in the
Republic of Georgia. This fossil, a little bit different from the naryocotomy boy, possibly
representing the same species, and it tells us a lot about the variation of these kinds
of early humans. A third is from Olduvai Gorge, and this fossil represents Homo habilis, another
species of early hominids, about 1.8 to 1.9 million years old, and gives us some interesting
clues about the evolution of the brain and tool use. And finally, discovered in 2008,
fossil skeleton from the site of Malapa in South Africa, very near to the sites that
I described in the last lecture. This fossil is quite different from the others, but lived
only slightly earlier, and gives us, again, some interesting hints about the evolution
of our genus from the earlier genus Australopithecus. So let me first say that this is a time in
the fossil record, between about 2 million and about 1.5 million years ago, that is very
different from what we recognize today looking around the world. When we look around today,
what we see is one species of humans, and that one species is variable in body size,
it's variable in physical characteristics like coloration, like hair form, like physiognomy,
all of those things make us vary from each other, and yet we recognize that wherever
we see somebody walking like a biped who's a primate, we know that that's a human. Between
1.5 and 2 million years ago, the world was a different place. To begin with, most of
the humans that lived on Earth lived only in Africa. Only a few colonists had already
emerged from Africa to other parts of the world. But within Africa, what we see is at
sites in East Africa, and sites in South Africa, where we have lots and lots of fossils, we
see that there are at least three species represented at each of those sites. One of
those species is Homo erectus, and that's probably the ancestor of all of us today. Another
of those species is Homo habilis. Homo habilis is on average just a little bit earlier in
time than erectus, but they overlapped with each other substantially. And the third species
is one or another of the robust Australopithecines. In East Africa, that means Australopithecus
boisei. In South Africa, Australopithecus robustus. After 1.5 million years ago, those species
begin to decline and ultimately disappear. What's left in the world is the human species,
the one that ultimately becomes ancestral to the rest of us, Homo erectus. So when we're
looking at the fossil record at the time of the origin of our genus, we're looking at
an ecology that has multiple different kinds of hominins in it. And those hominins have
to be interacting with each other. They live in the same places, and they have to be potentially
competing with each other for different kinds of resources. And in the case of the robust
Australopithecines in particular, we can say that their diet was probably varied, but that
immense chewing apparatus means that they were specializing on a kind of food that was relatively
low in dietary quality. Humans, on the other hand, took more of a high quality strategy.
And we're going to see the ways that technology might have helped to unwrap that new food resource
for us. This is Olduvai Gorge. Olduvai Gorge is one of the most well-known hominin fossil
sites. It's the place where Lewis and Mary Leakey began to excavate in the 1950s, and
they had a spectacular series of finds. The reason why they first became interested in
this site, which stretches across about 20 kilometers of northern Tanzania, is because
of the exposures of archaeological remains. They were finding tools there. And so it stands
to reason that the place where you find the tools is probably a good place to look for
the tool makers. We now know that Olduvai Gorge mostly occupies a period after about 1.9 million
years, so that we're looking at something that's coincident with the emergence of Homo erectus
as it turns out, and a site that preserves that other species of Homo, Homo habilis.
The technology that the Leakeys described was relatively simple and crude. They called
it Olduvai technology after their site, Olduvai Gorge. Olduvai technology consists of pebbles
of rock, big chunks that you might find in a riverbed because they're smooth and the
water's been flowing out over them, pebbles of rock of different types, basalt, quartzite,
fauna light, that have been struck very hard by another rock so that flakes will come off
of them. Now this is about as simple as stone technology gets, and basically you're reducing
a chunk of rock into flakes. The flake is really the predominantly useful tool because
a flake has a sharp edge, and when you have a flake that's of a suitable size, you can
use that flake to cut into things. We find the wear on the surfaces, the edges of these
tools that corresponds to wear that was put there by cutting into meat, wear that was
put there by cutting on wood, by cutting into other plant fibers. They were using these
tools for basically processing all kinds of stuff. In addition to the flakes, the rocks
themselves are useful because you can use a rock to bash your way into a bone, and if
you have an animal bone, that bone is likely to have fat rich bone marrow inside of it.
That's a really rich dietary resource if you can get it. Other kinds of meat eaters, especially
hyenas, can get into those bones by crunching them with their big teeth. Hominins don't
have that option. Our teeth are really wimpy compared to hyena teeth in terms of breaking
open bones, but this technology, as simple as it was, gives us a means of breaking into
that and exploiting that resource. So, simple technology, it's potentially quite important
for us. Who made the tools? Well, this is a bit of a mystery. When we look at older one
technology and think, what does it really take for a hominin to be able to make that?
People have had different answers over the years. Some scientists think, well, this is
really complicated. We see that they're carrying this rock over substantial distances, so we
think that they had some social organization that let them do that. But when we look at
the artifacts themselves, a natural question emerges, could you get an ape to make something
like this? I mean, after all, chimpanzees are well known for their flexibility of using
other kinds of tools. They once in a while will use rocks or large pieces of wood to
crack into nuts, and that doesn't seem very far from using these hammer stones to crack
into bones. They use twigs to fish their way into termite nests and eat the ants or termites
that they're getting from them. So, that kind of flexibility of tool use makes us wonder
could they have done this? Well, the archeologist Nick Toth decided to investigate whether chimpanzees
could do it. He got a bonobo, one of the close relatives of chimps named Kanzi, to try to
manufacture stone tools. And in a series of experiments, he succeeded in getting Kanzi
to make stone flakes that, in terms of their appearance and functionality, look pretty much
like old Yuan stone tools. So, it seems like the cognitive equipment to make these stone
tools wasn't something that chimpanzees couldn't have managed. That raises a question. Is there
something that we can discern about these early technologies that lets us investigate
the circumstances in which hominins decided to make this transition to manufacturing these
stone tools? Well, one of the things that we can look at is the pattern of breakage
of these tools. When you look at some old Yuan archaeological sites, you can take the
flakes that are laying on the ground and reconstruct them into the original rock. Because most
of the flakes aren't the tool that the hominins end up using. Most of them are waste flakes
that get laid right where they land. So, archaeologists have reconstructed a number of the actual cores
from which the stone tools were struck. And what they've shown is that early hominins used
some techniques to make these things that are recognizable in stone tool technologies recently
that a stone tool napper would recognize. One of those techniques is called the bipolar
technique. Bipolar just basically means you hit it on one side and then you turn it over
and hit it on the other side. And so you reduce it systematically by removing flakes from
both sides of it. That bipolar technique is in evidence early in the old Yuan technological
tradition. So, the basic manufacturing methods are there early on. That doesn't answer the
question as to their complexity. Another way of looking at these stone artifacts is to examine
in detail how far different types of raw material are carried. And did people choose one type
of raw material preferentially? It turns out that at a number of archaeological sites in
East Africa, we can trace exactly the outcrops where these different kinds of rock have to
have come from. And so we can measure how far those are from the archaeological site where
they're found together. And we can say, were they choosing one type more often than others?
Were they working harder to bring one type of stone from farther away because they liked
it more? And it turns out that they were. And in particular, they were choosing types
of stone that had fracture properties when they were broken that were more predictable.
So they were choosing the types of stone that were better to make tools with, and they
were working harder to bring those over a little bit longer distance to use them as
their tools. Now, it's convenient in a way that the leaky's found along with these old
Yuan tools at Olduvai Gorge evidence of a possible tool maker. And the type specimen of that
tool maker, Olduvai Hominid 7, is what became the basis of the species Homo habilis, named
habilis because it was able to make these tools. Well, Homo habilis is substantially
advanced over the Australopithecines in a couple of ways. One way has to do directly with stone
tool manufacture, and that's the size and shape of its fingertips. Homo habilis had
relatively thick fingertips as characterized by the bone structure called the apical tuft
in the finger. Those thick fingertips supported a larger surface area on the fingertips, and
that meant that Homo habilis could apply more force to grip an object strongly. That strong
grip is necessary for stone tool manufacture because if you're going to take two rocks
and hit them together, they're going to fly out of your hand as soon as they hit each
other, unless you're able to grip them quite strongly. So one aspect of their anatomy that's
informative has to do with their hands. The other has to do with their brains. Homo habilis
had a bigger brain than any Australopithecine. The average in that species was around 550
to 600 cubic centimeters. The average in Australopithecus was more like 450 cubic centimeters.
So this was a growth of about 25 or 30 percent in the size of the brain. Now to introduce
Homo habilis, I want to show you a couple of fossil crania. Now unlike Professor Martin,
I can't bring the real fossils with me. So these are casts of the fossils, but I want
to show you first this fossil skull, which is of Australopithecus. This Australopithecus
skull is from South Africa. It's about 2.8 million years old. It has the characteristic
traits that all Australopithecines shared. Its brain size is relatively small, its face
is sloping, and it doesn't have a nose that projects outwards from its face at all. That
shape of face is a little bit different than you'll see in this fossil skull. This is from
the east side of Lake Turkana. It dates to about 1.65 million years old. And what you'll
notice about this skull is not that it's a lot larger. In fact, if we set these skulls
side by side, you'll see that it's about the same size or if anything, maybe a little smaller.
But if we start looking at the size of the brain, you'll notice that its brain is a little
bit bigger than the Australopithecine fossil. In addition to that, its face is more vertical
and it has a smaller dentition. So smaller teeth, more vertical faces, a face that projects
just a little bit in the middle, these are characteristics that set Homo in the skull
apart from Australopithecus. Probably the most famous skull of Homo habilis is this one.
It's also from the east side of Lake Turkana, but this one is about 1.9 million years old.
So it's older than the other skull. It's also bigger. This is a bigger individual and it's
a bigger brain. At about 750 cubic centimeters, its brain is the biggest known for Homo habilis.
Bigger face, bigger brain, a little bit bigger teeth. But this skull is very interesting
because it's the earliest big brain skull that we know of. And if we look inside of that
skull at the fossil endocast, the endocast on its surface shows a little bit more development
in an area on the left side called Broca's area. And that area of the skull in humans
today is an area that corresponds to language production. So Homo habilis might have been
interesting in its behavior in a lot of ways. Well, to come back to the question who made
the tools, by the time we get to Olduvai Gorge we know the tools are made by Homo habilis
and ultimately Homo erectus. But the earliest known stone tools are 2.6 million years old.
That's 700,000 years older than the skull from the site of Lake Turkana I just showed you.
Somebody has to have been making these tools. That somebody, immediately after the first
stone tools are made, we find them alongside antelope bones that have cut marks on them
from these tools. So we know that they're using these stone tools very early to process meat.
Who was it that was doing it? Well, we have a few clues. We have a couple of jaw bones,
this the upper jaw from Hadar, but this one only 2.4 million years old, the same site as
Lucy's skeleton, but almost a million years later. That jaw bone looks very much like
the jaw bone from Olduvai Gorge of Homo habilis. So it seems quite plausible that something
like habilis in its teeth is there early on alongside the first stone tools.
The problem with this picture is that there are australopithecines running around that
also may have similar looking teeth. In 2008, these skeletons were uncovered at a site called
Malapa in South Africa. These skeletons have small brains, 420 cubic centimeters in the
one with the preserved brain size. They also have australopithecus-like body sizes. They're
about a meter to 1.2 meters tall, so 3.3 to about 4 feet tall. They're very small compared
to any early humans, but like early humans, they have relatively very small teeth. And
so if we thought that the tooth size was telling us about the diet changes that were involved
with the origin of our genus, Homo, that tooth size is there in at least one species of
australopithecus, this one called australopithecus sediba, that was living in South Africa 2
million years ago. So we have a bit of a mystery. Who were the early stone tool makers? We don't
really know. But what we do know is that this shift in diet, eating a higher quality diet,
probably including meat and including less of the resources that required that heavy chewing apparatus,
it had an influence on the evolution of our jaws. And there are genetic signs of that evolution.
It turns out that there's a protein that's expressed in the muscle of the jaw, the temporalis
muscle, it's attached to the side of your head, and that protein is called the Myosin
Heavy Chain 6, or MYH6. This gene is active in all other kinds of primates in that muscle,
but in humans, that gene is broken. It doesn't work anymore. A broken gene is what we call
a pseudo gene. It looks like a gene, but we can tell that it's not going to make a product
because it has a stop instead of making the entire protein sequence. It truncates it, so it doesn't
make a functional protein. That pseudo gene in humans is highly unique, and it probably means
that when this pseudo gene arose, our jaw muscles had already reduced to a substantial degree.
Now that reduction in the jaw muscles is something that you can notice on the crania of these
fossil hominins. When we look at this skull of Australopithecus, you can see that the temporalis
muscle occupies a big space on the side of the skull here and attaches relatively high up on
the cranium. Compare that to this skull, which is a similar size, but has a much lower attachment
of that muscle and has a much smaller space for it to go. That's showing you that these hominins
have deaccentuated that temporalis muscle. Well, the pseudo gene we estimate by comparing the genes
of humans, chimps, and other primates to have arisen sometime before 2 million years ago.
So it's in that time period when our lineage was losing that heavy, chewing apparatus that this gene
was losing its activity. I wanted to talk about pseudo genes because we can learn some interesting
things, and it's almost a paleontology within our genome to be able to look at our genes and see
the genes that broke and get an estimate of the times that they were broken. When we look at red
blood cells, for example, red blood cells course through your body and their surfaces have little
signaling molecules on them that your immune system recognizes. Of course, the best known of those
signaling molecules is what we call today the ABO molecule. It has two potential functional
signals that could be on your red blood cells, A and B. And this is why we call people blood type A,
blood type B. Somebody whose blood type AB has both of these molecules. Well, as most of you know,
there's another option. You could have blood type O. Blood type O is a protein that's lost its
function. It's a pseudo gene except the functional version of this still exists in the human population.
That's blood types A and B. The O type, by looking at its sequence compared to A and B, we can estimate
that different people who carry O today have alleles that originated at different times in the past.
And in particular, the earliest of those originated about 2.5 million years ago. So some people today
who are type O are carrying a type that originated in these potentially first tool makers.
Now, why that one was important is not especially obvious. We think it has to do with immunity to disease.
And the reason why we have different types today probably is because they enforce our immunity to
different kinds of pathogens. And so one of them has an advantage when one pathogen comes around,
but others might have advantages when different pathogens come. But there's another kind of signaling
molecule on your blood cells that has a relatively well understood function. This is called a
sialic acid. And humans have a pseudo gene of this version of the sialic acid where other kinds of primates
express what's called n-glycolonuraminic acid, NEU5GC for short. Humans don't make it. The enzyme
that's supposed to make that doesn't work in us. And so what we have instead is the precursor molecule,
which is n-acetylneuraminic acid, or NEU5AC. That molecule in other kinds of primates is the major
for malaria to attack. In humans, when we lost that functional molecule, it probably meant that what
today is the major chimpanzee version of malaria couldn't attack us anymore. We can estimate the time
that this deactivation happened. And it looks like it happened around the time of the origin of HOMO,
something like two million years ago. So it's quite possible that the success of our lineage might have had
to do as much with our immune system as it did with the kinds of stone tools we could make or the brain size
that we got. Or all of these things might have worked together so that in order to evolve a bigger brain size,
you first had to conquer the diseases that were holding you down. Well, one of the most important aspects
of our lineage compared to Australopithecus is the size of our bodies. And humans today, as I mentioned,
they're variable in size from place to place. Some people, especially here in America and in Europe,
are quite tall. In East Africa, there are very tall populations. In other parts of Africa, in Southeast Asia,
in South Africa, there are relatively short humans. People where the men average less than 5'2 or 5'3.
So there's a range of body size in human populations. All of them are much larger than Australopithecus.
Well, the first evidence of a large body adaptation in HOMO is really that skeleton WT-15000,
the nary-academy boy. It's found on the west side of Lake Turkana. It's about 1.6 million years old.
But as about a 10 or 11-year-old, this boy stood about 5'3. And if we envisioned him as having a growth spurt,
like boys do today, he would have been 5'7, 8, maybe even 5'10 when he was an adult.
That larger body size probably had a lot of consequences in terms of human evolution.
One of the things that it's really good for is giving you longer legs. And longer legs mean that you can walk further on the same fuel.
Now, in East Africa, it may be that food wasn't the essential fuel. It may very well be that water was the limiting factor.
If you can walk farther from a water source without getting dehydrated, well, that means that you can forage over a longer distance.
You can search for food for longer. And if you're a hunter trying to make use of meat for the first time,
that's a very important characteristic to have, to be able to search for that meat where you can get it.
Another consequence of larger bodies is that as the body got bigger and the pelvis remained short and adapted to bipedal locomotion,
well, babies got bigger. And as babies got bigger and brains got bigger, well, that creates a conflict with a small pelvis.
That conflict makes the birth process much more difficult in humans than in other kinds of primates.
One of the ways that we adapt to the birth process in humans is by delaying the growth of our brains until after we're born.
And so the trajectory of brain growth in humans looks very different from the trajectory in other kinds of primates, including chimpanzees.
They grow their brains fast when they're in utero. And once they're born, they can sort of slow down.
We grow our brains fast in utero and during the first year of birth, and that really gives us that brain-sized bonus.
Now, before I leave early homo, I want to bring in that fourth juvenile skeleton from Domenici in Georgia.
He's quite a bit smaller than the naryocotomy boy, and so the dispersal of early humans out of Africa,
it required them to attain a human-like body size, but we're talking about the body sizes of smallish humans today, not super tall ones.
But another aspect of Domenici that's very, very interesting is that it shows us some of the ways that cooperation may have been evolving in early humans.
Early humans starting to use meat, making tools that are used on other resources, plants, it looks like they're hunter-gatherers,
which means that they already have a division of labor and they're cooperating by sharing food.
There's no better sign of that cooperation than another one of the crania from Domenici.
This skull, D-3444, you can see is an older individual who's lost all of his or her teeth.
That total tooth loss is unique in the fossil record. We do not see that in human evolution until really we get to the last 40,000 years.
It means that this person had to have help getting the food that was going to nourish him or her and had to be able to coordinate activities with the rest of the group.
It implies that maybe this person had something to offer so that other people were willing to help her or him out.
That signal of culture is something that we're going to start seeing more and more in the human fossil record and will be key to our next transition to modern humans.
