Greetings! Today's lecture covers an evolutionary transition that is, in some sense, is different
from most of the others. Instead of talking about the transition from one major group
of organisms to another, or the transition from one species to another, as we have in
the last several, I'm going to talk about a transition that occurred within our species,
the species Homo sapiens. That transition has to do with the way that we've changed our
society and ecology in the last 10,000 years, a major change that's associated with the
invention of agriculture. This change involved the domestication of different kinds of plants
and animals and other organisms. It's caused massive changes to the ecology that we live
in and huge increases in human population sizes. The consequence of those changes has
been relatively rapid evolution within our species of many characteristics. And this
is of special interest to me because it's a part of my own research, how we've changed
genetically within the past several thousand years. So to give you an idea of the timeline
we're talking about, with the origin of modern humans, our species Homo sapiens, we were
talking about a time that occupied the last couple of hundred thousand years. Today I'm
going to be focusing on the last 10,000 years. And that 10,000 year period is special in
many respects. It corresponds to the period since the end of the last Ice Age. Over the
period from 20,000 years ago to 18,000 years ago, the Earth's climate was deteriorating.
Things got colder and colder until the climate reached what we call the last glacial maximum,
the point at which glaciers were covering much of the northern continents of the world.
After 18,000 years ago, the glaciers began to recede. But temperatures didn't reach
their Holocene levels, the levels of the last 10,000 years, until that time 10,000 years
ago. During this gradually improving climate, human populations began to grow. And I'll
talk about some of the evidence for that population growth. By the end of that time, humans had
become relatively denser in their populations and more numerous, and they invented in some
parts of the world agriculture. If we want to think about the kinds of genetic changes
and physical changes that have happened in this relatively brief span of time, I like
to show a picture of my daughter Lucy. It's a good picture of her because it shows her
blue eyes. 10,000 years ago, nobody on our planet had blue eyes. That's a change that's
happened enormously rapidly in some populations in a very short time period. Now, as an anthropologist,
I've studied crania from around the world, the skulls of different populations and how
they differ from each other and how they've changed. And one aspect of humans today is
that our skulls do vary from place to place. You can, to a certain extent, identify what
population someone came from by looking at their skull because of the features that vary
from place to place. But you can also identify changes that have happened over time. Understand
that when we're talking about the skulls of living humans, most of the variability of
these skulls has to have arisen within the past 30,000 years. So that's a relatively
rapid diversification as it is. But I've studied skulls from the Bronze Age, something
like three or four thousand years ago and more recently. And what we can show is that
skulls over that time period have changed in a number of ways. For example, in the Bronze
Age, it's not uncommon to see skulls that have a relatively thick brow ridge, even extending
out to the lateral part of the eye orbits. That's a morphology that's very rare in living
human populations in Europe, although it still persists in a few parts of the world, such
as Australia. Those changes that have happened in the European population, we can document
with numbers. For example, probably the simplest aspect of the skull that you can look at is
its size. How big is it? And the factor that dominates the size of the skull is the size
of the brain that's inside of it. Over the past 10,000 years in Europe, the size of the
brain has on average shrunk from a little over 1,500 cubic centimeters down to a little
bit over 1,400 cubic centimeters in males, a little over 1,400 to a little bit under
1,300 in females, so that there's been a decline of cranial size over time in the last 10,000
years. That decline is matched by a decline of the thickness of the skull, which is relatively
more minor, but the bones themselves that encase the skull have become thinner. It's
also paralleled by changes in the shape of the skull. To take a very gross index of its
shape, the length of the skull and the breadth of the skull and how those compare to each
other, skulls have gotten relatively broader over the last few thousand years, which means
that they've gotten shorter relative to their size. Those changes are changes that have
happened in the European population, but they've also happened in other populations in the
world, and in a few cases they've unfolded very rapidly. For example, if we look at cranial
series from Switzerland over the past 2,000 years, just since the time of the Romans up
until now, there's been a substantial change in the shape of the skull. That change is
due to the movement of peoples, people moving through Europe and carrying new genes with
them, but it's also due to evolution of this population.
Well, the size of the skull isn't the only thing that's changing. Also, the sizes of
the teeth are changing. They've gotten smaller and smaller over the course of the last 20,000
years, and that accelerated during the last 10,000 years as agriculture was invented.
Teeth got smaller and smaller and smaller. You might wonder, why do people get smaller
teeth? In this case, we have a relatively good answer. Smaller teeth are selected partially
because we don't need to have bigger teeth as much when we're eating an agricultural
diet, which includes more grains that tend to be processed by milling them, which is
not done by your teeth, it's done by tools, and also they're cooked, so you don't need
to have quite as big a teeth. But also, because of the transition to this starchy diet, well,
now periodontal disease and cavities become much more of a health risk than they were
in hunter-gatherer populations who ate a diet that depended on more wild resources, and
so these diseases help to select for smaller teeth because smaller teeth have less enamel
surface to be attacked by bacteria. Teeth are easy to explain. Skull sizes and brain
sizes are a little bit less easy to explain. Why is the skull reducing in size? Well, we're
returned to that issue later in the lecture. But first, I want to talk about some genetic
changes that we can trace by looking at genes and give some impression of the kinds of things
that humans are changing to adapt to their ecologies. Well, probably everybody knows
what a chromosome is. Those are the bodies that exist within yourselves that carry the
DNA, and DNA is the genetic material that you actually pass on from yourself to your
offspring and that you got from your parents. Well, when we look at genes, I find it helpful
to think about how we know about them and where our knowledge comes from. That knowledge
has developed over the course of more than a hundred years now. One of the really basic
ways that we can look at genes is to talk about where they're located in our entire
genome. Now, the human genome consists of 23 pairs of chromosomes. The one pair that's
special, the X and Y chromosome, they help determine your sex. Two X's in your female
and X and Y in your male. The other 22 pairs of chromosomes are numbered 1 through 22.
And if you look at a representation of those chromosomes as a map, well, these representations
usually have bands of color on the chromosomes. Those bands were identified early in the 1900s
by staining the chromosomes with chemicals. And you could actually use chemicals that
would mark parts of the chromosomes. You could look at them under a microscope and
see the bands. The numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, well, it turns out that chromosome
1 is the largest. And the reason why it was called chromosome 1 is because when they looked
at the chromosomes under a microscope, they picked out the largest one first and said,
well, that's 1. And 2 is the next largest and 3 and so on. So they're numbered in order
according to their length. We can now use our knowledge of genetics and the draft of
the human genome and our knowledge of the sequences of genes to localize where genes
are on different chromosomes. An example is a gene that corresponds to an enzyme called
lactase. Lactase is the enzyme that has one purpose. It helps you to break down the sugar
lactose. So it's a digestive enzyme. Its purpose is to digest the sugar. Lactase is shared
by all mammals because mammals are uniquely exposed to lactose, the sugar, because it's
the sugar that occurs naturally in milk. That's a special sugar. And most mammals get it when
they're infants, but don't get it when they've grown up. And in particular, every kind of
mammal is weaned at some point, which means that their mother no longer allows them to
have milk. And after that point, digesting lactose isn't an important quality anymore
for the mammal to have. They're never going to have access to milk again in their lives.
And so it's normal for mammals to deactivate this gene, to just not make it the active
protein anymore, because they're not exposed to the sugar in their diet. Well, that's normal
for mammals. But some humans are mutants. Mutants who carry a new copy of the lactase
gene, a copy that remains active after they grow up throughout adulthood. That mutant
copy is common in a few human populations. It's not universal. And in fact, if you looked
at humans in the last couple of thousand years, you'd find it localized to very specific
geographic areas. One of those areas is Europe and the neighboring parts of West Asia. Another
area is the northern plains of Africa, beneath the Sahara Desert, and extending down into
East Africa. Another area is the Arabian Peninsula. And what those areas all have in common is
that they're areas where dairy animals became important after the invention of agriculture.
So this is a gene that potentially is an adaptation to a new agricultural diet.
Well, it turns out that the mutations that cause lactase to remain functional throughout
life aren't located in the lactase gene itself. One of them is located in a next door gene
called MCM6. That gene has nothing to do with milk or digestion. It's totally separate
from that. But in that gene is a regulatory site that helps to engage the cell's transcription
machinery so that it will start making that enzyme. A mutation to that site is what helps
Europeans and West Asians continue making that enzyme through their lives. It turns
out that there are different mutations that have a similar effect in three different parts
of Sub-Saharan Africa and in the Arabian Peninsula. All of these mutations are relatively young.
Now we can tell the ages of mutations by looking at the area of the genome that surrounds
them. A chromosome is essentially a very, very, very long strand of DNA. It's hundreds
of millions of base pairs of DNA long. That's inherited as a unit from your parent to you.
And so if you've got one gene on that chromosome, you're going to inherit everything else that's
on the same chromosome with it. The exception is that during the creation of the sex cells,
egg and sperm cells, chromosomes can recombine with the opposite number of their pair. That
crossing over process takes DNA from one copy of the chromosome and puts it onto the other.
Over time, that tends to break genes apart from each other so that genes that are on
the same chromosome are over long spans of time inherited independently of each other
even though in each generation they're inherited together as one chunk. Well by looking at
the parts of the chromosome that are connected to each other, we get an idea of how many
times the chromosome has been able to recombine since a new mutation originated. And when
we look at the lactase gene and its neighbor gene, MCM6, that has the active mutation, what
we see is that every person in Europe and West Asia that carries the mutation that codes
for longer lactase persistence, those people all share a big chunk of the chromosome around
that. And that indicates that that mutation didn't happen a long, long, long time ago.
It happened recently enough ago that the chromosomes haven't had a chance to recombine. They haven't
had a chance to break apart the different genes so that they're all inherited together
as one chunk. And the time that we estimate for this is approximately 8,000 years ago.
That mutation, which today is very common in Northern Europe, I mean we're talking about,
you think of the population of Northern Europe, they like to drink milk and they continue
to do it as adults. The frequency of intolerance to lactose is relatively low. Well that population
today has about 75% of this new allele. But 8,000 years ago, all of those copies of that
gene descended from one copy that existed at that time in the past. Now the really cool
thing about lactase persistence is that we know something about the history of the European
population because we have a skeletal record. And because we're able to probe those skeletons
and extract some of their DNA, we actually know something about whether they had this
mutation or not. What's interesting is that in Central Europe and Germany and Austria
and Switzerland today, areas where the lactase mutation is very high in its frequency, 75
or 80%, 5,000 years ago when early agriculturalists were moving into Europe, these skeletons
that they left behind did not have this mutation. So it's a case where the mutation started
off very, very rare. And as selected mutations do, it increased relatively slowly. By 8,000
years ago it had originated something like 5,000 years ago when we sample skeletons,
it's not there common enough for us to detect it in the skeletons. But in the intervening
time it has increased rapidly in this one population. That's what we're talking about
when we're talking about recent genetic changes. They start off slow from a single copy, but
they come on very fast, especially in the most recent part of our history. Now, we can
ask what are the circumstances under which these kinds of evolutionary changes are happening?
The really basic thing that we can describe in the history of Earth and in the history
of humanity is an increase of numbers. We've gotten to be much more numerous. In the Pleistocene
when we estimate from knowing how many people there are in little groups and how many little
groups could occupy a given area, we estimate that there were hundreds of thousands, maybe
up to a million people living in the world at any given time. That number no doubt fluctuated.
It would have been higher at some times when climate was really nice, it would have been
lower at others. But it never got into the numbers of tens or hundreds of millions. Well,
after modern humans dispersed through the world, they were using a little bit more advanced
technology and they had dispersed to new areas that weren't inhabited before, areas like
Australia and the New World. So their numbers were larger. We think that there were several
millions of people living in the world at that time, maybe three million to six million
people. But at the end of the Ice Age, when people invented agriculture, that population
started to explode. Shortly after the development of agriculture, the population had grown ten
fold, up to 60 million. And by the time Romans came along, around 2000 years ago, the population
of the earth was over a hundred million. Now, of course, today we know that there are six
and a half billion or more people in the world. And so that increase in numbers has just continued
up to the present. Let me talk a little bit about the archaeological evidence for this
increase of population size. Because before the invention of agriculture, you can ask,
how do we know that populations were getting denser with modern humans? One of the reasons
we know is we have records of what the people were eating. And there are certain kinds of
resources that seem to mark population density really well. One of those kinds of resources
is tortoises. Tortises, that's land turtles. Well, tortoises are for humans a really easy
to get resource. If you see a tortoise, it can't run away. It's not going to escape.
And so hunter gatherers would pick up tortoises off the ground and carry them back to camp.
They still do it today. If you run into a tortoise, grab it and carry it back because
that's an easy meal. Well, so tortoises only really have one defense against humans. The
defense that works against almost every kind of other animal, their shell, it's completely
ineffective against humans because we can get through their shells or we can just set
them on a fire and cook them. So tortoises with humans only have two strategies. One
is to stay hidden and the other is to reproduce a little faster. Those are the two strategies
that we see tortoises beginning to take more and more as the upper Paleolithic era, the
dawn of modern humans goes on. What we see is that the tortoise shells that we find at
sites where humans were occupying, those shells get smaller and smaller and smaller as we
get up closer to the present. What that means is that tortoises had a shorter lifespan.
They weren't able to grow as big because humans were running into them and picking them up.
They had to reproduce faster to make up for that. You can think about the influence of
humans on these Pleistocene environments in really that way. As we became technologically
more sophisticated, we had a bit more of an impact on the other kinds of creatures that
were around. And of course, the most obvious signs of that are when humans reach new areas
and the megafauna encounters us for the first time. Well, with the intensifying climate changes
at the end of the last glaciation and with the arrival of humans, a new dangerous predator
using new strategies that these animals hadn't seen before, that combination of factors
seems to have been enough to drive many of these megafaunal animals to extinction. We're
talking about animals like the mammoths and mastodons of North America, ground sloths.
We're talking about, in a slightly earlier context, the megafauna of Australia. When
people reached there between 40,000 and 50,000 years ago, they killed some of the giant marsupials
and the giant tortoises. In fact, giant tortoises used to live on almost every continent. They
were found in Africa until hominids evolved. They were found in India until hominids arrived.
They were found on Flores until hominids got to that island. They were found in North America
until humans showed up. This is a real common pattern. Humans show up and they cause a big
ecological change in the composition of animal species. Well, it's not just the megafauna
that respond differently to humans. It's also small game. Humans are collecting small game
like rabbits and birds in larger numbers. That's a sign of their intensifying populations.
And of course, when agriculture is invented, people start to build cities, live in one place
where they can defend their resources. Cities are a direct sign of this ecological change
that humans are imposing. Probably more than any other of the ecological changes, meaning
where humans lived, cities have an influence on us because cities very much change the
circumstances for human pathogens. Diseases that previously couldn't get a foothold in
a really low density hunter gatherer population now could move us epidemics through humans.
And so we have new changes that respond to these epidemic diseases. Probably today, none
of those changes are more obvious than the adaptations that some populations have to
the disease called malaria. Malaria is caused by a parasite, a small microorganism, and
it's spread by mosquitoes. So places where humans live that are rich mosquito habitat
are places where malaria can spread. Historically, that's included all of the tropical world,
but also parts of the temperate world, as far north as England, as far north as the
east coast of the United States. So malaria historically has been a big influence on human
populations. It remains a really big influence on human populations today in the tropics.
And there are several species of malaria parasites, but the two most important are falciparum
malaria and vivax malaria. I mention those two because we have genetic adaptations that
help us to resist those two types of malaria, and those genetic adaptations are relatively
recent. For example, across most of tropical Africa, south of the Sahara Desert, there
is a blood type that's called the Duffy O blood type. Now Duffy is a gene very much
like the ABO gene that I discussed in a prior lecture, but Duffy isn't one that causes problems
with transfusions of blood very often. So it's not one that you notice, but the three
types of Duffy, that O type, which doesn't make that protein, takes away the attack mechanism
for vivax malaria. And so in sub-Saharan Africa, where vivax malaria is not a serious problem
today, the reason why it's not there is a serious problem is because of this genetic
adaptation. When we look at the age of that mutation, it looks like it's something like
30,000 years old. And vivax malaria, the parasite, seems to have a history in humans that dates
to about the last 35,000 years. So it's a case of ecological intensification within
Africa giving rise to this new disease, and humans responding to that disease relatively
rapidly. We have defenses against falciparum malaria, too. Probably the best known of those
is the sickle cell trait. It's a condition that affects red blood cells if you have two
copies of the affected allele that makes them sickle-shaped and so causes problems with
anemia because the blood circulation isn't working properly. That's usually fatal in
the first few years of life, absent Western medical attention. But if you only have one
copy of the allele, you have a greater defense against falciparum malaria. And that alleles
become common in parts of West and Central Africa, precisely those regions where falciparum
is especially dangerous today. The other malaria defenses, things like alpha and beta thalassemia,
things like ovulocytosis and New Guinea, things like G6PD deficiency, there are a long list
of these. There are genes that cause a few problems on the side. There are other genes
that aren't obvious at all. When we look at other kinds of genes, it's not entirely obvious
exactly what the effects are. So for example, in Asia there are a number of genetic changes
that are under selection in the last few thousand years where it's not entirely obvious what
the advantage of them is. For example, there's a gene that influences the kind of earwax
that you have. Some people, especially in Asian populations, have dry and flaky earwax.
Other people have moist and sticky earwax. Now as to why the dry version, which is new,
should have been advantageous, it's not obvious at all. But it's clear that some effect of
that gene, whether on a different kind of tissue or some other part of the body, was
really important in the evolution of recent populations. Hair form in Asians is also selected
and highly important, but it's not entirely clear why. The thick hair version is advantageous
in those populations. To return to the advantages of different genes, we can look back at pigmentation,
where not just the gene that influences eye color, but also many genes that affect pigmentation
or under selection. Outside of Africa, the derived version of these genes, the new versions,
have been rapidly changing in the past 10,000 years. As to why it is that they're advantageous,
of course there are a couple of ideas about it. One idea is that maybe it's vitamin D
synthesis, which happens in the skin and requires ultraviolet light, so that when you move to
areas of the world that have less ultraviolet farther from the equator, you have more need
for vitamin D absorption, especially if you adopt an agricultural diet that has some compromises
in terms of vitamin D availability. But maybe the genes are doing other things and relaxed
selection as ultraviolet radiation becomes less important is a reason for them to have
changed. So when we consider the effects of these genes across the body and the numbers
of them there are, it turns out that there are many hundreds of genes that have been changing
in this time period of the last 40,000 and really intensifying in the last 10,000 years.
That's a pace of genetic change that's unprecedented in our evolution. If we look at the differences
between humans and chimpanzees in years, well that's about 10 million years going up to
our ancestor with chimpanzees and then down to chimpanzees on the other side. The last
40,000 years of our history occupies only a narrow snapshot of that time. But if we
look in terms of mutations that have been selected, that have some advantage in populations,
the number that occurred between humans and chimpanzees is relatively small compared to
the big number that happens in the last 40,000 years. So much so that that small time slice
takes up as much as a quarter to a third of our adaptive evolution. That's a huge difference
in the pace of evolution. And if we think about other kinds of analogies in the natural
world that match this rapid pace of evolution in humans, we can think about those very animals
and plants that we have influenced most directly by domesticating them. For example, when we
compare corn or maize to its wild ancestor, teosinte, teosinte doesn't look very much
like an ear of corn. It's a narrow little stalk that has little hard triangular seeds,
whereas an ear of corn looks like an ear of corn. That's a huge phenotypic difference
and it's a difference that's matched in the shape of the plants. Again and again, when
we looked at domesticated species, you see the huge differences between dog breeds from
Chihuahua to Great Dane. You see the huge differences in horse breeds and cattle breeds. You see
genetic differences that are arising in microorganisms that we have domesticated. For example, bakers
and brewers yeast. We're imposing rapid selection on many kinds of animals and plants just as
we have created the circumstances for this selection on ourselves. It's a great evolutionary
transition in the history of life, one that is very centered on what it means to be a
modern living human.
