Hello, it's good to see all of you again.
I expect the previous lectures have wetted your appetite for learning more about major
transitions and evolution, so hopefully today's lecture is going to give you the first main
course of knowledge on that topic, while also leaving you eager for more.
In this lecture, we're going to be diving into the deepest part of geologic time, and
we're going to discuss the first and the longest of the major transitions.
This is the evolution of simple prokaryotic cells into more complex eukaryotic cells.
Now I'm in awe of this topic, first because of the vast amounts of time that are needed
to be considered.
Also it means all subsequent evolutionary transitions, everything we're going to discuss
in this course.
I really want to emphasize this, stems from this one transition.
As you recall, relative age dating is discerned by noting how fossils have a definite order
in the geologic record, also known as biological succession.
This was known before evolutionary theory had developed, and it's still used by geologists
today.
Absolute age dating involves the use of radiometric techniques, such as ratios of parent-daughter
isotope pairs, to supply definite dates for rocks and fossils that might be associated
with these rocks.
Using these two tools, along with a firm understanding of geologic processes and earth history,
we can reliably figure out when these evolutionary transitions happened, even one that looks
at life from one, two, or even three billion years ago.
With these principles in mind, we're now nearly ready to go back into deep time, or what we
informally call the pre-Cambrian.
The pre-Cambrian is a general term used by geologists and paleontologists, referring
to all geologic time before the Cambrian period, anything more than 543 million years ago.
Put another way, the pre-Cambrian encompasses both the Archaean and the Proterozoic eons,
with the Archaean eon corresponding roughly to the very earliest life on earth, during
4.0 to 2.5 billion years ago, and the Proterozoic eon that follows from 2.5 billion to 543
million years ago.
A span of almost 2 billion years, corresponding very roughly to the transition we'll be discussing
today.
Now, I say very roughly because the boundaries for the eons were defined long before, many
of the scientific results we'll be discussing today.
Now overall, the pre-Cambrian represents almost 90% of earth history, yet only the first
two evolutionary transitions we cover in this course are from that time span.
All other transitions occurred during the remaining 10% of geologic time.
So if we organize this course so that each lecture represented equal amounts of geologic
time, it would come out to about 200 million years per lecture.
We would arrive at the first evidence of life of any sort here in lecture 3, so far
so good, but we wouldn't begin discussing the first major transition within life, which
is our actual subject today, until lecture 9 or so.
The earliest evidence for that second major transition, that would be about lecture 13.
Probably even more surprising, we wouldn't even get to the evolution of dinosaurs until
the start of the very last lecture.
Oh, and the evolution of humans, that'd be covered in the last 45 seconds of that last
lecture.
So this sort of scaling hopefully puts geologic time and perspective for you, and it certainly
does for me.
Now as for the origins of life, that's really a different subject for another course.
Let's just point out that all of life known on earth today is based on the same macromolecular
building blocks of genes and proteins.
This familiar fact gives new meaning to an observation by Charles Darwin.
He pointed out that nature produces huge variety, but isn't so good at inventing anything new.
What that means is a small set of basic forms can recombine to produce the almost endless
variety we see throughout the history of evolution.
So life begins with prokaryotic cells, or simply prokaryotes, which are still very important
today and include two groups, bacteria and archaea.
A bacteria we all know about because these microbes affect human health.
And we're conscious of the effects bacteria have on our daily lives, giving us reasons
to wash our hands, disinfect wounds, or use antibiotics.
The other group of prokaryotes, archaea, may not be so familiar to many of you, which
that's okay, because it was unknown to science until 1977.
This oversight was understandable because these single-celled organisms are superficially
similar to bacteria.
In fact, some people have even referred to them as archaeobacteria.
But this is a little misleading because they most definitely are not bacteria.
They differ from bacteria by having some unique metabolisms and biochemical traits that they
actually share with eukaryotes.
None of these are known as pathogens and some function as mutualists, in which they live
symbiotically with another organism.
In fact, you may have some archaeans living in your gastrointestinal tract right now, named
methenobrevipacter, or methenosphera.
These aid in digestion, and as you can tell from their names, they produce methane as
a metabolic byproduct.
Now, incidentally, archaeans are not to be confused with the archaean eon, although there
certainly were archaeans in the archaean, which does get confusing if I say it that way.
So remind me not to do that again.
Well, we and every other eukaryotic organism would have found the early archaean a very
unpleasant environment with high temperatures, low oxygen, high methane, which is partly
from prokaryotes, but also from volcanoes, all punctuated by frequent meteor showers.
Well, anyway, we'll talk more about a bacterian, archaean layer, but for now, know that prokaryotes
have the following features.
They're small size, they don't have a nucleus or a nuclear envelope, the chromosomes instead
are scattered throughout the cell, there aren't any organelles with membranes, and they're
typically expressed as one cell life.
In other words, they don't organize into multicellular organisms, and they have asexual reproduction.
Now the transition to eukaryotic cells makes possible all life other than bacterian archaeans.
So this includes algae, both single celled and multicell, and all other plants, protestines,
which are single celled organisms that are closer to animals, such as amoebae and foraminifera,
and of course animals.
In contrast to prokaryotic cells, eukaryotic cells have the following traits.
They're larger size, they have a definite nucleus with a nuclear envelope, the chromosomes
are all enclosed in one place, they have complex organelles such as mitochondria and
chloroplasts, and they reproduce sexually.
Now because of their primitive traits and smaller sizes, prokaryotic cells clearly had
to have evolved into larger and more complex prokaryotic, eukaryotic cells at some time
in the geologic past.
But before we talk more about that evolutionary transition, let's examine how uniformitarianism
helped us to better understand what life was like a few billion years before animals
had evolved.
Since the first half of the 19th century, geologists and paleontologists had known about
some intriguing fossils from the Precambrian called stromatolites.
Stromatolites, which are these layered structures in sedimentary rocks, are often expressed
as prominent dome-like or mound-like features in Precambrian rocks.
These hypothesize that stromatolites were made by colonies of cyanobacteria, which
can be either photosynthetic bacteria or they could have been from single celled algae,
and these were preserved as trace fossils of those colonies.
Because these bacterial or algal colonies grew on muddy or sandy surfaces in shallow
marine environments and they formed sticky mats that collected suspended sediment on
these mats, think of flypaper but substitute the flies with sediment.
Some of these colonies then show up in rocks from about 3.5 billion years ago during the
Archean Eon and some of them became huge during the Proterozoic Eon from about 2.5 billion
years ago.
So does this mean that eukaryotes appeared 3.5 billion years ago?
No, probably not.
We think that stromatolites began before the evolution of eukaryotic cells, such as algae,
and they actually spanned the transition.
The Archean stromatolites seemed to have been made only by cyanobacteria, whereas the Proterozoic
stromatolites were made by algae or a combination of algae and cyanobacteria.
Now, stromatolites were fairly common in shallow marine environments for almost 3 billion years,
but they mostly disappeared from sedimentary rocks made from about 545 million years ago,
which is also the beginning of the Phanerozoic Eon.
This is also when we see a rapid increase in the body and trace fossils of animals.
So paleontologists figured that these inverse relationships between stromatolites and animals
came about because some marine animals, ancestors to say snails and other molluscans, had evolved
to graze on these mats, thus causing their demise.
Well, the problem with this idea was that not everyone agreed on the origin of stromatolites
as mats of cyanobacteria or algae.
Some scientists even proposed geochemical origins of stromatolites that were completely
unrelated to life.
But without any modern examples to compare to the fossil record, this was a disagreement
that was tough to resolve.
So what helped to change our views of stromatolites and, hence, life during the Archaean and the
Proterozoic was the discovery of modern stromatolites as so-called living fossils.
These live stromatolites were found in 1956 in and along the coast of Western Australia
in a place called Shark Bay.
And they are absolutely beautiful examples of stromatolites.
Just as paleontologists had predicted, they were colonies of cyanobacteria that had trapped
in bound sediment onto sticky mats.
But how did they escape destruction from hungry grazing animals, such as modern marine snails?
Well, these stromatolites live in a lagoon with very high salt content, and that's called
hypersailing.
These conditions exclude animals that normally would eat the stromatolites.
Since then, scientists have found more modern stromatolites in other parts of the world,
such as in the Bahamas, Abu Dhabi, and other places that have the right conditions for
excluding animals that normally would eat them.
I've personally seen stromatolites in hypersailing lakes in the Bahamas, and I am just thrilled
to know these modern examples are still around to help us understand these stromatolites
from the ancient past.
So let's look at some reasons why prokaryotes though are considered the most primitive examples
of life.
Well, first of all, prokaryotes are the only organisms we see today that can live in extreme
environments with very hot, very cold, or anoxic, low oxygen conditions.
This hints at their long history of adapting to drastically changing environments.
Prokaryotes are also very simple compared to eukaryotic cells in their organization of
genetic material, also their lack of organelles, and asexual reproduction.
Evolutionary biologists regard these as very basic traits for life, while more complex
forms took more time to evolve.
So we might think about, for instance, the deep sea floor where we have hydrothermal vents
and that's a place where these bacteria could evolve.
We also have prokaryotes that are in lakes, hypersailing, and very hot hydrothermal pools
in Yellowstone National Park.
These are also examples of extreme environments where these organisms thrive and live today.
Well, besides stromatolites, what's the fossil record for prokaryotes?
For these, we can look to three lines of evidence.
Chemical fossils, body fossils, and trace fossils.
Chemical fossils, as you recall from the previous lecture, are elements or compounds in rocks
found in certain amounts or combinations that indicate the former presence of life.
These are very simply called biomarkers.
For early life, one of these biomarkers is provided by stable carbon isotope ratios.
You've probably heard that carbon isotopes are used for radiometric age dating, but that's
different.
Carbon dating looks at the ratio of an unstable isotope, the parent element, carbon 14, to
a stable isotope, or the daughter element, which is nitrogen 14.
On the other hand, carbon has two stable isotopes that don't decay, carbon 12 and carbon 13.
Carbon 12 is by far the more abundant of the two, making up about 99% of all carbon atoms.
But carbon 13 is abundant enough that modern instruments can easily detect it and calculate
how does it vary with relation to carbon 12 and a given rock sample.
Carbon 14, we don't even worry about that in pre-Cambrian rocks because it has such
a short half-life, only about 5,700 years.
It's going to be absent from any rocks and long decayed and altered into its daughter
element, nitrogen 14, any rocks that come from the pre-Cambrian.
What we have observed about life and stable carbon isotopes is that living things tend
to concentrate carbon 12 relative to carbon 13.
This means that the ratio should differ noticeably from a ratio of these two isotopes in the
absence of life.
This signature of life shows up distinctly in the ratio between the two isotopes, and
certain ratios are only caused by life.
People who study the chemical compositions of rocks, known simply as geochemists, are
the ones we turn to whenever we're trying to figure out these ratios.
Since stable carbon isotope ratios indicate the earliest evidence of life, we've looked
for rocks from Greenland and these date to about 3.7 billion years ago, and we have that
evidence.
Unfortunately, we don't have any really good way of knowing exactly what types of prokaryotes
were responsible for this geochemical signature, but we're pretty sure that prokaryotes were
responsible for these biomarkers.
In terms of how life forms might have derived energy, we're also pretty sure that the first
life forms were very likely anaerobic heterotrophs.
In other words, they gained their food from outside sources, just like modern Archaeans.
Autotrophs evolved later.
As stromatolites are formed by the upward growth of cyanobacteria or single-celled algae,
their presence in Archaean age rocks implies that prokaryotes had already evolved from anaerobic
heterotrophs to autotrophs.
Moreover, some autotrophs have probably evolved to have chloroplasts.
Chloroplasts are organelles that gather sunlight and use it to make their own food through photosynthesis,
just like plants and algae do today.
These types of autotrophs are no more specifically as photoautotrophs.
Body fossils of probable prokaryotic cells are younger than the chemical fossils, but
they're still pretty old, about 3.4 to 3.2 billion years ago.
These fossils have small sizes, no nuclei, and they're similar in their forms to modern
prokaryotes.
These fossils are preserved in rocks in both South Africa and Australia.
The rocks are composed of chert, and chert's wonderful because it's a silicon dioxide and
it's very good for preserving fossils over long periods of geologic time.
Trace fossils of prokaryotes, we already mentioned these, stromatolites, and they're even older
than the body fossils.
Stromatolites have been found in rocks from 3.5 billion years ago in Australia, although
they're much more common in protozoic rocks.
Some of these stromatolites were so big they actually formed the first known reefs during
the Archaean and the protozoic.
Again, the later stromatolites of the protozoic may have been incorporating algae.
That marks the transition to eukaryotes.
Now another type of trace fossil caused by prokaryotes are etchings in minerals.
These are sometimes called bioalterations in which the microbes actually altered the minerals.
These leave distinctive marks that match those seen in modern prokaryotes.
The oldest known bioalterations are etching seen in formerly volcanic rocks of South Africa.
These are dated as 3.5 billion years.
So when do eukaryotic cells show up in the fossil record?
It's a little tough to tell, especially because we're looking so far back into time.
Also because of plate tectonics, weathering, and other Earth processes that tend to recycle
elements at and near the Earth's surface, precambran fossils are the least likely to
be preserved.
But we know that this fossil evidence should be in sedimentary rocks that formed in aquatic
environments, such as marine environments.
Furthermore, we can predict the ages of the rocks based on what we already know about
prokaryotic fossils, as well as through molecular clocks.
Now based on molecular clocks, scientists have calculated dates for the probable evolutionary
divergence between prokaryotes and eukaryotes.
These estimates though are wildly varied.
They range from about 3.9 to 2.2 billion years ago.
So with 1.7 billion years to play with, how to narrow this down?
Well for one, most evolutionary biologists think this divergence probably happened later
rather than sooner, perhaps close to 2.2 billion years ago.
Thus fossils are very helpful for better pinpointing when this divergence happened.
Although the fossil record for the oldest eukaryotes isn't great, we do have chemical
fossils, body fossils, and possibly trace fossils of them.
For chemical fossils, biomarkers known as sternings are in rocks from 2.7 billion years
ago.
Sternings are only found in eukaryotes.
So we can be relatively sure these compounds indicate either a presence of eukaryotes or
their immediate ancestors.
Body fossils of probable eukaryotes include some fossil algae that are in rocks from 2.1
billion years ago.
Now remember, algae are eukaryotes.
Oh, and aquatarks, which are these organic walled microfossils.
These show up in rocks from about 1.7 billion years ago.
Now although aquatark is kind of a catch-all term for the remains of the oldest organisms,
paleontologists have looked at, they haven't precisely identified them, so these so-called
aquatarks though, they do bear some resemblance to modern eukaryotic cells.
Now rocks from northern Australia also contain some eukaryotic fossils that date from about
1.5 billion years ago.
So how do these eukaryotes and prokaryotes come together and how is there some sort
of evolution then of eukaryotes out of those?
Well, compared to prokaryotes, eukaryotes have a greater genetic similarity to archaea
rather than bacteria.
Because these two groups, eukaryotes and archaeans, probably share the common ancestor.
Now oddly enough though, some of the eukaryotes also have traits that are shared with bacteria.
So one mode for the evolution of eukaryotes though is endosymbiosis.
Endosymbiosis literally means living together within, which in this instance refers to multiple
prokaryotic cells fusing to form eukaryotic cells.
That's even combining a bacterium and an archaean.
Now this scenario, some smaller prokaryotic cells developed into mitochondria and chloroplasts
and other specialized organelles after being engulfed by larger prokaryotic cells.
Now this process would have been favorably selected if both prokaryotes benefited from
the symbiosis.
An alternative hypothesis is that both archaeans and eukaryotes descended separately from
bacterial ancestors.
So far though, there's less evidence supporting this hypothesis than for endosymbiosis.
Another problem is it also requires a few more steps than endosymbiosis.
So it goes against a basic perspective that we evolutionary scientists like to use whenever
we assess an evolutionary scenario.
And this principle is called parsimony.
In other words, whatever scenario requires the fewest steps is more likely to be the
correct one.
So what sort of selection pressures would have led to endosymbiosis?
Well, that's a very good question.
Eukaryotes have lower metabolic rates than prokaryotes, and that's a function of their
lesser surface area volume ratios.
So their early evolution probably happened in environments that favored organisms with
lower energy needs or organisms with some sort of novel means for quiron energy, such
as enhanced photosynthesis or consuming new complex molecules that would be in heterotrophs.
Now I mentioned sexual reproduction earlier too, and let's think about that with regard
to the evolution of eukaryotes.
Prokaryotes use asexual means for reproduction, such as binary fission or gene transfer.
Now eukaryotes, by contrast, they began with mitosis.
That's a form of cell division in which chromosomes containing DNA are duplicated from a parent
cell into two daughter cells, also having an identical number of chromosomes.
This full complement of chromosomes is called diploid, whereas half that number is haploid.
At some point, perhaps about 1.5 billion years ago, meiosis also evolved in eukaryotic
cells.
This is a form of cell division in which only half of the chromosomes are incorporated into
new haploid cells.
How meiosis began is one of the remaining mysteries of evolution, but greater genetic
variability in eukaryotes certainly enabled these organisms to better adapt to changing
environments.
Now as you probably know, especially if you yourself have reproduced, these haploid cells
are also called gametes, and by convention, they're divided into male and female gametes.
No, I'm not going to go any further with that explanation, but as many of you probably already
learned this outside of this course, anyway, the development of sexual reproduction certainly
would have accelerated evolution in eukaryotes through its effect on genetic variety, through
sexual recombination.
Think about how genes are shuffled more readily by sex in which separate haploid sets of genes
from male and female parents, they make these new combinations that never would have happened
through binary fission, mutations, gene exchanges, or all of these other mechanisms for producing
genetic variety.
Remember, one of Darwin's original principles of natural selection was that great variety
existed within species that allowed for selection of certain favorable traits.
And although Darwin didn't know about the source of that variation, genes in other words,
he did recognize that sexual reproduction was responsible for bringing out variations
rapidly.
This was especially evident in selective breeding of, say, domestic animals or special breeds
of plants.
Moreover, an exchange of genetic material might have also helped to remedy any errors
in the copying of DNA, or it prevented errors from occurring in the first place.
This would have been an immediate advantage for the first organisms making that transition
to meiosis.
The chromosome pairing of meiosis also may have started out as a way to suppress gene
recombination.
So, with the evolution of eukaryotes came the evolution of sex, which I suppose many
people consider that as a major transition in evolution in and of itself.
Well, how did this evolution of eukaryotes from prokaryotes change the world literally
other than through the origin of sex?
Well, we could think about cyanobacteria, also known as blue-green algae evolving, followed
by the first red algae about 1.2 billion years ago, and green algae about 750 million years
ago, how these photosynthesizers diversified and proliferated throughout the world's oceans.
Think about how this increase in algal abundance, whether they were single-celled, whether they
were multi-cellular, caused an increase in oxygen content of the oceans and atmosphere.
This is from photosynthesis.
This increase in oxygen also likely caused a microbial extinction event because anaerobic
bacteria to them oxygen is poisoned, so they would have been poisoned by the oxygen being
intruded into their formerly safe environments.
The earliest fungi evolved by about 1.5 billion years ago, apparently with flagella, which
made them closer to animals than plants.
These new eukaryotes filled in niche as decomposers in marine environments, and later on they
would fill in that same sort of role in terrestrial environments once life started going on to
land.
As with the transition from single-cell to multi-cellular algae, eukaryotic cells capable
of movement increasingly organized into multi-cellular colonies, and they even evolved into multi-cellular
organisms that were moving around in the later part of the protozoic about 600 million years
ago.
These were the earliest animals, and of course we all know how animals have changed the world
in many ways.
So our next lecture is going to jump far forward in time, and we're going to look at a second
major transition from single-cell eukaryotes that were capable of movement, which are called
protozoans, into multi-cell organisms we call metazoans.
In other words, the evolution of the first animals, and how those animals represented
a major transition in the evolution of eukaryotes.
See you then.
