Hello, and welcome to today's lecture, which is going to be about the origin of insects
and flight and insects.
In our previous lecture, we left the Paleozoic oceans and we considered what sort of evolutionary
challenges were overcome by life when it came out of the water and onto land.
Now algae, fungi, plants, and animals, they all had to adapt to conditions that were radically
different from what they experienced in the more constant conditions of aquatic environments.
Now insects, which are the most abundant animals in terrestrial environments today, those accompany
these transitions too, but their earliest history is a little more obscure.
So what are insects?
Insects most basically are arthropods, which are invertebrate animals with jointed legs.
Arthropods are placed under an evolutionarily related group called hexapoda, so you know
they have six legs, and that sets them apart from spiders, scorpions, ticks, and mites,
which are arachnids and have eight legs.
But other important anatomical traits that distinguish them from other arthropods are
a body that's divided longitudinally into three parts, a head, a thorax, and an abdomen,
an exoskeleton that's made of a tough organic compound, a polysaccharide called chitin.
They also have two antennae, and they have compound eyes.
Now the study of insects is called entomology, and it's one of the most difficult of the
biological sciences to study because of just the sheer enormity of what you have to know
in it.
I first learned this when I was a kid, growing up in the 1960s, because entomology was one
of my favorite subjects, and in fact I used to delight in eliciting these blank stares
from adults by telling them I wanted to be an entomologist when I grew up.
Well fortunately I later went into paleontology instead, but you already knew that.
Anyway, I remember reading then in 1970 or so that scientists estimated there were about
900,000 living species of insects.
Now the number is conservatively figured at 5 million, and it may actually be closer
to 10 million.
In contrast, mammologists only have to study about 5,500 species.
Now this isn't to put down mammologists as they certainly have plenty to study too, but
it puts things in perspective.
In short, insects present the curse of plenty to entomologists who study them, and they
clearly represent an astounding sort of success story in terms of their evolution.
Now because insect exoskeletons are made of a polysaccharide chitin instead of hard minerals
like calcite, aragonite, or appetite, their fossilization potential isn't so good.
This preservation bias is even more apparent as we go to look at rocks from further back
in time, such as those from the Devonian period.
And to make matters even worse, rocks formed from terrestrial environments normally underwent
much more leaching and oxidation than those in marine environments.
That may have dissolved any insects that were buried and could have been preserved as fossils.
All in all, fossil insects from the earlier part of the Paleozoic, not surprisingly, are
very rare.
So with those caveats or paleo-apologies in place, why bother discussing the evolution
of insects at all?
Well, nothing in evolution says success likes speciation.
And with insects representing nearly 80% of all species alive today, we could ask how
did this stunning diversity all start?
This means we have to pay attention to the early evolution of insects no matter how
sparse their initial fossil record might seem.
Furthermore, we also need to consider the evolution of powered flight.
This was a novel adaptation to animals that it's evolved in other lineages, but insects
were the first to do it.
So let's consider a little scientific mystery, which I'll call the case of the misidentified
fossil, which later became known as the oldest fossil insect, rhinonatha hersti.
This fossil was discovered in 1919, and it was in rocks from the early Devonian period
from about 400 million years ago, and from the rhinocert of Scotland, which was mentioned
earlier having land plants and fungal symbionts.
Now this fossil, when we first studied it, it was identified as springtail, which was
understandable because springtails closely resemble insects.
They're under a group called cullambola, and then those are all placed under hexapoda.
But springtails are bland-dwelling animals, and they have six legs, and they're arthropods,
so these are all traits that people normally associate with insects.
So hexapoda, which literally means six legs, shows how springtails and insects share that
anatomical trait.
But springtails have one important anatomical feature that makes them very different from
insects in their physiology.
They breathe through a series of pores in their exoskeleton.
Now insects, in contrast, have these marvelously evolved respiratory systems called tracheal
systems.
These use a combination of openings called spiracles and tubes called trachea, which
bring oxygen directly to the insect tissues from the outside world.
Now some terrestrial insects have trachea connected directly then with air sacs.
Aquatic insects, they augment the system with gills.
Something else that supported this identification of rhinonathohersetide as a springtail, what's
its occurrence in the rhine chert with fossils of another springtail?
So this was kind of a guilt by association, which often happens in paleontology, and it
caused these to be lumped in with other springtails.
Well, there was a matter of its age.
It was about 400 million years old.
That meant most fossils from rocks that age, paleontologists would look at that and say,
well, that can't possibly be an insect.
Surprisingly though, one paleontologist who looked at the specimen in 1928 did use the
word insect when describing it.
But the significance of that designation seemingly was ignored afterwards.
Nonetheless, the specimen remained in the collection of the Natural History Museum in London for
decades afterwards, and there was little subsequent mention or interest in it.
For people outside of paleontology, you might not understand that because paleontologists,
though we accept that, it's just a reality of our research.
Now sometimes we have too many fossils to study properly.
Large museums in particular have collections that can be pretty daunting to tackle in
any sort of meaningful way.
For example, I know if I just walked over to the Natural History Museum of the Smithsonian
Institution right now and I asked to see their fossil collections and they said, yes,
I might be there for several decades studying what they have.
As a result, paleontologists often employ a focused attention on a specific group of
fossils and then they hope that their study of a few fossils connects with some sort of
major break, like a major discovery.
In this instance, more than 80 years though passed between the discovery of this fossil
before two American paleontologists, Michael Engel and David Grimaldi, they examined this
specimen in 2002.
Now during their study of it, they soon realized this wasn't an ordinary springtail, and they
studied it intensively to test the hypothesis that it might be something else, namely an
insect.
Well, in 2004 they published an article that documented its true nature.
It was indeed the oldest known fossil insect in the world.
That's pretty exciting from 400 billion years ago.
Now this placed insects in terrestrial environments not too long after the undoubted colonization
of land by other arthropods.
This was a very exciting insight, not only on the early evolution of insects, but the
early evolution of terrestrial ecosystems.
So how could such a discovery get any more thrilling to a paleontologist?
Well, a few details of the anatomy in Reineonatha revealed that it was a very special insect,
indeed.
Its mouth parts were more like those normally associated with flying insects.
And even though the specimen didn't have preserved wings, those mouth parts and a few other features
were sufficient to link it with other winged insects.
This discovery means insect flight might have started much, much earlier than previously
supposed.
The oldest known winged insects from the fossil record were about 320 million years old, coming
from the Carboniferous period.
So this fossil insect potentially not only fills in an 80 million year old gap in the
evolutionary history of insects, but a flight in insects.
Flight was a major evolutionary innovation in insects.
And as we discussed in this lecture and some future ones, flying insects in particular
changed terrestrial ecosystems in really significant ways.
But before we get into the details about the probable evolution of flight, we might get
even more basic first.
What were the ancestors of the first insects?
Well, in terms of the evolutionary lineage of insects, we again can examine what insect
relatives we have around today, compare those anatomical traits, their genetics, and test
their relationships.
For example, we know the following about insects and their relatives.
And DNA analyses show that the closest living relatives of insects are this group of crustaceans
known as remapedes.
This means insects are actually more closely related to crustaceans than demeriapods, like
millipedes and centipedes, which we discussed in a previous lecture.
The common ancestry of insects and crustaceans, well, that was a mildly surprising discovery
as many scientists assumed on the basis of their shared anatomy and habits, habitats
that insects were connected evolutionarily with meriapods.
Now, hexapoda is an evolutionarily related group that contains insects, but it also includes
springtails and two other groups of wingless arthropods.
In fact, all of the groups other than insects were at one time regarded as true insects,
but entomologists have since separated them.
Now based on these established relationships, insects must have evolved from six-legged
terrestrial arthropods.
But why have insects been so successful, evolutionarily speaking?
Well, let me count the ways.
They have high reproductive rates, which under the right conditions in given species can result
in several generations each year.
They have huge numbers of offspring, which when combined with high reproductive rates
ensures this high genetic variability in any given population of a species.
As a result, insects show really rapid responses in their populations to any sort of selection
pressures and don't take my word for it just as scientists are chemical companies that
manufacture pesticides.
They frequently change their formula because the pesticide resistant insects are adapting
so rapidly.
This is an example of what I would call unnatural selection in that humans have unwittingly
selected in favor of the better adapted insects, which then go on to reproduce and pass on
their pesticide resistant genes to future generations.
It is Darwin's original outline for natural selection, writ large and fast.
Now this is why insects are oftentimes considered poster children for the study of microevolution
and macroevolution in modern animals.
With insects, we've observed both microevolutionary change and the macroevolution of new species
within the span of a normal human lifetime or two.
Now just imagine how insects have evolved over the past 400 million years or so and
you'll get a good idea of how entomologists and paleoentomologists have no shortage of
evolutionary puzzles to figure out.
When did insects first show up in the fossil record?
Well we mentioned rhinionathahirsty earlier from 400 million years ago from the Devonian
of Scotland and this insect apparently capable of flight is in the same deposit as the oldest
known springtail which is rhiniela pre-cursor.
Now springtails today are flightless and no fossil springtails are no-nab wings either
so it doesn't look as if insects or springtails came from some unknown flighted ancestral
arthropod.
Nonetheless, the presence of these mandibles in rhinionathah that look very much like those
of winged insects implies that more primitive wingless insects must have originated in the
Celerium period.
So I and other paleoentologists would not be surprised if some fossil insect someday
or their immediate ancestors were found in rocks from say the latest part of the Celerium
period about 420 million years ago or so.
Now this supposition is backed up by molecular clocks which predict the diversions of insects
from insect ancestors happened about 420 to 430 million years ago in the latest part
of the Celerium period.
Now if I asked you to think about insects right now and you had to name the first ones
that come to mind immediately, which ones pop up?
I'll bet your list includes ones you would swat, shoo and step on such as say mosquitoes
flies and cockroaches respectively.
With a little more thought though you might also mention ants, grasshoppers, wasps and
maybe a few others that occasionally make an annoying appearance in your garden or home.
But I'll also bet you listed some insects for which you hold at least a little bit of
affection such as say butterflies, moths, bees, beetles, cicadas, fireflies, crickets
and mantises.
What do all of these insects have in common?
They all have wings and winged insects are so representative of insects in general, yes
that includes ants too, that you can't talk about their evolutionary history without also
discussing the development of wings and flighted insects.
What are the modern insect orders that descended from flighted ancestors?
Well the group of insects with wings or later in their evolutionary history lost wings is
called pteragota.
The list of orders is a long one so we're going to just look at some of the most important
orders here.
There's ephemeroptera, these include mayflies, there's odonata, these are dragon flies and
damsel flies, dyctheotera, cockroaches and mantises, their ancestors go back at least
three hundred and sixty million years ago, dipterans which are flies and mosquitoes,
colyopterans, beetles which as a group have been around for nearly three hundred million
years.
One of my favorites, hymenopterans, these are wasps, bees, ants and the oldest ant and
bee fossils, they're from about a hundred million years ago.
Isopterans are termites which are probably not too popular with many of you, but hemipterans
are true bugs although we sometimes call all insects bugs, there's a group within insects
that we call true bugs.
So pteragota can also be divided into two groups, the paleotera and the neotera.
Now if you're up on your greek and latin roots you know paleo and neo refer to ancient and
new respectively and tera refers to wing.
So you would be correct in surmising that the paleotera are actually the more primitive
winged insects.
So which of the orders just listed are paleoterans, well the ephemeropterans and odonates which
include mayflies, dragonflies and damselflies, and dragonflies were common insects in the
carboniferous period about 310 to 320 million years ago.
So their modern living descendants may help give us some clues about their ancestors.
So let's take a look at dragonflies and damselflies, they have the following traits, they have two
pairs of wings that extend out to the side, held horizontally in dragonflies but a little
more obliquely in damselflies.
They have large compound eyes, they have legs underneath the body that are used for standing
but not for walking.
Now what led up to dragonflies in the fossil record, we're not really sure.
The next oldest known winged insect other than rhinonatha comes from rocks about 325
million years old from the lower carboniferous of the Czech Republic.
Now this insect belonged to an extinct group of winged insects known as archaeoarthopterans
which actually are under the neotera.
This means the split between paleoterans and neoterans took place before 325 million
years ago which is perfectly reasonable.
Nonetheless, no discussion of paleozoic insects can omit the largest flying insects that
ever lived and that would be the dragonflies of the carboniferous period.
These are lovely insects, the most famous of these is Meganura which lived about 300
million years ago.
This insect had a wingspan of about 70 centimeters or close to 2.5 feet.
These huge sizes must have been attributable to some sort of higher amount of oxygen in
the atmosphere along the lines of say 30% or more compared to the 21% of today.
Now unlike many insect fossils and rocks this old, entire specimens have been found.
So paleontologists don't have to extrapolate the size of the animal on the basis of say
a few isolated parts.
So knowing how modern dragonflies are such fantastic predators today, Meganura and these
other giant dragonflies of the carboniferous period must have been the scariest things
in the air, giving good reason even for small vertebrates to be afraid of an attack from
above.
Also keeping in mind that flying vertebrates hadn't evolved yet, these insects once evolved
ruled the skies and that was for a good amount of time during the Paleozoic era.
So how did flight first evolve in insects?
Well, you have to think about what's the right mix of genetic traits, selection pressures
and adaptive responses that could have resulted in the evolution of say giant dragonflies
from flightless ancestors within only about 80 million years or so.
These are important questions because insects are the only invertebrates to have evolved
powered flights.
That makes them unique in their development of this life habit as we now take for granted
in nearly all insects.
Well several hypotheses have been proposed for the evolution of flighted insects.
Here for the sake of simplicity, I'm going to present just two of the most basic ones
of which there are many variations on these as themes.
The first is the surface skimming hypothesis.
This states that water-loving insects, perhaps similar to modern mayflies or stoneflies, had
either lobes or some sort of modified gills on their thoraxes that assisted them for moving
rapidly across water surfaces.
Now in this scenario, the possession of these structures would have acted like little sails,
catching any air movement across a water body in increasing speed.
So the selection for larger structures that became more recognizable as wings would have
come from evading predators, finding food, or more quickly getting together with mates.
If you think about it, many of those behaviors would have come in really handy if you were
a small insect in a big pond.
Now although this is a really difficult hypothesis to test directly from the fossil record, mayflies
and stoneflies are very well represented in the fossil record from the later part of the
Paleozoic era, about 300 to 250 million years ago.
And that includes the Carboniferous period.
Oh and stoneflies, incidentally, they're fully aquatic insects today.
They belong to the insect order Plectotera, which is under Neotera.
Now the second idea is the gliding hypothesis.
This one proposes that non-aquatic insects, and that's an important distinction, non-aquatic
insects with similar body parts to the hypothesized skimmers, such as say, thoracic lobes that
they had on their bodies, that would have selected in favor of an improved ability to
disperse better and terrestrial habitats, again, whether for food, reproduction, or protection
from predators.
Now this mode of dispersal, that would have been possible with taller plants.
And sure enough, taller plants became more common starting the Devonium, about 370 million
years ago.
In the earlier time of the Celerium period, say, 430 million years ago, forget it.
That kind of mode of flight wouldn't have worked very well with plants that didn't get
much taller than a meter or so.
So you might have discerned I'm being a little biased here, because I clearly prefer the
surface skimmer hypothesis versus the gliding hypothesis based on the amount of evidence
I presented and perhaps my enthusiasm.
Nonetheless, in science and especially in evolution, it's really dangerous to fall into these
either or arguments, as oftentimes the reality is there's a third, fourth, or fifth possibility
that may become apparent with each new fossil discovery.
Well, in the meantime now, though, I'll point out that these two hypotheses summarized here
aren't necessarily exclusive to one another.
Both could have resulted in selection pressures that resulted in the convergent evolution
of flight in separate lineages of insects.
In either instance, half wings were better than no wings.
Because such flight appendages would have helped insects to move around faster and farther
than their ancestors, hence that would have helped them to survive and pass on their genes.
Now in evolutionary theory, competing hypotheses sometimes turn out to be one, the other, both,
or neither.
We'll return to this viewpoint with future lectures, so I'll be looking for that.
Now regardless, the initial flight appendages of insects must have had muscle connections
in the thorax.
This would have allowed for the development of powered flight.
Muscular attachments to these structures would have been selected favorably and very
quickly.
As an insect that didn't want to wait around for a stiff wind, it would have had a decided
advantage in its reproduction and staying alive from predators.
And now we know through advances in modern genetics and developmental biology that the
mutations necessary for flight appendages and the musculature that would have attached
to those appendages may have been very rapid indeed.
The discovery of hox genes in the 1980s changed our views on how certain appendages and insects
might have evolved where no appendages were located before.
Hox genes are these genes that code for proteins along the axis of an animal, and they're often
associated with specific segments.
Now without going into too much detail about these genes, geneticists were really surprised
to find out they essentially could be turned on or off.
I'm talking about the genes, not the scientists.
Anyway, these genes could either suppress or allow a certain protein sequence to be programmed,
which resulted in an appendage not growing or growing.
What does that mean?
Well modern flies, such as fruit flies or house flies, they only have one pair of wings,
whereas their ancestral condition was more like dragon flies or two pairs of wings.
This means that flies lost a pair of wings somewhere in their evolutionary history.
But with our new understanding of hox genes, flies still have the genetic code for those
wings.
They just need to be switched on.
Sure enough experiments with these genes soon produced flies with four wings.
The extra pair grew out of the site where only some vestigial structures were located
before.
Now some of these genetic manipulations get even crazier, and biologists have even translocated
the genes so that legs grow out of the heads of these flies, which makes me wonder about
my lab bound colleagues and what they do to alleviate boredom in the lab.
But we won't go down that road.
Regardless, hox genes give us tremendous insights on how mutations might happen more quickly
in the evolution of animals, or how certain traits can be lost, but then might still
be lurking in an organism's genome, such as wings and insects.
What other evidence should paleontologists look for when attempting to interpret the origins
of flight and insects through clues left in the fossil record?
Well, one source of information that's been greatly underappreciated comes from trace fossils.
When one considers how many winged insects there are, such as mayflies, damselflies,
dragonflies, and stoneflies, that these insects have aquatic phases in their life cycles, then
these insects also should have left traces of their activities on stream and lake bottoms
during the later part of the Paleozoic era.
And sure enough, insect trace fossils are being interpreted more frequently from rocks
300 to 320 million years old.
Some of these are also being attributed to the larvae or the nymphs in mature stage of
these aquatic insects, some of which also may have been winged insects.
So expect this line of research to become more fruitful in upcoming years, seeing that
insect trace fossils are much more commonly preserved than their chitinous bodies.
Now these sorts of indicators might be ambiguous, though, as one of the weaknesses of trace
fossils is that a large number of different animals might make very similar looking traces.
In other words, the larva of flightless insects might look very much like those of winged
insects.
So what we need is something more definite.
A trace fossil that might actually show some of the anatomy and behavior of a flying insect.
Well, fortunately, there's at least one, and from rocks about 310 million years old in
Massachusetts.
It is, without a doubt, an impression of a flying insect.
Based on its profile, it was probably related to mayflies.
This trace fossil shows where it momentarily landed on the mud, and no tracks are connected
to the impression.
Skeptic might say, oh, it's just the impression of a dead body and doesn't necessarily indicate
flight behavior.
But what's cool about this specimen, it actually shows the angle from which the insect descended
and some small marks where it moved its legs.
So this is a very nice find indeed, and shows not only that insects were flying at that
time, but occasionally were coming to the ground too.
Now what sort of impact did this evolutionary transition of insects and insect flight in
general have on the world?
Well, in a word, enormous, especially if applied to terrestrial environments.
Imagine a terrestrial world without flying insects.
And basically you'd be talking about an alien planet.
Many winged insects perform a variety of ecosystem services.
Think about carrion beetles and dung beetles, for which every day I'm thankful.
These are invaluable in their recycling of nutrients in terrestrial ecosystems.
To take an example that's going to become very important later, nearly every pollinating
insect today is winged.
And these then affected the evolution of flowering plants, and vice versa.
That's going to be the subject of a future lecture.
Now because flowering plants produce fruits, and fruits and trees played an important role
in primate evolution, it would not be a stretch to say that primates would not have evolved
without flying insects being around for a long time before then.
But another important recent aspect of how winged insects directly impacted humans and
human evolution is also in the transmission of disease.
Think of mosquitoes, flies and cockroaches, and keep in mind how species of these have
been go-betweens in facilitating the spread of disease.
This role of insects thus changed the evolution of humans and their immediate ancestors.
In short, the world would be a very different place without winged insects, and it would
not look anything like what we have around today.
So given this major transition, the evolution of flying insects, what else happened to
terrestrial ecosystems just afterwards?
And how might insects have been a part of these evolving ecosystems?
The first forest started to grow outward and upward from about 400 to 300 million years
ago in the Devonian Carboniferous Periods.
This changed both local environments and even global climate.
How did mere plants do this?
Well, that's the topic of our next lecture.
See you then.
