Welcome back to the course in this lecture, and I'm glad to see the first lecture brought
you back wanting to learn some more about major transitions in evolution.
As we saw last time, we now have all sorts of tools for better understanding macroevolution,
including an improved fossil record, plate tectonics, ecology, and genetics.
What we introduced, but didn't discuss much, was how major transitions in evolution can
be better understood through the sciences of paleontology and geology.
So in this lecture, we're going to cover these two topics together, paleontology, which
is the study of ancient life, and geology, which is the study of the Earth past and
present, both of which are focused on deep time.
How does anyone ever get a feeling for deep time?
Well, it usually starts, and it's certainly dead for Darwin, with rocks.
So in that spirit, I'd like to share with you the first time I really felt the immensity
of our Earth's history.
I was a young graduate student in geology on a three-week field trip to England and
Scotland with some other graduate students.
This field trip was led by a geology professor who was very happy to take us into the British
countryside to look at all sorts of rocks.
We really enjoyed being outside and studying geology during the day, then at night we would
get together in a local pub to discuss what we had learned.
This gave us a genuine taste of how geology has been done traditionally in Great Britain
for nearly 200 years, and it was a charming initiation into a science that I still very
much love and practice today.
Well, anyway, one wet, dreary day as we are on the Isle of Mull in Scotland, we are looking
at this outcrop of rock, and at the base of the outcrop was an expanse of pinkish rock
that looked very much like a granite, but it wasn't.
Granites are made from molten rock or magma, and a cool, far below-the-ear surface making
it what geologists call an igneous rock.
This rock, though, may have been igneous at one time, but it had been subjected to some
high heat and pressure that altered its original composition and texture.
So it had changed from an igneous rock to a metamorphic rock, which, as the name implies,
is a rock that had changed its original form.
Lying directly on top of this rock was an entirely different one, and this was a red
sandstone.
This is a sedimentary rock formed by sediment or broken pieces of previously existing rock,
some of which included bits of the underlying metamorphic rock.
The sandstone had obviously formed after the metamorphic rock, and we could safely conclude
that it was geologically younger.
Well, here's a present-day picture of those two rocks, and in the same area of Scotland
we visited on that field trip oh so long ago.
So it sounds fairly straightforward and ordinary, right?
Well, our professor then pointed to the place where these two rock players joined, called
a contact, and he blew our minds with just a few facts.
The underlying metamorphic rock had been dated as 2.8 billion years old.
The sedimentary rock above it was 700 million years old.
What happened in between the formation of these two rocks?
No one knows.
Whatever rocks used to be there were gone, lost to erosion forever.
Now do the math, 2.8 billion minus 700 million equals 2.1 billion years of Earth history
missing from that spot, 2.1 billion years.
Well, as you can imagine, it was a very sad night in the pub afterwards as we all lamented
the incompleteness of the rock record in how whatever fossils might have been recorded
from that place during that time had vanished a very long time ago.
And just to put things in an evolutionary perspective, in that 2.1 billion year time
span of missing time, prokaryotic cells evolved into eukaryotic cells.
And single cell eukaryotes evolved into the first primitive animals.
Yet, none of this evidence was preserved in these rocks in Scotland.
The metamorphic rock had been heated enough 2.8 billion years ago that any signs of life
would have been melted, cooked, or otherwise erased.
The sandstone looked as if it had been deposited in rivers on land, so you might think there
was a chance that a few fossils might be preserved in it.
The problem was that the geologic record worldwide shows no evidence of life on land 700 million
years ago.
That major transition in evolution didn't happen until more than 200 million years later.
Now overall, this was a lesson in how, when thinking about how to define these major transitions
in evolution, time matters.
And to better overcome the challenges of confronting deep time when studying evolution, paleontology
and geology are the most important sciences for such study.
Oh sure, other sciences can certainly contribute to understanding evolution too, but, and especially
when we get into the relatively recent evolution of primates and humans, but you absolutely
can't avoid paleontology and geology if you really want to figure out the reasons for
when, how, and why certain transitions happened in the history of life.
Well we'll come back to geology soon enough, but I first would like to direct your attention
to paleontology and fossils in particular.
A fossil is any evidence of ancient life, and by ancient, paleontologists normally
mean at least 10,000 years old or more.
Well this means that a slice of pizza that's stayed in your refrigerator a little too long
doesn't qualify as a fossil, but neither do Egyptian mummies or pyramids.
There has to be some greater antiquity behind this evidence of ancient life and in fact,
the vast majority of fossils predate the origin of our species.
Now this might sound surprising, except that 200,000 years ago is so much less than the
time from say 200,000 years ago to 500 million years ago.
Fossils can be placed into three categories, all of which are very important in their own
respective ways.
The first and most obvious category consists of body fossils.
Body fossils comprise direct evidence of ancient life and, as you might surmise, are
the actual bodily remains of organisms.
Body fossils can be preserved as hard parts such as shells and bones, molds and casts
of body parts, altered parts in which body parts might have been replaced by another
mineral, or even carbonized films of soft tissue.
Here are a few fossil specimens I brought in that are preserved differently from one
another, which I'll explain one by one.
They'll give you a better sense that even little things can be different from one another
in terms of our understanding of the knowledge of deep time.
So for example, here we have a trilobite.
And this trilobite is from rocks from about 500 million years ago.
And that was an arthropod-like animal that lived in the seafloor during that time.
Here we have a solitary rugos coral.
This is from the Ordovician period.
It's about maybe 450 million years old.
Also rugos corals became colonial.
So we have examples of colonial rugos corals from about the same time, although these lasted
all the way through the Permian period.
Here we have a carboniferous fern, and it's an example of a fossil fern that has been
carbonized.
So you're actually seeing the body parts has been losing its volatiles, and now we're
looking at just a carbon film of what used to be there.
Here we have any kindoderms, specifically an equinoid related to sea urchins and sand
dollars that we have today.
This is from the Cretaceous period, more like 75 to 70 million years ago.
And here we have an ammonite.
These are beautiful animals.
These are cephalopods, distantly related to squids and octopi, and it has these gorgeous
suture lines that indicate where it had chambers that it used for floating and swimming in
the ocean.
Here we have a chunk of a dinosaur bone.
This is a leg bone from a Hadrosaur dinosaur, probably Edmontosaurus, and it comes from
the North Slope of Alaska.
It's about 70 million years old.
This is an Eocene age gastropod, otherwise known as snail, and it is about 50 million
years old.
Interesting is this preserved as an internal mold, and the shell is actually gone.
And here we have the youngest fossil.
This is a fossil beetle.
It's from the Pleistocene, and you can even see some of the carapace is still nice and
shiny and very well preserved.
This is probably from rocks that are less than 2 million years old.
So all of these fossils, sometimes they have soft tissues, sometimes they have proteins
or fragments of genetic material, such as DNA, but these are extremely rare.
They usually occur in geologically younger fossils that were buried under special conditions.
So as a result, when any genetic material is found, it's a cause of much celebration
and scientific debate.
An example are proteins that were found in the remains of a T. rex, and fragments of
genetic material have also been found from insects that lived at the same time as dinosaurs,
as well as from some plants and even fossil hominids, such as Neanderthals.
Now most paleontologists are interested in studying body fossils, which can range from
fossilized remains of one-celled bacteria to massive dinosaur bones.
And body fossils are most often the raw material from which we base our interpretations of
major transitions in evolution.
For example, we mostly test body fossils for anatomical evidence of these transitions.
For example, the evolution of flowering plants from non-flowering plants, flying insects
from non-flying insects, and mammals from non-mammalian ancestors.
One example is a transition from non-mammal to mammal, which is strikingly illustrated
by the skulls and jaws of Demetrodon, Thernaxodon, and Morgalluchodon, which collectively range
from about 260 to 190 million years ago.
Now the second category of fossils is trace fossils.
Trace fossils are indirect evidence of ancient life exclusive of body parts that show some
aspect of behavior.
Trace fossils consist of tracks, trails, burrows, nests, feces, tooth marks, and many other
signs of how organisms behaved in the context of their original environments.
Now although not as many paleontologists work with trace fossils as with body fossils, their
study of trace fossils, a field known as echnology, which literally means the study of traces,
is extremely important for interpreting how behaviors may have changed or stayed the same
in a given evolutionary lineage.
Let's take a look at this trace fossil, a burrow made by a trilobite nearly 500 million
years ago.
And in this, we have a natural cast of the trilobite fossil in which the trilobite moved
in the seafloor and the direction of movement was this way and we're seeing imprints from
the legs.
Now if I juxtapose that with the body fossil of a trilobite, you can see how paleontologists
can actually match those up in terms of which animal made the trace fossil and which animal
actually is the trace maker.
So with those fossils, we can compare the size and the form of this trace fossil to known
body fossils of trilobites from rocks of the same age and then make a reasonable hypothesis
about how these trilobites behaved.
Sometimes we're even lucky enough to have a trilobite body fossil preserved in a trace
fossil and that makes that sort of identification all too easy.
Now few trace fossils are very important for evolutionary studies such as the fossil tracks
of the first four-legged animals from 400 million years ago.
These give us insights into how these animals moved relative to their fishy ancestors and
modern four-legged animals.
Also fossil tracks from 3.6 million years ago made by human-like apes also called australopithecines.
These confirm that these apes were walking upright at that time much like modern apes
and more like humans.
Now the third category of fossils is chemical fossils.
These fossils are organic compounds signifying how one slivvy material was present.
These are called biomarkers or other chemical signatures of life.
Such fossils can't be spot on the field but instead require expensive lab equipment to
analyze and detect.
These fossils also don't get into beautiful displays in museums nor do they enable their
discoverers to grace the covers of magazines or start dating Hollywood stars, you know
like most paleontologists.
Nevertheless, chemical fossils are also important for discerning major transitions in evolution,
especially when one-cell life was going through some significant changes starting about three
billion years ago or so.
Well, most fossils are found in rocks so this is where geology is unavoidable.
In other words, you can't study paleontology without also using geology.
And yet, contain within the geologic record is a definite ordering of fossils in rocks
that's consistent, predictable and very useful to an understanding of evolution.
This fact was actually recognized in the early 19th century, well before evolutionary theory
took hold after Darwin published the Origin of Species in 1859.
In the early 19th century, geologists in Great Britain and elsewhere in Europe noticed these
fossils reliably showed up in the same positions in vertical sequences of sedimentary rocks
despite being in widely separated places.
Among these geologists were James Hutton, William Smith and Charles Lyell, probably
the three geologists most responsible for the basic founding principles of modern geology.
Hutton was probably the first geologist to contemplate the then radical concept of deep
time and he's famous for his quotation about the Earth's history.
We find no vestige of a beginning, no prospect of an end.
For people who previously thought the Earth was only about 6,000 years old, this represented
a revolutionary way of thinking.
William Smith was important for drawing up the first geologic map in which fossils helped
him considerably in defining the ages and relative positions of the sedimentary rock
layers, also known as strata.
In fact, he's often known in geology as William Strata Smith, although he probably didn't
have that nickname growing up, which was in a family of farmers before he turned to surveying
and then did his geologic map of England.
Charles Lyell consolidated evidence for the principle of uniformitarianism, which is a
mouthful of a term but simply refers to how modern Earth processes today also likely operated
in the past.
In other words, water ran downhill long ago in the geologic past, just like it does today,
and sediments were deposited by flowing water in streams and on seashores.
Lyell was also a big influence on Darwin in thinking about how, when given time, long,
slow gradual processes could result in big changes.
We'll come back to this idea in just a minute.
So these geologists and others who started looking at fossils more carefully became really
curious when they observed certain fossils disappeared at certain places in sequences
of strata, only to be replaced by new fossils above, at the time they didn't understand
why, but they did note that this happened.
We now know that this ordering of fossils, called biological succession, was the result
of extinctions, which caused the disappearances, and evolution, which caused the appearances
of new life forms.
The simple principle that the oldest rocks are at the bottom of the sequence of strata
and the youngest on the top, that's called superposition.
So with these two principles used in tandem, it became relatively easy to say that the
relative ages of fossils in these rocks could be worked out.
For example, let's take a look at this.
Where you have related more directly to evolutionary theory, you might think about how fossils arranged
in a sequence of strata, such as trilobites, as opposed to rocks, they follow this definite
order where you see trilobites that are down at the bottom to the top, where they progress
from older to younger.
Now, how this related more directly to evolutionary theory was that Charles Lyell taught geology
to Darwin.
Darwin himself was also a geologist.
Along with his many other talents, Darwin then applied this geological knowledge to
his development of the origin of species.
This helped him considerably in formulating evolutionary theory because he began thinking
in terms of the long periods of time required for some major transitions in evolution.
For example, when he wondered about the speciation of finches, tortoises, or other animals, he
started thinking about how much time was needed for some of these changes to take place.
He also started thinking in terms of thousands of generations of change versus just a few
sudden ones.
Well, since the time of Lyell and Darwin, geologists and paleontologists have used a
well-tested and universally applied method for dating rocks worldwide, and much of this
dating is based on relative ages of fossils.
For example, no matter where we go in the world, we always find trilobites in strata
older than those of dinosaurs.
We always find dinosaurs in strata older than those containing the remains of fossil primates,
let alone humans.
This led to the start of the geologic timescale, which is a standard scale applied to the ages
of rocks and their fossils worldwide.
The broadest time unit in a geologic timescale is an eon, followed by eras, then periods,
and then epics.
The boundaries between these time units are not picked arbitrarily.
Instead, they're based on very real and worldwide extinctions of species and the evolution of
new species.
The eons of geologic time, in order from oldest to youngest, are Archean, Protozoic, and Phanerozoic.
The Archean eon was when at least one continent began to form and the most primitive single
cell life, such as bacteria and similar organisms, called prokaryotes, evolved.
The Archean experienced almost a billion years of meteorite impacts more frequent than fortunately
than we have today.
Now, during the Protozoic eon, oxygen produced by photosynthetic prokaryotes was being captured
in these formations called banded iron formations.
Meanwhile, some prokaryotes evolved into more complex cells, bukaryotes, which later went
on to make up algae, fungi, plants, and animals.
The last few hundred million years that Protozoic eon is when the first animals arose as organized
aggregates of bukaryotic cells.
And then there was no looking back after that.
Well, except in this course, where we do a lot of that.
Now the Phanerozoic literally means visible life, and that was based on the assumption
that all fossil remains were in rocks from that eon.
But now we know, through the presence of earlier fossils in the Proterozoic and even Archean
rocks, that this is not true.
But we still refer to the Phanerozoic as the time when fossils became much more abundantly
preserved.
The Phanerozoic eon is the eon that contains the most abundant and easily identifiable
fossils, and it encompasses most of the major transitions we cover in this course.
So we'll learn how the Phanerozoic eon is subdivided into three eras, and then those
are further subdivided into twelve periods.
Being aware of these subdivisions allows us to focus more precisely on when certain evolutionary
transitions took place.
Now the three major eras of the Phanerozoic eon were conceived as early, middle, and
later life.
The Paleozoic, Mesozoic, and Centozoic respectively.
These divisions are based on mass extinctions recorded in the fossil record.
For example, the most devastating mass extinction in the fossil record separates the Paleozoic
from the Mesozoic, whereas the mass extinction that took the dinosaurs out, that's what separates
the Mesozoic and the Centozoic eras.
The Paleozoic era, which started 543 million years ago and ended 250 million years ago,
is the time of trilobites, the first fish, and coal forests, as well as many evolutionary
ancestors, including the first mammal-like reptiles.
The Paleozoic subdivided into seven periods, most named for specific locations where fossils
were found.
In order, from oldest to youngest, are seven periods of the Paleozoic, starting with the
Cambrian.
The Cambrian is from a name for whales, where relevant fossils were found.
Incidentally, the Cambrian periods also sometimes contrasted with the Pre-Cambrian, which refers
to not a specific period, but to all of geologic time before the Cambrian.
The Ordovician, that's named for a specific tribe that once lived in whales, and most
of the earth, especially in Northern Hemisphere, during the Ordovician, was under water.
Meanwhile, you had a super connet that moved toward the South Pole, and that eventually
caused temperatures and water levels to drop.
Now, Solerian period is named for yet another location in whales.
This was a time of higher temperatures and relatively higher sea level.
The Devonian is a time of three continents, named for Devon in southeastern England.
The Mississippian or early Carboniferous period is a time when continental collisions formed
the Appalachian Mountains of the Eastern U.S.
Then you have the Pennsylvania period, or the Lake Carboniferous period, during the Carboniferous
you had ongoing collision of these two continents that produced the mountains of the Eastern
U.S., while another collision produced the Ural Mountains over in Europe.
The Permian is when you have the super continent of Pangea forming, and that is the Permian
period is named for a site in the Ural Mountains.
Now, major evolutionary transitions that happened during the Paleozoic include the development
of skeletons and invertebrates and vertebrates in the Cambrian, the origin and subsequent
evolution of vertebrates in the Cambrian, and throughout the rest of the Paleozoic.
The first land plants and animals in the Ordovician and Silurian, the first forests in the Devonian,
the first flying insects also in the Devonian, the evolution of loaf and fish into amphibians
in the Devonian, the development of enclosed eggs and reptiles in the Carboniferous, and
the early evolution of the ancestors of mammals in the Permian period.
The Mesozoic era, or middle life era, is the time of dinosaurs in many other large reptiles
and it has three periods.
First is the Triassic.
This was the time of a single supercontinent called Pangea that started to break up into
the continents we know today.
The second is the Jurassic period, named for the Jura Mountains between France and Switzerland.
Pangea was continuing to break up then, and continents drifted apart geographically isolating
their plants and animals.
The Cretaceous period is the third period of the Mesozoic.
This was the leading period for the deposition of chalk, which is calcium carbonate, to form
during the Mesozoic.
This period was very warm and sea levels, accordingly, were quite high.
Now major transitions that happened during the Mesozoic included the evolution of the
dinosaurs, of course, the evolution of mammals and their origin, the evolutionary radiation
of some reptiles to the seas and skies, the origin of birds from dinosaurs, and the co-evolution
of flowering plants with pollinating insects.
Now the Cenozoic era, or new life era, and sometimes nicknamed the Age of Mammals, it
has two periods, the Paleogene and the Neogene, and these are separated by a major climate
change from warmer to cooler climates at about 23 million years ago.
Continues to separate in ways that then fostered further evolutionary diversity.
So the major transitions of the Cenozoic will cover include the evolution of whales
from land-dwelling mammals, the origin and early evolution of primates, including monkeys
and apes, the divergence of some apes into a lineage that led to our genus, Homo, and
the evolution of Homo into our species, which continues to evolve today.
Now the Paleogene and Neogene periods are also divided into smaller units of time called
epics, and these will be discussed later on in the course, especially when looking at
the early evolution of primates.
Well the geologic timescale as we know it now, it's all fine and good, but paleontology
and geology, as practiced in the 19th century, encounter just a little problem when talking
about time.
You see a relative age dating doesn't tell you exactly how old a fossil or rock might
be, only that they might be older or younger than some other fossil or rock.
In other words it's like saying, I have an older sister and a younger brother, but I
have no idea how old they are in years.
So relative age dating is augmented and tested by absolute age dating, and this is mainly
facilitated through the technique of radiometric age dating.
Now I'm not going to go into explaining radiometric age dating in too much detail, it's a well
known and well established method for dating rocks, and it's been around for more than
a hundred years.
But it is based on how radioactive elements decay at constant rates, and these decay rates
have been calculated accurately for these radioactive elements.
Decay of what is called a parent element eventually results in a daughter element.
The daughter element is the final, stable byproduct of decay.
These are then derived from ratios of parent isotopes to daughter isotopes.
And when that ratio reaches one half for each of them, we call that a half life.
Here's a graph that shows how those changes happen over time in very predictable ways,
and as you can see there are more exponential relationships between one another as you see
time goes on.
Now radiometric age dates can be discerned from volcanic ash deposits, lava flows, or
other igneous rocks that may be above or below or cross cutting sedimentary rocks that bear
fossils.
This sort of dating doesn't work very well on fossils themselves because fossils are
often composed of minerals that re-crystallized or filled with older minerals yielding very
unrepresentative dates.
Ash deposits on the other hand, those are ideal for dating sedimentary rocks because these
can narrow down the ages of fossils below or above these layers.
For example, a geologist or paleontologist might have dinosaur bones that are in rocks
above and below an ash bed, and the ash beds dated at 70 million years old, which tells
us the bones below are older than 70 million years whereas the ones above are younger.
Even better is if several ash beds are interspersed throughout a sequence.
And the dinosaur bones in between the two ash layers could be dated as between say 69.5
and 70.5 million years old for example.
I have seen exactly the situation with dinosaur bones and volcanic ash beds in Alaska, in
which ash beds are used to more precisely date the dinosaur bones above and below them.
So these radiometric dates gain from igneous rocks when used in combination with relative
age dating, aid considerably in figuring out when these evolutionary transitions may have
happened.
What's the most important take home message of all this?
Basically, macroevolution takes time.
This is a concept that Lyle, Darwin, and many other scientists realized early on in the
19th century, and it still holds true today.
Great spans of time are sometimes needed for major transitions to happen, but we also
now know that evolutionary rates can vary.
So it doesn't always happen through the extremely slow and gradualistic processes that Darwin
originally imagined.
Regardless, all of evolutionary theory developed since Darwin has affirmed the importance of
taking into account adequate time needed for these major transitions in evolution to happen.
For example, no one expects that only one or two generations will result in the formation
of a new species of plant, insect, or bird.
But some evolutionary processes may have operated under time spans so vast that we have a very
tough time pinpointing exactly when a major transition took place.
In such instances, paleontologists may very nonchalantly refer to hundreds of millions
of years, or even billions of years, when they're discussing evolutionary change.
That is precisely what we'll do in our next lecture, where we're going to go far back
in the geologic time, to the Archaean and Proterozogions.
There we're going to ponder how the simplest cells could have undergone life's first major
evolutionary transition, the leap from simple prokaryotes to the more complex eukaryotes.
See you three billion years ago.
