Hello, and welcome to the lecture where we consider dinosaurs.
Both their origins and how their subsequent evolution made them the icons of paleontology.
In the previous lecture, we looked at how the first amniotes, or reptiles, evolved from
non-reptilian tetrapods during the Carboniferous Period.
This step was mainly related to selection for a new mode of reproduction, namely the
laying of enclosed eggs, and that placed reptiles firmly on land.
This behavior allowed reptiles to expand into new habitats and ecological niches that had
previously excluded amphibians.
And where water was not, reptiles could still go, eat, and reproduce, and that soon resulted
in their proliferation and diversification, especially when you look at it in the face
of global climate change that was favoring their natural selection.
So skull types that reflect this had adaptive radiation as even the earliest reptiles in
fossil record.
They could be classified as anapsid, synapsid, or diapsid.
At some point past the Permian Period, been in the middle to early parts of the Triassic
Period about 230 to 250 million years ago, one lineage of diapsids in particular began
evolving the traits we now associate with the first dinosaurs.
So before we get to the main topic of this lecture though, let's talk about that word
dinosaur as a cultural metaphor, in contrast to their actual evolutionary history.
Dinosaurs are, of course, the extinct animals everyone seems to love or at least be aware
of.
As fossils, they have this considerable hold on public consciousness.
Dinosaurs were adopted by popular culture early on in their discovery in the 19th century.
For example, Charles Dickens, he mentions a dinosaur in the first paragraph of his
novel Bleak House.
Sculptors from the same time and other artists, they attempted to replicate dinosaurs visually,
also for public appreciation.
In 1914, one of the first animated motion pictures, the Gertie the Dinosaur, showed
a human interacting with a dinosaur in entertaining ways that, remarkably enough, didn't involve
the human being eaten.
Well, later in the 1930s, dinosaurs even made it into advertising, showing up as icons
for petroleum company in which the company attempted to link its product with these
long-gone animals.
Now, of course, dinosaurs, they've been a cash cow ever since then, inspiring many
other advertisements, movies, books, toys, and other products using dinosaurs as their
pitch.
There are very few places in the world you can go without seeing a dinosaur, or at least
its representation.
So, if you conducted some sort of psychological study to answer why people are so taken with
dinosaurs, you might try a word association game, find out what pops up when you say the
word dinosaur.
Well, in my experience, the words big, scary, and extinct, and their synonyms seem to top
the list.
Your results may vary according to the ages of the people you ask, for kids, the answer
might be awesome.
And that's usually the most common response.
From this sampling, though, one might reasonably conclude that many people associated dinosaurs
with things that are large and frightening, but they also may symbolize some sort of outmoded
concept or outright failure.
Think of how often a company, person, or concept is referred to as a dinosaur, and it's not
meant as a compliment.
But just how valid is this metaphor when you view it from the perspective of evolution?
Yes, some dinosaurs were very big, some weighed more than 50 tons, including the largest land
herbivores and carnivores that have ever lived.
But a large number of dinosaur species also range from crow-sized to human-sized.
And in fact, the first dinosaurs were not especially large either.
Most of them were smaller than the same kids, who now admire their awesomeness.
So cross off big from your list for a lot of dinosaurs, and especially the earliest
of their lineage.
With that knowledge and the fact that most dinosaurs were herbivores, they become a
little less fearsome, too.
Well, once you look at their evolutionary history, calling them extinct is a viewpoint
based on our living in the present.
Dinosaurs first evolved from their diapsid predecessors in the late Triassic period about
230 million years ago.
They made it to the end of the Cretaceous period, which ended 65 million years ago.
That means dinosaurs were living and evolving for a minimum of 165 million years.
This rich evolutionary heritage is backed by the discovery of more than 500 genera
of dinosaurs identified thus far.
New genera continue to be found every year, and multiple species are under some of those
genera.
So knowing that the fossil record represents only a very small sample of what dinosaurs
actually lived during the Mesozoic era, we can reasonably estimate how many dinosaurs
were at least maybe as diverse as modern birds, if not more varied.
Oh, and speaking of birds, a major revelation in our study of dinosaur evolution was that
dinosaurs did not really go extinct.
They're still here as birds.
As we're going to discuss in an upcoming lecture, birds evolved from small feather dinosaurs
during the latter half of the Mesozoic era.
And of course, they're still very much a part of life today.
Which means dinosaurs beat the bum rap of being extinct, too.
So it looks like all of those cultural metaphors fall down once examined under the harsh light
of the fossil record and evolutionary theory.
Who are we to talk about dinosaurs as big failures?
Instead, we'll talk about dinosaur successes, big and small, and how they evolved from non-dinosaurian
animals in the first place.
Well probably the best place to start is to ask a basic question, one that might be posed
by any number of children, but is equally valid for adults.
What is a dinosaur?
This actually is not as straightforward of a question as one might think, because the
answer is changed with new classification schemes.
In the previous lecture, I mentioned that organisms could be grouped into evolutionarily
related categories, called clades.
And these sometimes defy previous classifications based on Linnaean names, such as kingdom,
phylum, class, order, and family.
The cladistic system places emphasis on the evolutionary history or the phylogeny of clades.
So sometimes you'll also hear it called a phylogenetic classification.
The diagram associated with cladistic or phylogenetic classifications is called a cladogram.
And we've actually been looking at simplified versions of these throughout the course.
For example, a general cladogram for amniotes looks something like this.
We'll come back to this cladogram later, but for now you should know these diagrams
serve as visual representations of hypotheses.
Also, in paleontology, cladograms are constructed on the basis of anatomical traits that might
be shared between fossils.
With this method, we're operating under the premise that organisms with a greater number
of shared traits, and that includes genetics, are more closely related than those with fewer
traits in common.
This differs from the Linnaean system in that ancestor-descended relationships are more
important than, say, fitting an organism into a phylum, class, order, and so on.
So for dinosaurs, they can be defined through their shared anatomical traits, most of which
deal with modifications of the limbs and the hip bones, which we're going to discuss soon.
But dinosaurs also can be defined by ancestor-descended relationships.
For example, many paleontologists now define a dinosaur as a member of the clad that contains
the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and triceratops, as well as all of their
descendants.
Now that sounds a little unwieldy, but it accurately represents how dinosaurs are an
evolutionarily linked group of animals.
A number of anatomical characteristics unite dinosaurs, but perhaps the most important
development in their evolution is represented by their acetabulum.
An acetabulum is an open hole in the hip, and that allowed the head of the femur to fit
into the hip in a ball and socket arrangement.
This trait enabled dinosaurs and their immediate ancestors to walk upright or erect, with their
legs within a narrow plane of the body.
In other words, sprawling gates, which we normally associate with reptiles like lizards,
alligators and crocodiles, were banned in dinosaurs.
Now in erect posture, that probably helped with breathing while moving, and particularly
while moving quickly.
Moving upright also meant dinosaurs became speedier in their everyday locomotion, which
must be one of the reasons for why this behavior was selected favorably in the first place.
Why would you move even faster if you were a reptile-like animal?
Well we actually see the answer demonstrated in a modern reptile, the common basilisk lizard
of southern and central America.
It goes up on two legs to achieve its top speed.
In fact, this lizard sometimes moves so quickly it can run across bodies of water.
Now this is an example of the selective advantage of using two legs, or bipedal locomotion,
which basilisk used to escape predators and other threats.
Bipedal locomotion also confers the advantage of freeing up the forelimbs, which then can
be used for grasping food or other functions.
Now in dinosaurs though, this bipedal movement also may have been accompanied by more efficient
breathing.
For example, if you ever see a lizard running, such as a basilisk running on water, it's
performing that feat anaerobically.
Think about holding your breath while sprinting 100 meters and you'll see what I mean.
With us, although the evidence is still not quite clear enough to say for sure, paleontologists
suspect that dinosaurs developed a more effective way of breathing while moving about.
After all, birds have a far more efficient respiratory system than other vertebrates.
In that they use a system of air sacs in addition to lungs.
That's why some birds can fly at very high altitudes for long periods of time.
These air sacs allow breathing in birds to work more like digestion does in all animals.
That is, fresh air is always flowing straight through the lungs, while the air sacs pump
out old air.
This ability, even if not very well developed, would have provided great advantages to dinosaurs
while they were escaping predators or seeking prey.
It also would have sped up the plots of any dinosaurium, boy meets girl stories, which
might have resulted in their mating, passing on genes, so their children would be fast
moving too.
But how do we infer biped motion in these long extinct animals, such as the first dinosaurs?
Well one way, which ties in directly with body fossils, is looking at limb proportions
and modifications of the hands for grasping.
This is an example of how natural selection favors one trait at the expense of another.
In Ancestors of Dinosaurs, this inverse proportion shows up as a lengthening of the femur, tibia,
fibula and foot bones, which corresponded with a shortening of the forelimb bones.
An even better adaptation for running, and especially on two legs, is indicated by a
shortened femur versus a longer tibia fibula on the legs.
A shorter femur meant each leg was able to cycle faster through a sprint, and the tibia
fibula reached farther with each step.
Again you can experiment on yourself by measuring the ratio between your upper leg above the
knee and your lower leg below.
It's close to a one to one ratio.
This is more indicative of a bipedal animal that's very good at walking, but not so fast
at running.
Early dinosaurs on the other hand, or foot if you prefer, had uneven ratios based on
their shorter femurs versus their tibia fibula.
Now interestingly, we can look at the closest relatives of dinosaurs, how their common ancestors
led to different paths in their adaptations as their limbs changed in their proportions.
Let's look at pterosaurs for instance, also known as flying reptiles.
They share a common ancestor with dinosaurs, with both of them belonging to a clade called
ornithodira.
Now pterosaurs are considered as the animal's most closely related dinosaurs during the
Mesozoic Era because of similarities in anatomy.
This included reduced four limbs relative to the hind limbs and a shortened femur relative
to the tibia fibula.
Pterosaurs like dinosaurs originated in the late Triassic about 220 million years ago.
That was only about 10 million years after the first dinosaurs.
And although pterosaurs and dinosaurs shared a common ancestor, they had their own separate
and spectacular evolutionary histories through the remainder of the Mesozoic Era.
We'll talk more about pterosaurs and their evolution in the next lecture.
So dinosaurs can be split into two clades, mainly on the basis of their hip structures.
These hips are soritian and ornithitian.
Now soritian, this clade included all theropod dinosaurs, and those would be famous ones
like allosaurus, velociraptor, and tyrannosaurus.
Any other carnivorous dinosaur you can think of is a theropod dinosaur and a soritian.
Thyrio also includes the long neck dinosaurs or the sauropodomorphs, and examples of these
would be platiosaurus and apatosaurus.
Now the ornithitians, on the other hand, this clade included all ornithopod dinosaurs, that
would be such as hadrosaurus or myosaur, the so-called armored dinosaurs such as thyroforens
and chylosaurs and stegosaurs are examples of those.
Oh, and the so-called boneheaded dinosaurs.
Those would be the margenosephalians like triceratops and pachycephalosaurus.
So basic cladogram helps us to show how each of those clades relate to one another, not
only within soritia and ornithitia, but then how those clades are connected to one another
as well with a common ancestor.
So the names for each hip type reflect their similarity to those of modern animals.
For example, soritia.
That means lizard hip.
Ornithitia means bird hip.
This classification got confusing later though when we realized that birds were actually
soritians.
But not to worry, soritia represents the ancestral condition for birds and their evolution from
theropod dinosaurs later made their hips more bird-like.
Notice that for each type, the three bones making up the hip, the ileum, ischium and
pubis, are arranged differently.
In the soritian hip, the pubis points forward and down, whereas in the ornithitian hip,
the pubis points backward and down, and is parallel with the ileum.
Now the split between soritians and ornithitian dinosaurs, that happened pretty early in their
evolutionary lineage, probably about 235 million years ago.
But paleontologists have a tough time sorting out exactly when this happened.
Well nonetheless, most of the immediate ancestors of dinosaurs that more closely resemble theropod
dinosaurs, which are soritians, those are the ones we really need to look at with regard
to early evolution from that perspective.
So both types of dinosaurs descended from a clade of amnias called archosaurs, and
within the archosaurs was a more narrowly defined clade called the dinosauromorphs.
This literally means dinosaur forms.
Now archosaurs, which are diapsid reptiles, are signified by two important traits.
They had a hole in their skulls in front of the eye.
So we call this an antorbital fenestrate, and then they had teeth held in sockets.
That better kept these in the jaw when these animals fed.
Now archosaurs, which probably originated in the later part of the Permian period, or
early part of the Triassic about 250 million years ago, those included pterosaurs, dinosaurs,
and their relatives, as well as other rather large imposing animals that went extinct by
the end of the Triassic.
This was a hugely successful group of animals through much of the Triassic from about 250
to 200 million years ago, and of course through the rest of the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods
through dinosaurs and pterosaurs.
But archosaurs are also very much a part of our modern world.
Just take a look at any alligator, crocodile, or bird you're looking at an archosaur.
So dinosauromorphs, they're archosaurs that lived during the latest part of the Middle
Triassic period, and as mentioned previously, these are regarded as the closest precursors
to dinosaurs.
When we look at body fossils that represent this transition from dinosauromorphs to true
dinosaurs, we go to Argentina.
Argentina has some of the best dinosauromorph and early dinosaur body fossils in the world.
For example, the first dinosauromorph we'll examine, that's a leger patent, that comes
from Middle Triassic rocks of Argentina and dating to about 237 to 228 million years
ago.
Now leger patent was definitely bipedal, as can be told from its hind limbs, and it
had these interesting feet.
It had a fourth digit and its corresponding metatarsal or foot bones longer than the other
toes and metatarsals.
Now naturally it makes sense that as these animals started going up on their rear feet,
there would be some sort of appropriate selection pressures for their feet to change too.
So this foot arrangement may represent one of those early evolutionary experiments.
And this was a relatively small animal.
It probably measured only about 70 centimeters, little more than two feet, and probably registered
as food for a lot of the other archosaurs that were around at that time in the Triassic.
Now the second dinosauromorph considered as slightly more advanced than leger patent and
closer to true dinosaurs is Marasuchus.
It also comes from the Middle Triassic of Argentina and it falls into the same age
range as a leger patent from about 237 to 228 million years ago.
Now Marasuchus is known for a more complete skeleton and it has these traits.
It has a partial skull, it has cervical vertebrae that probably defined an S-shaped neck, it
had a nearly open acetabulum in its hip, forearms that were only about half the length
of the hind limbs, and a relatively long tail.
Now all of these features indicate it was a fast moving bipedal animal.
Even its long tail suggests this was used as a counterbalance while it was running.
It was about maybe twice as long as leger patent, measuring about 1.3 meters or close
to four feet.
This was still small enough though that probably didn't intimidate other carnivorous archosaurs
and running definitely would have been the better part of valor for its survival.
At the same time though this ability to move rapidly also gave it an advantage in running
down its prey, especially smaller lizard-like diapsids that had not evolved more efficient
ways of breathing.
Even better its hands were free to grab that prey and pass it to its mouth.
So both leger patent and Marasuchus are thought provoking archosaurs for their small size
yet also through their connection to the dinosaurs, which evolved into the largest land animals
ever.
So these represent really humble beginnings for the evolutionary history of dinosaurs,
something to keep in mind in future lectures when we talk about other animals that show
these dramatic increases in body size through their lineages, such as whales for example.
Well as you may have noticed there are only two dinosaur morphs that qualify as probable
dinosaur ancestors.
What about trace fossils as clues for the first dinosaur morphs?
Fossil tracks are terrific for telling us whether any given tetrapod was walking on
two feet or not.
A bipedal tetrapod would only show alternating rear foot impressions.
What's interesting to think about in terms of tetrapod evolution is that bipedal locomotion
has also evolved multiple times in very different lineages, including dinosaurs morphs, true
dinosaurs, birds and mammals, namely the hominin line that includes humans.
So as a result this is a great example of conversion evolution, although it seems to
have evolved first in a big way with dinosaur morphs and dinosaurs.
And sure enough dinosaur morph tracks, which look very much like the three-toed tracks
of dinosaurs, are in the lower and middle Triassic rocks of different places of the world.
The oldest undoubted dinosaur tracks, particularly those of theropod dinosaurs, show three-digit
impressions and this is a result of a change from a five-toed foot to a three-toed foot.
Now this evolutionary innovation was achieved through a reduction of the outside two toes
and development of the three central most toes.
Dinosaur morphs and early dinosaurs also began walking on their digits, a condition
called digitigrade.
This adaptation gave yet another advantage in locomotion as they had less surface area
contacting the ground while they were walking or running.
Added to this was their moving with their hind limbs directly below their bodies.
That meant their feet would have contacted the ground in a narrow plane, more like walking
on a tightrope.
So the ideal dinosaur morphosal trackway would show footprints made by an animal with three
prominent toes in a narrow range of motion.
Have we found any trackways like that and in rocks of the right age?
Yes we have.
Some of the tracks are in rocks from the early through the middle Triassic period from about
245 to 230 million years ago.
Now of course, as is typical with trace fossils, there are a lot of disagreements about exactly
what archosaurs made these tracks.
A few paleontologists have even interpreted some middle Triassic tracks as those of dinosaurs
which precede their body fossils by almost 10 million years.
Most paleontologists though don't accept this hypothesis and instead they consider these
tracks as having been made by dinosaur morphs.
So let's look at the earliest known dinosaurs.
Most of these dinosaurs are Sauritians and Theropods, although a few are primitive ornithitians.
Some of these Theropod or Theropod, like dinosaurs, like the dinosaur morphs, also come from Argentina,
and a few other places as well.
Eoraptor Luensis, for instance, from the late Triassic of Argentina, it dates from about
220 million years ago.
Eoraptor is largely accepted as the oldest known dinosaur, like its dinosaur morph predecessors.
It was small, it was only about a meter long or so, 3.3 feet.
And this dinosaur though, it had beautifully preserved skull and limbs and its anatomy
could be compared very easily than two other dinosaurs and dinosaur morphs.
Now one key dinosaurian trait it had was a femur that was adapted for fitting into the
acetabulum.
That allowed for more erect posture.
It also had an ankle that was modified for more erect support and its feet had three
prominent digits.
Now the next oldest Theropod dinosaurs and slightly younger in geologic age to Eoraptor
are the Hererosores.
Hererosores include several species such as Hererosaurus Isigualistensis from late Triassic
rocks of Argentina.
Now Hererosores was a much bigger dinosaur in comparison to Eoraptor.
It was closer to 3 meters or 10 feet long.
This dinosaur had a fully open acetabulum and it fit really well with the upper part
of the femur.
And its hands looked like they were adapted for grasping.
Now the earliest ornithitian dinosaurs include two significant specimens of Pysanosaurus
which is from the late Triassic of Argentina at about 220 to 215 million years ago.
There was also Eocursor Parvus that's from the late Triassic of South Africa and it's
slightly younger.
It dates from about 215 to 210 million years ago.
Now although both of these dinosaurs are younger geologically when you compare them
to Eoraptor and these Hererosores, they retain some primitive traits that reflect their relatedness
to the common ancestor of the dinosaurs.
So of the two, Pysanosaurus is regarded as the more primitive and it's been the subject
of debate about exact classification as a dinosaur.
It was again a little dinosaur, measured only about 1 meter or 3.3 feet long and as
a contemporary of Hererosaurus while living in the same area, it probably needed to run
fast to avoid becoming dinner for that dinosaur.
Now Eocursor consisted of a good amount of skeletal parts such as a part of its skull,
its vertebrae, its hip and limb bones.
Once reconstructed, this was also a small dinosaur.
It was slightly less than 1 meter and again 3.3 feet long.
So as was mentioned with dinosaur morphs, the earliest dinosaurs were all quite small.
The only one that might have worried us if alive today would have been the Hererosores
and even then they probably weighed less than an African lion.
So what caused some dinosaurs to evolve to these huge sizes and eventually take over
Mesozoic landscapes?
Well environments seemed fairly stable.
There was no evidence of global warming or global cooling at the end of the Triassic.
Competition has often been invoked as in dinosaurs outcompeted all of the other inferior animals.
But this doesn't hold up to scrutiny, especially when you consider how rare dinosaurs were
until the very end of the Triassic.
At that time dinosaurs show up in the fossil record, they comprise less than 5% of all
terrestrial vertebrates.
But by the end of the Triassic, they were more than 50%.
The most likely explanation and may not be a very satisfying one is that dinosaurs just
got lucky.
A mass extinction took place during the end of the Triassic period.
This was one of the five largest in Earth history and it justifies why we divide the
Triassic from the Jurassic period.
At that time, about 205 to 200 million years ago, the continents, which had all been together
as one supercontinent called Pangea, were starting to break apart.
That caused a lot of volcanism.
And not only are there extensive volcanic deposits dated from this time, but fossil
plants also show how CO2 went up dramatically.
That probably led quickly to global warming.
So the result was the extinction of many seed plants, which were probably followed quickly
by the extinction of their herbivores, then the carnivores that ate the herbivores.
Oxygen levels also dropped sharply.
As all of these archosaurs died out, ecological niches were opened up.
More efficient respiration, both from standing upright and possibly from air sex, may have
helped the dinosaurs and allowed for their greater diversification into the Jurassic
period.
So this extinction may have been the tipping point for the start of dinosaur evolution.
Now what made dinosaurs so successful, evolutionarily speaking, throughout the remainder of them
as a Zoic era?
Well, it was their adaptability and their diversity.
This is evidenced by their occupying every major terrestrial habitat from underground,
on the ground, and in the trees.
They also seemingly occupied nearly every ecological niche you could expect for a land
animal, and this we discern from their diverse feeding choices.
Now dinosaurs mostly stayed on land with only a few other than birds going to the air.
Meanwhile, in the oceans and the skies, dinosaurs were playing second fiddle to some other awesome
products of evolution, the marine and flying reptiles.
In our next lecture, we'll see why dinosaur advantages were confined to the land.
And that's during the Mesozoic era from 230 to 65 million years ago.
We'll also see then how evolution instead favored other reptiles to dominate the seas
and the sky.
