Hello, and welcome back to the course. Up until now, every evolutionary transition we've
discussed, prokaryotes to eukaryotes, single-celled eukaryotes to multicellular animals, soft
body to mineralized animals, and invertebrate animals to vertebrate animals, those all took
place in the world's oceans. In this lecture, we're going to get out of the water and onto
the land with evolution, and we're going to examine how life in general adapted to terrestrial
environments. This happened in the early Paleozoic era, around 500 to 400 million years ago.
This is more of an ecological transition, in which ecosystems were not just in marine
environments anymore, but now we're going on to land. This means the innovations we're
going to discuss, they're comprised of a large number of transitions from many lineages of
algae, fungi, plants, and animals. However, what all of those separate evolutionary histories
have in common are ecological factors. These allow us to make some sort of generalizations
about how this leap of life onto dry land happened. Moreover, this was an ecological
transition that took place over tens of millions of years. So why are we considering it as
a major transition, though? Well, all one has to do is realize that all terrestrial ecosystems
we have today and everything in them reflects this evolutionary history. And we're going
to reflect more on that toward the end of the lecture. But just to help you out for now,
let's do some sort of visualization. Let's go into a time machine, go back to the landscapes
of the early Cambrian world, which was about 500 to 540 million years ago. And if you approach
the surface from space, it's going to look something like this. You're going to see these
extensive seaways, a few isolated continents surrounded by the ocean, and then most of the
southern continents are going to be connected with one another. Well, let's say you land,
you step out of your time machine, you inhale deeply for a few minutes, and right away,
you notice you feel a little short of breath. This is because there's not so much oxygen
in the air. You're used to 21% during modern times. But during the Cambrian, there's only
about 15% oxygen available. So you walk around slowly to conserve your energy, and you find
that even walking across flat land is strenuous. Hopefully, though, you listen to all those
geologists and paleontologists who warned you beforehand about this oxygen shortage and
you brought along an oxygen tank so you could get around easier. Well, as you stroll about,
what you immediately notice is that everywhere you visit is barren. No trees, no land plants
of any kind, for that matter. Consequently, you're getting hot right away because there's
no shade anywhere either. You take a glance at the ground and you see not so much of soil
there, but it's some weathered and eroded sediment that looks very much like the local
bedrock. It kind of crunches underfoot, sounding like you're walking down a gravel driveway.
A few thin organic crusts composed of some hardy single cell prokaryotes like archaeans
or bacteria, those are on those surfaces. But because they're single cell organisms,
you can only see them as different colors and not individual organisms. In fact, you
mostly notice what is not there. For example, no mushrooms or other types of fungi are
visible. Nor are there any plants low lying or otherwise. Trees, forget it. Now you're
really wishing it for one, though, because the air not only feels hot, it's dry. And
the weather rock around you is reflecting that heat. You look up in the air and nothing
related to life is there either. No flying insects, no birds, windblown seeds, pollen,
not even spores. A landscape is eerily quiet, too. The only sounds you hear are the whistle
of the wind moving through the empty landscape, running water in a nearby river valley and
distant thunder from an approaching storm. The river is choked with eroded sediment.
And again, it's completely lacking the abundant vegetation you normally see on the banks of
a river. Only a few odors are in the air. And none of them have that organic scent you
normally associate with forests, meadows, ponds or streams. Finally, you see something
on this monotonous terrain that gets your attention. It's a small pool of standing
fresh water. In this pool, you may see some green algae growing there in some variously
colored colonies of archaeans or bacteria. These evolved hundreds of millions of years
before him, so it's not that surprising to see these. But otherwise, the water holds
no worms, insects, spiders, fish, amphibians or any other animals you typically would
expect to see in a body of fresh water. You slowly turn around, 360 degrees, not a single
moving four-legged animal on the land either. No reptiles, no birds, no mammals are anywhere
to be seen. Well, fortunately, your time machine landed near a marine shoreline, so you take
a short hike to observe where the land meets the sea. Here, you might see some algae and
a few inverberate animals living in the intertidal areas, but they're staying in the water. Out
of curiosity, you wait long enough and you watch the tide drop just to see if anything's
alive in the intertidal area. The only signs of life you see on those emergent tidal flats,
those are going to be trackways left by trilobites, some other arthropods, and maybe some worm
burrows. Well, perhaps you really like hot, dry, drab, rocky areas that stretch off into
the horizon, small pools of water devoid of much visible life, shorelines in which beach
combing yields very few shells, and a total absence of plants. Most of us, though, we're
probably going to get back in our time machine. We're going to come back to the present where
even the most forbidding terrestrial ecosystems, such as Death Valley, have plants, animals,
and other signs of life. So with this scenario in mind, perhaps you can better imagine what
sorts of evolutionary challenges life confronted with terrestrial environments as it started
to live in shallower water close to shorelines at the edges shared by the land and the sea.
Alternatively, life may have colonized freshwater or brackish water ecosystems first before
going on to land, but the point is, going from the sea to land, that's going to be the
big transition. Now, you might understandably point out how the power of imagination is
really insufficient for conveying any sort of actual scientific evidence for when these
terrestrial environments, when this macroscopic plant and animal life, started taking hold
in those environments. So what were some of these problems encountered by life as it moved
to the land, and how can we assess these? Well, here's a short summary of what would
be needed to make that jump to these terrestrial environments. You need to somehow prevent
dehydration. You also need to be able to tolerate temperature extremes. You need to stand up
because of the greater gravitational challenges. You need to spread your gametes and reproduce.
Also, in animals, you need to be able to take in oxygen without dehydrating. Perhaps the
most obvious adaptation needed for life on land, though, is going to be one that deals
with dehydration. Desiccation associated with rapid moisture loss is a problem even for
organisms adapted to living on land. In fact, I'm feeling a little thirsty right now, just
even thinking about it. Well, this problem becomes even more apparent in any organisms
that are used to living in water. The metaphor, like a fish out of water, comes to mind. So
while life was restricted to marine environments before adapting to freshwater environments
or the land, we have to consider how osmosis was handled. Now, when I say osmosis, it probably
triggered some sort of memories of what you learned about it in high school, although
it might have been more recently, too. Regardless, let's do a quick review of osmosis and some
related concepts. So we're all on the same page with understanding why it's important
for organisms living on land. Osmosis is very simply the movement of water through a semi-permeable
membrane from an area of greater concentration to an area of lesser concentration. Osmosis,
in turn, is affected by the dissolved content, otherwise known as solute, in the water. In
such a solution, water is the solvent or the substance doing the dissolving. For example,
marine water has 35 parts per thousand salinity. It contains sodium, chlorine, potassium, calcium,
magnesium, a bunch of other elements. Salinity, in other words, is a measure of how much solute
is in a given water body. Well, this affects osmosis because salty water, which has a lower
concentration of water than fresh water, is going to draw out fresh water from an organism
through its semi-permeable membranes. Well, this is a huge problem if you're a land dwelling
or a freshwater plant or animal and you're immersed in salt water. So organisms put in
such a situation are going to have significant amounts of water sucked out of their bodies.
This causes dehydration and possible death. Now, marine organisms, on the other hand,
they handle salt water just fine. Their cells contain water with the same concentration
of solutes as the sea water. This condition, where you have these concentrations as the
same and they cancel out osmotic pressure, that's called isotonic. So if you place a
marine organism out of water, though, well, that changes things. Most of these lose their
osmotic advantage pretty quickly. So regardless, though, of whether an organism is living in
fresh water, salt water, or on land, it must somehow regulate its internal water budget.
We call this osmoregulation. So in short, because all of these lineages of animals early
on in the Phanerzoic Eon evolved originally in full marine environments, either freshwater
or air would have presented strong selection pressures. These would have pushed organisms
living on the edge, so to speak, toward a different form of osmoregulation. In either
freshwater or air, osmoregulation would have shifted to block the effects of osmosis in
a way to prevent water loss. Thus what had to develop in the evolution of land dwelling
life from marine life were membranes that were a little less permeable. In land plants,
this is seen through these thick outer coverings on leaves or regulatory cells that let water
or gases in and out, such as stomata. In animals, this would have been watertight exoskeletons
or skin. So dehydration, that's one important problem for organisms going on to land. Another
one is related to that in temperature, and then you have to think about how extreme fluctuations
of temperature are inherent to sub aerial environments. Water better retains heat and
maintains a narrow range of temperatures than air. Accordingly, that makes body temperatures
easier to control in organisms that are adapted to aquatic conditions. Once out of the water,
though, air makes for a really terrible, awful blanket if you want to stay warm, especially
under air conditions with little cloud cover. For example, temperatures can shift tens of
degrees with night and day cycles in a 24 hour period in a typical desert. Thus any
organism living out of the water in that kind of environment or other types of environments,
they would have had such wild swings in temperature that you normally would not have in the water.
Heat retention, light water retention, though, could be aided again by having some sort of
tough skin or its equivalent for insulation. Now, third important factor to consider, whether
you're moving out of the water as a plant or an animal, is that living on land means
being heavier. Greater weight means greater gravitational challenges. Water gives you
buoyancy. That gives certain advantages in energy demands and reproduction. For example,
less effort is needed for locomotion or for spreading your gametes for reproduction. In
either instance, an organism or its gametes just go with the flow, so to speak. On the
other hand, getting out of the water, well, that means needing both the strength and the
structural integrity to support any verticality for plants or moving around for animals. And
for plants, then, a strong structural support was needed for staying upright, especially
for any plant that needed to develop anything resembling a stem. Plants also had to evolve
in a way so their gametes could be spread using water, or they would be light enough
to be caught by and moved about by the wind. For animals, they also would have had some
sort of structural support for moving out of the water, not only through muscular strength
but stiff body parts. Oxygen intake in animals also became problematic for any animal that
normally filters oxygen out of the water using gills. Gills are great for straining dissolved
oxygen out of water, but they're terrible in air. Think about how the previous mention
of desiccation is going to affect that equation. So how to develop a way to take in oxygen
directly that doesn't also cause dehydration? This means that animals had to evolve gills
that were more internalized and expanded, acting more like lungs in their intake of
oxygen. Well, we've been talking about plants and animals on land, but at some point we
also have to ask why these organisms would even bother leaving the oceans. Well, first
of all, let's look at what was happening after the Cambrian period in the Ordovician.
A major glaciation happened during the last part of the Ordovician. That was around 450
million years ago. This was the first major glaciation since the Proterozoa Keon. This
global cooling would have lowered sea level and accordingly exposed more land area for
organisms living in formerly shallow marine areas. This glaciation also resulted in a mass
extinction of organisms that were adapted to warm environments. So long-lived glaciation
would have favorably selected organisms adapted to living in cooler temperatures. Do you see
where this is going? More emergent areas meant more new real estate became available
and there could have been selection for organisms that could handle those wider temperature
variations. Added to this, these emergent areas already had some foundation of life
on them to provide sustenance once these plants or animals started creeping onto the
land. Now, what was some of the life that was already on land? Well, during our flight
of fancy to the Cambrian, which I narrated earlier, a bacteria in Archaeans had formed
colonies large enough for you to spot, kind of like the land equivalent of stromatolites.
Indeed, the fossil record backs up this supposition. Microfossils of prokaryotes have been found
in rocks formed in terrestrial environments from about 1.8 billion years ago. Structures
very much like microbial mats are also in 1.2 to 1.0 billion-year-old rocks that also
were in terrestrial environments. Now, molecular clock studies have also proposed that the
symbiosis of green algae and fungi, similar to what we see with modern-day lichens, that
was possible during the Proterozochium. That was about 700 million years ago. This hypothesis
is based on how both groups of fungi and algae appropriate to terrestrial environments were
calculated to evolve by them. But this inferred symbiosis is so far not supported by fossil
evidence. And like many molecular studies, it goes a little too far back into the past.
That's what paleontologists might expect. So, for macroscopic life on land, let's start
with algae. What evidence do we have for multicellular algae on land? Well, like many instances in
paleontology and evolutionary biology, we first looked at modern organisms for some guidance.
For example, some algae today are called carophytes. These are known through their common name of
stone warts. These carophytes are very interesting because they're green algae that live in
freshwater environments, and they have some primitive traits. And scientists consider
these as the most likely candidates for adapting to early terrestrial environments. For one
thing, they share a more common, recent common ancestor with land plants than they do with
other types of algae, and this is indicated by their genetics. Fossils of multicellular
algae in freshwater are also suggested by spore-like bodies that are preserved in rocks
from the Ordovician period. These are about 475 million years ago. Fossils similar to
carophytes are also in celerion rocks from 425 million years ago. So this gives us a
window of about 475 to 425 million years ago for that transition of freshwater algae to
algae on land. Now, what's the fossil evidence for the oldest known land, fungi? Well, fossil
remains representing a group of terrestrial fungi called Ascomycetes are known from late
celerion rocks of Sweden and other places. These dated about 410 million years ago. Ascomycetes
today, just to give you a frame of reference, these are represented by penicillium of antibiotic
fame, of baker's yeast, and, well, most importantly to me, brewer's yeast. So let's just say I'm
a huge fan of these fungi. So this place is fungi on land, though, relatively close to
the time of algae being on land, too. So by knowing these minimum ages for algae and fungi
on land, we might presume that the actual timing for both groups moving into this new environment
may have happened in the Ordovician or Celerium periods between 470 and 410 million years
ago. Now, lichens, which are symbiotic colonies of algae and fungi, probably started about
this time, too. It makes sense that some sort of symbiosis would have made the transition
of land a bit easier than going alone. That is, if algae and fungi had undergone natural
selection in terrestrial environments without this sort of mutualism. For example, the fungi
in these associations envelop algal cells and retard dehydration. The lichens are thus capable
of living under air conditions. They also gain their nutrients from the air or rock. This is
augmented by simple sugars that are formed by the photosynthetic algae. Even better, the fungi
most often associated with lichens are, you guessed it, the same ones we find in the fossil
record from the Celerium period. So it also makes sense that fungi would have co-evolved with the
first land plants, which we can hypothesize on the basis of two lines of evidence. One point is
that modern land plants have a mutualism with fungi that benefits both the plants and the fungi.
Fungal colonies that surround or penetrate plant roots called microresi assist in the
uptake of nutrients in a plant. Such fungi send out thin tendrils or hyphae into the surrounding soil
and they're then better able to pull in nitrogen and phosphorus, which aids in plant growth.
Plant roots also, in turn, provide carbohydrates for the fungi. Remember, fungi function as
heterotrophs and decomposers, so they need to eat unlike plants which manufacture their own food.
Now another piece of evidence for this symbiosis comes from the fossil record,
and this is great. We have fossilized plant roots and fungal hyphae found together in rocks from
the Celerium period around 400 million years ago. This direct association documented from the
fossil record suggests this co-evolution must have happened well before then, such as during the
Ordovician period, about more like 450 million years ago. So how did land plants evolve? Well,
land plants, otherwise known as embryophyta, probably descended from multicellular algae
and, as mentioned earlier, carophites are the most likely candidates. Again, we look first
to modern representatives of land plants for some guidance on their evolutionary history.
So the most primitive living plants we have today are liverworts, hornworts, and mosses.
These all fall under an evolutionarily related group called bryophyta. These are also non-vascular
plants, and non-vascular plants were probably the first land plants. After all, vascular plants are
relatively more complex, and thus they would have taken a more complicated route in their natural
selection. So not having vascular tissues meant these plants could not easily move nutrients
up and down any stems they might have had. Nonetheless, these plants did not have water
to support their weight, so they must have had some sort of stiff tissues to stay upright.
Yet, the first land plants also did not have leaves or roots.
For example, we have cookinsonia. Cookinsonia was a branching plant with sporangia,
and no roots. Sporangia are spore-bearing bodies. This has uncertain affinity. It was probably
related to mosses, but we do find it in Celerian rocks of the U.K., Canada, and Australia from
about 425 million years ago. Now, probably the most interesting fossil non-vascular plant is
aglophytin. This is a likely missing link. Well, of course, it's not missing because we found it,
but it's between non-vascular bryophytes and vascular plants. This land plant, like many
other early fossils of land plants, comes from a remarkable early Devonian deposit called the
Rhine chert in Scotland. This comes from about 400 million years ago. These fossils also offer a
great two-for-one special for paleontologists, as some of them preserve the remains of fungal
symbionts or microresi. Now, vascular plants, for the most part, are better adapted to living on
land than non-vascular plants. In fact, vascular plants are so successful in their evolution,
any plant that's not a bryophyte is a vascular plant or called a tracheophyte.
Now, as you can tell by that name, tracheophyte is referring to tissues. Vascular tissues
lend major advantages to plants on land. So, this extra support especially comes in handy
when you are transmitting water. In vascular plants, one set of tissue, the xylem tissue,
which you've probably heard of, that carried nutrients. And now, nutrient is coming from
the soil, nutrients along with water, whereas the other set, the phloem tissue,
is going to be carrying food manufactured by photosynthesis. So, in Ordovician and
Solerian landscapes, selection pressures would have favored a means of water retention,
perhaps resulting in plants with these regulator cells called stomata that help with the gas
exchange. Stomata are in all modern land plants other than liverworts, so these regulator cells
probably represent some sort of conservative strategy for adapting to land. Tough resistance
spores also would have been key for reproduction of land plants, and such a trait was likely
present in kerophytes first. Well, what are some of these earliest known vascular plant fossils?
Baragwanathia longifolia may be the oldest known vascular plant. This fossil is in late
Solerian rocks from about 420 million years ago in Australia, China, and Canada. Now, even though
this plant is older than aglofitan, the latter may reflect a lineage that lived millions of years
after the transition happened between vascular and nonvascular plants. Another one is rhinium,
and with it, astrozylin. These are among the earliest known fossil vascular plants. These come
from the early Devonian about 400 million years ago of Scotland, and when you look at those fossils,
you'll see the actual vascularized tissue that's characteristic of what we would see was xylem
and phloem tissue in those kinds of plants. Now, as you might have noticed so far,
we've talked about the foundations of a typical terrestrial ecosystem,
and that would be the photosynthetic producers and the decomposers. So what about animals?
What evidence relates to the early evolution of land animals? Well, most paleontologists
bet on arthropods as those most likely animals to hit the beach first, so to speak. This is because
arthropods had really tough exoskeletons. They could both hold in water and provide the structural
support then that they needed for moving out of the water. Some arthropods call celliceraids,
which is a group that includes horseshoe crabs and arachnids. They'd evolve book lungs early on
in the Paleozoic era. Now, book lungs are these internal respiratory structures. They differ from
book gills, which are external. Book lungs definitely provided an adaptive advantage
to any aquatic arthropod that went out on land for extended periods of time.
Well, evidence for the earliest animals on land comes from both body fossils and trace fossils.
The oldest known body fossil is pneumodesmus pneumonii, which comes from late celerian rocks
from about 428 million years ago, and these rocks are in the UK. This fossil is a probable myriapod.
Now, myriapods are a really interesting group of arthropods. They include millipedes and centipedes,
and as you know, both of those are land-dwelling animals. While molecular clocks applied to the
arthropod evolution indicate a probable divergence of centipedes from millipedes
at about 440 million years ago, that would have been in the earliest part of the celerian period.
So this date from molecular clocks actually is relatively close to the oldest body fossils
that we have of myriapods, which is a little gratifying for a change. Now, for trace fossils
of animals on land, we have tracts and burrows. Arthropod tracts have been interpreted from
dune deposits from the Cambrian Ordovician time from about 500 million years ago,
and those are in rocks in Canada. This means animals may have been crawling around on the land
before the establishment of land plants. It doesn't mean, though, that necessarily these
animals were staying on land. It's certainly possible they were adapted mostly for aquatic
conditions, and then occasionally they came up on land for food or mating. Well, for example,
modern female horseshoe crabs, they still come out of the sea every year, and they lay their eggs
on beaches. The males follow them to fertilize those eggs. Then they go straight back into the
sea, where they live the vast majority of their lives. So this is a great example of a type of
arthropod that still does that behavior. Well, interestingly, other trace fossil evidence comes
from millipede burrows. These have been interpreted from ancient soils, otherwise known as paleosols,
from late Ordovician rocks, and these were formed about 450 million years ago. We also found these
in the state of Pennsylvania. These trace fossils are particularly important because this evidence
predates most of the fossils of fungi, algae, and plants from terrestrial environments, although
by not more than about 20, 30 million years. So given all of this fossil evidence and knowledge
of these modern analogues, is it possible to reconstruct what the earliest terrestrial ecosystems
look like, say, oh, I don't know, in the Solerian period? Yes, it is. We can look at these environments
and think of them as being poorly developed soils with almost no organic matter, otherwise known as
humus. There might have been some fungi, perhaps some lichens. There would have been vertically
restricted algae or plants, either non-vascular or vascular. None of it would have been more than,
say, about like that, about a meter tall or 3.3 feet. That's based on the sizes of the fossil
plants we've found so far. Now animals would have been all invertebrates. They probably would have
been composed mostly of arthropods. Most of these arthropods would have been predators.
None would have been herbivores, but some might have been detritivores or eating detritus and
acting like decomposers. Hence, if you got back into your time machine, you traveled back to the
Solerian period, the world would look like this from orbit, and you would see a landscape that
would be a lot more interesting than what you saw in your visit to the Cambrian period. Well,
what would have happened to terrestrial environments without these evolutionary transitions?
Well, compared to the Cambrian terrestrial environments, these environments in the Solerian
would have had the following traits. There would have been less erosion of the landscape,
because land plants, their roots would have been holding the soil more in place. There would have
been more nutrient cycling, and none of it would have been very deep yet, but that was going to
happen later on in the Paleozoic. Fewer fluctuations and alterations would have been happening in the
hydrologic cycle. Think about how runoff from water going across the landscape would have been slowed
down by any sort of vegetation, however small. Less carbon dioxide and more oxygen would have been
in the atmosphere too, as these land plants started taking off and spreading across the landscapes.
All in all, this is an example of how some major transitions in evolution affected
the evolution of terrestrial ecosystems as a whole. Of course, these environments have been
changing ever since in accordance with earth processes and evolution. But these Ordovician,
Solerian, and Devonian environments gave us a foundation for future change. So what
addition to these ecosystems would have changed them even more? Well, the addition of a new group
of animals that later ended up ruling the earth. No, I'm not talking about dinosaurs,
I'm not talking about humans, I'm talking about insects. So please join me in the next lecture
as we travel the Devonian period and we look at the early evolution of insects and insect flight.
