Hello, and welcome to the lecture where we answer the age-old question of which came
first, the chicken or the egg, by using evolution.
As we'll see, understanding why the egg came first turns out to be an excellent example
of how a deep-time perspective can answer many previously unsolvable mysteries.
In our previous lecture, you learned all about one of the most important of all vertebrate
transitions, which was the evolution of loaf and fish into the first tetrapods, which started
walking on land.
Now this transition enabled vertebrates to occupy new ecological niches in these terrestrial
ecosystems of the Devonian and Carboniferous periods, and that was from about 400 to 300
million years ago.
Part and parcel with this transition was the co-evolution of forests, which included seed
plants and insects, which included flying insects.
The expansion of forests across Devonian and Carboniferous landscapes, along with the diversification
of insects and tetrapods, changed the face of the land in a radical way.
So what was next for tetrapods in their evolution?
Basically what happened were big changes in their reproduction, which reflected big changes
that also must have occurred in their terrestrial environments.
Now before we delve too deeply into the evidence for this transition in vertebrates, let's
go back to some of the first and best fossils related to this transition and where they
were found, joggins in Nova Scotia, Canada.
Now joggins is a world heritage site, which is at least partially because of its fossils,
and among those fossils are the oldest known reptiles.
Joggins is located in the Bay of Fundy, which has some of the highest tidal ranges in the
world, some of which reach about 8 to 9 meters or 26 to 30 feet.
Now Carboniferous age rocks there held these thick and economically valuable coal deposits.
These were mined as early as the 17th century, but more intensively in the 19th century.
This mining meant many people were looking at the rocks daily, which accordingly meant
they found many more fossils than these rocks.
Now it didn't hurt that the rocks were the products of rapid burial in deltas and former
coal swamps, which helped to preserve a plethora of fossils.
One site in particular joggins named Joggins Fossil Cliffs, this became quite famous for
its fossils, consisting of Carboniferous age plants, invertebrates, including insects,
and vertebrates.
Now the fossils of nearly 200 species have been identified from this site, and that has
provided paleontologists with this extraordinary glimpse of the paleoecosystems there from
about 310 million years ago.
Now the fame of the joggins fossil cliff site was known and praised by some of the best
known geologists in the world.
That included Charles Lyell, who taught geology to Charles Darwin, and Darwin even mentioned
the Carboniferous fossils of joggins in the Origin of Species.
Well the high tides of this area constantly scoured the outcrop.
That provided new exposures and more fossils every day, which is still the case today.
Well in 1852, Lyell and the great Canadian geologist William Dawson found a tetrapod
skeleton inside a fossil tree at that site.
This was the Lycopoda sigil area, was the plant in which that fossil was found, and
we talked about it just a few lectures back.
Now at the time, this was an unexpected find, but mostly because no one had ever thought
of examining a fossil tree for having vertebrate remains.
Even more interesting, the tree also contained fossil snails and millipedes, which, as potential
food items, gave a reason for the tetrapod to be in a tree trunk.
Nonetheless, this changed how paleontologists looked for vertebrate fossils after that in
the joggins area.
From then on, Dawson paid attention to the interiors of fossil trees wherever he examined
outcrops around the joggins fossil cliffs area.
This new search image eventually paid off when, in 1859, Dawson found the reptile Hylonomus
Lyellae, whose name means forest weller and in honor of Lyell, respectively.
This tetrapod was in a hollow space within the trunk of a sigil area, just like the previous
find from eight years before.
Nearly 150 years later, this fossil is still considered as the earliest known reptile.
Now, recall that it was in rocks from the Lake Carboniferous period from about 310 million
years ago, and in those 150 years since its discovery, only one other reptile close in
age has been found.
Now although the specimen was missing most of its skull, much of the remaining skeleton
was still there.
In life, it would have been at least 20 centimeters or 8 inches long and probably would have been
mistaken for a small lizard.
Now, other trunks of sigil area have been scrutinized in the joggins area since then,
and more than 30 stumps have yielded the skeletons of several hundred tetrapods, mostly amphibians
but including another primitive reptile.
Now is this some sort of amazing coincidence of some sort that these fossil trees would
just happen to preserve these vertebrate skeletons, including the oldest known reptile?
I think you know by now that coincidences are regarded with much suspicion in paleontology,
and they're not just accepted on face value.
Sure enough, a thorough investigation of the geological setting helped to answer questions
about how this could have happened.
The trunks of sigil area at this site were all vertical in place, reflecting the former
remains of a forest.
Nearby rivers or lakes flooded their banks, burying much of the forest, and perhaps the
trees soon died afterwards.
That preserved just their bottom most parts of their trunks and roots.
Now, as these trunks decayed, they attracted insects, millipedes, snails, and other invertebrates
that came to either eat the rotting wood or eat each other.
Now, in a typical food chain manner, these invertebrates in turn attracted tetrapods
that soon found out these rotting trunks were great places to pick up dinner.
Now, naturally, some of these tetrapods died while staying in these trunks.
And with more flooding and burial by sediments, they were entombed in their former dining
halls for the next 310 million years.
Now, with this compelling story in mind, we might now ask how the paleontologists who
found, collected, and studied these tetrapod skeletons were able to sort out which ones
were reptiles versus amphibians.
So what are the differences between these two groups of tetrapods?
As usual, you might first look at modern amphibians and reptiles, and that gives you
a starting point with distinguishing these two groups of tetrapods.
For example, amphibians have the following behaviors.
They have external fertilization, with the females laying eggs outside their bodies
that require fertilization by males afterwards.
They lay hundreds or thousands of eggs in water or otherwise moist environments.
And they have growth through a larval stage, otherwise known as a tab pole, and that's
in water where metamorphosis into an adult.
They have a dependency on water environments all through adulthood, especially when it
comes time to reproduce again.
Now, in contrast, reptiles have these behaviors.
They have internal fertilization, with the female receiving sperm placed directly inside
her by males.
There's growth of a membrane around each fertilized egg and development of other organs enclosed
by this membrane.
Now, laying a relatively smaller amount of enclosed eggs in a wide range of environments,
this was all done out of water, too.
An extended time of embryonic growth happened inside each egg, and that was followed by
emergence through hatching.
The hatchlings looked very much like miniature adults.
They had already gone through whatever metamorphosis that would typically happen with an amphibian
while inside their eggs.
Now, as you might have discerned, the most basic differences just pointed out between
amphibians and reptiles are not anatomical, but ecological.
Amphibians are very much tied to their watery environments.
They depend on water for reproduction, laying eggs and fertilizing those eggs externally.
The larval stage also needs water.
Adult survival normally requires water, too, although a few amphibians have evolved adaptations
for reducing water loss either through hibernation, also known as estivation, or tough skin.
Think of toads as examples of having the latter trade.
Well, there's also a good number of amphibians that spend much of their time on land and
completely out of the water during their adult lives, such as some salamanders.
Nonetheless, these salamanders typically live underneath moist vegetation, so finding them
often requires overturning leaves and rotting logs on the forest floor.
You no longer find salamanders, newts, or frogs in a desert, and even toads are arid environments.
Now, reptiles, in contrast, represent a declaration of independence from water.
They can reproduce on land without the need to stay near some water body.
Fertilization is internal, a major shift for vertebrates, which also resulted in the evolution
of male organs that were suited for introducing sperm inside of a female.
Reptiles also do not have a larval stage, so juveniles are going to hatch from an egg
as tiny versions of the adult.
This means there's no metamorphosis after hatching from an egg, just growth.
Although no reptile lives in a completely water-free environment, they're stingy with
what water they have.
Now to acquire it, they may get water from their food, such as plants for some herbivores.
To conserve water, they use overlapping scales.
Likewise, enclosed eggs used for reproduction basically put the water inside the egg.
It's a pond in microcosm.
So if you're thinking like a paleontologist though, you might ask a very good question
at this point.
How much evidence of these reproductive behaviors in both amphibians and reptiles actually fossilizes?
The short answer is, not much.
Although fossil eggs are relatively common in mesozoic deposits, starting about 200 million
years ago, they're unknown from carboniferous period rocks.
In fact, only one fossil egg has been reported from the Permian period too, and this is a
controversial specimen.
There are good reasons for why the first amniote eggs probably had poor preservation potential,
which we're going to discuss further on.
But in the meantime, we have to look at anatomical information then to discern when amphibians
made that evolutionary shift to reptiles.
Now I've been using this term reptile to describe the animals that follow amphibians,
but more properly, I should have been using another term I mentioned earlier, which is
amniote.
An amniote is a tetrapod that fits the behavioral traits mentioned earlier, such as internal
fertilization and the laying of enclosed eggs.
This group actually includes not just reptiles, but all mammals and birds.
Dinosaurs were also amniotes, as were many, many other reptile-like animals we'll discuss
in upcoming lectures.
In evolutionary classifications, the group amniota is defined as tetrapods that share
a common ancestor with two groups you can see today.
Synapsida, which comprises mammals and mammal-like reptiles, that we're going to discuss in the
upcoming lecture, and soropsida, which is all other reptiles.
That includes dinosaurs and birds.
Now the classification of vertebrates under these evolutionarily related groups, also
called clades, really changed how we name and discuss these animals.
Thus, very different groups of tetrapods previously placed under separate Linnaean categories,
such as class reptilia, class mammalia, order dinosauria, class avies.
These actually all share a common ancestry through their mode of reproduction.
So starting with amniotes, though, we can broadly classify its clades on the basis of
three skull types, and these are defined by the number of holes, or temporal fenestrate,
on the sides of their skulls.
A diapsid skull, for instance, has two temporal fenestrate on each side.
A synapsid has one, and an anapsid has none.
Amniotes possessing each of these skull types are referred to, then, as diapsid synapsid
and synanapsids.
For yourself, just feel the slight depression on each temple, and you're feeling your synapsid
fenestrate.
Diapsids and anapsids are both within soripsida, having had a common ancestor closer than that
with synapsids.
So these modern day examples of diapsids, what are they?
Blizzard, snakes, alligators, crocodiles, and birds, whereas turtles represent anapsids.
Now modern synapses are represented by all mammals.
Yes, you're a synapsid, as is your cat, dog, or any other mammal you can think of.
We'll get back to this evolutionary heritage in a future lecture, but for now I want you
to think about how all modern reptiles, birds, and mammals owe their present day existence
to the early evolution of amniotes.
So now you have an important clue about what anatomical features distinguish an amphibian
from a reptile, and they're in the skull.
One of the main differences is seen in the jaws, as reptiles developed greater biting
strength than their amphibian ancestors.
This evolution was presumably driven by their main prey items, which were these probably
very large carboniferous age insects and other invertebrates.
In diapsids and anapsids, one of the bones toward the back of the skull, the quadrate
bone, evolved so that it was lower and more forward.
This opened up an area in the back of the skull called the ottoch notch, which means
literally the hearing notch.
Considering that the first reptiles were out of the water, their hearing had to be adapted
for detecting sounds and air.
So it makes sense that natural selection would have resulted in additional changes to the
skull.
Now, interestingly, in synapses, the quadrate bone evolved in an opposite way, moving further
back and higher up in the skull.
This took out the ottoch notch.
This set up synapses to evolve their hearing in a different way.
That later involved modifying their jaw bones.
Oh, but I'm getting too far ahead of myself on this topic.
We'll cover that in more detail when we talk about the evolution of mammals.
Now other differences in the skeleton of the earliest reptiles that set them apart from
amphibians were adaptations that reflected being out of the water and spending all or
at least most of their time on land.
Thus their legs, pectoral and pelvic girdles and vertebrae all indicate better support for
movement on land.
The neck was also modified so that the uppermost two neck vertebrae or cervical vertebrae became
the atlas in the axis.
The atlas is the vertebrae on which the skull sits, whereas the axis is the bone directly
underneath the atlas.
Now one feature in particular in amniotes that helps to identify them is an ankle bone
called the astragalus, and that's absent in all non-amniotes.
This bone is a key feature that will figure into later classifications of amniotes, so
remember this one for later.
Now let's take a closer look at the one trait that really defines amniotes known as their
amniotic egg, also known as a clidoic egg.
What are some important traits of a clidoic egg?
Well here are a few of the most significant aspects as related to this evolutionary transition
from water to land and starting with eggshells.
Eggshells have various compositions but can be broadly categorized on the basis of whether
they're leathery or mineralized.
Leathery eggs have more of a tough, organically based covering, whereas these mineralized
eggs contain a little bit of calcite, which as you remember is calcium carbonate, combined
with organics.
Incidentally, this is one of the few examples of biomeneralization invertebrates that precipitates
calcite.
Now eggshells, regardless of whatever materials making them up, are porous and semipermeable.
That allows for respiration of the developing embryo while also retarding water loss.
That prevents also any other fluids from leaking out of the egg.
Now eggshells also provide some protection against predation, although later on this,
it was quickly overcome by the evolution of egg predators.
Now the overall anatomy of an egg, though, has of course an eggshell on the outside,
but the inside is very interesting in terms of how it reflects its evolutionary innovation.
The internal anatomy of an egg consists of the following.
The allantoids.
This is the purpose of this part is to exchange gases and handle waste products.
The amniion.
This part provides a membrane and that surrounds the embryo, keeps it enclosed in fluids, simply
called amniotic fluids.
Now the corion.
This membrane protects the embryo by lining the eggshell on the inside, but it also assists
with respiration.
The yolk sac.
This holds the food or the yolk for the embryo, which mostly contains proteins and fats.
Accordingly then, the yolk sac becomes smaller as the egg nears hatching.
So based on the characteristics of modern amniotic eggs, we can surmise a little bit
about how this evolution happened.
What do fossils show for this transition between amphibians and the first reptiles?
Well, let's start with body fossils.
There's a few, almost, amnios showing more of the transitions between these two groups.
The first of these we'll consider is a Cassinaria chidae, which comes from the early Carboniferous
of Scotland.
Cassinaria has enough amniote traits in its skeleton to provoke some pretty spirited debate,
especially considering it's from rocks that are about 340 million years old.
This makes it nearly 30 million years older than Hylonomus, which would certainly push
back the origin of amniotes as documented in the fossil record.
Now among these amniote traits were five digits on both the front and rear feet, and limbs
that seemed better adapted for life on land.
Sadly though, the skull was missing from the only specimen of this fossil found thus far.
So if another is discovered some day with a skull intact, this will test the hypothesis
of whether Cassinaria deserves the crown for the oldest amniote in the fossil record.
And with a skull, it could really wear that crown too.
But another interesting aspect of Cassinaria is its small size.
It was only about 15 centimeters or 6 inches long.
Now one suggestion made by paleontologists even before the discovery of this fossil is
that the transition between non-amniotes and amniotes would have happened with smaller
animals.
And this specimen seems to fit that hypothesis.
Now another interesting almost amniote is Wetheloyanna, which is also from the early
carboniferous of Scotland.
Now Wetheloyanna has been the subject controversy too, as it was originally identified as an
amniom.
And its initial diagnosis was accompanied by much fanfare that declared it as the world's
oldest reptile.
It certainly would have been older than hyalinomus as it comes from rocks about 330 million years
old.
Now more recent analyses of its skeleton though suggest it's a non-amniote but a very close
relative.
Regardless, Wetheloyanna and Cassinaria are extremely important specimens because they
give us a peak at that transition between amphibians and reptiles, which was apparently
happening by at least 340 to 330 million years ago.
Now of course the oldest known amniote is hyalinomus liely we mentioned earlier, but
another one and in only slightly younger geologically speaking is paleothyrus akateanna.
That's an amniote from the late carboniferous of Nova Scotia from about 310 million years
ago.
This is a very nice specimen in that it has a skull so it ties it in firmly with amniotes.
Interestingly, it has an anapsid skull, which note that there are no holes in the skull.
That's something that many paleontologists consider as a more primitive condition to
reptiles.
It's from rocks about the same geologic age as hyalinomus, but usually is considered
as slightly younger, but very close together in age.
Other early amniotes are represented by a number of other late carboniferous fossils,
two of which I'll mention here.
This is another fossil found in rocks of Nova Scotia from about 306 million years ago.
Now this was a relatively large reptile with a length of about 50 centimeters or 20 inches.
That makes it more iguana sized.
But perhaps the most interesting aspect of this fossil is its interpretation as a synapsid,
which would make it the oldest in the fossil record.
Now Petrolacosaurus was slightly smaller and younger, measuring about 40 centimeters, which
would be about 16 inches long, and it came from rocks that are closer to 300 million
years old.
Its skull is clearly more like that of a diapsid, in that it shows two temporal fenestria.
Now sadly, no definite fossil eggs have been found from the Paleozoic era, let alone in
rocks that also contain the first amniote fossils.
Now this situation, though, is probably more because these eggs were leathery rather than
mineralized.
As soon as amniote eggs began incorporating calcite in their eggshells, well, their preservation
potential improved drastically.
Now an increase in size and thickness of these eggshells also probably helped their likelihood
of making it into the fossil record, and even eggshell fragments can be identified.
Now as mentioned before, mineralized fossil eggs became common starting in the Triassic
period around 200 million years ago, and of course mineralized dinosaur eggs are abundantly
preserved in rocks from the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods starting about 200 million years ago
to 65 million years ago.
So in comparison to eggs, amniote trace fossils from the late Carboniferous, namely tracts,
are relatively common, but how to distinguish trackways made by non-amniotes versus amniotes
when you encounter them in Carboniferous rocks?
There's a little checklist that paleontologists can use to help.
Tracts of amniotes are often going to have prominent hard claws, and that means they're
going to leave sharper impressions at the ends of the digits.
Now both the front feet and the rear feet show five toe impressions, whereas non-amniote
tracts have only four toe impressions left by the front foot.
Evidence of scales, whether they're on the feet or other parts of a trace fossil, such
as on the bottom of the body.
That may also show if it's a reptile.
Trackways showing some sort of evidence of a less sprawling gate indicating a greater
ease of moving on land, again, is going to be more suggestive of a reptile.
So the oldest known tracks, interpretives, amniotracks come from New Brunswick, Canada.
These were in late Carboniferous rocks from about 320 million years ago.
Some of these fossil tracks in late Carboniferous rocks also of Alabama and elsewhere in the
U.S. have been identified as those reptiles.
These come from rocks that are about 310 million years old.
Collectively then, this assemblage of early fossil amniotes and their trace fossils indicate
they had already diverged into anapsis, synapsis, and diapsis by about 300 million years ago,
possibly representing a rapid diversification.
So in looking at the big picture, that is, what was happening with global climate that
could have triggered or accelerated this evolution in tetrapods, the most significant
event was about 318 million years ago.
This time marks the boundary that separates lower Carboniferous period rocks from upper
Carboniferous period rocks, which geologists in North America normally call the Mississippian
and the Pennsylvanian periods respectively.
Now what happened that would cause such an obvious geological boundary was a major extinction
event.
This was linked to global cooling and glaciation.
As you recall from our discussion of the evolution of the first forest, the growth of these ecosystems
on land are thought to have lowered CO2 levels in the atmosphere, which naturally led to
global cooling.
Now, conversely, the forests were also raising oxygen to higher levels.
That would have been favorable for animals capable of devoting more energy to reproduction
and other life functions.
Those organisms poorly adapted for this onset of cooler climate, they went extinct and thus
that opened up new ecological niches for their successors.
What also happened was that global cooling led to a drop in sea level.
That exposed more land surfaces for the expansion of tetrapods.
So even if amniotes had evolved before 318 million years ago, which they may have done,
their evolution would have received a big boost with this change in climate and taken
off from there.
And although we may think of all reptiles as cold-blooded, these new amniotes may have
been more tolerant to cooler conditions compared to some of their more amphibian-like competitors.
So let's get back to an important question in the evolution of vertebrates.
Why was the development of enclosed eggs so important?
The simple answer is that it opened more options for tetrapods to live their entire lives on
land and reproduce on land.
Furthermore, they could better protect their eggs when these were laid on land.
For example, at the time egg laying evolved, egg predation pressures on land were probably
quite low.
The only other tetrapods that could have eaten eggs would have been amphibians.
And because amphibians were mostly restricted to the water, they would have had to work
a whole lot harder to get up on land and find eggs.
A fair number of insects today are egg predators, especially ants, and insects were certainly
around during the carboniferous period, but none of the insect groups known to prey on
amniote eggs had evolved yet in the carboniferous.
In other words, terrestrial environments would have offered a clear adaptive advantage to
any tetrapods that could cut themselves off from those water bodies.
So the development of extensive forests just before the evolution of amniotic eggs suggests
that terrestrial ecosystems were likely a driving factor in amniote evolution.
This timing demonstrates yet another probable relationship between tetrapod evolution and
land plants.
Now, first, tetrapods themselves evolved into the shady forests that held so much food and
shelter.
Then, as these forests perhaps became patchy, and water bodies became more separated from
one another, as that happened with global climate change during the carboniferous period, natural
selection would have favored those tetrapods that could still maintain body moisture and
reproduce without shade or water.
So once freed from the water, this new lineage of tetrapods could move into and evolve in
a wide variety of environments and land.
They could face new selection pressures that sorted out their genes and ways that produced
the many new clades of anapsis, synapsis, and diapsis during the Permian and Triassic
periods from about 300 to 200 million years ago.
And that's also a broad answer to the chicken and egg question.
The first amniotes producing eggs date from at least 310 million years ago, possibly much
earlier, while the first bird ancestor, as we will see, dates from about 150 to 145 million
years ago.
That puts the gap between eggs and birds at over 150 million years.
That's a span that also included two major extinction events, and that's only about halfway
to the chicken.
From the first birds all the way to jungle fowl and then to the first actual chickens
is the second almost equally enormous interval.
So this is deep time popping up in an almost mind boggling way.
The first eggs predate the first chickens by about a third of a billion years.
Think about that one and how prepared you're going to be to answer the chicken or egg riddle
next time it's posed to you.
So next time, what we'll do is take a very big step from amniotes toward birds.
The diapsis that evolved during this large span of time were ancestors of the first dinosaurs.
And that came about 80 million years down the evolutionary path from the beginnings
of amniotes with little hyalinomas.
So in our next lecture, we're going to jump ahead to the Triassic period, where we're
going to examine how small diapsis within a clade called the archosaurs led to one
of the most evolutionary successful amnio groups of all time, the dinosaurs.
