Hello, and welcome to our lecture about the transition from dinosaurs to birds.
In our previous lecture, we took a broad look at the marine and flying reptiles that lived
at the same time as the dinosaurs during the Mesozoic era, about 240 through 65 million
years ago. Among these reptiles were many sores, ichthyosaurs, plesiosaurus, mosasaurus,
and pterosaurs, but it also included a few marine reptiles we see today, such as sea
snakes and sea turtles. These animals provide many interesting examples of the evolutionary
directions taken by different amniote lineages at different times.
Now there was some convergent evolution, especially where these different paths led
to superficially similar outcomes, such as ichthyosaurs resembling modern dolphins
or pterosaurs resembling bats. Birds represent yet another possible convergence in adaptive
behavior that happened during the second half of the Mesozoic era, starting about 150 million
years ago. Given how strongly the evolution of flight in birds resembles flight found
in pterosaurs. The evolution of birds, though, differs from that of pterosaurs on the basis
of two major points. One is that birds almost certainly evolved from a lineage of flightless
theropod dinosaurs. The other is that pterosaurs, along with dinosaurs, mosasaurus, and many
other previously successful animals, all went extinct at the end of the Cretaceous period,
whereas birds survived and thrived afterwards. Today, for example, we have 10,000 species
of birds or about 10 times the number of dinosaur species we've named from their 165 million
years of Earth history. So what made birds so special in their evolution that they survived
a mass extinction, one that took out the largest and the most successful reptiles of the land
and sea? Well, part of the answer to this question is related to that first point, that
birds are, according to the best recent work, the descendants of dinosaurs. This means that
dinosaurs did not really go extinct. But let me tell you a tale regarding the oldest known
bird, and serendipity, the best friend of a paleontologist. You'll remember that in
the first lecture of this course, we briefly mentioned one of the most famous fossils in
the world, archaeopteryx. Now, archaeopteryx is a fantastic example of a so-called transitional
fossil because of its mix of dinosaurian and avian traits. We're going to talk about
this fossil bird in more detail later, but in this example, we're also going to link
its fate with that of a paleontologist. The paleontologist was John Ostrom, a formerly
of Yale University, who was one of the most accomplished vertebrate paleontologists of
the second half of the 20th century. Ostrom was known for many contributions to vertebrate
paleontology, but he was probably most famous for his early promotion of evidence supporting
the hypothesis that birds are related to dinosaurs. This actually was not a new idea
at all. In fact, Charles Darwin's colleague and friend, Thomas Huxley, originally proposed
it in the 1860s. Now, I previously introduced you to Huxley in the first lecture for his
interest in the evolution of crayfish, but his interests were not just limited to invertebrates,
as he was a skilled anatomist of vertebrates too. So how did Huxley get interested in
the evolution of birds? Well, he was motivated by the first described specimen of archaeopteryx.
This was found in a late Jurassic formation in Germany and dating from about 150 to 145
million years ago. The timing of this discovery could not have been much better from Huxley's
standpoint, as Darwin's little book, The Origin of Species, had been published in 1859, and
this specimen of archaeopteryx was uncovered only two years later in 1861. Huxley published
several papers about archaeopteryx, in which he pointed out it was a beautiful example
of a form that was intermediate in its anatomy between reptiles, specifically dinosaurs,
and birds. So back to the near present, and with Ostrom, who was very much aware of Huxley's
works from a century before, and how this connection between dinosaurs and birds had
been made well before his own research on this topic. Now in 1970, Ostrom had already
started a very successful career as a paleontologist, but he also made a most remarkable and accidental
discovery that year. He was visiting a small museum in the Netherlands, the Taylor Museum
in Harlem, to study a late Jurassic pterosaur specimen that came from the same formation
in Germany as archaeopteryx. Well, upon examining the specimen, though, he realized it was not
a pterosaur at all, because it had feather impressions associated with its wings. Instantly,
he knew this was a specimen of archaeopteryx, the oldest known bird. Now at the time, this
was only the fourth specimen of archaeopteryx discovered since the 1860s. Most amazing of
all, it had been collected originally in 1855. That meant it actually was the first discovered
archaeopteryx, because the one that inspired Huxley, it was found in 1861. Well, Ostrom's
fortuitous discovery also presented him with an ethical dilemma. He wanted to study the
specimen, but he was afraid that the museum curator, once he knew the real identity of
the fossil, wouldn't let him borrow it for further study. But he also felt he couldn't
lie about its real identity, either. Well, fortunately, Ostrom did the right thing. He
told the curator this was a specimen of archaeopteryx. The curator then scared him by picking
up the specimen and taking it out of sight for a few minutes. But he soon returned with
it wrapped for Ostrom to take with him back to the U.S. for proper description. So with
this, the curator said to Ostrom, rather gratefully, you have made my museum famous. So this story
had a happy ending for all people involved, and science gained one more specimen of this
ancient bird, perhaps the most famous example of a transitional fossil. While also keeping
in mind that luck meets preparation sometimes in paleontology, let's go back to considering
the evolution of birds. Perhaps the best way to start such a discussion is to ask simply,
what is a bird? Well, most fundamentally, birds are dinosaurs, anatomically and evolutionarily,
just as humans are mammals. Now, this used to be a really shocking idea, somewhat heretical
fact. Back when this was the common view that birds descended from archosauror reptiles
that predated the dinosaurs. But so much evidence gathered during the past few decades from
both fossils and studies of modern birds support this hypothesis that it's now mainstream
and widely accepted that birds are dinosaurs. So we're now very certain that birds descended
from small theropod dinosaurs during the middle to late Jurassic, probably from about 165
to 155 million years ago. The reason why we think this transition happened well before
Archaeopteryx, which, as you recall, is about 150 to 145 million years old, is because of
how far Archaeopteryx had progressed down the evolutionary line from its theropod ancestors.
Archaeopteryx already had feathers adapted for flight and a number of other traits that
showed how this divergence of theropods into avian and non-avian categories had already
taken place quite a while before it flew in the same skies with pterosaurs. So that's
the big picture of birds as defined by the revolution. What are birds today compared
to their theropod ancestors in terms of their anatomy? Well, birds minimally have, or had
and later lost, the following traits. All birds have feathers, of course. They have
a reduction in the number and the sizes of the vertebrae and their tails. Look at the
tailbone of a rotisserie chicken, for instance. And what's left of an originally long theropod
tail composed of more than 20 vertebrae is now this stubby little thing called a pygostyle.
Their forearms, consisting of the radius, ulna, and combined wrist bones and digits,
are far more than 90% the length of their humerus. Their overall forelimbs, including
the humerus, are more than 120% longer than their hind limbs. Their feet have three forward
pointing digits, but the first digit, called the hallux, equivalent to our big toe, points
backwards. The first four of these traits are adaptations for flight, in that feathers
on the arms aid in aerodynamics, a reduced tail decreases weight in drag, the arms are
better suited for rapidly flapping wings, and the hind limbs shortened in inverse proportion
to better accommodate the lengthening of the forelimbs. But what about bird feet? Why is
the backward pointing, or otherwise called reversed hallux, so important in birds? And
how is this related to flight? Well, it's an adaptation for perching, and specifically
for perching on tree branches. You can imitate this adaptation by using your thumb as the
hallux, and the first three fingers on the same hand, and bring their tips forward. This
range of motion in the digits allows for flighted birds to more firmly grip branches. This comes
in very handy when you're flapping from tree to tree, and effectively prevents falling
out of those same trees, which would have been very bad for their continued survival
and evolution. Now, of course, there are a few exceptions to these anatomical generalities
when you apply it to all birds, especially when you look at their feet. Many shorebirds,
for example, have a greatly reduced hallux, and only the first three forward-facing digits
show up in their tracks. Why? The explanation, as usual, is evolutionarily related. If an
anatomical trait is no longer needed, natural selection over time may reduce the original
ancestral trait to a vestigial one. Many shorebirds, and especially flightless birds, have had
no need to perch for quite a while in their respective lineages. Think about the likelihood
of a seagull perching on a telephone wire, or an ostrich clutching onto the branch of
a tree, and you'll quickly get what I'm saying. Consequently, this reversed hallux eventually
went away in some bird lineages, just like the tail vertebrae of their theropod ancestors
went away with the early evolution of birds. In the evolution of some birds, though, this
hallux didn't go away, but it was joined by another one of its digits pointing backwards,
making sort of an X pattern in the foot instead of a trident. We see this kind of foot in
woodpeckers, and woodpeckers use the two toes pointing forward and the two pointing backward
for added stability while climbing vertically along tree trunks. Hence, many variations
on a main theme of this basic bird foot have been expressed since the time of the dinosaurs
through the evolution of birds, depending on selection pressures and genetics. So what
are some of these anatomical similarities we have between birds and theropod dinosaurs?
Well, because we paleontologists are so proud of archaeopteryx, as an example of a transitional
fossil, we'll return to that. Archaeopteryx had the following traits. It had a tail with
21 to 22 vertebrae. This made its tail long for a bird, but short for a theropod dinosaur.
It had a furcula, also known as a wishbone, that you might see in a chicken or a Thanksgiving
turkey. This is a bone formed by fusing both clavicles. This bone is in all birds, even
flightless ones, but it only occurs in a few types of theropods. Its breast bone, or
sternum, was poorly developed, unlike those of flighted birds, which have a prominent
keel to their sternum. Now, this trait suggests that archaeopteryx didn't have the proper
attachment sites for big pectoral muscles needed for vigorous flapping. So even paleontologists
have proposed that it was a weak flyer, or maybe even mostly glided. Now, the flight
feathers on archaeopteryx were very similar to those on birds. They have an uneven symmetry
on either side of the quill, also known as a rachus. These feathers, though, are different
from the feathers found thus far in theropods. Yes, some non-avian theropods had feathers,
which we'll return to later. Now, the skull had teeth in both jaws, which modern birds
certainly do not have. Oddly enough, though, the teeth aren't serrated, which is common
in theropods. The fingers on its hand were very much like those of a theropod, and even
have sharp claws on their ends. Moreover, it doesn't show the fusing of the wrist bone
and reductions of digits seen in the forearms of birds. Just take a close look at a chicken
wing sometime, and you'll see its barely recognizable digits on the tips of the wing. Now, computer-aided
tomography or CAT scans done on skull interiors of archaeopteryx also revealed that it was
more bird-brained than reptilian-brained. Add even more to this interesting blend
of avian and dinosaurian traits was a recent study on the probable growth rate of archaeopteryx,
which, likewise, produced mixed results. In 2009, paleontologists analyzed bones of all
known specimens of archaeopteryx for growth lines. The reasoning behind the study was
that if archaeopteryx had a fast growth rate comparable to birds, then it was more closely
related to birds than dinosaurs. On the other hand, if it had a slower growth rate, then
it was more akin to a dinosaur. Well, the results were what we scientists like to call
interesting. Its calculated growth rate, and hence metabolism, was three times slower than
that of a typical bird, and more on the lower range for an endothermic or warm-blooded animal.
This made archaeopteryx, at least in its physiology, more like a dinosaur and less like a bird.
After all, modern birds grow to adulthood very quickly. In many songbirds, for example,
hatchlings can become fledglings within just a few weeks, and they're flying, looking
for food, and seeking mates well within their first year. We know from calculated growth
rates of non-avian dinosaurs, like Tyrannosaurus rex, that some of these also grew up quickly
compared to modern reptiles, yet they were also slower than modern birds. This meant
archaeopteryx was in between a dinosaur and a bird, but leaning more toward the dinosaur
side of that spectrum. All in all, one could not ask for a much better example of a blend
between dinosaur and bird than archaeopteryx. And what continually astonishes paleontologists
about this fossil species is how we are still learning about it, more than 150 years after
its discovery and following intense study and considerable scientific debate.
So now let's get back to feathers in birds and dinosaurs. Ostrom pushed the hypothesis
that birds evolved from theropod dinosaurs on the basis of some anatomical studies he
did of the theropod dionicus, which he did in the 1960s. Dionicus, described and interpreted
by Ostrom and others, was regarded as a pretty terrifying dinosaur. It was fast-moving, agile,
and a predator that likely was a pack hunter. And it took down much larger prey through
a combination of high activity levels, speed, strength, and cooperation. Now these were
all qualities that argued for endothermia. And this was the real start of a radical idea,
that some dinosaurs wore warm-blooded. This is because birds are also warm-blooded or
endothermic, so linking birds and bird-like dinosaurs than constituting the next step.
So other paleontologists soon followed in Ostrom's footsteps and they continued to
affirm this hypothesis with more anatomical evidence that linked birds to theropod dinosaurs.
Now one problem remained for the supporters of this hypothesis. And it was frequently
brought up by the critics. And it was an important one. Not a single non-avian dinosaur had
been found with feathers. Now this was not at all surprising to paleontologists though,
as feathers have a much lower preservation potential in the fossil record when you compare
it to say mineralized tissue like bones. Nonetheless, the exceptional preservation of
archaeopteryx, complete with these delicate feather impressions, set a high bar for paleontologists
to find some non-avian dinosaurs that showed the same trait. Then starting in the late
1990s, paleontologists began to find a treasure trove of small feathered theropod dinosaurs
from the early Cretaceous in China, dating to about 120 million years ago. The last time
I counted, there were between 15 and 20 species of feathered dinosaurs and more are being
described every year. One of the most spectacular of these we mentioned in the first lecture
along with archaeopteryx and that was the feathered theropod micro raptor. This little
dinosaur was a rather astonishing find because it had feathers on all four limbs and its
tail, which made it look more like a biplane with a kite on the end. Although it probably
was a glider and didn't have true powered flight like birds or pterosaurs, it represented
a vertical shift in the ecological niches of dinosaurs more suited to birds in which
they had started going up into the trees. As a result, micro raptor and several other
small feathered dinosaurs have been interpreted as tree dwellers and they also show adaptations
in their hands for gripping vertical surfaces. Now, the oldest feathered dinosaur, also
from China, Anciornus Huxleyi, yes, named after Thomas Huxley, now dates from the Middle
Jurassic at about 160 to 155 million years ago. Thus, it predates archaeopteryx by about
5 to 10 million years. Even Velociraptor, a theropod from the late Cretaceous from about
70 million years ago, which has been portrayed in dinosaur art and movies as a scaly reptile,
has recently undergone an extreme makeover in this respect. One study showed that Velociraptor
had attachments for quills on its arm, similar to what can be seen on the forearms of vultures.
So now, paleontological artists have gone back to the drawing board, so to speak, and
they're illustrating Velociraptor and many other theropod dinosaurs with feathers. Now,
the earliest birds following archaeopteryx in the fossil record, they likewise show
transitional elements between feathered theropod dinosaurs and modern birds. Oh, for example,
the bird Confucius Ornus. It dates from the early Cretaceous of China from about 120 to
25 million years ago. It has plenty of flight feathers. It has a pygostyle and a toothless
beak. In fact, it seems to have the first known bird beak. So far, so good. You just
want to call it a bird and just be done with it. But it's not that simple, because it also
has prominent claws on its hands as well as a reduced sternum. In that respect, it's more
like archaeopteryx or a feathered non-avian theropod. So is it still a bird? Well, yes,
but we consider it a primitive bird and one a little bit further down the evolutionary
road from archaeopteryx and dinosaurs. Now, bird watchers spotted a Confucius Ornus
today, though they would surely be sending photos and frantic emails to friends describing
it as the strangest bird they've ever seen, quickly followed by adding it to their lifeless.
With all of this in mind about feathered dinosaurs and primitive feathers and birds, we're all
now very sure that feathers first evolved in theropod dinosaurs before fully flighted
birds had evolved. Now, feathers are basically outgrowths of the epidermis and their heavily
modified scales, the latter of which are still present in birds. So what could have caused
the selection of feathers as modified scales in dinosaurs before flight had evolved? Two
good explanations have been put forth to explain the evolution of feathers. One is that feathers
were also used for insulation. And once some theropod dinosaurs became endothermic, feathers
helped to retain body heat. In this sense, feathers also would have helped in protecting
and incubating eggs. Another reason, and I think a very compelling one, is that feathers
were used for display. That is to say to identify species and potential mates. Now, this isn't
so far-fetched at all considering the importance of plumage in modern birds for a species identification.
Court ship and pair bonding. Think about peacocks and other colorful birds that use their feathers
to attract and woo mates without necessarily using these for flight. In fact, recent analyses
of fossil feathers from several theropod dinosaurs from China, namely, angiornus, sinusoropteryx
and cyanornothosaurus, as well as the bird confususornus, revealed structures consistent
with specific pigments seen in modern bird feathers. Consequently, paleontologists can
now say, with reasonable confidence, whether these or other feathered animals had red,
yellow, white, black, or even iridescent feathers. Brightly colored feathers, of course, would
have related directly to sexual selection, a very important part of natural selection
in general. In other words, the dinosaurs with the most attractive traits, from a dinosaurian
perspective, that is, would have passed on their genes to future generations of behavior
we still see reflected in birds. So what's also very cool about this research is it tells
us that dinosaurs, by default, had color vision. Now, how did flight evolve from these feathers,
but originally flightless theropod dinosaurs? Well, there's three main hypotheses that
have been proposed. The first one is the ground-up hypothesis. This one states that fast-running
small theropods evolved flight from the selection of flight-adapted traits on the ground, such
as escaping predators and catching prey. The tree's down hypothesis, which states that
small theropods were tree climbers, they evolved flight first then by gliding, and then that
evolved to powered arms-flapping flight. But perhaps my favorite hypothesis, though, and
one that synthesizes aspects of the preceding two, is the incline-assisted running hypothesis.
This hypothesis is supported by experiments done on living birds to see whether having
half a wing was better than no wing when they were made to run up this vertical or otherwise
steeply inclined surface. Now, the experimenters clipped the feathers of the birds. Had them
run up inclines and timed them. And the answer was yes, flapping with only half a wing still
gave these birds a decided advantage in their speed. This meant that half-winged birds could
escape more easily from predators than no winged birds, which would have overcome a
major selection pressure. So now just substitute small no winged theropods for no winged birds,
then add lots of big theropod predators to this equation, and you'll see what I mean
about natural selection happening very quickly. So a similar test was done on differently
aged birds, from hatchlings to fledgelings, by dropping them from a modest height and
timing them in their descent as they furiously flapped their wings. Sure enough, furiously
flapped half wings slowed their fall significantly. That better assured a soft landing. This showed
how well even partially formed wings in feathered arboreal theropods would have increased their
likelihood of surviving a fall out of a nest from a tree. The results of these experiments
then also address a sarcastic rhetorical question I've sometimes heard uttered by critics of
evolutionary theory. What good is a half wing? Well the short answer is blots. The long answer
though is that the evolutionary path to flighted birds may have varied, but for whatever traits
favored any slight survival advantage, these adaptations emerged after many generations
of natural selection. So other evidence that supports the dinosaurian ancestry for birds,
this comes from developmental biology, studies of modern bird behavior, genetics, and more
paleontology. Well for example, teeth show up early in the embryos of birds, even chickens,
demonstrating an unused trait that birds share with dinosaurs. We also have very good evidence
from a few theropod dinosaurs indicating a convergence in their nesting behaviors with
those of modern flightless birds. Adult skeletons of at least two theropod dinosaurs, Truodon
of Montana and Citi Potti of Mongolia from the late Cretaceous period from about 70 to
75 million years ago, both of these dinosaurs were found on top of eggs containing embryonic
bones of the same species. Thus, these dinosaurs were likely protecting and perhaps insulating
their eggs just like modern ground nesting birds. A study of these dinosaurs also indicated
that the ones on the nest were probably males. This is exactly the same behavior we see in
modern ostriches and emus, where the females lay the eggs and the males tend to the nest
afterwards. Well another exciting find with regard to dinosaur bird connections deals
with the similarities of soft tissues derived from Tyrannosaurus rex and extant birds. In
this discovery, organic soft tissues were unexpectedly discovered deep inside the femur
of a T-rex from Montana. These soft tissues once analyzed were determined to be from the
dinosaur itself and they weren't the result of contamination by say modern organisms.
Cells in these tissues matched the forms of those in some birds, as well as proteins
in the tissue also matched those of birds. Sorry, no DNA was found though, so don't be
expecting any clone dinosaurs coming out of this research, but it did answer a long
asked question. What might T-rex have tasted like? Hmm, chicken. So given this overwhelming
amount of evidence about the evolutionary connections between theropod dinosaurs and birds, which
continues to grow every day, I and many other paleontologists would be extremely surprised
to find out this was not the case. In fact, to be wrong on this one would be so extraordinary
that we would probably be wandering around dazed and confused. In science we always
acknowledge the possibility of being wrong, but this is a hypothesis that's firmer than
most we have in paleontology. One thing's for sure though, as more researchers continue
to flesh out the details of this hypothesis, we're still going to be surprised by what
we find out about this evolutionary transition. So just how major was this transition from
dinosaurs to birds? Probably the simplest way to answer this question is to ask another
question. How would the world be different if birds had not evolved from dinosaurs? Well,
for one, I could think of, would be that the world would be a lot quieter without birds.
Think of no songbirds anywhere, with their thousands of songs and calls vanishing from
our auditory worlds. Now on the upside of things, I also can't help but think of how
the lyrics of sappy popular songs would have to use other animals suddenly appearing when
you're close to a loved one. But the air would be strangely silent wherever you traveled
and that would be a huge aesthetic loss. Another impact of an avian-free world would
be with insects, because many of these same songbirds are also excellent insectivores.
Get rid of insect-eating birds and expect a boom in the populations of flying insects
including mosquitoes. And although some birds today serve as carriers for few important
human diseases such as West Nile virus and avian flu, their consumption of mosquitoes
and other disease-buried insects also has a positive effect. In fact, many flying insects
surely underwent their own major selection pressures and evolution because of bird predation.
For an example of this, think of monarch butterflies and other types of butterflies and their erratic
flight patterns in general, which evolved in response to avians pursuing them as snacks.
But probably one of the most important large-scale roles played by birds ecologically is with
relation to flowering plants. Birds evolved at the same time and in the same environments
as flowering plants, and today birds are major cohorts in the seed dispersal of these plants.
Imagine how many seeds and fruits are eaten by birds, and then think of how these same
seeds are deposited with fertilizer already around them. Furthermore, because these birds
fly, the seeds can be carried far away from wherever these plants live.
So this interrelationship between birds and flowering plants provides us with a good reason
to follow this lecture with a look at the early evolution of flowering plants. This
was an evolutionary transition that changed terrestrial environments in a big way, starting
in the Cretaceous period at least 125 million years ago. But the evolution of flowering
plants is also intimately tied in with other animal enablers that may have helped them
to evolve, such as insect pollinators. And that will be the topic of our next lecture.
The co-evolution of flowering plants and their pollinators. See you in the Cretaceous.
