Hello, and welcome back for a lecture about flowering plants and the animals that pollinate
these plants.
This is an especially wide-ranging transition to cover in a single lecture.
First, flowering plants known as angiosperms, they number about 250,000 species, and that
accounts for about 80% of all land plants.
There's no way we can hope to do justice to this group in all of its richness, so we'll
just focus on some key points.
Second, the animals that do the pollinating, insects, birds, and even mammals, are arguably
even more diverse.
That means this transition involves an exceptionally large and varied cross-section of animals
as well.
Third, this transition resulted in a burst of biodiversity of plant and animal life as
we know them today.
Although some of the results may seem subtle, the overall impact of flowering plants and
their pollinators was perhaps no less important for the overall future of life on land than,
say, the first forests had been.
Back when they transformed the atmosphere and the landscapes of the planet.
Now, in the previous lecture, we examined the evolutionary transition of theropod dinosaurs
into birds, and that happened during the Jurassic and Cretaceous periods from about 150 to 65
million years ago.
We also pointed out how birds quickly became important parts of Mesozoic terrestrial ecosystems
and that they somehow had the right adaptations for surviving a mass extinction, which happened
at the end of the Mesozoic era.
Although this mass extinction resulted in the end of the great non-avian dinosaurs,
the evolution of avian dinosaurs continued in the form of birds.
At least part of this evolutionary success of birds, though, is very likely linked to
the development of flowering plants from non-flowering plants.
In fact, the early Cretaceous, which spanned from about 145 to 100 million years ago, was
a time of many important evolutionary transitions that ultimately affected our modern world
and even our evolution.
The origins and diversification of birds overlap with the origins of flowering plants, and
that happened by at least 130 million years ago.
Flowering plants, in turn, were quickly followed by the origins and explosive diversification
of many pollinated insects.
We don't think this was a coincidence, as most of the earliest birds and their feathered
dinosaur relatives, plants, and insects must have interacted with one another in very complex
ways, similar to how they do today.
Now in our modern world, we're so surrounded by the effects of flowering plants and their
pollinators, as exemplified by bees and butterflies, that it may be really difficult for you to
imagine a world without any of these.
So in this lecture, we'll go back to the early Cretaceous, when primitive flowering plants
or pangiosperms evolve from non-flowering seed plants called gymnosperms, and we'll examine
the probable selection pressures that led to this transition.
We'll also consider how pollinators of these first flowering plants, especially insects,
must have co-evolved with these plants.
Along with this, we also should think about how animals other than insects, such as, say,
birds and mammals, must have had their evolution affected as well, especially after the end
of the Cretaceous period, starting about 65 million years ago.
Being a flowering plant, as well as their pollinators, also must have provided some sort
of advantage for making it through that end Cretaceous mass extinction.
And part of this co-evolution is related to flighted insects and birds, in which their
flying abilities help to disperse pollen, seeds and fruits throughout terrestrial environments
more easily than, say, through wind or water alone, in a more precise way.
Flower anatomy evolved to take advantage of these opportunities, with new parts likely
derived from the modification of non-flowering gymnosperms, while insect anatomies also evolved
reciprocally to opportunities offered by the flowers.
Before we go too far into the evolution of flowering plants and their animal cohorts,
we probably need to go over some basic botany first.
For example, what is a flowering plant?
Well, seems like a simple question.
Flowering plants have flowers, right?
But if you go far back enough in geologic time, this provokes some serious discussion
in arguments among paleontologists.
Flowering plants are called angiosperms, and they're classified under the clade Magnolio
fita, flowering plants reproduced by using pollen, which contains male sperm.
This pollen then somehow has to be transported to the female parts of the same species of
plant, which contains ovules.
If the sperm and the ovules get together and cause fertilization, the ovules make seeds.
Then fruits grow to surround these seeds.
These flowers contain both pollen and ovule producing parts.
Among these parts are stamens, and these have filaments connected to anthers, anthers then
produce pollen.
Pistols, which with stigmas in style, receive the pollen and contain the ovules.
Flowering plants differ from non-flowering seed plants, such as gymnosperms, by having
an ovary surrounding the ovule, and that becomes the fertilized seed.
This ovary is what later grows into a fruit.
Flowers also have nectar, and that's a sugary substance produced by appropriately named
structures called nectaries.
Now, gymnosperms, such as pine trees and other conifers, they also reproduce by using pollen,
and they have male and female cones.
But of course, gymnosperms lack flowers, and thus they don't have an ovary to enclose
the seed.
Hence the literal translation of gymnosperm, which means they could seed.
The evolution of both a flower and fruit in a plant has a means for reproduction, and
what impact this had on terrestrial animal life really can't be overstated.
Once precursors of these features started being selected, and with winged insects helping
with that selection, this evolutionary transition probably accelerated because of how it became
a reciprocal relationship.
In this mutualism, insects enabled flowering plants to more easily reproduce and spread
their genes, while the plants provided the insects with new energy-rich food sources
that didn't cost the plant too much in terms of matter or energy.
From the start, flowering plants offered terrestrial animals a grade 3 for 1 deal, pollen, nectar
and fruit, to entice them into landing a hand, or rather 4 to 6 legs, to the reproduction
of those plants.
But before we get too far into the evolutionary implications of angiosperms as food for animals,
let's look at how this co-evolution with insects could have happened.
Very broadly, insects have been and are attracted to plants for three main reasons, and with
variations on those themes.
First of all, there are places for insect reproduction.
Secondly, plants offer shelter or protection against predators.
Third, plants offer food for developing offspring as well as adults.
And let's start with insect reproduction in that respect.
Plants are frequent sites for insects to reproduce.
As you may already know, insects have two basic reproductive modes.
What you may or may not know are the terms that entomologists actually used to distinguish
between these two, which are holometabolus and hemi-metabolus.
Now, holometabolus insects have complete metamorphosis during their development.
They go from an egg, to a larva, to a pupa, to an adult.
Examples of holometabolus insects include lepidopterans, moss and butterflies, dipterans,
flies and mosquitoes, coleyopterans, beetles, and hymenopterans, which includes ants, wasps,
and bees.
Now, in contrast, hemi-metabolus insects only have partial metamorphosis.
They go from an egg directly to an intermediate stage called a nymph, which already looks
vaguely like the adult, then, after nymph molds, it becomes an adult.
Examples of hemi-metabolus insects include odonates, dragonflies and damselflies, ephemeropterans,
mayflies, dicdiopterans, which would be cockroaches and mantids, and isopterans, termites.
Now, not only do the holometabolus insects have a more complicated developmental path,
many of them make their first appearance in the fossil record after the hemi-metabolus
insects.
While nearly all insects make use of plants, it's the holometabolus insects, such as butterflies,
bees and beetles, which are some of the best known pollinators.
Now, I want you to think about these major groups of insects just listed, which is by
no means comprehensive, and ask yourself how many of these use plants in some way for their
reproduction, and regardless of whether they're holometabolus or hemi-metabolus.
Now you might have checked off nearly every group we just listed, and although there might
be some exceptions within each group, you're probably right about your picks.
For example, in holometabolus insects, eggs can be laid on plant stems or leaves, or inserted
directly into the plant tissues.
Once these eggs hatch, caterpillars or other types of larvae call these plants home until
they pupae.
And the pupae, like the eggs, may be attached to the plant stems or leaves.
Adults leave these plants temporarily to go mate, and then the females come back later
to the plants to lay their eggs.
Now, the second reason why many insects love plants, or at least are dependent on them,
is related to shelter or protection against predators.
Now, as just mentioned, insects, they deposit eggs on the inner sides of the leaves or inside
plant tissues, or they use them as hiding places.
And that's whether for larva, pupae, or adults.
Related to this are two evolutionary processes that are well studied at insects, which are
mimicry and camouflage.
Now mimicry is a broader term for selection of traits that look, sound, or smell like
something else, so it ends up protecting that organism from being eaten.
Now camouflage is actually a visual form of mimicry.
Many insects have evolved this with plants in order to better fit the visual aspects
of a plant.
In fact, one of the most famous case studies of natural selection of insects associated
with camouflage involved the favorable selection of darker colored variations of a species
of moth in areas of the UK that had lots of soot on the trunks.
Now insect predators, namely birds, were picking off all the lighter colored variants that
landed on those dark tree trunks.
Although this experiment was affected by human alterations of the natural environment, it
gave us some food for thought about how plant colors and patterns can determine whether variations
in an insect are passed on to future generations or not.
Well even more impressive, I think, are examples of natural selection of mimicry where insects
have mimic plants to an amazing degree.
And these include so-called stick insects or fast metodians and other insects that look
like fresh or even dead leaves like the so-called leaf mantis.
Now camouflage can be as simple as a green insect just blending into a green background
of a leaf, but oftentimes involves selection for a certain shape and size as well.
Now for insects and flowering plants, their connections to plants through pollen and nectar
as food are quite obvious, especially if you think of honeybees and butterflies.
But many of the same insects that come to flowering plants for pollen and nectar also
use these plants for reproduction and shelter.
Which means the three for one deal I mentioned earlier, in which plants offer something attractive
to an insect, actually may be a four for one or more deal.
So let's get back to the part of the deal that involves flowers specifically.
Flowering plants offer pollen, nectar and fruit, pollen's food for many insects and
other animals.
Most famously, many species of bees gather pollen on these specialized spurs on their
rear legs as they go from flower to flower.
They then carry back this pollen to a brooding chamber or cell.
They make a little pollen ball care package and they lay eggs in the brooding cell.
Once the eggs hatch, the pollen ball's ready to eat and its nutritious food for hungry larvae.
Now pollen is often sticky.
This helps it to adhere to a pollinator, ensuring that more pollen goes with the pollinator
before it takes off for the next flower.
So these insects are acting as surrogates for the plants, helping them to get male and
female gametes together with relatively little effort on the part of the plant.
Oh, Nectars, Nectars are really interesting because they represent a blatant or one might
say brazen adaptation for attracting insects.
Nectars consist mostly of simple sugars like glucose and sucrose, so they're easy for
the first flowering plants to make.
For the pollinators, these simple sugars supply lots of energy, thus that maximizes their
flying from one flower to another and helping out even more with pollination.
But plants that kept their nectar only accessible to insects going deep into the flower, they
were more likely to be pollinated generation after generation.
After all, flowers giving away nectar without getting their pollen transfer, well, they're
not going to last very long.
Nonetheless, a few insects such as butterflies and moss went to the trouble of evolving a
very long feeding tube called a proboscis.
Now what's very interesting about this sort of flower versus insect version of one-upmanship
is that flower shapes can be used to predict the morphology of their pollinators.
Darwin actually did this.
He observed this orchid and Madagascar that had a flower more than 30 centimeters or 12
inches long.
So its nectar could only be reached by an insect with a proboscis at least that long.
Now Darwin was so confident about the tight relationship between flowers and pollinating
insects, he predicted that a moth with a 30 centimeter long proboscis, and think about
that, that long, must be pollinating this orchid.
Well, people chuckled at Darwin for this because it was assumed that a moth with a 30 centimeter
long tongue couldn't possibly exist.
But about 40 years after Darwin's prediction, a moth was discovered in Madagascar with,
yes, you guessed it, 30 centimeter long proboscis.
That Darwin's onto something.
Now just in case a pollinator gets lost, it's on the way trying to find some nectar or some
pollen, flowers help out, they've evolved these visual cues on their petals that point
straight to the source of nectar.
Some of these cues called nectar guides can only be seen in ultraviolet light, which limits
which insects can see them.
For an insect, these are like runway lights, or more aptly the insect equivalent of a flashing
sign with an arrow on the roadside cafe that simply says, eat here.
So a lot of insects can't help but pull off the highway for a nice sip of sweet nectar
and then leave the diner carrying a whole bunch of pollen on them.
Now all of you are probably aware that also that they're brightly colored flowers and
these are meant to attract insects and other pollinators.
But these brightly colored flowers are adaptations targeted to daytime pollinators.
For example, many experiments done on bees that have used fake flowers of varying colors
to test bee preferences and bees do indeed narrow their choices to certain colors.
These are colors they can only see during the daytime.
Also some types of insects are restricted to certain colored flowers.
Bees for example, they prefer blue or yellow flowers, although they see an ultraviolet
too.
Now in contrast, white or other light colored flowers are intended to attract nighttime
pollinators such as moths and bats.
Flowers that evolve to select nocturnal pollinators also tend to have stronger smells.
This helps the pollinators that might not be navigating by say sight alone.
This sort of evolution shows how competition for the bountiful resources offered by flowering
plants went down pathways determined by cycles of night and day, very broadly represented
by the divergence of butterflies and moths.
This split is estimated to have happened at least 50 million years ago during the Eocene
Epic.
Now nectar is not always just sweet and innocent sugar though.
Sometimes it serves a more insidious purpose, such as for the protection of the plant.
For instance, some flowering plants that want to protect, prevent insects from eating their
body parts will secrete nectar on the outside of the plant and that attracts predatory insects,
which then eat the insects that attack the plants.
This means they're doing the plant equivalent of saying, you mess with me, you mess with
my friends.
Now we all know that flowers have scents that they also enjoy, but that we enjoy, but many
of these are targeted to attracting pollinating insects.
Now some flowering plants nicknamed carrion flowers even give off the smell of rotting
meat.
Now we don't find these so nice, which probably explains why you don't ever see florists
offering these flowers for sale, but carrion flies and some beetles, which play their eggs
on dead animals, are immediately drawn to these flowers by the aroma, and so they end
up being key pollinators for these plants.
Now what about fruit?
Many insects also have close relationships with fruits as food sources, whether these
are fresh or rotting.
Also many insects, such as fig wasp, depend on fruits for their reproductive cycles while
also helping to pollinate the plant.
Well we could just go on and on with identifying modern examples of the co-evolution of flowering
plants and their pollinators, so let's break away from the present and go back to where
I'm most comfortable, which is in the geologic past, and ask ourselves just how and when
these sorts of relationships began.
Let's start with the origin of flowering plants.
How did flowers evolve from non-flowering plants?
Well, good question.
Darwin even referred to the relatively sudden appearance of flowering plants in the geologic
record as a abominable mystery.
The intermediate forms between gymnosperms and angiosperms still aren't known very well,
and this topic is a frequent source of controversy among mypalaeobotanus friends.
Nonetheless, some Jurassic gymnosperms called natalis are often regarded as precursors of
angiosperms, or at least they share the common ancestor with flowering plants.
Now modern natalis are placed under a division of plants called nitophyta.
These gymnosperms are considered likely candidates for precursors of flowering plants because
they have these special tissues called, in their xylem tissue, called vessel elements.
Now vessel elements, which aid in transporting water in a vascular plant, are absent from
all other gymnosperms, such as cycads and conifers, but they are an angiosperms.
Well, does this shared trait necessarily represent evolutionary relatedness?
Not really.
As many traits must be shared before you can make that sort of relationship between an
ancestor and a descendant, and in fact some paleobotanus point out quite rightly that
vessel elements may have evolved separately in this lineage of gymnosperms and angiosperms.
However, molecular phylogeny so far shows some relatedness between natalis and angiosperms,
so this hypothesis is certainly worth some further testing.
Now what's the fossil record for the earliest known flowering plants?
The oldest undoubted angiosperm fossils are from three species of the same genus, Archefructus,
and this comes from the early cretaceous of China from about 125 million years ago.
Interestingly, Archefructus was a water dwelling plant and may have been related to lilies,
so this has led to some speculation that maybe the early evolution of flowering plants may
have been in watery environments rather than in forests or other terrestrial environments.
But whether these flowering plants represent the most basal evolutionary traits of an angiosperm,
well that's a subject of debate, but as of now they're the oldest known in the fossil
record.
For instance, one Jurassic plant, Schmesneria, it's been proposed as a possible angiosperm
ancestor or even as an angiosperm.
This plant's very interesting.
It dates from about 170 to 180 million years ago, also from China, but also in Europe,
and it's a ginkgo, which is a type of gymnosperm, but it has some structures called carpals
that closely resemble those of flowering plants.
Fossils protect the ovule of a flowering plant, which prevents herbivores from consuming
this part.
Well, chemical fossils linked with angiosperms, called oleonanes, they suggest an even deeper
origin for flowering plants, going back to the Permian period, or more than 250 million
years ago.
But this radical idea hasn't gained much support among paleobotanists.
Most are looking to say the late Triassic or the Jurassic, as more likely times for
when angiosperms would have diverged from gymnosperms.
But once flowering plants had evolved, their diversification blossomed, so to speak.
Later in the Cretaceous, only about 30 million years after Archefructus, flowering plants
underwent this tremendous radiation at about 100 million years ago.
But this may have begun earlier.
Molecular phylogeny suggests that all of the major groups of flowering plants had radiated
by about 140 million years ago, which is very early on in the Cretaceous, or 15 million
years before Archefructus.
Well, what about the Cretaceous extinction event that killed the dinosaurs, marine reptiles,
pterosaurs, and many other animals?
Well, it might seem surprising that flowering plants, which we might imagine as relatively
frail, delicate little flowers, they survived the N. Cretaceous mass extinction.
But this would be wrong on at least two counts.
First, flowering plants evolved quickly, and those of the late Cretaceous had already
undergone at least 60 million years of adaptive radiation.
Second, which is related to the first point, flowering plants surely benefited from their
mutualistic alliances with virtually all types of small terrestrial animals that also survived
the Cretaceous mass extinction.
That is, flowering plants got by with a little help from their friends, especially insects,
and vice versa.
Indeed, flowering plants immediately took off in their diversification again for another
65 million years, eventually aided even more by their mutualistic relationships with, today,
farmers, florists, and human plant lovers of all kinds.
Now, could pollinators have facilitated these angiosperm radiations?
Well, in a word, yes.
And in fact, that should be an emphatic.
Yes.
In the Cretaceous period, we see what might be termed as an explosion in the diversification
of insects.
And these are likely pollinators, moths, beetles, and especially hymenopterans.
Let's briefly survey the important pollinators of today, and then we'll consider which of
those pollinators would have been likely candidates for co-evolving with the earliest
flowering plants.
Now, first of all, wasp and bees, which are under a group called a poidea.
There are butterflies and moths, lepidoptera, we mentioned earlier.
Beetles are coeliopterans.
And we also have ants, which are under Formicidae.
And we have vertebrates, and this is something a lot of people sometimes forget, is that
vertebrates are also pollinators.
We have birds, such as hummingbirds and honey eaters, especially.
Bats, which include fruit bats, honey possums, which are in Australia, and even lemurs.
And lemurs are the largest animals other than humans that are known to pollinate.
So does the fossil record of these pollinators, does it match up at least with those of flowering
plants?
Well, some of these pollinators evolved long after flowers had already diversified.
Bats, for example, they wouldn't be around until the Eocene Epic, at around 50 million
years ago, which was nearly 75 million years after the oldest known fossil flowers.
And although birds were certainly around by the late Jurassic, and they became more diverse
throughout the Mesozoic, from about 145 years on, million years on, no fossils resembling
a hummingbird or any other bird specialized for pollination are known.
Birds are more likely evolved early on with flowering plants as seed dispersers, in which
they ate delicious fruits that contained seeds, they flew somewhere else, and they deposited
these seeds all wrapped up nicely in some warm nitrogen-rich fertilizer for the insect
pollinators many of the previously listed ones they were present during the Mesozoic.
They only became noticeable in the fossil record after flowering plants started taking
off in their diversity.
Most of these pollinators we know through body fossils, and some exquisite specimens
are preserved in amber.
Let's look at only a few examples of these probable pollinating insects.
Now for beetles, the earliest flowers do co-occur with those in the early Cretaceous,
but we currently don't know if any of these beetles were pollinators.
Nonetheless, from about 90 million years ago are some fossil water lilies that have flowers
looking very much like those of modern water lilies.
Beetles pollinate modern water lilies though, and because flower forms so often fit their
pollinators, these Cretaceous lilies were also likely pollinated by beetles too.
Hymenopterans, which include, as we mentioned earlier, wasps, bees, and ants, they became
much more common and diverse by the mid to late Cretaceous.
Wasps were the oldest hymenopterans from the fossil record, with some from the Middle Jurassic,
dating to about 160 to 170 million years ago, and a fair number of them are known from the
Cretaceous.
Bees evolved much later from a wasp lineage in the mid Cretaceous.
Just like birds or dinosaurs, bees are actually wasps.
So now you know the evolution of both the birds and the bees, and I'm going to add a
bonus to this lecture.
Now the oldest known fossil bee is Miletus Fex bermensis, and it was preserved in amber
from the Cretaceous of Burma from about 100 million years ago.
This bee represented a new evolutionary direction for wasps, as most wasps, even today, prey
on other insects.
So the evolution of some wasps into bees may have started through their exploitation of
new food sources provided by flowers, which started at least 25 million years before the
first known bee.
Now interestingly, Miletus Fex was a very small bee, measuring only about 3 millimeters
long, or less than 1 eighth of an inch.
This accords very well with the hypothesis that many of the first flowers were also
small structures, so their pollinators are expected to have been similarly small sized.
The oldest fossil ants show up in amber from about 90 million years ago, also in the middle
of the Cretaceous.
It's currently unknown if any of these ants were pollinators, but it is noteworthy that
ants show up in the fossil record just after bees.
Now the oldest Lepidopteran fossil, Archaeolepsis manae, is from the early Jurassic of the UK,
coming from 190 million year old rocks in the UK.
So although this and other Mesozoic Lepidopterans were more like moss than butterflies, their
fossil record predates angiosperms.
Nonetheless, Lepidopterans did seem to radiate in the Cretaceous, although their fossil record
is less certain compared to many other insect groups.
Now the oldest known fossil butterflies come from rocks about 50 million years old and
although some researchers have proposed their origin in the Cretaceous, butterflies probably
did not precede flowering plants.
This is because of the very close relationship between specific flowering plants and butterflies.
So it makes sense that butterflies instead would have evolved from a lineage of non-butterfly
Lepidopterans.
Butterflies became much more common though in the fossil record after 50 million years
ago, such as some specimens from 35 million year old rocks in Colorado.
So the fossil record for angiosperms and potential pollinators seemed to track one another quite
well, and this strongly suggests their co-evolution.
It's such a tight relationship in fact that it's very difficult to tell whether this co-evolution
was driven first by plants or insects.
This uncertainty is made even worse by the poor fossil record for the oldest known flowering
plants and their possible pollinators, although both of these improved dramatically through
the Cretaceous.
We also have trace fossil evidence of pollinating insects including water very likely wasp and
bee brooding burrows from Lake Cretaceous rocks of Argentina and Montana from about 75 million
years ago.
Now some Cretaceous fossil leaves also have traces made by insects that look very much
like those made by Lepidopteran caterpillars.
The timing of these trace fossils ties in really well with the body fossil record.
Collectively then these fossils show that terrestrial landscapes had dinosaurs, birds, flowering
plants and pollinating insects as parts of their terrestrial ecosystems.
Well why is pollination important for evolution anyway?
Well, pollination as I always like to say is basically evolutionary bribery in which
the insects are attracted to pollen, nectar and fruits that they can use for food.
In the mere act of gathering pollen and by visiting more than one flower, pollinators
unwittingly transport gametes and aid in the fertilization of that species of plant.
Pollinators thus are facilitating cross fertilization, which produces great variety in plant species.
And variations very good for natural selection to happen, from which you have a wide range
of inheritable traits, some that will be favored by whatever happens over generations.
Likewise, but on the flip side of the co-evolutionary equation, our pollinating insects in the
geologic past that could better access these rich resources offered by flowering plants,
they were favorably selected too.
We especially see the fruits of this evolution, sorry pun intended, in many of the mouth parts
of pollinating insects.
Amazingly, conversion evolution even happened in hummingbirds and hummingbird moths, a vertebrate
and an invertebrate respectively, where these animals behave very much the same way in their
quest for nectar from flowers.
So what were the consequences of these major transitions in evolution?
Well of course it is hard to think of a world without flowers, fruits or pollinators.
This world did exist at one time before the Cretaceous, but certainly was lost forever
after flowers and their pollinators co-evolved.
Today, animals are responsible for pollinating about 90% of all flowering plants.
So we're witnessing the result of a genuinely widespread and diverse form of mutualism,
and one continuing to evolve today.
Flowers are nearly universal objects of beauty in human cultures, as are the pollinators themselves
such as butterflies and hummingbirds.
On a more practical scale, most fruits, vegetables and grains are the result of pollinators.
Human food would become very dull and nutritionally basic without the handiwork of pollinators.
Primates in general, especially fruit eaters, would suffer greatly in their absence and many
of these primates would go extinct.
But what was good for primate evolution was also good to a lesser degree for the evolution
of even the earliest mammals.
And with that, we're now at last in a position to tackle the subject of mammal evolution
in all of its richness.
Thus, in the next lecture, we're going to back up considerably in the geologic record
to the Permian and Triassic from about 260 to 200 million years ago.
There we're going to consider the origins of mammals, and we'll also ask how they
diversified afterwards, leading to the mammals we see around us today.
You may never look at the family tree in quite the same way again.
