Hello, and welcome back to the course. In the previous lecture, we briefly visited the
protozoic ion and the adiacron period, in which we looked at the early evolution of
beta zones. Now, these animals include some unusual forms that don't fit very easily into
the categories we apply to most animals today, but some had traits that allied them with
a broad group of say, radiata or bilateria. The evolution of these new groups of animals
came with some rapid changes from about 600 million years ago to 543 million years ago.
The latter marks the start of the Phanerozoic ion. As we learned before, the term Phanerozoic
literally means visible life, and this is indeed when life became much more abundantly
represented in the fossil record. Now, in this lecture, we're going to ask the question
why, and it's a twofold why. One of these is, why did life seem to diversify so quickly
in the early part of the Phanerozoic? The second is, why did fossils become more easily
preserved? The answers to both whys are related to the development of skeletons, or mineralized
tissues, and invertebrate animals. This evolutionary innovation not only helped to record more
clues about how life evolved, it also reflects biological factors that might have been driving
a seemingly accelerated evolution of animals just after the deacron. The evidence for this
increased rate of evolution has in fact inspired a hypothesis nicknamed the Cambrian Explosion.
This refers to the diversification that happened from about 525 to 510 million years ago during
the Cambrian period. Now, most paleontologists are now shying away from that explosion part
of the label because skeletons actually appeared tens of millions of years before this interval.
Still, it's worth asking how so many different animal groups arose during the Cambrian.
Okay, here's one more why question for you. Why are skeletons such a big deal when trying
to figure out the early evolution of animals? Well, this question is answered by looking
at one of the most important fossil assemblages from the Cambrian period. It's known as the
Burgess Shale Fauna. So, why is the Burgess Shale Fauna so important? Well, sorry, that's
another why, isn't it? Well, the Burgess Shale is important because it has the remains of
soft-bodied animals, but some of these already show evolutionary responses to hard-bodied animals.
The Burgess Shale Fauna was discovered by a paleontologist, Charles Walcott, who found them
in 1909 in a formation called, appropriately enough, the Burgess Shale, and that's located
in the Canadian Rockies of British Columbia. Now, Walcott was an accomplished paleontologist
and geologist even before finding the Burgess Shale Fauna, but this was the fine for which
he earned lasting paleontological fame. As was mentioned earlier, this fossil assemblage
was remarkable because it's composed mostly of soft-bodied animals, yet it was from about
505 million years ago. Now, Walcott originally described and named many of these fossils,
but fortunately other paleontologists in the 1980s through today have studied them too.
With these more recent and detailed looks of the Burgess Shale fossils, we gain some new insights
on how these soft-bodied animals had evolved in about 40 million years,
or since the end of the Ediacaran period, and in the presence of newly evolved animals with
minerals in their bodies. In fact, animals with hard parts make up about 15 to 20 percent of
the Burgess Shale fossil assemblage, so it's not all soft-bodied. Some of these fossils reveal
beautiful and complex animals that, similar to the Ediacaran animals, don't have any easily
comparable analogues today. For example, the aptly named Helusogenia. It looks like this really
punked-out worm. It has rows of spikes running down its back, and these really strange-looking
tentacle-like projections on its bottom. A little more palatable, but still pretty weird, is Wibaxia.
This is an animal that resembles a cross between a tank, a porcupine, and a worm.
Now, its numerous overlapping plates and spikes tell us that it had good reason to be a little
scared of what was out there, and it obviously had these accoutrements to deter predators.
These structures were likely made of hardened organic compounds like chitin,
so they were more like the material you'd find later in, say, a crab or an insect rather than
the more overtly mineralized structure you might have in a seashell. Then there's Morella. It's
this really elegant-looking arthropod whose dual spikes smoothly sweep back behind it,
giving it an appearance that easily could inspire a spaceship in a science fiction series.
Now, Morella is actually the most commonly occurring fossil in the Burgess Shale fauna,
and it's been the subject of much debate about its classification, though.
Some paleontologists said it was related to trilobites, which had already evolved as a group
earlier in the Cambrian, but now it's thought to represent some sort of early evolutionary
lineage of arthropods. That tells us something about how quickly arthropods had evolved in
the earlier part of the Cambrian period. Well, my favorite animal, the Burgess Shale
fossils, though, is Anomalycharis. Anomalycharis was the king or the queen of the Cambrian seas,
and presumably was its biggest predator. Now, Anomalycharis had eyes, as did many other animals
of the Burgess Shale fauna. In the case of Anomalycharis, though, these eyes probably function
in the same sense as the wolf in Little Red Riding Hood. That is, the better to see you with,
some individuals were as long as a meter, dwarfing any other animals living on the seafloor. In fact,
it was so big among the animals of its time that paleontologists originally thought that
its various body parts belonged to three different species, including a shrimp, a jellyfish, and a
sea cucumber. For a long time, paleontologists couldn't even conceive that a single species
was responsible for such a varied anatomy. But it wasn't until a specimen was found with
all three parts attached to one another before they realized their mistake.
So one of these mistakes in parts of Anomalycharis was this ring-like structure composed of mineralized
plates that is often described as looking like a pineapple slice. Well, paleontologists later
found this structure attached to the underside of the head. That means it was associated with the
mouth. And if you think this mouth was used for chewing seaweed, you'd be wrong. It was adapted
for crushing. Now, paleontologists disagree on just how good it was at crushing, but it certainly
could handle soft-bodied animals, and there's some speculation that it could break hard-bodied
ones too. In front of the mouth, too, were this pair of arms with sharp, spiky projections that
curled directly to the mouth, so these very likely were used to grab onto a prey item and not let go
of it, thus providing for many a yummy soft-bodied meal. Now, this odd mixture of hard and soft
tissues in Anomalycharis is especially intriguing because it shows an intermediate state between
a completely soft-bodied animal and a hard-bodied animal. Moreover, these predators had to come
up with new means for breaking down prey animals. We'll come back to this concept later when we
consider the evolutionary importance of a predator like Anomalycharis. With this, we'll think about
what could have influenced natural selection, favoring traits that dealt with such threats in
the Cambrian seas. So the Burgess Shale fauna gave us this unique window into what was happening
with the evolution of animals at a crucial time. This was about 505 million years ago. This time
was tens of millions of years past the Ediacaran animals, their soft bodies, their unusual lifestyles,
and instead started to show more evidence of how animals had started eating each other,
as well as avoiding being eaten. Now, the phrase there is no such thing as a free lunch could
probably be applied to the Cambrian period as these animals began to pay a price in their
evolution for being predators or prey. One of the ways this manifested was through the development
of hard parts. As we can see from the Burgess Shale fauna, animals had developed spikes and
plates for protection, and some had these well-developed eyes for seeing predators.
Predators, in turn, also had eyes for seeing prey from afar, and they developed appendages
and mouth parts for getting past some defenses. Anomalycarus provides first evidence of size
as an advantage, too. If you were this little soft body worm on a sea floor during the Cambrian,
you would not have lasted a minute against a fearsome predator like Anomalycarus.
So, let's get back to those hard parts and fossils and why this was so important in evolution.
The process in which organisms take elements out of their surrounding environments and
precipitate them as minerals in their bodies, we call that biomeneralization.
Now, probably the most common examples of this process are seen in Moluscan shells. Think about
clams, snails, but also think about vertebrate bones, too. Sure enough, these fossils and others
are preserved very abundantly in the fossil record, but biomeneralization was also, still is,
express in a wide variety of ways and in many organisms, not just Moluscans and vertebrates.
Let's go through some of the most common ones, calcite, for example, for just calcium carbonate.
This mineral is common in some algae, you find it in some protozoans, especially a group called
foraminifera. A lot of vertebrate animals have it today. Likewise, calcite contributed to the
skeletons of organisms early on in the Cambrian. Later on, land-dwelling vertebrates even used
calcite in their egg shells. Now, aragonite is also calcium carbonate. This is a mineral that's
quite common in some algae, many invertebrates, particularly Moluscans and modern corals. Because
both calcite and aragonite are made of calcium carbonate, these minerals and skeletons are often
collectively called calcareous. Opaline silica, or SIO2, that's another important mineral. This
is precipitated in single-celled algae, such as diatoms and silica flagellates. A few protozoans
and radiolarians, too. Oh, and even terrestrial plants, such as scouring rushes use silica,
and you have a few sponges that use silicate elements called spicules. Appetite is another
mineral that's very important, particularly to vertebrates. This is the main one composing teeth,
bones, or even dermal armor in vertebrates. A few invertebrates, though, also use appetite
in their skeletons, but compared to vertebrates, these are pretty uncommon. Now, magnetite,
that's a pretty cool one, FE304, that's present in very small amounts in a few organisms, such as
umbacteria, a few Moluscans, and birds. As you can imagine, birds use magnetite to aid in their
navigation during their long migratory flights. So, given all of these examples, biomineralization
is most commonly expressed in invertebrate animals as either calcite or aragonite in their exoskeletons
or endoskeletons. Exoskeletons are on the outside of an organism, whereas endoskeletons are on the
inside. Now, you might assume that all invertebrates that biomineralize have exoskeletons. Well,
that would be wrong. A kind of derms, which includes sea stars, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, and various
other animals with sea as a prefix, actually have endoskeletons, in which a thin layer of skin
covers their calcareous parts. So, let's look at some examples of common fossils with mineralized
parts from the Cambrian and Nordavision periods in that first 100 million years of the Phanerozoic
Ion. Umboluscans, for example, this group diversified very quickly in the early part of the Paleozoic
era, still very successful today in marine and freshwater environments. Some have even adapted
to terrestrial environments. Typical moluscans include bivalves, which would be, say, clams and
oysters, gastropods, which would be all snails and slugs, and cephalopods, such as squid, cuttlefish,
nautiluses, and octopuses or octopi. I never can decide which. Oh, others you may not have heard
of include monoplicoferens, which looks like a bivalve with only one shelf, making it a univalve,
and chitins, which have these eight overlapping plates, making up most of their skeleton.
Remember Kimberella from the Ediacaran? That fits what most paleontologists would consider as a
primitive moluscan. Obrachyopods are another interesting one. These fossils look superficially
like bivalves, but they have this different symmetry and anatomy from those moluscans.
Their two shells are unequally sized, and they use a feeding apparatus called the lophafore for
pulling in suspended organic matter from seawater. These animals were very successful in the Paleozoic.
A lot of their lineages went extinct, but there's still some around today. You only find them in
marine environments. Corals, of course, are very important. Two groups of corals originated, proliferated,
and went extinct during the Paleozoic. Those would be the rugos corals and the tabulate corals.
These were succeeded in the Triassic period by scloractinid corals about 200 million years ago.
These are still composing coral reefs today.
Now, corals are closely related sea anemones, and each individual cup of a coral holds an animal.
Rugos corals were either solitary or colonial, whereas all tabulate corals were colonial.
Corals are beautiful little predators bearing these stinging cells that inject toxins into passing
prey like thousands of little harpoons. So think about how a coral reef, having many colonies of
corals, are harvesting seafood at phenomenal rates, and they were doing very much the same
thing early on in the Paleozoic. Oh, and corals also have this really interesting form of symbiosis
in which they combine forces with zoanthellae. Zoanthellae are the single-celled algae that
live within the soft tissues of a coral and provide them with glucose and other products of photosynthesis.
Now, corals in turn scratch the backs of the zoanthellae, that is, if they had backs,
by giving them carbon dioxide. The algae uses that in photosynthesis.
Now, modern corals literally cannot grow their skeletons or otherwise grow, live,
without zoanthellae. We think this was very much the same situation for Paleozoic corals.
Now, arthropods, these are invertebrates with jointed appendages. It's a very successful group of
animals, and they were remarkably diverse here in the Cambrian, considering how they were rare
to absent in the deacron. Among the arthropods were the trilobites. These comprised one of the most
successful groups of animals ever, living for nearly 250 million years. Their evolution, in fact,
was at the height during the Cambrian period. These animals probably are the most famous denizens
of the Paleozoic seas. They incorporated calcite in the body starting about 530 million years ago,
and that, of course, immediately improved their fossil record. Now, a few trace fossils have
been attributed to trilobites from rocks older than 530 million years ago, and these are often linked
to soft-bodied trilobites, which we presume are the ancestors of the hard-bodied ones that followed.
Well, trilobites also used calcite in their eyes. This took advantage of the refractive properties
of this mineral to develop this really sophisticated way of viewing the world. Other arthropods that
originated early on in the Paleozoic era included crustaceans, horseshoe crabs, and arachnids,
and then later insects, with varying degrees of mineralization in those lineages.
Now, echinoderms, this is a really big, important group of marine invertebrates that have been around
since the Cambrian period. The word echinoderm literally means spiny skin, and that's readily seen
in modern sea urchins, but also in sea stars, sea cucumbers, and sand dollars. Echinoderms were
very successful evolutionarily speaking during the Paleozoic era, and a group of echinoderms
called crinoids became so common their skeletal parts made up most of the sediments we see in
some limestones formed during that time. Now vertebrates, as I mentioned before, their
biomineralization is normally expressed as appetite in teeth and endoskeletons, otherwise known as
bones. As we're going to learn in an upcoming lecture, true vertebrates show up early on in
the Cambrian period, then they quickly diversified it to a huge variety of fishes through the
Paleozoic. Some of those even evolved to go up in land. So mineralization in vertebrates
also produced body armor. We see these bony plates or osteoderms that also became parts
of the skin in some fish. Now biominerals can also combine with organic polymers such as a
chitin or collagen. Those may come positive materials that are both strong and flexible in
animals. A little bit of these organic compounds goes a long ways. Only 5% of these organics by
weight can make the difference between, say, a bival shell bending versus, say, shattering when
put under any sort of pressure. Also think about how some bones and vertebrates are remarkably
porous in light. They're filled with organic materials such as marrow. Yet even porous bones
and vertebrates can maintain structural integrity under tremendous pressures that are exerted by
everyday living. So now you have a small sample of just how many fossilized animals from the
Cambrian period and later had mineralized tissues. Although the minerals that form an algae and plants
are really interesting in their own right, we're not going to cover those, but instead we're going
to focus on animals. So from this viewpoint, you might very well be asking, how did so many
different animals from such very devolutionary pathways all develop the ability to biomineralize
within just 50 million years or so? Well, in answering this question, I won't go into the
details of how biomineralization actually happens in every major group of animals. That would just
take too long. But we can look at selection pressures. What selection pressures would have
resulted in biomineralization? Well, the first step in the development of biomineralization
may have been some sort of biochemical response to changing ocean chemistry. We have lots of
geochemical clues from sedimentary rocks toward the end of the Edeachron period. For instance,
that show, CO2 or carbon dioxide decreased as the atmosphere changed and oxygen became more abundant.
Now, increased oxygen in the atmosphere, that was caused by increased photosynthesis from algae.
This meant that carbon sinks became more common. Now, what's a carbon sink? That's a geochemical
process by which carbon gets locked up in the carbon cycle for a while. In this instance,
carbon combined with oxygen to form carbon dioxide and CO2 combined with hydrogen and oxygen to form
bicarbonate or HCO3. So, both carbon dioxide and calcium became over-saturated in the world's oceans
toward the end of the Precambrian, or close to 515 million years ago. Well, with so much calcium
and bicarbonate available in seawater, probably became difficult for organisms to handle it.
So, they needed some way to get rid of such excessive amounts. The least energetic way to
do that was to combine them into one precipitate, calcium carbonate. Similarly, high amounts of
phosphorus and phosphates along with calcium and seawater, those were sufficient for some organisms
to start precipitating appetite and again without using too much energy. In fact, the earliest of
the small Shelly faunas that show up in the fossil record of the latest Edeachron and the
Cambrian period at about 550 and 530 million years ago, these were composed of either calcium carbonate
or calcium phosphate. This means that biomineralization preceded the so-called Cambrian explosion.
So, what could cause a wide variety of animals, some of which were not closely related to one
another, to all start secreting minerals in their tissues at about the same time?
Well, the simplest explanation proposes that this trigger, the changing chemistry of the oceans,
result in this widespread response by organisms to precipitate minerals in their tissues.
But either at the same time or soon after that, natural selection was accelerated by the evolution
of predators. If you think about it, predators would have placed these new pressures on animals.
So, animals that are favorably selected just happen to have mineralized tissues already in place,
not from predation, but from adapting to ocean chemistry. This happenstance of having a favorable
trade already in place before a different selection pressure is applied is called an
X-aptation. Now, sometimes this is also called a pre-adaptation, which of course is an oxymoron,
because an organism doesn't adapt in advance. I mean, it's silly to think that some simple
invertebrates had the foresight to develop hard shells in anticipation of predators that would
be around someday. But it is entirely feasible that some organisms had already adapted to some
other selection pressure, thus they already had what they needed for adapting to predation.
But, and this is an important point, biomeneralization evolved multiple times in its separate lineages
of animals. Think about all of the organisms we listed before, single-celled and multi-celled algae,
protozoans, invertebrates, invertebrates. This also makes biomeneralization an example of
convergent evolution. Convergent evolution occurs when you have different lineages of organisms
arrive at the same or very similar adaptive solutions to selection pressures. Hence,
their traits are considered analogs. That's different from a homologue. A homologue is just
the same structure that's been modified by natural selection within a lineage. For invertebrate animals,
a whole lot of converging was going on, because you had moluskines, brachyopods, corals, arthropods,
the echinoderms, they all developed hard parts, were at least partially calcareous by the end
of the Cambrian period. Likewise, vertebrates started to evolve teeth and bones by the end
of the Cambrian too. So it makes sense that some extrinsic factor, such as changes in ocean chemistry,
that might have triggered these multiple responses across many unrelated groups of organisms
over a relatively short time, geologically speaking. Now, as predation became more common,
though, organisms that could secrete shells or other skeletal protection, those would have been
favorably selected. Shells also helped organisms to escape environmental pressures, such as a
desiccation, or they might have even aided in burrowing, which I might add was a behavior that
also assisted in protection, as organisms could then better hide from predators with eyes,
such as anomalous carousel and other such fearsome beasties. And sure enough, trace fossils from the
Cambrian period show how burrowing became much more common during and after the Cambrian.
So which came first? The predators or their biomineralizing prey?
Obvious fossil evidence of predators is in the first half of the Cambrian period,
but some tantalizing evidence of predation also comes from the Iacrin period.
For example, some specimens of a small, shelly fossil of unknown affinity,
Claudina, have these drill holes in them, and they strongly suggest some sort of foul play.
Now, you also could look at healed bite marks that are in trilobites.
These healed bite marks indicate how something found trilobites tasty enough to take a nibble.
My bet, anomalous carousel was that animal. So all of this brings us to what is called the
Red Queen Hypothesis. Now, the origin of that term is from Lewis Carroll's character in Through
the Looking Glass, and the quote is, it takes all the running you can do to keep in the same place.
The Red Queen Hypothesis is that co-evolution happens from cohort number one,
let's say that's the prey, evolving in response to selection pressure from cohort number two.
The interesting thing is, you could switch those, vice versa. This then results in some
sort of selection pressure on both cohorts or an arms race. So in other words, you could have
some sweet, innocent little moluskin that's on the sea floor being hunted by a rapacious sort
of predatory worm. If it evolves correctly in the right way, that moluskin will be protected
in future generations, but the worm also has to respond in its predation, which causes then a
sort of arms race. In these predator prey scenarios, we have to think about the selection pressure,
though, is greater from the prey than that for the predator. All you have to do is compare and
contrast the immediate loss of life versus, say, just going hungry in evolution. And it's no contest.
You can't pass on your genes when you're dead. You can still pass on your genes when you're on
your fed, though. Nonetheless, natural selection was going to be forever changed by this proliferation
of predation in many lineages of animals. Predation even eventually evolved in plants.
Think about sundews, pitcher plants, and Venus fly traps, for which photosynthesis was just not
enough. The Red Queen is now a common model for how co-evolution occurs in predator prey
relations. So how did bio-mineralization change the world and our views of evolution?
Well, for one, body fossils became much more apparent in Phanerozoic rocks from
543 million years ago to the recent past. This was noted by even William Smith, Charles Lyell,
and other geologists of the early 19th century. So bio-mineralization put the visible
into the eon of visible life. With bio-mineralization, reefs changed from those that were composed of
just termatolites or sponges to full-fledged coral reefs. In these reefs, massive colonies of
rugos and tabular corals formed the core of wave-resistant structures during the early part
of the Paleozoic era. This established the foundations for these important marine ecosystems
that we still see today. And a point I'll make when you look at this picture of a Cambrian reef,
there's anomalous caress above the reef and you see the corals underneath. Think about how many
predators are in that picture now. By the middle Cambrian, you had predators that evolved into
these ecosystems and were now a normal part of the seascape. So with these hard surfaces also
provided by skeletons and say a coral reef, there came these new opportunities for organisms to
adapt to new niches. Many animals evolved to bore into solid rock, including reefs. Some fish,
such as a modern day parent fish, even eat rocks to gain nutrition from the algae growing on it.
And of course, last but not least, predator-prey relations were never the same. So this is
reflecting the early evolution of vertebrates during the Cambrian period, which developed
their own hard parts, skeletons and teeth, and those evolved throughout the rest of the Paleozoic
era. And with that, we'll conclude this lecture and I invite you to learn more about vertebrate
evolution in our next lecture.
