Well, in case you haven't noticed yet, I'm not Professor Martin.
My name's Professor John Hawks, and I'm a paleoanthropologist.
Now paleoanthropologists study the fossil record and evolution just like paleontologists
do, but we specialize on that branch of life that's closely related to humans and our
primate ancestors.
So I'm here to talk about the primate fossil record and the way that it led through several
transitions to humans today.
The first transition I'm going to talk about is the transition from early primates to
anthropoids.
Now anthropoids include monkeys and living apes and humans, so this is a really central
branch in terms of understanding our relationships to other animals.
The primates started out as good climbers, entering the trees sometime during the last
days of the dinosaurs and diversifying during the early part of the Cenozoic.
That arboreal adaptation served them very well to help them to avoid predators and to
give them new food resources in the trees.
But anthropoids are specialized in several ways.
They're diurnal, which means they're active during the day.
They're social, they live in varied sized groups but almost never solitary.
They have a flexible, mixed diet, and they have larger brains and single births.
Those kinds of characteristics help to give them a more complex sort of behavioral pattern,
and it's one that in terms of understanding how we ultimately would emerge from these
primates really forms the basis of our evolution.
So let me introduce you to the anthropoids.
They include hominoids, that's living apes and their fossil ancestors, and humans.
The New World Monkeys, who live, as their name might imply, in the Americas, South America
especially, but also the tropical part of North America.
New World Monkeys are an incredibly diverse branch of the primates.
They include very small monkeys, like tamarins and marmosets.
They include spider monkeys, who are sort of large and ape-like in their moving through
the trees, squirrel monkeys, cappichin monkeys, the clever organ grinder monkeys, and howler
monkeys, large leaf-eating monkeys that howl loud communications through the forest.
New World Monkeys, on the other hand, live in Europe, Africa, and Asia.
And the Old World Monkeys are similarly diverse, just like the New World Monkeys.
Baboons are maybe the most recognized Old World Monkeys.
They're big and terrestrial.
Maccax are smaller and live in terrestrial settings from Africa all the way to Japan,
where the famous snow monkeys are Maccax.
Various and colibus monkeys live in Asia and Africa respectively, and they're primarily
leaf-eating monkeys, convergent in many ways with the howler monkeys in the New World.
And little monkeys, like Gwennons and vervet monkeys, that live in many different arboreal
niches and have tremendous differentiation of their color patterns and their social
behaviors.
So that gives you some impression of the diversity that exists within the anthropoids.
All of this diversity originated from one ancestor sometime during the Eocene period.
And to understand when and where that ancestor lived, I'm going to have to tell you some
stories about the history of primate paleontology and the way that we've changed our interpretation
of anthropoid origins over the last hundred years.
Now I want to talk about a man who is vilified a lot in evolutionary circles because he stands
out as an early opponent to ideas about the evolution of species.
This man, a prominent French scientist named Georges Jecouvier, was so accomplished in
the field of anatomy and paleontology that the French ultimately gave him an honorary
title.
They called him Baron Cuvier.
His descriptions are voluminous.
He worked to classify animals in all parts of the animal kingdom.
He classified as many as 5,000 descriptions of different fish species.
He worked to understand animals that were exotic to the early 19th century Europeans.
Animals like rhinoceroses.
So he was really a man of developing interest in biology broadening out the view of what
biological description was.
In the context of what you've seen so far in this course, as an example, he identified
mosasaurs in the Maastricht layers of Germany.
He's maybe best known today as an opponent of evolutionary ideas.
And I have some sympathy for him on this score because the evolutionary ideas that he was
responding to were those of his French contemporary Lamarck.
Lamarckian evolution is what's called inheritance of acquired characteristics or the idea that
you could develop new characteristics during the course of your life and then pass those
on to your offspring.
That's very different from our understanding of evolution today, which is based on variation
within a species and natural selection so that we don't think that there was inheritance
of characteristics that you acquire during your life.
Cuvier was right, in other words, to oppose Lamarckian evolution, but that led to sort
of a blanket dismissal of ideas of gradual change over time.
What's maybe ironic about this is that Cuvier himself provided some of the best evidence
that we have for the evolution of different kinds of animals.
And in particular, through careful analysis of layers of rock, he showed how animals changed
in composition in different rock layers as you move up a stratigraphic column.
Maybe he's best known in paleontological work for his work in the Mahmatra gypsum beds.
Mahmatra today is a suburb on the north end of Paris and it's famous for the shrine that
sits on top of it, the shrine of Saint Denis.
But the Mahmatra in the 19th century was mainly known as a quarry where men worked to excavate
gypsum, which they would process into the famous plaster that we now call after Paris,
plaster of Paris.
So the Mahmatra gypsum beds were laid down as sedimentary layers during the Eocene period
and they contain a diversity of animals that Cuvier recognized immediately don't exist
anymore.
Probably the most prominent example and the one that led to great fame for him was a fossil
opossum, opossum being a marsupial that we have in the United States and exists in the
southern continents but did not exist at that time in Europe.
This opossum he called Daedalphus gypsorium and what made Cuvier really famous about
it was that when they found the teeth of this animal it was clear that the rest of the animal
was still embedded in the rock from which it was being excavated and so Cuvier said
these teeth are the teeth of an opossum.
I predict that there will be two bones that you'll find the marsupial bones which in marsupials
today help to support the pouch and that you'll find those when you dig in the rock and excavate
this fully and when the fossil was excavated that's indeed what they found the marsupial
bones were there and so Cuvier became famous for being able to predict on the basis of
just the teeth what other kinds of aspects of the skeleton will be found there.
He called this the principle of correlation of parts the idea that different parts of
organisms could predict what was going to be there.
Today we recognize that that's an aspect of evolutionary history animals aren't just
jumbled grab bags of different parts that are taken from one animal and another they
evolved their parts as part of a history and so you'll find consistently that an animal
that has one kind of tooth is likely to have other features that go along with it.
Well these beds from the Eocene what time period are we talking about there to give
you sort of a quick overview of the last 65 million years the Eocene is early in this
time period but not the beginning and if we think of the 65 million years since the end
of the dinosaurs as being 65 minutes well then the first 10 minutes are occupied by
what's called the Paleocene and I'll show you a couple of primates today that come from
the late Paleocene of North America.
The Eocene takes up the next 20 minutes so basically half an hour is taken up by those
first two periods.
The later periods occupy what's the rest of primate and ultimately human evolution.
The parts of the time period that I'll be talking about in the next several lectures
are the Myocene, Pliocene and Pleistocene.
Those take up the last about 25 minutes of our 65 minute time period especially our evolution
the evolution of humans that took place in the Pleistocene which is really just a little
over a minute of that 65 minute span.
The Eocene world was very different from today's in terms of biogeography all the continents
were more or less in the places that they are today you recognize the world's map but
what you notice immediately when looking at a map of the Eocene world is the extent to
which those continents are separated from each other by bodies of water.
Most obviously Africa, Europe and Asia are separated from each other by an extension
to the east of the Mediterranean Sea that goes so far as to almost separate Asia from
India.
India had been crashing up into Asia and that process continued during the Eocene, Oligocene
and Myocene so that the Himalaya Mountains which didn't used to be there were raised
up to be the highest in the world.
Well with these continents isolated from each other their biology was to some extent isolated.
And during the course of the Eocene because many of the seas that separated these parts
of the world were shallow land bridges occasionally would connect the different continents with
each other.
We're going to find primates in North America, in Southeast Asia, in Europe and in Africa
and those primates all got there at different times by different land bridges that emerged
over the course of time.
The one exception to that is South America and as we get to the end of the lecture you'll
see the mystery of how primates reached South America for the first time.
Well in the Montmartre beds, Cuvier found a fossil primate.
He called it Adapus and Adapus as a name is really the first clue that Cuvier didn't have
a clue what it was.
Adapus means in Latin two apus and apus is the name of the Egyptian bull god the cow-like
god and Cuvier really thought of this as being a relative of some sort of cow-like herbivore.
He placed it into a group which he called Pachyderms which means thick skin and today
we know that this is a primate by virtue of its teeth and its skull.
We can cut Cuvier some slack because the skull was not very well preserved of the specimen
he had to work with but the confusion just shows how much we've learned about the fossil
record of early primates.
In general we know mammals to different classes from their teeth.
The teeth of mammals are specialized into different types and those types take on very
different forms in different kinds of mammals.
Cattle and other kinds of herbivores have high crowned teeth that are good for grinding
up leafy material and shearing it into little pieces.
Other kinds of animals like pigs, bears who are omnivores have teeth that are made for
grinding and crushing.
Carnivores have sharp teeth that are made for cutting meat.
So we can tell mammals to usually order and often to families by virtue of what kinds
of teeth they have but with early mammals this process can become very difficult.
For example the aphrotheria we now recognize as a group that contains a really diverse
set of mammals, elephants and manatees, we're big and gray so you think well they go together
but also animals as diverse as golden moles who are the African version of moles like
you see underground here.
Shrews, tenrex which are sort of primate looking insectivores and hyraxes, small little herbivores.
That huge diversity is not bound together by the teeth and so when we look at a family
like that that emerged shortly after the demise of the dinosaurs and began to diversify right
away it becomes really difficult to understand how they're related to each other.
Today we have the great help of genetics and genetics helps to clarify some of these relationships.
For example today we know that primates are closely related to other kinds of small insectivorous
originally animals including bats, rodents, dermopterans who are sometimes called flying
lemurs or collugos and tree shrews.
This is really a motley group that shares one central characteristic they all are capable
of living in trees and so that gives us a clue as to the origin of the primates as small
mammals that were arboreal.
To talk about some of these other lineages for just a second I want to show you a fossil
bat.
This comes from the Eocene of Germany and from an exceptional site called the Messel Pit
which is a pit that was excavated for the purpose of getting oil shale out of it.
So it was an industrial pit in Germany up until about 1971.
It became famous however because these shale layers had exceptional fossil preservation.
This bat as an example shows you the extent to which you can see the soft tissue preserved
and also shows you the already very bat like architecture of its body.
Long arms, long fingers that make up the wings and essentially bat like characteristics including
as it turns out echolocation.
So that diversification happened really rapidly.
On the topic of this diversification of early primates and closely related mammals I want
to mention a group called the Plesiodapids.
Plesiodapids are maybe primates, some scientists call them primate like mammals because in
terms of their skeletons they seem to converge on primates but in terms of their crania they
are quite different.
They have procombant incisors that stick out very far from the front of their face and
were ever growing almost rodent like and yet we don't think that they were rodent relatives.
They appear to have gotten this characteristic in convergence with rodents.
Well the Plesiodapids are found in North America and Europe which gives you a sign of the land
bridges that we're connecting those to probably through present day Greenland at that time.
Also found in North America and Europe are the group related to Cuvier's primate the
Adapids.
One of the most interesting things about Adapids is that the fossil record of them in North
America is so dense especially in Wyoming in the Big Horn and Bridger basins that we
can trace the gradual evolution of different kinds of Adapids into each other.
We can see for example the gradual increase of tooth size over about eight million years
of the Eocene from relatively small toothed Adapids to big toothed Adapids but at the
same time the divergence of in three cases different lineages that are diversifying in
terms of the sizes of these teeth.
They apparently were repeatedly invading different ecological niches even as the climate was
consistently changing in a way that favored larger animals with bigger teeth.
Well probably the most famous of the Adapids to be discovered so far is one that came from
the Messelpit of Germany that exceptionally preserved site.
This fossil is called Darwinias and the skeleton that's most famous is nicknamed Ida.
Darwinias tells us a number of the details of these Adapid primates.
It helps to inform us of some of the ways that these early primates are similar to today's
Anthropoids and also some of the ways that they're different.
For example in terms of tooth development Ida is showing that she's a juvenile individual.
You can see from her teeth that the juvenile teeth especially the deciduous premolars which
will ultimately be replaced by the permanent premolars.
Well the deciduous teeth are still in and the permanent ones are developing underneath
them in the bone getting ready to push the baby teeth out and emerge as permanent teeth.
By looking at the rate at which these teeth were developing we can say some things about
the growth of Ida's body compared to her teeth.
And what we can say is that for her size of primate just sort of a small cat sized primate
she was developing her body at a rate very much like living primates in comparison to
the development of her teeth.
That's a hint that an Anthropoid like life history which is relatively delayed compared
to other kinds of mammals is present in those early groups of primates.
Well there's another group of primates wandering around the Eocene that is rather different
from the Adapids but is another candidate for the ancestor of the Anthropoids.
That kind of primate is called omomaiidae or the omomaiids.
Omomaiids are similar in their skull in many respects to living Tarsiers.
In contrast Adapids are similar in their skulls to living lemurs.
These are two different kinds of primates and to explore the relevance of those primates
to the evolution of the Anthropoids it's important I think to point out the relationships
of the Anthropoids and other primates as we understand them.
So here's a phylogeny of the primates that expresses what we now understand about the
different major groups of them.
Homonoids that includes us and living apes well we're off on one end of this.
We're in the Anthropoid group together with the New World and Old World Monkeys and as
you can see from the phylogeny homonoids are closely related to Old World Monkeys and the
New World Monkeys form an out group to our in group.
Well the next closest relative of the Anthropoids are the Tarsiers and although it's common
for anthropologists to talk about these different kinds of early primates as prosimians meaning
that they lie outside of the Anthropoids in fact they're not all equally related to each
other or to us.
Tarsiers are closer relatives to the Anthropoids.
Lemurs and Lorises two living kinds of primates are themselves close relatives of each other.
And so when we look at the contrast between Omomaiids who are Tarsier like and Adapids
who are Lemur like then there seems to be a hint coming from the relationship of Tarsiers
with Anthropoids that probably the Omomaiids are the ancestors of these primates.
Well to understand their biology a little more fully I think we can look at a present
day lemur and you get a picture of what the Adapoids might have looked like.
For example they have a moist nose or rhinarium.
That moist nose is something that living day Anthropoids don't have but it's essential
to the mating system and probably also the olfactory sense of these other kinds of primates.
The purpose of that moist nose is to better receive pheromones and transmit them up into
an organ called the Jacobson's organ inside the nose.
That organ requires a space to communicate with that moist rhinarium and the space makes
a little gap in between the front two incisors of these kinds of primates.
What's in common between living prosimians both Tarsiers and lemurs and lorises is that
many of them in all of the groups are nocturnal and many of them are principally insect predators
especially the smaller versions of these primates.
The Tarsiers in particular are really developed as insect predators so much so that they eat
animal flesh and almost nothing else.
I say animal flesh because although they're principally insectivores they are also known
to get small animals, mammals, lizards and they've been seen even to jump into the air
and get birds.
So Tarsiers although they're tiny and very very cute they fit in the palm of your hand
are surprisingly vicious.
Well, if living prosimians have these shared characteristics they tend to be nocturnal,
they tend to be insect predators although the lemurs on Madagascar have developed different
specializations also and they tend to be solitary although again the larger lemurs are exceptions
to this who are quite social.
Species and apes are different today they're mostly diurnal they're active during the day
only one species of monkey the owl monkey of South America is an exception to this.
Mostly they have single births whereas in prosimians twin births are quite common.
Mostly anthropoids are very pro-social they live in large complex social groups sometimes
a handful of animals often times a whole crowd of animals and they eat mostly a mixed
diet which includes fruit and leaves.
So where do they come from and where do these features originate?
Well to answer that question we can turn to a part of the world that we've also found
fossil primates but I haven't talked about yet, Africa.
In northeastern Africa in Egypt there's a region called the Fayum depression this is
just off the west bank of the Nile and it's relatively lower than the Nile valley itself
so that the ancient Egyptians diverted water into this and made a large lake that they
irrigated and had a nice oasis.
Well the Fayum depression is not only notable for its ancient history it's also notable
for its Eocene and Oligocene stratigraphic profile.
Primates have been found here since the early years of the 20th century and those primates
include adapids the species Aphrodapus which shows us many of the convergent features that
adipoids and anthropoid share including a relatively tall jaw bone that has vertically
implanted incisors and is fused at the symphysis.
Those are features that the anthropoids also have and might have clued people into the
idea that maybe these are related to each other but at the same time there are anthropoids
preserved at the Fayum including an anthropoid that unlike most living anthropoids was nocturnal
Beretia megalopsis, megalopsis means big eyes.
So the Fayum in the late Eocene early Oligocene is showing a diversity of adipoids and anthropoids.
Well also in the early years of the 20th century early anthropoids were found in Southeast
Asia in particular in Myanmar or Burma.
That country produced a species called Pandongia cauterii and Pandongia like living anthropoids
was dentally like us and also had those jaw characteristics the tall jaw the fused symphysis.
It pointed early paleontologists toward the idea that this was an early anthropoid.
When in the late 1980s early 1990s exploration recommenced in this part of the world people
started finding other anthropoids and probably the most important of those is an anthropoid
called Eosimius.
It's important because it's relatively early living about 43 million years ago it's very
possibly the earliest anthropoid yet to be found and it was found in China.
So the fossil record of the early anthropoids lead us to a natural hypothesis that the anthropoids
originated from a Tarsier like ancestor somewhere in Asia.
Now the Tarsier ancestor we haven't yet found but the Omomaiids were present in North America
in Europe and presumably in Asia so the opportunity was there.
At the same time these deposits are telling us that they got into Africa relatively early
after their origin so that the dispersal of anthropoids into Africa from South Asia was
an important aspect of our early evolution.
That's not a singular occurrence.
Other kinds of mammals also dispersed from Asia into Africa at that time.
Those animals include anthracotheres who are hippopotamus like even toad herbivore like
animals.
Maybe related to whales or hippopotamus.
And histrarchodonate rodents which include today's porcupines and South American rodents
like the capybara and the cavies.
So those mammals are dispersing.
What about the anthropoids is allowing this dispersal?
Well, what seems to be important in early anthropoid evolution is this change in diet.
They're eating instead of primarily insects, they're eating leaves and fruits.
That dietary transition may be a consequence of having a slightly larger body size or it
may have enabled them to develop slightly larger bodies.
But the anthropoid features that we see today, larger brains, an accentuation of the visual
sense, the closure of the eye orbit behind it and color vision, those features seem to
have originated as a consequence of the origin of the anthropoids, not as causes of them.
And I say that because they all originated after the anthropoids originated.
In particular, we know a lot about the parallel evolution of vision in terms of three color
vision in New World and Old World monkeys.
Both of these kinds of primates got three color vision, the kind of vision that humans
also got.
We have it by sharing it with our relatives, the old world monkeys.
But the New World monkeys got this separately.
We understand the separation in evolutionary terms because we know the genetic basis of
this three color vision.
The pigment genes that receive colors in the retinas are coded for by genes on the X chromosome.
That's one reason why color blindness is much more common in males than it is in females
and humans because this is an X-linked polymorphism.
Well, in the New World monkeys, their genetic duplication that gave rise to three of these
pigment genes instead of two, which are ancestral for mammals, that duplication seems to have
happened independently from the old world monkeys.
And as an evolutionary event, it's had a different sort of history.
In particular, three color vision is polymorphic in most New World monkeys.
Some individuals have it and other individuals don't.
Whereas in old world monkeys, it's monomorphic.
So to finish our talk about early primate evolution and the origin of the anthropoids,
I want to introduce one final mystery.
How did the New World monkeys get there?
South America wasn't connected to these other continents by land bridges during the course
of the Eocene or the Oligocene.
We know this because there wasn't a huge influx of mammals into South America.
Only a few mammals were able to make the crossing into South America.
Those include monkeys, but they also include the rodents that now live in South America.
So how did they get there?
The leading hypothesis for this is that rafts of trees and other vegetation coming down
the rivers of Africa may have had enough resources to keep monkeys alive as they made the crossing
across what once was a much smaller Atlantic Ocean.
So the colonization of the New World by monkeys was really a random chance event, is something
that opened up a new horizon for primates and that today we can see the legacy of.
In the next lecture, we'll be talking about the evolution of our own kind of primates,
the hominoids.
