Today's lecture concerns the transition from ape to hominin.
Now last time I explained the evolution of the apes and their great diversity during
the myosin, but after the myosin the origin of our lineage occurred at a relatively distinctive
event and when we look at those fossil relatives that can be closely linked to living humans,
we'll see that they have one feature that sets them apart from all living apes today,
their bipedal.
There are also a number of other features that we can look at in these early hominids
that we call the australopithecines.
Some evidence gives us some clues about their sociality and possibly their means of communication,
but probably more important than anything else is what we know about the diet of these
early hominids.
It's a characteristic in which they're distinct not only from living great apes, but also
from living humans.
They're really off by themselves.
To reorient where we are, the hominids are that branch of the primates that are closely
related to humans and more distantly related to any of the living apes.
Our branch originated between four and seven million years ago.
You'll often hear people call this same branch the hominids and for my purposes they're synonymous,
although for a taxonomist it makes a difference whether it's a bigger group or a smaller group.
Hominids only lived in Africa up until two million years ago, and so we have a real wide
spread of them across that continent, but it's never a time when they left Africa to
go to other parts of the world.
East Africa has produced a rich fossil record of these early hominids as has South Africa,
and I'll be talking about both of those regions today.
But one drawback of the fossil record is that we think that there were probably hominids
in other parts of Africa during the Pliocene also, and those parts of Africa are just less
well represented in the fossil record.
So we'll be focusing on the parts where we have really good fossil evidence, but remember
it's probably not the entire story.
To go back to the apes that immediately preceded the hominids, let me just review a little bit
about Ardipithecus.
Ardipithecus lived between 5.5 and 4.3 million years ago, and its fossil remains have been
found in Ethiopia, the northern end of East Africa.
As a species, Ardipithecus had a number of characteristics that set it apart from living
apes.
It had arms and legs that were approximately the same length, and that made it really well
suited to quadripetalism in the trees and on the ground.
It was large in body mass.
It fit right in between chimpanzees and orangutans in terms of its size.
It had opposable toes, like other great apes, and it had very long fingers and short thumbs,
which made its hands very good for hanging underneath branches.
Those characteristics really make Ardipithecus quite different from hominids today.
But Ardipithecus had some characteristics that link it with the hominids and either make
it a possible ancestor of the hominids or a close relative to our common ancestor with
chimps and gorillas.
Key among those features are the teeth.
Ardipithecus had larger and thicker molars than today's chimpanzees, but in particular
it had relatively small canine teeth, smaller even than today's bonobos, who have the smallest
among the great apes.
Those canine teeth are potentially quite important to understanding the social organization
of these primates.
Canine teeth, you would think of them as big fang-like teeth, like you chomp into things
with, and they do play that role, especially in carnivorous animals today, and chimpanzees
are well known for their ability to eat meat.
But they have in primates even more importance in terms of a social role, because canine
teeth right in the front of your mouth are a signal.
When you see a chimpanzee making a big grin and drawing its lips back so that you can
see all of its front teeth, that's a very threatening gesture.
This is something that chimpanzees and other kinds of primates are doing to show off just
how big and tough they are.
So that threatening gesture is something that lots of times, if you see a chimpanzee in
a zoo, you don't understand that's what they're doing.
They're showing you that they're mean.
Now if we look at a human making a similar gesture, drawing the lips back and showing
the front teeth, this is a really friendly gesture, and really worldwide it's a universal
that this is something that humans do to show their friendliness.
It's a pleasant gesture.
It would have a very different meaning if like chimpanzees and other kinds of primates
we had very long threatening looking canine teeth.
Now it's those small teeth that seem to be showing a signal in humans.
And so when we find late myosin apes like Ardipithecus with these relatively short canines, that
possibly tells us that they have a social organization that's communicating things a little bit more
like we do, and a little bit differently from living great apes.
Well in terms of signals, another very interesting kind of signal that chimpanzees use is called
a threat display.
A chimp will run around, especially the male chimps, because the male chimps are competing
for mating opportunities and for dominance within their groups.
They'll run around, they'll puff up their fur really big, they'll make themselves as
big a display as they possibly can.
Sometimes they'll drag branches around to make lots of noise, and often they'll rise
up on their two hind legs and run around that way, making themselves very tall.
That kind of signaling is one of the contexts in which living primates operate bipedally.
They get up on two legs and they run around.
In other contexts, if they're carrying something and they need to get from place to place,
sometimes if females are carrying their offspring and they also need to grab something else,
walking bipedally is something that chimpanzees and gorillas and orangutans can do today.
The best known of the bipedal primates is the gibbon.
Now gibbons have extraordinarily long arms and they're especially good at swinging arm
over arm in the trees, but when they're on the ground, these long arms are almost useless
to them.
I mean, they're really too long to even knuckle walk effectively, and so when a gibbon's on
the ground, they will run bipedally using their arms to balance, sort of like this.
And that kind of bipedal motion, when we see it in other kinds of primates, we understand
that their locomotor potential is so flexible that they're able to use different styles
of locomotion.
Now for hominids, we're a little different.
Humans today have what we call an obligate adaptation to walking upright, bipedality.
That obligate bipedality involves many of the elements of our skeleton, going from our
feet right up to our heads.
And so when we look at early hominin fossils, we pay attention to the differences across
their skeleton.
Of course, the fossil that lays out those differences most clearly is the famous fossil
called Lucy.
Lucy is from Hadar, which is also in Ethiopia, not very far from the place where Ardipithecus
was found, but Lucy lived more than a million years later, about 3.2 million years ago.
Lucy's skeleton is so complete that we have elements of her pelvis, of her hind legs,
both the femur and the tibia, of all of her limb bones, her forelimb bones, and her mandible.
So we know quite a bit about Lucy, including her size.
She stood about a meter tall, which is about 3.3 feet.
Including her age, she was an adult, which means that she had her third molars and probably
was around 15 to 20, maybe a little bit older in age.
And we know her weight.
She weighed about 35 kilograms, which is something like 80 pounds.
So on every measure, she's smaller than Ardipithecus.
She's really small compared to living humans.
But when we look at her bones and the bones of other early hominins, they align with ours
in those characteristics that show bipedal locomotion.
So let me show you some more of these hominin bones to give you a picture of exactly what
we're looking at when we look at features that are adapted to bipedality.
This is a chimpanzee pelvic bone.
It's the hip bone.
It goes right on the side of the body here.
This chimpanzee bone you can see is very long, and especially this top part of the bone,
which is called the ilium.
It's very long.
It rises up above the ball and socket joint of the hip, which is called the acetabulum.
This is a human hip bone.
It's exactly the same side.
We can put them next to each other here.
And you can see the differences in terms of their height and in terms of their width.
If we take a look at these bones from the top, you can see that the human bone is more curved,
and the chimp bone has a much smaller opening here.
That curvature relates to what we call the pelvic inland.
The pelvic inland is that part of the anatomy that humans and other mammals have to give
birth to babies through.
And so it has to be large enough to accommodate the head of those infants.
Now when we compare an early hominin, this one from South Africa from a site called Sturkfontein,
and I'll show you several fossils from this site.
When you compare this early hominin to a chimpanzee, you can see the great difference
between these.
The early hominin, like the human, is relatively very short.
Like the human, it's relatively curved.
If I put it again next to this human hip bone, you can see the great similarity in the shape
of these.
That's a tremendous sign that the skeleton of these early hominins was entirely reconfigured
to make them more effective as bipeds.
So you can ask, why is it that the hip has that shape?
And the reason is actually quite simple.
The hip bone has to do two things in a biped.
The first thing that it has to do is it has to keep your body upright when you're standing
on one foot.
Now if you're any other kind of primate, standing on one foot is a very rare position
to be in.
So you tend to have support from at least one of your other legs, if not all of them.
For a human, standing on one leg is something we do with every step we take.
And especially when we're walking or running, we put a lot of force through that joint.
And if we didn't have strong muscles to support us there, our bodies would collapse literally
in the other direction.
So what we have are muscles that connect between the hip bone and the top of the thigh bone.
Those muscles that you can feel operating when you stand on one leg are precisely the
muscles that this early hominin had attached to its hip bone and attached to the top of
its femur.
So that anatomy allows effective upright stance.
The other thing that the hip of a biped has to do is to make sure that you can move forward.
If you're walking forward and not able to employ your muscles effectively to give you
that leverage with each step, well then you're not going to move very far.
For hominids like us, this is a very efficient mode of locomotion because our legs are swinging
and our body sort of moves with them, almost like a pendular motion.
That's really good.
It's something that quadrupeds can't quite take advantage of as easily.
If you have a pelvis that's configured like a chimpanzee's pelvis, then in order for your
muscles to retain their leverage, you have to have a squatting sort of gait.
And that's, in muscular terms, very inefficient.
I have to be firing my leg muscles all the time to keep my body in this bipedal stance.
It's one of the reasons why this is such an effective threat display for chimpanzees because
it's energetically very expensive to make that kind of motion.
For humans, if we had to walk around like this all the time firing those leg muscles,
it would be energetic disaster.
We wouldn't be able to eat enough to support our bipedal locomotion.
So the fact that we have legs that support our body as columns when we're standing and
that can operate effectively as pendulums when we're walking, that's tremendously effective.
But what it means is that we had to change the operation of our muscles, in particular
the gluteus maximus muscle, which is the largest muscle in your body.
In humans, this is the major muscle of making your legs go like this.
It's the muscle that you use when you're climbing stairs, but we don't use that large
muscle hardly at all when we're just walking at a relaxed pace.
And the reason why is because of our efficiency.
The bones are structured in such a way that we use that muscle when we have to, and when
we don't have to, we can keep it relaxed.
Well in chimpanzees, this same muscle, homologous with our gluteus maximus, isn't making this
kind of motion at all.
It's a muscle that makes the legs go out like this.
Not an especially important motion in chimploca motion.
And so this is rather a small muscle in chimpanzees and other primates.
Now I mentioned standing on one leg.
Well, you have to reconfigure other parts of your anatomy if you're going to stand on
one leg.
And one of the most important of those pieces of anatomy is the knee.
This is the distal part of the thigh bone of an early hominin.
And what's really unique about it is if I set it on its legs like this, you'll see that
the shaft of this bone is coming up at an angle.
Now if this was any other kind of primate, these would be at right angles to each other
because this limb has to operate in really all different kinds of positions.
Every in humans in particular, when we're standing on one leg, well, our foot really
needs to be beneath our center of gravity or else again, we're going to fall over.
So the way that we accomplish that is by having our foot underneath our center, by having
our tibia, that lower leg bone, come straight up from the foot and having an angulation
at the knee so that our hip joint can remain out here to the side of our body.
That's our mechanism for standing on one leg or for walking with each step and it's
one that has highly distinctive signs on the distal part of our thigh bones, highly distinctive
signs that we also find in these early hominins.
So you see anatomically many parts of the body are involved with bipedality.
Now I want to say a couple of words about hominin trace fossils because my colleague
Dr. Martin has an awful lot of experience with trace fossils.
In the hominin fossil record, we have relatively few of them.
But one of the most famous evidences of human evolution are these footprint trails from
a site in Tanzania called Laitoli.
These footprints are about 3.6 million years old.
They were found by Mary Leakey in the early 1970s and they very clearly show the footprints
of two individuals walking side by side.
Now you don't have to be an expert to interpret what's going on with these footprints.
For one thing, there are no knuckle marks dragging along beside them.
These are fully upright bipedal footprints.
They look like two people that you might have seen at the beach.
Now if you look closely at the footprints, they don't necessarily look entirely like
ours.
For one thing, one of those sets of footprints is quite big, but the footprints are very
close together and the other set of footprints is much smaller and the footprints are spaced
a little more naturally apart.
It really leads to the impression that these two hominins who were walking on an ash layer
that came from a volcano and was later sealed by another fall of ash from the same volcano.
So really capturing a moment in time.
Those two hominins must have been matching each other's pace.
The bigger one may be walking a little bit more slowly so the small one can keep up.
Now artists have reconstructed this track way in a lot of different ways.
They have one of them following behind the other one.
They have one of them sort of being a kid and the other one a grown up.
My favorite reconstruction is probably the one where they're walking arm in arm because
you can see that the footprints are so close together that these hominins would literally
have had to be in contact with each other if they were walking side by side.
Looking at these in reconstructed form, I think you get the impression that although
they're walking upright like humans are, they're not really very human like in a lot of ways.
Here you see them reconstructed with fur on their bodies and that's very typical.
They're reconstructed with faces that are much like chimpanzees and if you look at them
their heads are chimpanzee-like in proportion to the size of their bodies.
That's something that's very clear from the other remains of Australopithecus.
Those remains show that they had relatively ape-like skulls, human-like, post-crania,
but much smaller than humans.
No fossil better represents this than the first Australopithecin to have been found.
It's from a site in South Africa, a cave called Tong.
Like many of the South African sites, Tong was the site of active quarrying for lime.
Basically people making concrete factories and so on, they're after the lime and the
limestone that they can use to make it.
Well inside of this limestone there are caves and cavities of various kinds that were filled
often long, long ago and because they were filled from the surface with dirt and animal
bones that came in, remains of plants, they're full of junk that over time became cemented
together as groundwater continued to percolate through carrying the dissolved lime through
it and calcifying the entire thing.
And so these caves have become a rich source of fossils, especially fossil primates.
And the first of those to have been noticed was this site called Tong.
Well Tong as a fossil is part of a face and the jaw of a young child, probably about four
years old, and together with it the natural cast of the inside of the child's skull.
That natural cast called an endocast, it sort of corresponds to the space that was taken
up by the brain.
It's not precisely that because there are spaces in between your brain and your skull
that are filled with membranes and fluid.
But it gives us an impression of the brain size, it also gives us an impression of some
of the characteristics of the surface of the brain.
The person who found Tong, Raymond Dart, he interpreted this skull immediately as a
member of our lineage, the hominins.
And he did so not on the basis of anything related to being a biped, he did it on the
basis of its teeth.
He looked at the development of the teeth in this young child and said, these are developing
in a human like way.
And these molars, they don't look like chimpanzee molars, they don't look like gorilla molars,
these look like the molars of a hominin, although with some differences they're quite
a bit bigger for example.
We've learned over the years that Tong is really important evidence about the pace of
development.
It's developing in a slightly more human like respect than chimpanzees do in terms of the
molars being a little bit more delayed in development, the canines developing a little
faster and those canine teeth being much smaller.
Dart was precisely right about the developmental implications of these features, but Tong as
a specimen reminds us of much more than these aspects of the skeleton.
In later years it was discovered that Tong had evidence of the predator that originally
ate it.
That predator in this case was an eagle.
If you look closely inside the eye orbits of this fossil, what you see is the talon
marks that the eagle made when it clamped onto the skull and presumably either ate it
on the spot or possibly carried it away because in paleontological terms the eagles that lived
in South Africa were large enough that they might have been active predators even of juvenile
primates of a large species like these early hominids.
So these early hominids, they weren't masters of their environment.
They were very subject to predation.
This fossil skull cap from the site of Swartcrans in South Africa has two holes in the back
of it that correspond almost perfectly to a leopard jaw that was found at the same site.
It was one of those convenient things where you see the holes and you think, what are
these holes for?
And then you, oh, that's what they're for.
This was another victim of predation.
Imagine that unlike other kinds of primates, especially the other great apes who have long
life histories, who have long birth intervals, these early hominids had become committed
to living on the ground.
Now we know that the earliest sites where we find them, including Lucy's sites, were
principally wooded.
So they were developing this kind of bipedal locomotion when they still had refuge to go
to in the trees.
And Lucy, among other things, was probably a very good climber for this reason.
But that commitment to an obligate form of bipedality means that you're compromised in
many respects.
The first compromise to strike us was the increased risk of predation.
It's the fact that now you're out on your own, you might look a little bigger to a predator
because you're taller, but if you stray a little bit far from the trees, as juveniles
probably often did, you're at extreme risk of one of those predators getting you.
This must have been one of the biggest risks to these early hominids.
Now when we think about early hominids, it's one thing to explain their anatomy in terms
of being effective as bipeds.
But in addition to that, it's important to point out that over the course of several
million years of their existence, these hominids evolved into many different types.
We think that there were probably more than seven or eight species of these hominids and
they fell into different niches that were especially differentiated in terms of diet.
Over two and a half million years ago, we see different kinds of hominids in the fossil
record.
This jaw of Lucy's species is one of the earliest.
It's from the site of Lytoli and what I want to show you about it is the relative sizes
of its teeth.
This jaw has big molars compared to your molars or my molars.
That big molared form is what hominids were adapting into.
We can ask the question, why did they have this adaptation?
What was it that they were eating?
Because chimpanzees have molar teeth that are about our size and humans have relatively
small molar teeth compared to these early hominids.
What is it that they were eating?
Well we have some evidence about this from isotopic study of these bones.
Hominids have sampled by drilling the bones a little bit, taking bone powder and sampling
chemicals that occur in different forms in nature.
In particular, carbon forms, carbon 12 and carbon 13, which relate to the proportion
of different kinds of plants in the diet.
It turns out that plants that have a four-chain photosynthetic cycle, what are called C4 plants,
and that includes mostly grasses.
Those plants have a different ratio of carbon 13 to carbon 12 than other plants, such as
trees and herbaceous plants.
So that difference allows us to get a little bit of a picture of the diet of these early
hominids.
One of the things that we can tell from their large teeth is that they're adapted to eating
hard, small objects, things that have to be ground and crunched up.
That hard, small object adaptation could be nuts, but the teeth make it look like they
were eating a high C4 proportion, a high grass proportion.
Now, humans don't eat grass, except we do eat parts of grasses.
We eat their seeds, and we eat sometimes their underground roots, and we eat the animals
that eat the grass, including insects that eat the grass, termites, for example.
All of these are possible food sources for these early hominids, and we have some clues
from the anatomy of the teeth in terms of what they could chew effectively, and also
some clues from later Australopithecine sites where we find pieces of bone with scratches
on them that really look like they might have been digging into termite mounds to try to
get into those.
Those clues tell us that their diet was varied.
They were eating lots of different things, and that it included more grassland species
and grassland adaptation in that sense than what other kinds of great apes do today.
The really maximum point of this adaptation was found in the robust Australopithecines.
They're a side branch to our evolution.
They're not our ancestors, but they exhibit many of the characteristics that make the
Australopithecines really effective at chewing these hard objects.
Their jaw muscles are so large that their cheeks flare outward away from their skull
to accommodate those jaw muscles, and when you sort of feel on the side of your skull
and chew with your mouth like this, you'll feel those muscles.
Those muscles in these hominids were so large that they met in the center, so these guys
were really well adapted to chewing.
Another sign of this adaptation, their molars and premolar teeth were all the largest known
in the hominid fossil record, some of them literally bigger around than a nickel.
And one last thing, their front teeth were so crowded by these huge back teeth that they'd
reduced to tiny size.
So this was a really distinctive adaptation in these robust Australopithecines, but they
disappeared sometime after 1.4 million years ago.
After that time, our ancestors were the only ones in the fossil record.
So I want to say, as we're thinking about these Australopithecines and their place in
our evolution, just how hard it is, in many cases, to get this tremendous skeletal evidence.
A great example is this cave, Sturk Fontaine, in South Africa.
It's near Johannesburg, and today it's part of a World Heritage site because of the numbers
of caves that are near there that have these hominid fossil remains.
Well, in 1993, a fossil was found there, called today STW573, but its nickname is Littlefoot.
Littlefoot was first, the foot was the first part that was found, but as they exposed this
part of the cave, they discovered that a mere complete skeleton was embedded in the rock.
Again, this rock is so hard to excavate out that they have to prepare it gradually with
dental tools and with a diluted solution of vinegar to dissolve away the calcite.
As they do that, the bone emerges from the rock.
Well, they've been at this now for more than 15 years, and this process of taking this
skeleton out of the rock has been a life's work for a number of paleontologists.
So as we think about the Australopithecines moving into our own genus, Homo, we'll see
in the next lecture the ways that we differ from them, and some of the ways that South
African fossil evidence continues to give us new surprises about our evolution.
