Greetings. In this lecture, we're going to cover a very important transition in our relatively
recent evolution, and that's the transition from Homo to our species, Homo sapiens. That
transition is one that requires us to look beyond some of the features that we're evolving
in the evolution of our genus in terms of body size, in terms of our basic mode of subsistence,
and to direct us toward those elements of our behavior that really set us apart from
other kinds of animals. Elements like language, elements like relatively advanced technology,
like symbolism and art, those kinds of things humans have and we recognize them as somehow
fundamental to our humanity. Well, those are things that emerged within the past few hundred
thousand years. We'll also talk about the sudden dispersal of humans from Africa that
seems to have happened within the last hundred thousand years, and the interactions of those
early modern humans with other kinds of hominids that hasn't been especially clear how closely
we're related to. Interestingly, new genetic evidence is starting to show that we're much
more closely related to some of those more ancient hominids than we thought, and that
we actually have genes from some of them that we once thought might be extinct. So I'm going
to be able to describe some of my favorite hominids, especially the group called the Neanderthals.
But first, let's set the stage a little bit further back in time. When we talk about humans
and behavioral complexity and technology, one of the first things that comes to mind
is fire. When did humans conquer fire and begin to control it? Well, the first place
where we have good evidence of human-influenced fire is a site called Swarkran, South Africa.
And that evidence for fire is relatively early in the fossil and archaeological record, about
1.4 to 1.5 million years old. At a relatively later site in Israel called Gesher Benot-Yakoff,
there's evidence not only for some control of fire, but also for hearths that humans
had controlled fire and used those hearths to structure their activity. They were cooking
some things of the fire. At this site, it was next to a lake, so they were cooking lots
of fish. They were processing their tools at other parts of the site. And so this is
really good evidence that they're structuring their behavior in interesting ways. Other interesting
things that they're doing, well, a million years ago, we find humans on an island called
Flores, which is in island Indonesia, and it's two water crossings from Java. Now, Java
during the Ice Ages was periodically exposed so that you could walk there from the mainland,
and then the sea levels would rise so that it was an island again. And so Java and some
other large islands in Indonesia, like Borneo and Sumatra, have an essentially Asian animal
population. They have tigers, they have rhinoceros, they have Asian monkeys, and they had early
humans as early as 1.8 million years ago. Some of the first people that dispersed from
Africa made it to Java. But most of these animals didn't cross the water that was in the deep
channels that were never exposed by the climate changes that were going on. They couldn't get
across. And so by the time you go from Java to the next-door island, Lombok, and go from
there to Flores, now you have almost none of the Asian mainland mammals. But a million
years ago, there are stone tools being deposited on this island by some kind of ancient human.
So it seems evident that humans at this time, they're able to cross substantial bodies of
water. Did they have boats? Well, they must have had something to be able to make them
do that dispersal. The only other terrestrial species that manage this are elephants who
could swim and snorkel with their trunks, and rats who could also swim. So there's something
interesting about humans. Well, in terms of what's going on behaviorally
with humans, one of the biggest questions has to be, could they talk? When we look at
humans today and think of the ways that we organize our cooperation with each other and
the ways that we learn to do things, most of our learning takes place verbally in terms
of somebody directing your attention to something. Hey, this is how you do that. Or somebody
telling you the name of something. Oh, that's a car. So that you're developing the social
knowledge by exploiting the knowledge that other people have and are willing to give
to you by using language. It's so important to our behavior today as a species. It's a
little bit hard to imagine what humans were like technologically without it. And yet we
have good reason to think that the earliest stone tools were not being made by people
who had language. For example, Australopithecus. We have one juvenile skeleton of Australopithecus
from East Africa that has a bone in its throat called the hyoid bone. That bone is the only
one in your skeleton that actually reflects the position of your larynx. And so it's
the only bone that gives us any kind of sign as to whether an animal was able to make the
same kinds of sounds that we do. Now the larynx of Australopithecus was configured very much
like the larynx of chimpanzees, which means that there were vocal sacs that helped to
resonate their sound so that they could make high-pitched calls potentially over long distances.
But this is not the kind of larynx that humans have today. And so we think that Australopithecus
probably didn't have any kind of language-like communication. It was probably much more like
other kinds of primates. But early Homo shows some signs that it might have had language-like
communication. I mentioned in the last lecture the skull from Easter Cana that had a little
bit of sign of Broca's area, that part of the brain on the left side that's involved
in coordinating speech. So that gives us a hint that something might have been changing
along with larger brains. A more direct hint comes from the site of Atapuerca, Spain. Atapuerca
is a mountain, and in this mountain is a cave with what's called a cima de los huesos, which
is Spanish for the pit of the bones. In this cave, there's a place where there's a vertical
shaft, and at the bottom of this shaft, the cavers who were exploring the cave found bones.
These bones at the top of this level were cave bear bones, and so they thought these
were interesting, and they told the paleontologists, come and get the cave bears out. And when
they came and dug under the cave bears, they found hominid bones, and it's humans all
the way down. This, in terms of the number of specimens and in terms of the number of
individuals, is the largest fossil site that we know of in the human fossil record. It's
very important to our understanding of human evolution, and at 600,000 years old, it occurs
at a really critical time in Europe when populations have been there for a little while, but they
still retain basically the aspects of early humans that set us apart from Australopithecus.
They haven't yet emerged into what we understand today to be homo sapiens. Their brains are
smaller than ours, but from this site, there are two hyoid bones, and both of these hyoid
bones have a very human-like configuration. It's a good sign that the adipuerca hominids
were making sounds in a human-like way. Now, if you've got what you might think of as the
microphone to make the sounds, you also might want to have the receiver to receive the sounds,
and the adipuerca hominids gives us some clues about the auditory apparatus of early humans.
By CT scanning the crania with a micro CT scanner, people are able to reconstruct the
inner ear bones, the bones that are in the middle ear that give you the ability to transmit
sound from your eardrum into the inner ear where you receive the sound that's in it to your brain.
Those middle ear bones in the adipuerca sample are shaped relatively like human middle ear bones.
They're ear bones that seem to be shaped in a way to amplify human-like sounds. So you've got both
the vocal channel that seems to be human-like and the auditory channel that seems to be human-like.
Well, the missing component is the major organ of the brain that handles language. That's the brain,
and that major component we have relatively little ability to look into, but there is one clue.
There's a gene that's called FoxP2, and it says nothing to do with foxes. It's short for forkhead
box. It's a developmental gene that helps to lay down the pattern of development of the brain.
This developmental gene is conserved in all other kinds of mammals except for a few. By conserved,
what I mean is that everybody has basically the same sequence, but humans have two changes that are
unique, that aren't present in other kinds of primates. Those two changes, because this gene has
been shown to be involved in language disabilities in certain kinds of families of humans, those two
changes make us wonder whether this might be a gene that has evolved in humans specifically for
supporting language in some way. So that's maybe a genetic hint. What's interesting about this genetic
hint is that this gene, which has two changes in humans, has the same two changes in an ancient kind
of humans called the Neanderthals. In fact, our ability to recover DNA from these ancient fossils is
really beginning to reshape the way that we think about the evolution of our species. While I'm talking
about the Neanderthals vocal apparatus, I should say that for a long time we've known that the
Neanderthals have a highway bone very much like ours. That, for a long time, was the one highway
bone we had in the hominin fossil record. And so the Neanderthals have, for a long time, stood out as
being interesting in terms of understanding how we evolved as a species. It hasn't been clear whether
they're a branch to the side of ours that didn't contribute much to our evolution, or whether they
might have had a more direct contribution to our evolution as a species. And so it's important for
me to give you a bit of a description of them, because they are my favorite hominids. If this is a part
of anthropology where I've done a lot of work, it's in the Neanderthals. So to give you a quick background
to them, they lived in Europe primarily, but also in West and Central Asia. They lived there between
about 150,000 and 30,000 years ago. So the Neanderthals are stretching across a period that's very
interesting in terms of human evolution. It's a period when behavior, as manifested in the archaeological
record, is really shifting to a more modern-like kind of technological complexity. It's also a period
when we think about the Neanderthals that it's hard to envision what their lifestyles are like
in comparison to ours. So to give a bit of a picture, I want to take you for a moment to a cave. This cave
is called Vindia Cave, and it's in the very northern part of Croatia, the country in Central Europe. This cave
it's the most beautiful place that you could imagine fossil humans ever being found. It's a lovely green
valley outside the cave. The cave itself is the size of a large amphitheater. Your voice echoes inside
of it, and outside the opening of the cave are wild strawberries. It's just wonderful to be there.
From this cave came three bones that are really nondescript. They're little fragments of bone.
They're a piece of a shin bone and other two pieces of long bones. They're from different individuals
as it turns out, although that wasn't obvious from the bones themselves. These bones have turned out
to be among the most important in human evolution, because it's from these bones that we recovered
the DNA of these fossil Neanderthal individuals. That DNA sequence has begun to tell us a lot of things
about the biology of these ancient people. I mentioned already that it showed us that they shared this
gene, the Fox P2 gene, the changes that are present in humans and not in other kinds of primates.
Other things that we've learned have been amazing. In the last lecture, I mentioned the O blood type.
We now know that Neanderthals had one of the O blood types that are shared by modern humans.
Neanderthals had a version of a gene that in humans corresponds to red hair.
And by reconstructing the function of the changes that existed in the Neanderthals, it's possible to say
that they probably had red hair too. So there's all kinds of interesting things we've begun to learn about them.
One of the things that became clear relatively early in the process of sequencing genetics from them
is that when you looked at Neanderthals from lots of different places, they were genetically quite similar to each other.
That's something that modern humans today also have. They have a great genetic similarity to each other.
And so when we started looking at the genetics and seeing this similarity in the Neanderthals
and this other kind of similarity in humans, it really seemed like these two were distinct populations.
That they had emerged in parallel to each other in different parts of the world.
And where the Neanderthals we know were living in Europe, West Asia and Central Asia,
well, our species seems to have been emerging in Africa during the same time period.
But in 2010, we got a draft of the whole Neanderthal genome.
Through extensive technological advancement, they're able to sequence the tiny fragments of DNA
that are left in these bones and reconstruct them into a draft of a genome.
Probably, at least from my point of view, the most interesting aspect of this research is that
it's shown that the Neanderthal genes are similar enough to the genes of some living people
to be able to say that they contributed some of their genes to us.
And the percentage looks like about one to four percent, which is not a lot of our ancestry.
It's a little bit. Genealogically, it's the equivalent of maybe one great, great, great,
great-grandparent. In genealogical terms, that great, great, great grandparent contributes
about three percent of a person's DNA.
And the Neanderthals, between one and four percent of the DNA of populations today,
they live outside Africa.
That raises a really interesting question.
If this ancient kind of human who lived across a large stretch of western Eurasia
Africa only contributed a very tiny fraction of the DNA of people who live in that part
of the world now.
How is it that today the DNA of Africans that lived in the last 100,000 years came to predominate
over the DNA of the people who lived outside of Africa before?
How did it happen that Africans had such an important influence on our evolution?
Well to answer that question, it's maybe worthwhile to understand some of the differences
between Neanderthals and us in terms of their strategies for subsistence and in terms of
their lifestyles.
For example, Neanderthal bones are thicker than ours, and they're curved, and if you
look at their long bones, like their thigh bone, the joints are very large relative to
the size of the shafts.
What that means is that Neanderthals were adapted to more stresses in their locomotion
than we are.
They were more muscular in comparison to their mass than we are, and that muscularity and
those stresses probably reflect something about their lifestyle.
One of the most important aspects of Neanderthal biology is the extent to which we find their
bones with healed injuries to them.
Probably the most famous skeleton that exhibits this kind of injury pattern is from a site
in Iraq called Shenadar 1.
Shenadar 1 had an amputation of one of its arms, and as you can see the humerus on that
side was atrophied so that it completely lost its bone mass because that arm was no longer
usable.
Shenadar had all kinds of other injuries.
He had broken ribs, he had a fracture to the side of his face, he was probably lame
due to an injury to one of his ankles.
Those kinds of injuries are very difficult to live through if you're an active forager.
This is a case in the fossil record where we have to imagine that this man who lived
to be 45, 50 years old, which was very old for Neanderthal, was probably valuable to
the people in his group.
He was probably contributing something to them so that their cooperation was centered
around keeping him alive.
Well, if you look at the injury pattern that we find on all kinds of Neanderthals, it's
a lot of head injuries, a lot of broken ribs, a lot of arm injuries, not very much in the
pelvis and legs.
Those are injuries that are really difficult for an active forager to survive.
And so the pattern ends up looking like the pattern of injuries of today's humans who
work closely with animals, especially stockmen and rodeo riders.
So we can look at the Neanderthals and say, wow, this injury pattern is because probably
of their hunting strategy.
They're recovering bison, horses, red deer.
These are big dangerous animals.
And if you're imagining how to hunt these when you don't have a bow and arrow, when
you don't have a rifle, you've got to run up to these big animals with a spear and thrust
it into them, that's dangerous work.
It's work that required intensive cooperation.
It would have taken other people to drive those animals, probably both men and women
in the group, driving the animals so that the people left waiting for them in the animal's
path to jump.
That kind of hunting strategy is very difficult to carry off.
And yet we think that that was the predominant kind of hunting strategy that early humans
must have had.
It was one that left all kinds of dietary risks to them.
So we find hypoplasias on their teeth, places where the teeth weren't developing normally,
probably because of hunger.
We find evidence of cannibalism at early Neanderthals sites.
When they got hungry enough, they ate each other.
And yet cannibalism is itself a very human-like activity.
It's something that humans do when they're forced to it.
And we have descriptions of that from many situations in human history.
And when we look at the archaeological record that Neanderthals left us, they left us some
very interesting artifacts, artifacts that tell us something about their symbolic nature.
So for example, in Spain, there's a site where there are shells that the Neanderthals collected.
And in one of these cases, the shell has a natural pigment band around the side of it
on one side.
And if you flip it over, the shell itself doesn't have a natural pigment band, but Neanderthals
used pigment to color in the band on the other side.
They were painting things.
They were collecting shells and stringing them from necklaces.
They were using chunks of pigment to color on their skin or hides, because we can tell
from the wear pattern on these pigment chunks that they were rubbed on something soft, not
on a hard thing like a cave wall.
So that kind of symbolic behavior, the kind of leaving artifacts that meant something
to somebody, it tells us that they were behaviorally very human-like in many ways.
So it may be no surprise that we share their genes.
They were evidently very close to us, so much so that we would probably put them inside
of our species, Homo sapiens.
At the same time, in Africa, these kinds of symbolic behaviors are also emerging.
By 70,000 years ago in South Africa, there are clear artifacts that show that humans
had symbolic behaviors.
There are chunks of rock that have incised lines on them that make zigzag patterns.
There are little pieces of ostrich egg shell that were ground around the outside with holes
punched in the middle so that they could be used as beads.
There are little stone plaques, including one from a site called Apollo 11 Cave, that
has a lion painted on it.
It's these early aspects of symbolic behavior that seem so persuasive to us when we think
about what it means to be human.
They don't approach in scale some of the later evidences of artistic behavior that we have,
but they show us that the spark is there.
There's something about these populations of people that's different from the humans
that came earlier, that's modern in some way.
Well, in Africa, it's not only this kind of behavioral modern aspect that's emerging,
it's also an anatomically modern aspect.
When we look at the fossil remains of humans in Africa after about 200,000 years ago, they
start to develop features that we recognize today in living human populations.
Probably the most obvious is that their brain isn't getting a lot bigger anymore, but it
has moved forward and the face has moved under it so that the skull as a whole seems to be
more rounded, it's globular.
These people had a forehead instead of a brow ridge that stuck in front of their forehead.
They had a rounded back of the skull instead of an angled back to their skull.
Those characteristics, it's not obvious why they changed.
One possibility is that this has to do with the development of the brain so that the genes
that make brains maybe more suited to modern behavior invoked certain kinds of changes
in the architecture of the brain.
Or it's possible that this is just a side effect of other kinds of evolutionary changes.
For example, a reduction of the face that came with smaller teeth, which are also evolving
at the same time.
Whatever's the case, these modern humans are beginning to become anatomically recognizable
and we can start to chart their spread out of Africa.
By 90,000 years ago, we have these modern humans emerging out of Africa into what is
today Israel or the Near East.
Those modern humans are living a little bit earlier than Neanderthals who also lived in
what is today Israel about 60,000 years ago.
If we want to think about when was it possible for these populations to interact with each
other and exchange the genes that we see genetically they must have done, this is a really good
candidate for the place because here we have apparently African derived humans and Neanderthals
living in close to each other for potentially a long period of time.
Whatever's the case, after 60,000 years ago, humans of African derived origin begin to
disperse through the world.
They initially spread across South Asia.
Later they spread into Europe and wherever they spread we start to see archeological
signs of very interesting complex behaviors.
Of course, from my point of view, one of the easiest forms of these behaviors to point
out is artistic.
When we go to Europe and go deep into caves and find caves that have painted walls with
pictures of animals on them, in some cases pictures of humans, those walls were painted
by people after 33,000 years ago.
The modern humans who came into Europe and supplanted there the Neanderthals.
We see the evidence for that artistic expression in terms of portable objects that they carry
around.
Venus figurines are among the most famous of those portable objects but there are others
including the famous lion man, a man like figure with a lion's head.
These seem to show some element of symbolism possibly of ritual that's very human like
in the way that we can tell archeologically.
We have to ask the question.
Those kinds of human like behaviors, as I showed you, are stuff that Neanderthals seem
to have been on the verge of doing.
So what was it that modern humans had that Neanderthals didn't have?
The answer to this is really today unknown.
It could be that the technology made a difference, that when modern humans emerge they're using
projectile weapons and ultimately bows that allow them much lower risk when they're hunting
large animals than the Neanderthals had.
It could be that they were able to make use of a broader range of resources especially
as the climate began to deteriorate at the maximum of the last ice age.
Neanderthals had lived in Europe for a long time, had lived through a couple of glacial
cycles, but maybe the end of this last glaciation as it became more and more intense was just
enough to give modern humans an edge.
Or maybe it's something that we can't see in the archeological record such as disease
or some kind of social organization that wouldn't leave an obvious archeological trace.
These are hypotheses that we'll be exploring in the future no doubt, but at the moment
it remains something of a mystery.
Now as modern humans spread through the globe they reached the places that today and historically
we know that humans lived including the New World which meant that to get there they had
to adapt to the Arctic to spread through the Bering Land Bridge into the Americas.
They had to invent ships and boats to get to islands and by 30,000 years ago they're
spreading into island Melanesia. By 40 or 50,000 years ago they had spread to Australia,
the island continent.
And on the topic of islands I have to return to the island I talked about early in the
lecture, Flores, 18,000 years ago in a cave on Flores was buried a skeleton, a skeleton
that looks very unhuman like in many respects. Like Australopithecines it's small in body
size, like Australopithecines it has a small brain, it has human like teeth. We have to
wonder what is this? Some scientists say this is Homo erectus that reached this island a
million years ago and over time became dwarfed because on islands large animals often because
of a lack of resources or the need to reproduce more quickly shrink in their body sizes. Other
scientists say this is something that was obviously living there when modern humans had
already arrived in the area. Maybe this is a pathology that we haven't yet been able to
diagnose. Whatever is the case this is probably the biggest sign that there are still mysteries
to uncover about the origins of modern humans and their spread through the world and certainly
will occupy a lot of our attention in the next several years.
