Hello, and welcome back to the Four of the Evolution of Mammals.
This is a major transition that has already been underway for the last five lectures.
So let's recap those other transitions.
The previous lecture dealt with the co-evolution of flowering plants and pollinators during
the Cretaceous period from at least 125 million years ago.
Most pollinators were flying insects, but what we did not discuss is that about halfway
through this span of time, mammals also became intrinsically connected to flowering plants.
Some mammals became pollinators, but many others were seed dispersers through their consumption
of fruits.
This co-dependent relationship between flowering plants and certain terrestrial mammals still
holds true today, and it becomes even more important for the later evolution of mammals,
such as primates.
But even long before mammals became a cohort to this evolutionary history of flowering plants,
they lived in terrestrial ecosystems worldwide, and that started minimally by about 220 million
years ago during the Triassic period.
And for the origins of mammals, we have to go all the way back to synapsid reptiles, which
started in the Carboniferous period about 310 million years ago.
It was from these synapsids that mammal-like reptiles arose in the Permian period from
about 290 to 250 million years ago, showing a smooth transition from what we would call
a synapsid reptile to a synapsid mammal.
In other words, mammals and their ancestors appeared and began to evolve at almost the
same time and, for some of the same reasons, as the dinosaurs.
And although they were overshadowed by the dinosaurs, at some points literally, mammals
were a part of the world throughout most of the Mesozoic era.
So the evolution of mammals has been underway for far longer than you may have realized.
But before we go back to the Permian, and then the Triassic, and the Jurassic periods,
to look at the origins and early evolution of mammals, let's spend just a little bit
more time in the more recent Cretaceous period, which was the big finale of the dinosaurs.
There's one particular mammal from then I would like you to know about.
This mammal helped to change some of the stereotypes we might have had about mammals from that
time, and it's worth discussing for that reason.
Let's talk about Rapino mamas.
That's the Cretaceous mammal that ate a dinosaur.
Now, even when we're aware that dinosaurs and mammals evolved roughly in parallel throughout
the Mesozoic era, we normally think of the mammals as the tiny, defenseless, little insect
eaters that hid in burrows and otherwise stayed inconspicuous while dinosaurs ruled all terrestrial
ecosystems.
This stereotype of mammalian inferiority has been reinforced by pop culture, which often
shows mammals hiding from dinosaurs or functioning mostly as snacks for them.
Well, for example, one dinosaur digside I visited that they had t-shirts for the volunteers
with a cartoon theropod dinosaur throwing a small mammal up in the air to catch in its
mouth.
This cartoon was accompanied by texts that said, mammals, the popcorn of the Mesozoic.
Now this view that mammals were singled out for consumption by dinosaurs has been carried
out to an extreme in many movies or other forms of popular fiction that have dinosaurs
eating humans, which carnivorous dinosaurs for some reason always find delicious.
So you can imagine how pleased mammologists must have been when the mammal Rapino mamas
robustus was discovered from early Cretaceous rocks of China from about 130 million years
ago or about the time of the first flowering plants.
This anaclosely related species Rapino mamas giganticus, they're the largest known mammals
from the entire Mesozoic era.
Rapino mamas giganticus was probably more than one meter or 3.3 feet long, slightly larger
than a Virginia possum.
Now compared to most Mesozoic mammals, this was huge, especially considering that nearly
every other mammal from that era was described as true sized.
Best of all, one specimen of Rapino mamas robustus contained bones of a juvenile stetachosaurus
in its gut region.
Stetachosaurus was a small ornithitian dinosaur and the presence of its bones in the body
cavity of this mammal implied that it had been eaten by the mammal.
So this constituted firm evidence that at least one species of mammal either preyed
on or scavenged dinosaurs and they were getting big enough to compete directly with smaller
dinosaurs as carnivores in their ecosystems.
In other words, these Cretaceous mammals were giving a little preview of a day when mammals
would routinely eat many dinosaurs every day.
Nowadays we call it chicken and it tastes like, well, you know.
Well you probably already know the traits of mammals that helped distinguish them from
similar vertebrates because of your own self-awareness.
General characteristics of mammals include hair, mammary glands, relatively large brains
compared to their body sizes, and long care for their offspring.
Far less obvious, mammals also have several bones that reflect their evolutionary connection
to their more reptilian ancestors.
These are the three middle ear bones, the Malleus, Incas, and Stapes.
Those are otherwise known colloquially as the hammer, anvil, and stirrup for their superficial
resemblance to these tools.
These bones are related to the evolution of finer hearing in mammals.
Two of these three bones, the Malleus and Incas, developed originally from the reduction
of bones in a reptilian jaw.
Well we'll discuss this in more detail later, especially in the context of what behavior
and environmental factors might have selected for these traits.
The three modern types of mammals, which are classified on the basis of modes of reproduction,
give a strong sense of the evolutionary progression of mammals.
The first are monotremes.
These are egg-laying mammals, and that's clearly a primitive trait that overtly reflects
their reptilian ancestry.
Mammals for monitoring ancestors have been found from about 120 million years ago, but
their primitive skulls and shoulders suggest they share traits with animals from about
150 to 200 million years ago.
The second group are marsupials.
They're the oldest known example dates from 125 million years ago.
These mammals have live birth, but embryonic offspring are nurtured in a pouch for an extended
time out of the uterus.
Placental mammals make up the third group, they're also known as euthariens.
These mammals, like marsupials, also have live birth.
The big difference in their reproduction though, is that placentals use a placenta for longer
development of an embryo in the uterus.
The oldest known placental mammal is from rocks from about 125 million years ago.
Now if monotremes, only five species are living today.
Two in Australia, three in New Guinea.
The most famous of their group is the platypus, ornithorhynchus annatinas, which is native
to all of Australia.
This mammal looks very strange when you compare it to most mammals in the rest of the world.
But once you get past its duck-like bill, beaver-like tail, and the poison spurs on
its legs, oh not to mention its female's laying eggs, it actually has all the traits
of a typical mammal.
When British naturalists first tried to classify it and they brought back specimens from Australia
to Great Britain, people thought it was some sort of elaborate practical joke, in which
a taxidermist stitched together parts of several animals.
Now later zoologists realized it represented a member of an ancient lineage in Australia,
which then was backed up by the fossil record.
In fact, the oldest monotremes in the fossil record come from early Cretaceous rocks in
Victoria, Australia from about 120 million years ago.
Other monotremes include echidnas.
These are the short-beaked echidna, tachyglossus aculetus, which is also native to Australia,
also in nearby New Guinea, are three species of long-beaked echidnas, of the genus sacglossus,
which are all native to New Guinea.
The close geographic proximity of these egg-laying mammals all point toward their common origin
in that area of the world.
Now that doesn't necessarily mean monotremes as a clade originated in Australia, but it
is a place where a certain lineage of monotremes found safe haven to continue their evolution
over more than 100 million years.
Very likely egg-laying lineages of mammals older than monotremes exist in the geologic
past.
Now the term monotreme refers to animals that have only one hole for reproduction and excretion.
But monotremes are the only egg-laying mammals still around, which gives us a direct link
to the reptile-like past of mammals.
Likewise, with marsupials, which probably originated in one of the southern continents,
either South America or Australia, but these pouchberry mammals definitely evolved to a
greater degree in Australia in parallel with placental mammals elsewhere.
During their evolutionary history in Australia, marsupials actually had an evolutionary advantage
over placental mammals.
The relatively smaller brains versus body sizes of marsupials meant smaller energy demands,
which also meant they didn't have to eat as much as their placental cousins.
This gave marsupials a superb advantage in environments that were ecologically poor in
producing food used for energy, such as deserts.
Now because nearly 70% of the interior of Australia is desert and has poor soils, and
it has been like that for tens of millions of years, selection pressures would have favored
mammals that had such energy-conserving traits.
As a result of marsupials undergoing adaptive radiation in Australia over the past 60 million
years or so, they provide many examples of convergent evolution with placental mammals.
Well, placental mammals, of course, became the most successful of all mammalian groups
worldwide in their evolution during the past 65 million years.
The list of placental mammals runs to almost 4,000 species, many of which are rodents and
bats, which evolve very quickly.
A few other important groups to note are ardeodactyla.
Now, ardeodactyls are hoofed mammals distinguished most easily by having an even number of toes,
so you can think of cows, deer, pigs, camels, giraffes, and hippopotamuses.
Yet, ardeodactyls also include cetaceans, which are all whales and dolphins.
This will be explained more in the next lecture.
Another group are perisodactyla.
These are odd-toed mammals and include horses, tapirs, and rhinoceroses.
The evolution of horses is a marvelous story in itself, with the earliest ancestors already
appearing 55 to 45 million years ago, while the genus of horse that still survives today,
known as equus, dates from about 5 million years ago.
A carnivora, every predatory land mammal, that's not a monotree, more marsupial, belongs
to this group and it includes canids, felines, and mustelids, also known as weasels, otters,
and their relatives.
Probocidia, these are mammals that are elephants and their relatives, which, other than the
three living species of elephants, includes a large number of extinct species like mammoths
and mastodons.
Now primates, these mammals include lemurs, tarsiers, monkeys, and apes, to name just
a few.
As my colleague, Dr. Hawks, will be exploring, the primates started out as arboreal, then
some liniages came down from the trees, then they expanded into a variety of habitats,
but I'm going to gladly concede the details of primate evolution to him.
Now other noteworthy placental mammals are anteaters and their kin, insectivores and
manatees.
Well, I could go on.
But I think you get the point.
Mammals and especially placental mammals represent a highly successful group of animals in their
evolution.
Now the diversification of placental mammals, along with their spread into terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems during the past 65 million years, even resulted in some liniages developing
into relatively larger brain mammals, such as cetaceans, which include all whales and
dolphins, and primates.
What were the ancestors of mammals?
Well, mammals are, most basally, synapses, and that's a group of amniotes based primarily
on its skull type.
Synapses skulls, as you probably remember, are identified by a single temporal fenestra
on each side of the skull.
Now in contrast, diapses, which include crocodilians, lizards, dinosaurs, and birds, have two temporal
fenestriae on the sides of their skulls.
As mentioned earlier, synapses evolved as early as the carboniferous period, at least
310 million years ago, and the oldest known synapse from the fossil record is archaeothyrus
from Nova Scotia, which is from 306 million years ago.
A general trend in early synapse skulls was an enlargement of the temporal fenestrae.
This was probably the result of selection for larger jaw muscles that attached the bones
around these holes in the skull.
Well, why have larger jaw muscles?
One might think it was related to selection of stronger bite forces, which is probably
correct, but this and other adaptations to the jaw also reflected greater ability to
chew food, rather than swallowing at hole or in big chunks.
We'll soon revisit how synapsed jaw bones and other bones of the skull rearrange themselves
to accommodate the ability to process food, and lots of it, which probably related in
some way to synapse physiology.
By the Permian period, which lasted from 300 to 250 million years ago, synapses evolved
to some rather large and fearsome animals.
The most famous of these were the large, sail-back reptiles of the Permian period called Pelicasaurus.
The most famous example of a Pelicasaurus is Demetrodon, and it consists of several
species.
These were large predatory synapses that lived during the middle of the Permian period from
about 290 to 270 million years ago.
Many people erroneously identify these synapses as dinosaurs, which of course they're not.
This confusion is unfortunately encouraged by toy companies that make plastic replicas
of Demetrodon, then place them in the same bins with replicas of dinosaurs.
This is an endless source of irritation for a lot of paleontologists, which is why I brought
it up.
Just to show you an idea of how wrong this is from an evolutionary perspective, Demetrodon
and all other Pelicasaurus share a more recent common ancestor with humans than they do
with dinosaurs.
Synapses in general were the ruling reptiles of the Permian until the end Permian mass
extinction, which happened 250 million years ago.
That caused most of their lineages to disappear.
But among the synapses that survived this mass extinction was a group of synapses called
therapsids, which spread worldwide, and by worldwide I mean their fossils have been found
on all seven continents.
These animals were sometimes nicknamed mammal-like reptiles, an erroneous moniker that some paleontologists
are now discouraging.
If anything, it actually should be reversed as in reptile-like mammals, because these
animals show a large number of traits we associate with mammals, when these are compared especially
with diapsid reptiles.
Therapsids, which began in the early part of the Permian period about 275 million years
ago, have begun to show more typical mammalian traits, such as differentiated teeth, stronger
jaws, modifications of the jaws to enable better hearing, and an upright posture.
So let's go through each of those traits, and their evolutionary role in therapsids,
and how we can understand that toward the evolution of mammals, and let's start with
differentiated teeth.
Now these are results either of variations in diet or teeth serving different functions,
such as molars for crushing and grinding, incisors for shearing, and so on.
What's also interesting to think about in mammals, though, is how some teeth are not
just for eating, but sometimes used for display.
For example, canines in many mammals are used for intimidation of rivals within their
own species, or to scare away predators.
And sure enough, when you look at a lot of therapsid skulls, such as that of the early
Triassic therapsid, through an axodon from about 245 million years ago, many have enlarged
canines.
Now were these teeth used for threat displays between synapses during the Permian and Triassic
periods?
Well, however thrilling it is to imagine therapses burying their teeth at one another, perhaps
accompanied by dog-like snarling and barking, it's very difficult to test from just the
fossil record.
Nonetheless, accoutrements like big, knobby protuberances on their heads and thick skulls
that accompany these prominent teeth in some therapsids, these traits all reflect adaptations
for what we would call intraspecific or within species competition for mates.
And this is a behavior we definitely associate with mammals.
Anyway, the use of teeth for displays is an important concept you should file away for
now and retrieve later when Dr. Hawks discusses differentiated teeth in primates and the
ancestors of humans in upcoming lectures.
Now the most important evolutionary changes within therapsid jaws that led to what we
consider a so-called normal mammal jaw are best represented by a group of therapsids
called synodonts.
Now don't confuse these with conodonts, which we discussed earlier in the Rise of the Vertebrates,
although the dot here again refers to teeth.
Synodonts, whose name literally means dog teeth, are represented by fossils in late Permian
rocks of Germany, Russia and South Africa, starting about 260 million years ago.
Synodonts were the only therapsids that survived the end Permian mass extinction.
Then they became more widespread in the early Triassic, perhaps through the opening of new
ecological niches that were left by their therapsid cousins.
Now synodonts show numerous modifications to their jaws indicating more efficient chewing.
One of these changes was to increase the size of the lower jaw bone, the dentury, so that
it became one solid piece of bone.
In pre-therapsid reptiles, the lower jaw was comprised of several articulated bones,
which would have hampered repeated chewing.
This ability to chew food suggests that synodonts had this new adaptation in a lineage of synapses
as their needs for more food increased, and this corresponded then with increased energy
needs for endothermia.
One major change in their jaws was for two of their reptile jaw bones to move up to the
inner ear.
The quadrate became the incus and the articular became the malleus.
As a result, a new joint developed between the lower jaw bone, also known as the dentury,
and the squamosal bone.
So another important shift in the skulls of synodonts versus pelicasaurus and other therapsids
was the full development of a secondary palate in the roof of the mouth.
Now what this did was enable these animals to eat more food.
Well, how does a secondary palate make sense as an adaptation for eating more food, evolutionarily
speaking?
Well here's a simple question I'll ask that should put this in perspective.
How many of you hold your breath while you eat?
Well the answer should be none, and even if some of you for some odd reason said yes,
you still have the choice of breathing while eating.
The synodonts could breathe, run, and chew gum all at the same time.
Now this is made possible because the secondary palate separates the nasal cavity from the
oral cavity.
In synodonts, this became even more apparent as the nasal passage moved to the back of
the throat, which ensured that breathing tubes and feeding cavities were separate from one
another.
In contrast, most reptiles can't eat and breathe at the same time, well except for
crocodilians, which in their own evolutionary history also developed a secondary palate,
but that's another story.
How did synapseid limbs change though, and what do these changes say about synapseid
behavior?
Well this is where synapses and dinosaurs actually show some convergent evolution.
As synapses went from the more sprawling posture associated with a normal reptile to
a more upright one.
Limbs also lengthened, tails shortened, and hip bones got smaller.
Now all of these shifts in synapseid evolution from the Permian through the Triassic periods
are thought to reflect the energy demands of increased brain size, increased metabolism,
and increased activity, which are all likely associated with endothermy.
Now endothermy, which developed independently in the lineage of theropod dinosaurs that
led to birds, freeze vertebrates from depending on the ambient temperatures of their surrounding
environments for warmth.
But this adaptation comes with a price, as the need to generate heat internally requires
many more calories.
In this instance, the caloric needs of endotherms are about four to five times more than a similar
sized ectotherm.
Endothermy though would explain why therapsids, and especially synodonts, have so many adaptations
related to eating more food when compared to diapsids.
But why develop endothermy in the first place?
Well one interesting hypothesis is that some niches were related to therapsids adapting
to nocturnal habits.
That is, these reptile-like mammals avoided direct competition with diurnal reptiles by
doing the night shift.
This especially became acute later in the Mesozoic era as dinosaurs began to dominate
terrestrial environments, forcing the descendants of therapsids, mammals, to go into niches
unoccupied by dinosaurs.
The evolution of excellent hearing, smell, and even whiskers in many mammals then makes
even more sense as adaptations for nighttime activities, and it marks a relatively major
transition in its own right.
And although this wouldn't have been the cause, the knights were very slowly getting longer
as the earth's rotation slows, the day-night cycle lengthens, possibly by an hour or so
every 100 to 200 million years.
Synodonts were overshadowed by diapsids throughout much of the Triassic, although some synodonts
evolved into mammals by the Middle Triassic.
Synodonts actually trended toward smaller sizes in their evolution through the Triassic,
and with only a few exceptions such as Burpinumumus, the dinosaur eater of the Cretaceous, mammals
stayed relatively small for the rest of the Mesozoic era.
So what is some of this fossil evidence for the first mammals?
Well, of course, we first looked at body fossils, but wherever trace fossils can help out with
a better understanding of mammal evolution, we'll use those two.
Adelibacilius, from the early late Triassic of Texas, is the oldest known mammal.
Now that's an interesting specimen in itself, but also Sinoconodon, from the early Jurassic
of China, is geologically younger than Adelibacilius, but it's sharing many of its same primitive
traits, including multiple tooth replacement.
Morgan Eucodon, from the early Jurassic of the UK and China, is also a great example
of a transitional fossil.
Morgan Eucodon seemingly has diffodonti, and diffodonti is a true mammalian trait.
It's a trait we've all experienced in which the teeth are no longer replaced endlessly
if they're lost.
Instead, just one set of replacement teeth, known popularly as milk teeth, were shed during
youth and replaced by adult teeth.
Now this innovation aided in improved occlusion, or how the teeth come together, as replacement
teeth would have had a tough time matching up each time if the teeth were lost on a regular
basis.
This trait also points towards suckling and milk as food during early growth, as no teeth
are needed at that stage of life in a mammal.
In other words, even if mammary glands do not preserve in the fossil record, diffodonti
provides a clue as to when mammary glands first evolved in mammals.
All of these mammals, as well as several others from the early Jurassic, beautifully demonstrate
the reduction and positioning of the so-called reptile jawbone elements just before these
were fully incorporated into the mammalian inner ear.
Now Megazoastrodon, from the early Jurassic of South Africa, was probably closely related
to Morganeucadon and had limbs showing a mixture of mammalian and synodon features.
And the most successful of Mesozoic mammal groups were the multituberculates.
These had evolved by the late Jurassic, and they survived an incretaceous extinction living
through the Eocene Epic of the Centozoic Era.
That means these mammals, with origins of the Mesozoic Era, also witnessed some of the
evolution of primates in the Centozoic Era.
Mammals were probable omnivores, whereas most previous mammals were likely insectivores.
Now in the early Centozoic, some multituberculates seemed to have also evolved tree-climbing.
So that means these mammals also may have interacted with primate ancestors.
Now mammal-traced fossils from this time, early in their evolution, are apparently either
rare or rarely recognized.
Nonetheless, some fossil tracks and small burrows attributed to mammals have been reported
from rocks throughout the Mesozoic Era.
I've seen their tracks in the Jurassic of Argentina, for example, and some of these show a typical
hopping pattern that you might also see made by modern mice, where the rear feet exceed
the front, and they make this beautiful 4x4 pattern as they hop.
Now unfortunately though, we have few ways of knowing which mammals made these, but they
provide some very interesting supplementary evidence about a mammalian presence, wherever
their bones might be absent in these rocks.
Now we've talked about how extinctions play an important role in many of the evolutionary
transitions, such as the endovonian extinction that later led to the development of amniotes
and the end Triassic extinction leading to the further evolution and eventual supremacy
of the dinosaurs.
But how did Permian Triassic mass extinction at 250 million years ago relate to mammal evolution?
As mentioned before, various synapses and therapsids went extinct at the end of the Permian
period.
This completely changed the direction of therapsid evolution going into the Triassic, because
the only ones left standing were synodonts.
Thus ecological niches were likely open for synodonts in the early Triassic.
That led to selection of specializations in diet and other adaptations that took their
lineages down the evolutionary path to mammals.
Now how did the major transition of mammal evolution result in the world we see today?
Another mass extinction at the end of the Cretaceous period was evidently responsible
for opening niches for both mammals and birds in terrestrial ecosystems.
Now this in turn lent well to the diversification of mammals in the Cenozoic era.
So mammals actually may owe their origins to the Permian and Triassic extinctions, then
their remarkable expansion and diversification to the Cretaceous extinction.
Mammals did not merely lay low under the shadows of the dinosaurs during the Mesozoic era.
As we've seen, mammals evolved in a way that gave them advantages over dinosaurs with a
whole set of interrelated changes.
Better respiration, better digestion, better ability to withstand cold temperatures, better
sense organs for operating at night, better jaws and better teeth that helped some of
them being able to eat a wider variety of food items.
All those adaptations and exaptations prepared mammals to live in nearly every terrestrial
habitat, with a bewildering variety of forms and behaviors emerging all throughout the
last 65 million years.
Now most of the familiar mammals of today, horses, lions, tigers and bears, appeared
only after the extinction of the dinosaurs.
For example bats, which are distinctive both as flying mammals and for navigating by sound
through echolocation, they make all of their intriguing appearances in the fossil record
only after the Cretaceous extinction.
But Earth's greatest habitats are found in the world's oceans, which is where one group
of hoofed mammals evolved in a grand way to become the largest mammals and the most
massive animals of all, whales.
In the next lecture, we'll take up how all of the adaptations that ultimately gave mammals
so many advantages on land also made possible a new and major transition back into the oceans
of the world.
