Hello and welcome back to the course. This time we're going to discuss what you could
almost think of as two distinct although related transitions, the first forest and the beginning
of seed plants. The insects we discussed in the last lecture did not evolve in barren
landscapes. Instead, insects had plant-filled habitats on land that provided food, shelter,
places for reproduction and fulfilled other biological needs. In fact, evidence tells
us that the early evolution of insects happened at about the same time in the Devonian Carboniferous
Period, about 400-300 million years ago, as the rise of seed plants and the first true forest.
And that brings us to the subject of today's lecture, the evolution of seed plants and the
early evolution of forests. In this lecture we're going to ask how seed plants evolve from plants
that lack seeds and how forests began to develop in major ways, irrevocably changing terrestrial
ecosystems and affecting life on land ever since. We'll also address how these first forests
apparently affected global climate, and that serves as an example of how evolutionary processes
can provoke these far-reaching alterations to the Earth's atmosphere and environments.
But before going too deeply into answering those points, let's ask a rhetorical question that
maybe should impress upon you the relevance of this topic to our modern world. Here's the question.
How is it possible to recycle 300 million-year-old light? Now, you've no doubt heard of recycling
and energy-efficient light bulbs, but you may not know that many people in their everyday lives
are reusing light-derived energy that was first stored by plants more than 300 million years ago.
Yes, I'm talking about coal, and I just happened to have a specimen here. And with this coal,
you can see some of the plant fragments that are still in it, and you can see that this was
definitely from a terrestrial environment in which these plants thrived. In what was now North America,
about 310 million years ago, during the latter part of the Carboniferous period, these extensive
forests, composed of spore-bearing and seed-bearing plants, grew in widespread swampy environments
along the west side of the then newly formed Appalachian Mountains. Now, because the Appalachians
were newly being created by this collision of continents at that time, they hadn't undergone
as much erosion as we've seen in them today. Now, mountains probably taller than the present-day
Rocky Mountains were there, and these were pushed up into a chain that stretched from present-day
Norway and Scotland all the way down through the Appalachians. These tall mountains, in turn,
caused a rain shadow, and that was from the inland sea that laid just to the west. This rain
shadow happens when you have rising air masses carrying moisture up the side of a mountain chain,
then, as these air masses cool, much precipitation is dumped on that side. In the meantime, though,
it leaves the far side of the mountains a little moisture deprived. This same phenomenon is
happening today in the Pacific Northwest, where you have lots of rain pouring on Portland, Seattle,
and other cities west of the Cascade Mountains, while environments east of the mountains are
relatively dry. So this large amount of precipitation, of course, means great volumes of runoff went
into the rivers. These rivers flowed to the west and eventually poured into the interior seaway.
Accompanying this runoff were huge amounts of sand and mud carried by the rivers. So wherever the
river met the sea, they formed these huge deltas, similar to what we have in the Mississippi River
Delta today, and then just think about the extensive bayous swamps and other wetlands
that would have been associated with these lowland deltas. Then think of the abundant
vegetation that lived in these environments. Now imagine how the same sorts of environments
developed all along the western margin of the Appalachian Mountains, with these broad
deltas and swamps and these great amounts of organic material being produced by the plant
communities in those environments. These were the vast coal swamps of the Carboniferous period.
And in fact, even the word Carboniferous means carbon bearing, referring directly to how those
environments at that time produced and buried such abundant amounts of carbon locked in coal.
These forests grew and thrived because of sunlight they received during that time.
Their remains accumulated in shallow water and with each rainstorm and accompanying flooding,
they were buried quickly by these delta sands and muds that came off the mountains.
These rapid burials preserved the organics under anaerobic conditions. Then with enough overburden,
these were compacted under pressure and that changed the organics into hydrocarbons that
eventually matured into coal. Now fast forward 310 million years later, when starting in the 19th
century, we humans started mining these coal deposits from west of the Appalachian Mountains
and we used in the fuel smelters for the steel industry in Pennsylvania, Alabama,
and other parts of the U.S. Even before that, during the 18th century,
coals of about the same age were used in Great Britain to power the industrial revolution.
So these coals formed under varying degrees of heat and pressure, ranging in quality,
that later became economically significant. For example, coals that could burn and produce
more BTUs or British thermal units per volume, those became more valuable than coals that yielded
less energy. Later, as the ill effects of air pollution caused by burning coal were recognized,
coal with low sulfur content was sought out and used. Now these coals formed more often in
freshwater environments, whereas the high sulfur coals, those formed in swampy environments on
the edge of the Carboniferous Inland Sea and they gained their sulfur from marine waters.
Now coal is still used for smelters of course, but now it's also used in coal burning power
plants to produce electricity for lighting. And in fact, in the U.S., coal has typically
accounted for about half of all electricity production and worldwide coal has been the
leading source of electricity. This means that the light given off by our sun during the Carboniferous
is being converted back into light we're using today in our households and workplaces today,
and on a massive scale. All of these conversions in matter and energy we can connect to the
evolution of land plants that then contributed their remains to these first forests. So in many
parts of the U.S., when you turn on the light, you're recycling the energy stored in plant
tissues from more than 300 million years ago. Well what kind of plants existed in these coal
forming forests? Most of these plants represented then new innovations in vascular plants,
otherwise known as tracheophytes. As a result, much of this lecture is going to review the plants
making up the first forest, but we're also going to ask what factors could have driven their evolution
cumulatively resulting in forests. In fact, the evolution of seed plants is a great example
of an evolutionary transition that likely was related to plants adapting to more
wide spread changes in environmental conditions. What vascular land plants preceded seed plants?
As we learned in a previous lecture, some spore-bearing plants, known as pteridophytes,
had evolved during the Celerium period close to 420 million years ago. The pteridophytes
include ferns, which were common during the Devonian period around 350 to 400 million years ago,
and of course representatives of that lineage are still around today. Now during the Carboniferous,
some ferns actually became large enough to be called tree ferns. And if any of you have traveled to
the southern hemisphere, such as in, say, Australia, South America, or New Zealand, you're going to see
tree ferns in those rainforests. Now one pteridophyte of the Devonian that became even larger than
tree ferns we see today, and well-known to paleontologists because of its size and common occurrence
in Devonian rocks is archaeoteras. Now archaeoteras is a great example of how far vascular plants had
come since their humble beginnings in the Celerium period, at least 70 million years earlier.
This plant looked like a modern tree and stature, and it was so abundant that it formed the first
true forest. Full-size specimens had trunks more than a meter wide and are estimated to have been
more than 30 meters or 100 feet tall. It was also a perennial plant growing within its trunk and
through lateral buds on its branches and stems. Paleontologists even have estimated that some
specimens may have lived as much as 40 years. This plant was so large, paleontologists originally
thought parts of it belonged to separate plants. This is similar to how parts of the Cambrian
animal, anomalocaris, were regarded as, say, different animals. Well, for example, one fossil
plant was named Kelly's Island, and that was based on specimens of fossil wood. Whereas archaeoteras
was named from its leafy parts, which look very similar to those modern ferns. But it turned out
that Kelly's Island actually comprised the roots and the stems of archaeoteras. And speaking of
roots, these were likewise massive and they started extending out and into the soil in ways
vascular plants hadn't done before. As roots like these evolved in vascular plants, they then started
to affect the development of soils, especially when these roots combined with fungal colonies,
or microresi, which we mentioned in an earlier lecture. Now, archaeoteras demonstrates how
xylem and phloem tissues had become quite advanced in vascular plants by the end of the Devonian
period. And these, combined with strong woody support to increase these plant heights, that then
overcame gravity and desiccation, which were the two biggest challenges faced by the first
land plants. But these had clearly been overcome by the later part of the Devonian period, or around
370 million years ago. So why was their selective advantage to greater height in some vascular
plants? Well, the main reason must have been competition for light. As more plants began
covering the ground, it made sense for some to reach higher above these other plants
to get the light they needed for photosynthesis. Now, what's interesting to think about in this
respect is that as soon as very tall plants like archaeoteras evolved, they must have created more
shade. This, in turn, meant that understory plants would have then been selected for shade
tolerance. We'll come back to the evolutionary significance of shade in Paleozoic forests
later in the lecture, as well as some in the next lecture. Now, another group of tall teritophytes
in the Devonian and the Carboniferous periods were a group of vascular plants called sphenopsids.
These included horsetails and lycopods, such as club mosses. Let's talk about the horsetails first.
The plant equicetum today, for instance, that's a common horsetail that either grows wild or it's
cultivated as an ornamental plant. Now, horsetails are also nicknamed scouring rushes, and that's
because their tissues have tiny grains of silica, which is a great example of biomineralization
in plants. That made them useful for scouring metal pots and pans, hence their name. So these
modern species of equicetum, they can grow to more than seven meters or 23 feet tall,
consisting of single stalks capped by their spore-bearing organs. Hence, they are in their
nicknames because they look superficially like a horse's tail. Now, probably the most impressive
of horsetails of these fossil horsetails is Calomites. This was a distant relative of equicetum
that lived during the Carboniferous period. Now, this plant would have towered over modern
horsetails as it was estimated to have grown to more than 30 meters or 100 feet tall, or,
as tall as Archaeoteras got during the Devonium period. Similar to Archaeoteras, it was big enough
that different parts of it were initially given different names, such as annularia and astrophilides
for its leaves. Now, these plants lived in moist environments. They had extensive root systems,
and that allowed them to grow clonally by spreading shoots of the same individual plant
laterally. This sort of growth is still evident in equicetum today. So if you see a patch of it
with hundreds of stems sticking out of the ground, you may only be looking at a few individual plants.
Well, clonal growth gave these plants a big advantage in being able to proliferate quickly
through these terrestrial ecosystems, and consequently, they occupied space much more
quickly through their other mode of reproduction, which was by spores. Now, sphenopsids include
club mosses, which are also known as lycopods. Lycopods are not true mosses, though. These
mosses, as you recall from our earlier lecture about the colonization of land environments,
mosses are bryophytes, and they're non-vascular plants. Modern lycopods, like other teritophytes,
are vascular plants that reproduced by spores, and most lycopods were, and still are, restricted
to moist habitats. Now, lycopods are further distinguished from other vascular plants by
having microfills. These are single vein leaves. So we were first introduced to these plants in
the lecture about the colonization of land, in which the Celerian fossil plant, Paragawanathia,
is the earliest known lycopod. Now, some modestly sized club mosses, they're alive today, but their
real heyday, that was in the late Paleozoic, especially during the Carboniferous period,
from about 360 to 300 million years ago. Now, some of these Carboniferous club mosses and their
close relatives, the quill warts, Lepidodendron and Sigillaria, these became monstrously large.
They grew to more than 30 meters, or more than 100 feet tall. These plants were densely spaced,
approaching 1,000 stems per hectare, hectare being a square 100 meters. And then how would you know
such details about their density is what you're asking? Well, in some instances, the trunks of
these trees are preserved in place. That tells us exactly where the original forests were located.
So this combination of large plants and high density helped to form the first true forest.
These plants then made up much of the biomass that later contributed to the cold deposits
from the Carboniferous period. These plants were also among the first land plants with
well-developed root structures, looking very similar to the roots we see in trees today.
Some of these roots were so large, their fossils were mistaken for stems or trunks.
For example, the roots of the quill wart Sigillaria. They were even given their own genus name,
Stigmaria, before paleontologists realized they were actually just separate parts of the same plant.
Now, as you can see, this mistaken identity, this was a recurring theme with plants of the
Devonian and Carboniferous periods. Now, this sense, it was like the parable of the blind men
and the elephant, in which various site-deprived men describe each part of an elephant, like
its snake or a rope and a tree, when actually they were feeling its trunk, its tail, and its leg,
respectively. But once paleontologists got used to the idea that Devonian and Carboniferous
land plants could get so big, this mistake was made less often. So increased height,
that could be an advantage everywhere. But the moist, swampy conditions favorable to the towering
horsetails and the gigantic lycopods didn't exist everywhere. As remarkable as all of the preceding
plants were in these early forests, probably the most far-reaching and novel trait that evolved
in tracheophytes during this time was the ability to form seeds. Now, seed plants, which are also
known as spermatophytes, include forest plants of all shapes and sizes, including cycads, conifers,
ginkgos, and all angiosperms, which are flowering plants. And here we have examples of each of
those, where we have a cycad and we have a conifer and we have a ginkgo going from left to right.
So these modern spermatophytes comprise a very diverse group of plants, and that speaks highly
of their subsequent evolution from the first seed-bearing plants in the Devonian.
Now, nowadays we take seeds for granted. We barely think about them, whether we're eating peanuts,
spitting them out while eating watermelon, or brushing off sesame seeds from our clothes while
eating a bagel. They're even so common for some breeze of plants, you can walk into a hardware
store or garden center and buy them in nice, neat, little, labeled packages. Now, all of this we
consider as part of everyday normal life with seeds, but it started in the Devonian period,
about 370 million years ago. Now, three features had to develop from these four bearing plants,
in order for them to be able to make what we think of now as a seed. Number one is a seed coat.
That serves as a protection against desiccation or other types of damage. Number two would be
nutrients, and that can be starches, oils, or proteins. And number three would be an embryo,
and that's going to be the potential new plant that is going to use the nutrients to grow.
So as you might have noticed with modern seeds, they normally have this hard, tough exterior
that makes up the seed coat. For plants that reproduce on land, especially dry land,
this is an essential adaptation for keeping the nutrients and the embryo in each seed
safe from any harm. Whether that's drying out or consumption by animals,
that might regard seeds as nutritious snacks. Now, sometimes seeds are even indigestible.
And in that, what they're doing is they're adapted to survive a journey through the
gut of an animal and be better off for it. Coming out the other end of the animal covered in
fertilizer. In a few upcoming lectures, we'll talk several times more about the co-evolution of
fruit-eating animals and flowering plants. But for now, suffice it to say that seeds from
the start were selected with protection as the key trait. So why evolve seeds? Well,
certainly many species of land plants were getting along just fine using spores for their
reproduction. And that's how modern ferns and related plants continue to propagate and pass on
their genes today. So let's take a look at the underside of a fern leaf, and you're going to
see these regularly spaced, dot-like spore bodies called sporangia. And those can reproduce by using
haploid gametes or diploid spores. Now, ferns and other teritidites, they show these obvious
alternations of generations. In one generation, these plants may produce haploid gametes. This is
the gametophyte phase. In another generation, they may produce diploid spores. And those later
undergo meiosis. This is the spore fight phase. So basically, the spore fight phase is responsible
for producing gametophytes, which then produce gametes. Actually, all vascular plants, including
gymnosperms and angiosperms, they have alternating generations too. But for some of these, they're
not so obvious. Now, fern sex gets rather complicated, so I'm not going to get into that too much.
But we'll just say it's more complex than sex and seed plants. Now, regardless, though, gametes,
once shed in spores by a fern or some other spore-bearing plant, those are then dependent on
the happenstance of bringing these egg and sperm-bearing parts into close contact with one another
for fertilization. The strategy of using spores originated in water currents and then later
adapted to land by using wind currents. Either way, the use of wind or water currents also helps to
ensure genetic variety. And that prevents inbreeding. But because so much is left to chance in getting
their gametes together, spore-bearing plants are dependent on huge numbers of spores released into
the outside world as kind of a reproductive and genetic lottery. So the spores also lack
any sort of food supply for growth once they're germinated. For spores on land, the food supply
is more precarious, and the currents for moving gametes around are even less reliable than they
were in water. So plants that could evolve more dependable ways to exchange gametes and get food
would especially have an advantage on land. So enter the seed plants. Seed plants have internal
fertilization of gametes and seeds develop in the female part of a plant. That's called an ovule.
Because seed-bearing must have evolved from spore-bearing plants, we again look to some
modern plants to see if any intermediate modes of reproduction are apparent. Low and behold,
there is an intermediate sort of process in teritophytes, a process called heterospory.
The prefix heteroid refers to different as in differently sized spores. So in plants that
have heterospory, they have small and large spores, appropriately called microspores and
megaspores. The microspores develop into micro gametophytes. Those produce male gametes or sperm
and the megaspores, yes you guessed it, develop into megagametophytes and those produce female
gametes or eggs. Now, here's what gets really interesting. The fossil record shows when this
evolutionary shift happened in plants. When spores from the Solerian to Devonian rocks were examined
spanning from about 420 to 400 million years ago, paleontologists found that spores both increased
in diversity of forms and evolved into two distinct sizes. This means that heterospory
had evolved by the early part of the Devonian period around 410 million years ago. But how did
heterospores go on to contribute to the development of seeds? Well, the larger megaspores, instead of
being let go, stayed in the sporangium of the sporophyte parent. Someone analogous to parents
with children who just graduated from college and decide to move back in. Well, the next step
is that the megaspore is going to be fertilized by a microspore within the sporangium. This process
called endospory is very similar to internal fertilization seen in seed plants and that clearly
represents a step in that direction. What was needed next was a way to enclose the fertilized
embryo like a seed coat. And sure enough, endospory also occurs in sporangia that have a protective
covering called an integument. So what's very interesting about the evolution of heterospory
and endospory is that these reproductive modes evolved multiple times in separate lineages of
plants. Thus, it serves as an example of iterative evolution in which the same trait shows up in
different lineages through similar factors in their natural selection. But the bottom line is
heterospory shows up in the fossil record in the early part of the Devonian period. Then seed plants
are present in the later part of the Devonian, meaning this transition happened within about 30
to 40 million years or so. So this brings us to one of the more important transitional plants of
the Devonian Carboniferous Forest, the seed ferns, also known as Turitospherms. Turitospherms,
which literally means fern seeds, that's a group of extinct seed plants that live from the late
Devonian period starting about 370 million years ago through the Eocene Epic, which was about 50
million years ago. Most of these plants, though, had died out by the end of the Cretaceous period,
and only a few holdouts survived in Australia through the Eocene. Now the term Turitospherms,
came about because Paleobotanists at first thought these plants were evolutionary links
between ferns and cycads. And cycads, by the way, are that's a group of non-flowering seed
plants that somewhat resemble palm trees. Nowadays, the Turitospherms are more based on what they
are not. Among the seed plants, they're not cycads. They're not conifers. They're not angiosperms.
Nonetheless, Turitospherms were among the first land plants to use enclosed seeds,
and they show up at about the right time in the fossil record,
just after the evolution of these differently sized spores and Turitophites.
The evolutionary scenario for seed plants descending from plants without seed
fits very well with the timing indicated by the fossil record. The Turitospherms show up
just when you would expect to find transitions between spore plants and seed plants. Furthermore,
the evolution of seeds shows how reproduction these plants was still ensured
in the face of changing environments. Seeds help some land plants adapt to drier conditions.
It also decreased their need then to stay in or close to water sources.
This meant seed plants could expand into previously unoccupied habitats and grow unhampered by any
competition for space and terrestrial ecosystems. As a result, seeds probably evolved in spore-bearing
plants selected during times of drier climates or otherwise more airy conditions.
So, is this hypothesis backed up by the geologic record? Well, yes. The early part of the Devonian
period from about 415 to 400 million years ago was warmer than today by about 6 degrees centigrade
or 10 degrees Fahrenheit, and rocks from this time on most continents indicate widespread rarity.
By later in the Devonian, though, from 400 to 360 million years ago, conditions changed again,
becoming less arid and more temperate. Nonetheless, seed plants continued to evolve and adapt to new
environments and climates after their initial development earlier in the Devonian.
So much later, when conditions again became drier, beginning at the end of the Carboniferous,
the seed-bearing plants would again have important advantages over, say, the horsetails and the
club mosses, which became far less prevalent and no longer grew to the size of trees.
So, how did these non-seed-bearing, vascular plants collectively form the first true forest?
We think that lycopods would have more likely grown in dense populations in more swampy or moist
environments. This supposition is based on the growing preferences of modern lycopods and the
occurrences of fossil ones in rocks that look like they formed in swampy environments, such as coal
swamps. Now, to rid of sperms, the now extinct transitional group, they may have been more
upland trees filling in those drier areas. So, other teritophytes were also common,
but most were more likely understory plants. However, well, some of those teritophytes would
have taken exception being called understory plants, considering a few species reached heights of almost
30 meters or 100 feet. So, what really happened with the evolution of seed plants, though, was that
some land plants were now freed from water bodies and they could spread over these drier
parts of formerly barren landscapes. Now, insects were mentioned earlier for possibly
co-evolving with these Devonian and Carboniferous forests and considering that they share the
same environments, there would have been some plant-insect interactions for sure. For example,
do we have any fossil evidence, though, that insects took advantage of this abundant vegetation
by eating any of it? The answer is yes, although apparently this plant-eating,
also known as herbivory, was limited compared to amounts and types of herbivory we see today.
This is where insect trace fossils come in handy. Wherever insects ate parts of a leaf,
an obvious scar is going to be left in the leaf. So, apparently Devonian and Carboniferous insects
were not the only terrestrial invertebrates eating plants, though. Some fossil wood from that time
also shows marks that are nearly identical to those made by modern wood-boring mites.
Other trace fossils and fossil leaves, wood and seeds are linked to insects with piercing or
sucking mouth parts in which the insects poked into plant tissues to feed on whatever nutrition
might have been offered by these plants. So, seeds in particular must have offered a really
tempting target for insects, considering they're concentrated starches, oils and proteins.
This started yet another sort of arms race between plants and insects that we still see today,
where plants have evolved various defenses against herbivory and insects keep evolving
new ways to get past those defenses. Well, how did forests change terrestrial ecosystems?
These ecosystems were altered in many ways, not just locally but globally. A soil erosion certainly
would have been decreased considerably because these root systems would have kept soil in place.
Think back to when we talked about the initial colonization of land and how land plants stabilized
sediments, and this became even more of the case with the spread of forests
into the Devonian carboniferous landscapes. Less soil erosion in turn would have altered the
forms and courses of rivers, so it would have changed them from braided rivers to more meandering
rivers. The latter are much more common today. Forests also started sequestering carbon,
and that was through taking carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere, storing it in the plant
tissue in larger amounts. Then, as this plant tissue became buried, it was taken out of the
carbon cycle for quite a while, although now we're returning that carbon into our atmosphere in a
big way by burning coal-powered plants as well as through the combustion of other fossil fuels.
But this sequestration of carbon may have even affected global climate by leading to ice ages,
including one at the end of the Devonian period. As many of you know, carbon dioxide is a greenhouse
gas that acts as an insulator in the Earth's atmosphere, and CO2 in the atmosphere seems
to have affected global temperatures throughout Earth history. When these concentrations plummeted,
global temperatures went down too. In short, the development of forests at the end of the Devonian
period about 370-360 million years ago triggered an ice age. That actually contributed to a mass
extinction at the end of the Devonian too. We also think another ice age related to an increased
burial of carbon and a drop in CO2 happened during the middle of the carboniferous period,
about 320 million years ago. This also led to a mass extinction, although not as bad as the one
in the Devonian. Did these forests witness any major transitions in the evolution of animals too?
Yes. The Devonian period was rich with these interrelated transitions, all of them influencing
one another. We already mentioned insects were co-evolving with forests, but vertebrates were
affected too. Especially important from a vertebrate standpoint were the canopies provided by these
new forests, which gave vertebrates new opportunities to get out of the water and start moving around
on land underneath that canopy. These animals, especially four-limbed vertebrates called tetrapods,
were a third major transition to take place within the Devonian period, and the tetrapods
are going to be the topic of the next lecture, where we'll be considering the origins of walking on four legs.
