Well, thank you very much.
So chaos theory I'm going to assert is really one of the great theories of 20th century
physics.
It essentially describes how relatively simple systems, I'll demonstrate two in a second,
can exhibit extremely complex and unpredictable motions.
So it tries to make sense of what is seemingly chaotic and complex from something at heart
is simple.
And that's really going to be the key message of my talk.
But I've got a couple of demonstrations and I'm very grateful to the Royal Institution
staff for actually making these up.
And they're both pendulums of a sort, pendular, I suppose.
The first one is a pendulum which has two rather than just one pivot here.
So you may have seen this, but it's quite a nice demonstration of the sort of complex.
So if I start it here, it's kind of pretty much like an ordinary pendulum, just goes
backwards and forwards in a predictable way.
But if I start it a little bit higher up, you'll see the sort of very irregular, hopefully
you'll see the very irregular kind of way in which the lower pendulum oscillates around.
And it would be very hard to predict, for example, with a computer how that lower pendulum
will go around once.
Well, yes, just made it.
The second one is another pendulum, but it's got some magnets underneath it.
I'm going to use this a little bit later on in the talk for another purpose.
But for the time being, I mean, just watch how the pendulum makes its kind of very irregular
way.
I hope you can sort of see that, maybe, makes its very irregular way around the magnets.
And again, extremely hard to predict, very, very kind of complicated trajectory, but very
simple dynamics.
This is a picture of me in my office with a couple of my group.
This is kind of one of those time-lapsed photographs with a little LED at the end of
the second magnet.
And you can just see, you know, how kind of complicated that looks.
OK, I'm going to focus on a particular chaotic model that was not a physical model, although
actually you can make a physical model out of it, but it's really devised as a piece
of mathematics.
Don't worry, I've written some equations down, but you don't have to understand any
of these equations except for one thing, which I'll tell you what that is in a minute.
But these were equations discovered by the guy on the top left, Ed Lorenz, who was an
American meteorologist who was actually trying to show a simple model of weather and why
weather is so difficult to predict.
Now as I say, you don't need to know anything about these equations except that Lorenz made
use of a mathematical discovery by Isaac Newton called the calculus, the so-called differential
calculus.
My point about saying that is that if one were able to kind of go back in time and show
Newton the equations that Lorenz had discovered, this is Lorenz discovered them in the early
1960s, so if you went back 300 years and showed Newton those equations, he would have actually
understood exactly what they were.
He would have said, oh yeah, that's three coupled nonlinear differential equations.
In other words, it's an equation, the little dot above the x, y and the z on the left hand
side of the equation denotes what's called a time derivative, how fast these quantities
are changing with time.
But anyway, the point is that Lorenz made use of kind of classical mathematics to describe
his equations.
And yet the equations generate a type of geometry that Newton would have been utterly alien
to Newton.
He would have had no concept whatsoever of the type of geometry that these equations generate,
and that's what I want to talk about.
So that's a picture of the geometry.
But just to sort of say, what would Newton, Newton would have gone to school and like
all people at that age indeed up to pretty much when I was at school, you were taught
about Euclid's geometry, the geometry of spheres and ellipses and ellipsoids and things like
that.
And the thing about a sphere is, if you kind of zoom into a sphere sufficiently, that's
a bit of a tongue twister, it kind of gets boring, it just gets flat, it looks flat.
It's just you kind of lose all of the structure or an ellipsoid or a hyperboloid or anything
like that.
Any type of Euclidean geometry looks boring if you zoom into it enough.
But these types of geometries, which we now call fractal geometries, never get boring.
You can zoom in as much as you like.
You can zoom and zoom and zoom and zoom, and you'll still see structure in this geometry.
And what I'm going to argue in this talk is that this geometry provides a bridge between
the classical mathematical and indeed physical world of Newton.
Incidentally, Newton's great discovery that planets go around the sun on ellipses is a
kind of an application of Euclidean geometric thinking.
But these fractal geometries are a kind of a bridge between that classical world.
And first of all, the world of 20th century mathematics.
And the bottom here, I've got three of the greatest 20th century mathematicians, Kurt
Girdle, Alan Turing and Andrew Wiles, and I'll talk about them a little bit more.
And I'm going to claim that this fractal geometry provides a link between the maths of Newton
and some of the greatest discoveries in 20th century mathematics that these three individual
mathematicians help show.
And I'm also going to claim, and this is my own personal view, that this type of geometry
can also explain one of the most conceptually difficult experiments in 21st century physics.
In fact, it was an experiment that was performed by three, come on to this, three experimenters
who won the Nobel Prize in 2022, what's called the Bell experiment, and the Bell is named
after John Bell, Irish physicist at the bottom of those three.
And it seemed to resolve the big debate that Einstein and Bohr, Niels Bohr had in the early
20th century in favour of Niels Bohr.
And I'm going to claim that fractal geometry actually might tilt the balance back towards
Einstein.
That's my view.
Not everyone necessarily agrees with you on this, I should say.
Okay, so I'm actually going to claim, Klaus's theory is actually one of the three great theories
of 20th century physics.
Quantum mechanics and relativity, Einstein's special and general theory of relativity are
clearly two mega theories in physics, I'm going to claim that Klaus's theory is the
third.
And not only that, at the end I will try to, as I say, make the claim that one of the holy
grails of physics, which so far has eluded physics, and it's been a holy grail for at
least 70, 80 years, is trying to marry quantum mechanics and general relativity theory together
into a unified theory, and we just don't seem to be able to do it.
And my claim is that the geometry of chaos may be the missing ingredient here.
Okay, so that's sort of, that's for later in the talk.
So let's start by talking about these three great theorems of 20th century mathematics.
So Kurt Girdel, a kind of mathematical logician, Austrian in the 1930s, proved this kind of
remarkable result, which is that the set of mathematical truths is actually much, much
larger than the set of things that can be proven by algorithms.
So algorithms are things that run on your computers in a kind of sequential way.
We can prove certain things on computers and with algorithms, but Girdel said that mathematical
truth is much, much bigger.
What we can prove by algorithms is a small part.
It's a very kind of esoteric result, but nevertheless kind of conceptually important.
And Alan Turing, at sort of roughly the same time, in a sense, he came up with a specific
example of what Girdel was talking about, and he took what is called Hilbert's decision
problem.
I'll explain what Hilbert's decision problem is in a second, but it's just a problem.
And he showed that this problem posed by the mathematician David Hilbert some years earlier
cannot be solved by any computer, no matter how powerful.
In other words, it can't be solved by algorithm.
One of the great remarkable things about Turing's paper was that to prove this result, he had
to define what a computer was.
In those days, they weren't electronic computers, so he kind of devised what's now called a
universal Turing machine, which is really what we now call a general purpose computer.
A few wiles in the 1990s proved a very kind of famous conjecture, sometimes called Fermat's
last theorem, but Fermat didn't actually prove it, but he conjectured it, that a certain
equation, this equation, x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n, has no solution
in integers, whole numbers, positive whole numbers, if n, another whole number, is greater
than 2.
So 3 squared plus 4 squared equals 5 squared, that works when n is 2, but if n is 3 or 4
or 5 or anything greater, you can't find any kind of these whole number solutions where
x to the n plus y to the n equals z to the n.
And this has been kind of bugging mathematicians for centuries and centuries, and Andrew Wiles
finally nailed it in the 1990s.
So I want to describe why fractals say something, which sort of sounds bizarre perhaps at first
sight, to these three great results.
And to do that, I have to introduce you to the concept of state space, this is going
to be an all-important concept, and to introduce you to the concept of state space, I'm going
to imagine buying a pair of trousers and substitute your own article of clothing or something
if you prefer.
So buy a pair of trousers, so you have to decide obviously what leg length you are,
what your waist size is, and maybe the trousers come in different colors, call them shades
of gray if you like.
So you have three parameters that you have to decide on if you want to buy a pair of
trousers.
Now if you wanted to, you could imagine a pair of trousers being represented as a point
in a three-dimensional space, a kind of abstract three-dimensional space, not physical space,
but a sort of abstract space, where one dimension, the up dimension was represented the length
of the trousers, so the longer the trousers you had, the further up that axis would be
the point, and another axis would be the width of the trousers, and the third axis would
be the grayness.
And so a particular pair of trousers is represented by point, so if you project the point onto
the up axis, it gives you the length of the trousers, you project it onto the axis going
into the page, it gives you the width, and if you project it down onto that horizontal
axis, it gives you the grayness.
So this is an all-important concept in this talk, a state space, and it's the state of
a pair of trousers if you like.
Now you could imagine that, I don't know, there was another, perhaps you had another
option before you bought your pair of trousers, which was how much, what ratio between let's
say natural material and synthetic material, sort of cotton and polyester, you had an option
of all cotton, all polyester, or some mixture in between.
So then if you wanted to represent a point in this extended state space, the state space
would have to have a fourth axis somehow orthogonal to these other ones, so you'd have to go into
the fourth dimension.
Now the point I want to make is that I hope from a kind of concept, although we can't,
none of us can imagine what four dimensions is like, but I hope from a conceptual point
of view, saying that a state of a pair of trousers where you have this additional dimension
of material being a point in four dimensional space, it's not terribly conceptually, I mean
you can't visualize it, but conceptually it's okay, because what I want to talk about later
on is kind of potentially enormously large dimensional state spaces of the whole universe
actually.
And if you get confused, just think trousers with a few extra, then you'll be good, good
to go, you'll be a cosmologist.
Okay, so what these equations that Ed Lorenz discovered, what they do is first of all,
we have not trousers state space, but we'll call it Lorentz state space, where a point
in Lorentz state space corresponds to a value of these three variables x, y and z.
And the equations actually describe how the state moves, it's as if the trousers sort
of magically start to change their waist size or their length, but here the state of the
Lorentz model starts to evolve.
So you can run the equations on a computer, these are too difficult really to, you sort
of do it with pencil and paper, but it'd be terribly awkward, but you can do it on a computer
very easily.
And this shows an example of a computer generated evolution of an initial point, and it kind
of goes round a bit of a loop, and then it comes over and it does another little loop.
And okay, so what's going on here?
You might say, well, suppose I carried on forever, what would happen to the point, the
evolution?
Would it fill the whole of this Lorentz state space?
Or would it stay in a subset or something like that?
So this is what Lorentz did back in 19, in the early 60s, and he discovers something
rather curious, that it was kind of, if you just carried on forever and ever and ever,
the state didn't fill the whole of the state space, it just stayed within a sort of subset.
And the subset wasn't just some amorphous kind of blobby thing, it seemed to have some structure,
it had these two loads.
It looks a bit like a butterfly, sometimes called it a butterfly, and now I mean chaos
sometimes is referred to as the butterfly effect, and that's a complete coincidence.
The fact this looks like a butterfly has got really nothing to do with the butterfly effect.
The butterfly effect is about, well, we'll come to it in a minute, about the unpredictability
of the system.
But anyway, Lorentz looked at that, because his computer could produce output, which could,
you know, graphical output, and he kind of puzzled, what is this thing I'm looking at?
And first of all, he knew enough about the equations that he realized this wasn't a solid,
like a solid object, a solid three-dimensional object, but he also convinced himself it couldn't
be a two-dimensional object either.
And this is where he discovered this kind of quantity being, or this geometric thing
being a fractal.
The actual words, which I wrote down from his paper, which is kind of the pivotal moment,
which kind of changed a lot of things, actually, in 1963, we see that each surface is really
a pair of surfaces, so that when they appear to merge, there are really four surfaces.
Continuing this process for another circuit, we see there are really eight surfaces, and
we finally conclude there is an infinite complex of surfaces, each extremely close to one another,
or the other of two merging surfaces.
So I've tried to get the essential idea here, tried to see if I can put it over to you,
and in a kind of, in a way, it's a little bit like, you know, pastry, rolling out pastry
and making what's it called, philu pastry, where you keep folding things over.
What the equations are doing, if you look at the top left figure, is taking a kind of
surface, and the equations kind of stretch the surface out, and then fold it over, in
state space, in the state space, not in physical space, in state space.
And then, if you look at the top right, the idea is, okay, you take this folded surface,
and you let the equations kind of work on that, and they do the same thing, they stretch
it all out, fold it over again, okay, and you take it back, and now you're looking at
the bottom figure, so you've got two lots of folding, stretch it out again, fold it
over, you've now got four, eight, sixteen, thirty-two, just keep repeating and repeating.
And in some sense, this is a kind of a representation of lots of folding over, and what you can
then do is take a cross-section through that fold, and this is sometimes called a Lorentz
section, and what you find is that you have a structure which was discovered by a mathematician
called Georg Kantor in the 19th century, and it's called a Kantor set, and it is the prototype
fractal, and when Kantor came up with this, people thought he was completely, his contemporaries
thought he was completely crazy, and in fact it sent Kantor into a depression because these
ideas never got recognized in his lifetime, it's only much later we realize how utterly
brilliant Kantor was. Kantor's construction actually was much, much simpler than these
chaotic equations, but what I'm trying to say is that the heart of this chaotic geometry
is Kantor's set. So just to describe Kantor's set, the idea is very simple, you start with
a line, with a finite length, and you remove a third, the middle third of that line, so
you now have two pieces. So in this figure, the top one is the whole line, then you come
down one, and you see these two, like, thirds left over, and then you take these remaining
two-thirds, and you chop out the middle third of each of those, so now you've got four,
smaller bits still, and you chop out the middle third of those, and now you've got eight,
and you chop out the middle third of those, and you keep doing this literally forever,
and Kantor's set is what is left over when you have continued chopping out middle thirds
forever. Now, what is really weird about this, and in fact, maybe I'll show this, what is
weird about this is that how big Kantor's set is depends on whether you look at it from the
inside or from the outside. This is why I've made an allusion to the TARDIS, Dr. Who's TARDIS,
which kind of looks small and insubstantial from the outside, but is kind of, you know,
palatial on the inside, and similarly Kantor's set, Kantor's set takes no, is no size whatsoever,
it's a mathematician called it zero, measure zero, it has no size, it's zero size, and yet
from the inside it contains not only an infinite number of points, and this is the bizarre thing,
it contains as many points as you started with on the full line, the full real line,
and that's why his colleagues thought he was kind of a bit barking mad, but turns out his
structure, as I say, is exactly the structure that we see when these chaotic equations continually
stretch and fold surfaces in the state space. Okay, so with that we can start to link the
fractal geometry to these mathematics, and oh sorry, one thing I forgot to do, yes,
one thing I forgot to say, I was going to go backwards and explain what Hilbert's decision
problem, I forgot to do that, so let me actually just go back, can we do that quickly? Okay,
I didn't actually say what Hilbert's decision problem, Hilbert's decision problem is really,
can we find an algorithm where you input some mathematical conjecture that you have,
and it could be, for example, the conjecture of Fermat, that those equations have no solutions
in positive integers for n greater than 2, because the idea is can you input that into
some super algorithm, and the algorithm will run on a big computer and it'll sort of chunter away
for a while, and then stop and say, yep, your conjecture is true, or no, the conjecture is false.
And what Turing showed was that there is no such algorithm that would do such a task for a general
mathematical input. So in some sense, Turing's result is a specific example of this girdle
result, which is that mathematical truth is much greater than algorithmic truth. So here was a
problem which couldn't be solved by algorithm, and we would now call it un-computable, an
un-computable problem. Now in the 1990s, a computer scientist called Simon Dubey showed,
and I'm not going to go into any details, but problems like Hilbert's decision problem can
actually be formulated in a completely equivalent way in terms of geometric properties of these
fractal, what are called fractal attractors, the Lorentz geometry is sometimes called an
attractor. It just means an intrinsic property of the dynamical system. But what Dubey showed was
that you can write, you can express problems like Hilbert's decision problem, things that are known
to be not computable, not algorithmically provable, as a property of a fractal. So just as Hilbert's
decision problem cannot be proven by an algorithm, so for example determining whether a line intersects
a fractal or not is similarly algorithmically un-computable, and the two are basically,
what a mathematician would call isomorphic, they're the same problem. So there's a remarkable link
between fractal geometry and as I say, these problems in these kind of remarkable theorems
in perhaps the mathematics of the first half of the 20th century. Now as far as Andrew Wiles is
concerned, again, you know, take me too long and you sort of, you wouldn't be interested in the details,
I'm sure, but proving Fermat's theorem, I mean, was an enormous achievement, it used a type of
number system which number theorists are very familiar with, but for I think most people,
including actually most physicists, are not familiar with, and they're called piadic numbers. And a
way to understand the difference between piadic numbers and, if you like, ordinary numbers that
we're used to, like, you know, two one and a half and pi square root of two and things like that,
I call those ordinary numbers. The ordinary numbers are the sorts of numbers you need to describe
mathematically Euclidean geometries. So if you want to talk about a sphere or an ellipsoid or
hyperboloid or something, mathematically you would do it in the language of what are called real
numbers or ordinary numbers. But if you want to describe the geometry, really get down to the
geometry of fractals, then actually these piadic numbers are the, you know, provide the means to
actually talk kind of analytically and mathematically about these fractals. So again, you know, the
geometry of these things which, as I say, Newton would have kind of understood by creating this
remarkably strange geometry linked very directly to this type of modern number theory which led
Wiles to prove this very great result in mathematics, Fermat's Last Theorem. All right,
now I'm going to slightly switch gears for ten minutes because, also, because, you know, if one
says one has a great theory of physics, I think it clearly needs to explain some fundamental
things, perhaps first and foremost, but it also has to be practically important. It has to, you
know, affect our daily lives and, you know, manifestly quantum mechanics affects our daily
lives. Everything, you know, modern electronic gadgets and, you know, everything that we use in
our daily lives has some link back to quantum mechanics. Even actually general relativity,
I'm not sure whether people know this or not, but the fact that GPS is a useful tool for locating
our positions actually makes use of general relativistic corrections to Newtonian's gravity.
If we only use Newtonian gravity, we would, GPS's would be too inaccurate to be useful. So actually
even something like general relativity which predicts black holes and things also has practical
relevance. So I want to talk about something I've worked on for many years which is of practical
relevance which is to do with chaos. And, you know, chaotic dynamics or chaotic systems are often
described as systems that are unpredictable, and even I used that word earlier. But in some sense,
that's, I mean, whilst it's true, it's not very useful. I mean, if something's unpredictable,
there's not much you can, you can do about it. But actually this notion of unpredictability is
only really about the long term, you know, predicting things perhaps for a long time in the
future. One of the more interesting aspects of chaotic systems, and we can demonstrate this,
or I'm demonstrating this here with the Lorentz equations, is that the predictability of a chaotic
system depends on where you start the system. And some states are very predictable, and some
states are very unpredictable. So this is an example where we imagine we have an initial state that
we don't know exactly what that initial state is. There's some uncertainty, some little error bar,
and we can represent that by saying that the initial state lies somewhere in that initial
ring. Look at the top left hand diagram to start with. So the initial point lies somewhere in
that initial ring. And the question is, we want to make a prediction, maybe each little arrow
represents a day, let's say, this is kind of a weather type thing. So after 10, 15 days,
the system has made a transition to the other side of the attractor. But you'll see that the
little ring hasn't actually spread out at all. In fact, if anything, it's actually slightly
shrunk. So although, again, we don't know precisely where the final state will be, we're
pretty certain that it actually lies somewhere in that second, in that right-hand wing of the
attractor. So this bit of the attractor, the fractal geometry, is actually very, very predictable,
even though it's a chaotic system. The top right figure shows an example which perhaps is more
generic, which is that the little ring of points starts to evolve downwards. And as it gets towards
the bottom of the attractor, then it kind of starts to deform into like a banana shape,
a sort of, yeah, kind of banana shape, and then that gets stretched out. And we don't know for
certain, for example, whether the true state, which lies somewhere in that initial ring, actually
made the transition to the right-hand lobe of the attractor or stayed on the left. There's uncertainty.
But then on the bottom here, you see an example where the uncertainty is kind of explosive.
My initial point is somewhere near the bottom of the attractor, and now
just things get ripped apart very quickly. And you basically got no idea whether the true system,
the true state, lies on the left or the right. Now, as we will see, this is generic for chaotic
systems that the predictability depends on the initial conditions. And if it's important to know
whether you're entering a system which is predictable or unpredictable, the way you can find out ahead
of time is to run multiple forecasts. You just vary slightly your initial conditions, and you look to
see, are all the forecasts diverging in state space, or are they all sticking together?
And this is what I worked on for a number of years with colleagues, I don't know if my colleague
Roberta Beitzer is in the audience or not, yes, here he is. He and I worked on this for a number of
years at the European Center for Medium-Range Weather Forecast, kind of putting this idea
into kind of weather forecast reality. And what I'm showing you here is three
examples of which kind of illustrate the three different phases of the Lorentz attractor,
but for the real world of weather prediction. And we're looking specifically at extreme weather
and tropical cyclones or hurricanes in different parts of the tropics.
And this top one is of a forecast about a week ahead of a cyclone called Cider,
which as you can see was predicted with a pretty high probability most of the tracks are going up
towards Bangladesh, off hitting Bangladesh. So clearly if you were, you know, if you were
leading some kind of disaster preparedness in Bangladesh, you would have a pretty good heads
up that this was a very high probability type of event and indeed that's exactly what happened.
The middle one is the famous Hurricane Katrina which hit New Orleans in whenever it was some years
ago now. And again we're looking at these ensembles of hurricane tracks about a week before
landfall. And you can see actually at that range there was clearly a possibility that
Katrina would hit New Orleans, which is halfway along the Gulf of Mexico there. But it was by far
not clear. It was not and it was not the most perhaps the most likely scenario at that range.
So if you were governor of New Orleans, I mean, you know, you or or indeed a national disaster
preparedness, you wouldn't perhaps put all your eggs in the basket of making or putting all your
resources into preparing New Orleans because there are other places at risk as well. But
as you got closer to the lead to the actual time when it hit made landfall, then it would have been
more obvious New Orleans was at risk. And the bottom one, which is a bit like that explosive
instability in in Lawrence is called Hurricane. It was a thing called Hurricane Nadine where you
literally didn't even know whether it was going to go east towards Europe or west back towards the
Caribbean. Now it's turned out that this is this has been really kind of pivotal in the way in which
disaster preparedness agencies and humanitarian agencies now act. And it's created a program
called anticipatory action, which is really changing the way things things work in the
humanitarian agency. Because in the past, as I'm sure you're all aware,
you know, these agencies didn't have like infinite amounts of money. They had a limited amount of
money and they couldn't afford to put a lot of resources into events which may not happen.
And typically then what tended to happen is they went in after after a hurricane had hit,
supplying food and medicine and shelters and water and so on to people afflicted.
But after it's hit, you know, often the logistics are really difficult. And it's often, you know,
when you have outlying islands and things, it can take a week or more for people to get desperately
needed food and medicine and so on. So the idea behind anticipatory action is you send this stuff
out ahead of time. It sounds obvious, but the question is, how do they ensure that their limited
funding is used efficiently? And the answer is now with these ensemble forecasts,
they have objectively estimates, objective estimates of probability, the probability
that an extreme event will hit. And they will have done a cost benefit analysis prior to
the event occurring, which would say when the probability exceeds some thresholds,
some predetermined threshold, let's say it's 70% or something, 80%, then we send the supplies in
ahead of time. So in other words, these ensembles, as I say, driven by, motivated by very idealized
models like Lorenz's model, have completely changed the way in which humanitarian organizations now
are able to provide emergency supplies ahead of time. And they can do it in a cost-effective way.
They're not sort of wasting resources when things don't happen. They have an objective means of
deciding because they have objectively estimated probabilities. So in the case of SIDA, you know,
the probability would be around 80% at seven days for Katrina, obviously probability for hitting
New Orleans at that range is much less. And probably that wouldn't have triggered
anticipatory action for New Orleans. But in any case, this is kind of changing the way
things have done. So that's one application of chaos. I'm just going to come back to
before I leave sort of weather and climate. I'm going to come back to this magnetic pendulum
just to illustrate a concept, I suppose, because one hears from time to time from,
let's say, those who are skeptical about climate change, the argument, well, if the weather is
chaotic and you can't really make kind of reliable predictions more than a few days ahead, how can
we possibly ever trust a century-long forecast that the climate is going to change? And my answer to
that type of assertion, if you like, is to say that you haven't really understood the nature
of climate change. So I'm going to try and illustrate the point. I don't know how we,
as I say, the team put this together this afternoon. So we'll see if it works. So
the idea here is we let the pendulum go. And what we're going to do is imagine each magnet
kind of represents a weather, a possible type of weather. And some of them, perhaps, are
represent warm types of weather. Others represent cold weather, perhaps some are dry, some are wet.
And this would be our normal sort of climate. The climate oscillates around these weather types
in a very irregular and hard to predict way. But nevertheless, if this thing were to keep going
forever, we could calculate the statistics. How many, how often was it near one of my warm
weather states? Or how often was it near one of my cold weather states and so on?
We'd build up a probability distribution. And that probability distribution would be very
robust. The longer we could run the pendulum for, you know, the more reliable and definitive would
be these probabilities. So what's happening with climate change is that we're tilting the table.
We're emitting carbon dioxide. And that's making this thing now operate on a surface which is no
longer flat. So when I, now with my tilted surface, I look at the statistics of these different types
of weather, we see it's no longer the same as when it was flat. The warm weather states have now become
more populated, more likely a priority. So this is a chaotic system where we've imposed a kind of
external forcing. And the external forcing, the system is still chaotic with the imposed external
forcing. But the statistics of the system have changed. And the statistics have changed in a
completely predictable and robust way. So that is the nature of climate change, you know, or trying
to estimate climate change. It's trying to estimate changes in the statistics of weather,
given our emissions of carbon dioxide. I hope that's moderately clear. Anyway,
so if you're ever confronted by somebody's, oh, the weather's chaotic, you can't possibly
forecast 100 years from now. It's not, we're not doing an initial value problem. We're trying
to estimate the changes in the statistics of weather, given a kind of a change from a level
playing field to an unlevel one. By the way, this example of the ensembles and the anticipatory
action, I mean, this is quite a nice, I think, example of how, in meteorology, we use a hierarchy
of models from some rather idealized ones, the one that Lorenz discovers, a very idealized model,
right through to the very complex models, which need, you know, big supercomputers,
that produce the actual trajectories for the tropical cyclones and hurricanes.
And all of our, or myself and my colleagues, were delighted when our colleague,
Suki Manabi, who developed really one of the first climate models for doing climate change,
won the Nobel Physics Prize in 2021. It's really a great sadness to me that Lorenz never won the
Nobel Prize. He died in, I think, around 2008 or so. Certainly should have won the Nobel Prize.
Okay. I've lost track of time, but I'm going to push on.
I think ensemble prediction has enormous applications in other areas. And in the book,
which I wrote and is out now, I discuss applications of ensemble prediction to conflict,
COVID, and indeed the economy. And it's a kind of fascination to me about whether these sorts
of systems also have periods, and it seems that they do, periods of very high predictability,
interspersed with periods of extreme intermittent instability. And again, ensembles provide the
means to predict that ahead of time and hopefully take precaution reaction. Now, I'm not going to
talk about this in this talk, but if you're interested, there's chapters in the book.
Because what I want to finish with is the, well, 2021 was Suki Minabi. 2022 Nobel Prize
were three physicists, Allen Aspe, John Clouser, and Anton Seilinger,
who did one of these quantum experiments, which as I say, I would say is, if you had to say,
one physics experiment, which is just conceptually difficult to understand, it is, it is this one.
It's the, it's the so-called Bell experiment. I'm going to try and explain what I mean by that.
And here's some sort of, well, okay, so here's what the Scientific American
said when they got the Nobel Prize. The universe is not locally real. And the physics Nobel Prize
prize winners proved it. Here's some stuff I just pulled off. YouTube, Einstein proved wrong.
And the other one, scientists, oh yeah, who proved the universe is not real. Okay, so now, okay, so
you might think that's bizarre, but this is what probably 99% of physicists believe.
That Bell, these Bell experiments, the experiment, I say what I mean by Bell experiments,
the experiments that these three guys showed, independently by the way, separate labs around
the world, either mean that physics has what Einstein called spooky action at a distance,
which means that something I do here, something I do in this, in this lecture theater, you know,
put it this hand up, rather than this hand up, can affect an outcome of an experiment
potentially on the other side of the galaxy. So that's what spooky action at a distance means,
and sort of doesn't make a great deal of sense to many people, but nevertheless,
or we have to say that quantum reality somehow, yeah, is indeterminate. There's nothing definite
about reality. And Einstein also coined the phrase to his dislike of, he coined the phrase
spooky action at a distance because he didn't like that, and he also coined the phrase God
doesn't play dice to sort of encapsulate his dislike of this notion of indeterminism.
But now most people think Einstein was wrong, and Niels Bohr, his great advocate who argued,
sort of, yeah, quantum mechanics is weird, was right. But I want to show you there is another
argument. But I need to do that. I need to say a little bit about this Bell experiment. So excuse
perhaps a little bit of the detail, but I'll try and make it as simple as I can. The experiment is
based on a source of pairs of particles, photons, let's say, particles of light. And these particles
are called entangled. They have properties which are sort of correlated with each other. Now,
in some way, that isn't a kind of a big deal. You could imagine a source spitting out a red ball
in one direction and a blue ball in the other direction. And you say, well, okay, if I see
that this is a red ball, I know the one over here is a blue ball. So the fact they're correlated
isn't itself a problem. But we'll see that the correlation is such that you can't explain it in
that simple way. So we've got these two particles going out in opposite directions. And we have
these kind of cartoon figures, they're called Alice and Bob experimenters, who measure the
polarizations of these photons. They have polarizers which you set to a particular
orientation. You can orientate your polarizer with respect to the stars in the sky or something
like that. And the outcome of a particular experiment is that the photon is measured to have
a horizontal polarization or a vertical polarization. It comes out with one of two.
Each experiment, each individual realization of experiment comes up with a
like a zero or a one, a horizontal or vertical or up or down or something like that.
So the way I'm going to describe this is that the experiment has run over four days,
just for the sake of argument. And on each day, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday,
Alice and Bob choose different orientations for their polarizers. They don't necessarily have
to communicate when they do the experiment, they don't communicate with each other which directions
they're going to use. But Alice has two directions and Bob has two directions. I think I'll call
them the zero direction and the one direction. So Alice has a zero and a one direction,
Bob has a zero and a one direction for his polarizer. Okay, so Monday you have this little
ensemble of particle of entangled particles. Alice does her measurements and she notes down
when they get horizontal and when they get vertical and similarly Bob. And then on Tuesday,
they do the experiment again with another set of particles. But now Bob uses a different,
his second orientation. On Wednesday, they do experiments with a third set of particles.
Now Alice chooses a different orientation and Bob goes back to the original one. And finally,
on Thursday, they both choose the second of the pair of orientations. So each day they have an
ensemble of particles and from those measurements they can come together and basically calculate
how well correlated the measurements were. So when Alice got a horizontal, did Bob get a
horizontal and when Alice got a vertical, how correlated were they? And this is an equation
for these correlation coefficients, the four correlations. And it turns out for a range of
possible orientations, this particular mathematical sum and difference of correlations exceeds
the value two. And the reason why that's significant is that Bell himself, John Bell, showed
that it's impossible for a traditional deterministic model to satisfy that inequality unless
this notion of spooky action at a distance is occurring. So in other words, how Alice chooses
the orientation affects the outcome of Bob's measurement. That would be spooky action at a
distance. Now, you might ask me, when I say traditional, what do I mean by traditional? So
this is an important word which we'll come back to in a moment. But
that is basically, you know, so the, so Clouser, Aspe and Seilinger basically showed that this
experimentally, this correlation, that this sum and difference greater than two
is really a very robust result. There's no doubt about that is what you see in experiments.
So then the question is, how do you interpret that result? And most people, as I say, they take that
last line, the bottom of the page and say, okay, if it's a traditional deterministic model,
then there must be spooky action at a distance, or the world isn't deterministic to something
indeterministic, fuzzy, stochastic, noisy, you know, there's nothing definite about anything.
Now, this is where we're going to talk about, come back to fractals, because there's an
implicit assumption, and it's very rarely mentioned when analyzing Bell's experiment,
and I want to go through it sort of semi carefully. Let's imagine, or let's consider,
those particles that were actually measured on the Monday.
Could those same particles have been measured with the polarizer settings on Tuesday, Wednesday,
or Thursday's polarizer settings? Well, when you do a measurement on a particle,
say two photons, they go into the polarizer, they kind of get destroyed. The photon gets absorbed
by an atom, it kind of raises in the energy level of an atom. That photon is gone. It's not there
to do an experiment on Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday. So if you ask the question,
could these same particles have been measured with Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday's
polarizer settings, you're asking a counterfactual question, because it's not a question that could
have happened. It's a question that perhaps might have happened. You might have said, well,
suppose that particle, that photon that I measured on Monday, what would have happened
if I'd measured that photon on the Tuesday instead? But that is a counterfactual question.
And whether that counterfactual question has any meaning or not depends on the laws of physics.
It can only depend on the laws of physics, because you can't go out and actually do the
experiment, because in reality, you had that photon had been measured and destroyed on the Monday.
Now, the question then is, is it possible that one or more of these counterfactual worlds could be
inconsistent with the laws of physics? If it was the case that the counterfactual worlds were
inconsistent with the laws of physics, then you could actually explain Bell's experiment
without having to invoke these incomprehensibly weird ideas about action at a distance or
indefinite reality. So there is a literature, but it's not a well-known literature on Bell's
theorem, which actually makes this point about counterfactual measurements. The kind of well
definedness of counterfactual measurements are critical to the interpretation of this experiment.
Okay, so here's what a physicist would say so far. Maybe there are some in the audience
who are just dying to get up and say, they would say, yeah, but we use counterfactuals all the time.
And they might cite an example. Suppose here's a boy. He's throwing the ball the football
wherever it is to his father. He launches the ball up. It goes through the air on a parabolic arc.
The father catches it all well and good. We might say, well, suppose the child had thrown the ball
with half the initial velocity. Would it have reached the father? Well, that sort of question
you can answer with your high school physics. Anyone who's done A-level physics or something,
you know about projectiles. You have a formula which says for a certain initial velocity of the
projectile and a certain angle, it goes on a parabola and it travels a certain distance over
the ground and it hits the ground. So to answer that question, if the boy, the counterfactual
question, if the boy had thrown the ball with half the velocity would it have reached the father?
You just plug half the velocity into the formula and it comes out, you know, the distance is half
the distance or a quarter of the distance or something and no, it wouldn't reach the father.
So that is the traditional deterministic view. You have a formula. The formula covers what actually
happened and it covers all sorts of possibilities that might have happened but didn't happen,
didn't happen, or possible counterfactual worlds. So the typical physicist's response
to what I've just said in the previous slide is, look, you're worrying about nothing because clearly
the laws of physics allow us to counterfactually vary initial variables and parameters and blah,
blah, blah. And that's why I want to come back to fractals because they give us a very,
very different picture on this problem. Now, we need to think pretty big here and
your initial reaction might be to say this is a bit ridiculous but I'm going to say,
suppose the whole universe is a deterministic dynamical system evolving on some now not
weather or pendulum or something like that but some humongously big state space.
Trouser space on steroids, if you like. It's every particle in the universe, you know,
is contributing to this state space. But nevertheless, suppose there is some kind of
fractal attractor. Now, one important point is that it's kind of a consequence of the
girdle-turing stuff is that there is no formula. There is no simple thing I can code up on a
computer that will tell me, for example, you know, where exactly this fractal is in the state space.
I know it exists but I can't do a calculation which will tell me categorically that a particular
point lies on the attractor or doesn't lie on the attractor. But, okay, but before I get to that,
let's stop for a second and you might say, well, look, pendulums, okay, the weather, okay, but
the universe, I mean, the universe is really dominated by gravitational effects on,
you know, on large scales. And I haven't talked about gravity at all. So is gravity chaotic?
You bet it's chaotic. In fact, the very first example of chaos was actually shown by
French mathematical physicist Henri Poincaré right at the beginning of the 20th century.
And here's a really beautiful illustration of what Poincaré found from a very sort of theoretical
point of view. This is Simon Tadevel's animation. We're looking at four gravitationally bound bodies.
I'm going to show you an animation any second now. And, well, let's watch them.
Yep, there they go. So they're orbiting around each other in four really nice ellipses and it
actually looks extremely predictable, doesn't it? Until, whoa, it's such a beautiful result. I'm
going to show it again because I just think it's so, I've looked at this. This is, by the way, oh,
yeah, before I start the animation, this is another beautiful illustration of this feature of chaos
that the instabilities in chaos can be very localized in state space and their manifestation
can be very intermittent. This is why, you know, there is some plausible belief that some of our
financial crashes and maybe conflicts and things like that are when our social systems approach
some of these very intermittent instabilities and kind of, and blow apart. But we're seeing
exactly that process here. We've got five periods of oscillation where these bodies seem to almost
describe perfect ellipses and then on this, the sixth one or something, they just zip off to infinity.
Let's look at it again because it's so nice. So there they go and you imagine trying to do a
prediction. You might say, oh, well, you know, they just carry on like that forever. Why not?
You know, they've done it in the last four episodes, five episodes.
Okay. So that's, so chaos, so absolutely chaos occurs in gravitationally mound system. So I hope
this idea that the universe could be indeed a chaotic system evolving on a fractal attractor
is not completely bonkers. So with that in mind, let's go back to our Bell experiment.
So what I've drawn here are four points corresponding to states of the universe on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, where our Alice and Bob do their four, if you like, sub experiments. They
compute the four different correlation functions that eventually go into the Bell equation,
the Bell inequality. Now by construction, by my hypothesis that the universe is a deterministic
system evolving on a cosmological fractal attractor, these four points must lie on the
fractal attractor. So I've drawn them, if you have drawn the points, you know, lying on one of those
trajectories. So that makes it all nice and consistent.
But now what I'm going to do is draw the counterfactual worlds where we hypothetically,
because this didn't happen, but we hypothesize that we are taking Monday's particles
and measuring them with Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday's polarizer settings. So I have to take
Tuesday and somehow perturb the true state of the universe a little bit to reflect the fact that I'm
no longer dealing with Tuesday's particles, but Monday's particles, and similarly for Wednesday
and Thursday. So the white dots are these hypothetical counterfactual worlds whose reality
is needed if you are to prove the Bell, the interpretation that Bell's inequality or the
Bell experiment requires spooky action at a distance or indeterminism.
Now I'm going to zoom into this because what I've done is deliberately put Wednesday's
counterfactual in a fractal gap in the sense that it now violates my assumption that any
realistic states of the universe have to lie on the fractal attractor. So what it means is that
Wednesday's counterfactual, according to this illustration, is not a plausible realistic state.
In other words, it's inconsistent with this notion that the universe is a deterministic
dynamical system evolving on a fractal attractor. Okay. Well, look, I've just drawn it there,
but it turns out I have papers written with colleagues, some by myself, some with colleagues,
which show that this can be made into quite a rigorous idea and that at least one of these
three counterfactual worlds must lie in a fractal gap, and hence it's not physically real. And that's
enough to explain Bell's experiment without invoking non-locality or indeterminism. Okay.
That may seem a slightly sort of technical thing. What is this saying in a more big picture way? So
what I want to move into the next slide is what this is really saying about physics in the big
picture. What is the real message behind the Bell experiment if this interpretation is correct?
I think it signals the end of some of a kind of principle that has served us extremely well
in the past in science, but maybe running its course. And that's a kind of reductionism.
Now, I'm not claiming every type of reductionism is wrong, but a particular reductionism which
says the smaller we look at things, the more fundamentally we're probing the structure of
nature. And it's worked, of course, extremely well in terms of our discovery of atoms,
and of course, understanding atoms and the electrons that go around the nuclear, the nuclei
has been critical for understanding chemistry, the chemistry of life chemistry, inorganic chemistry,
everything. And to understand atoms, we have built accelerators which smash atoms apart,
they smash nuclei apart, and we can understand that really what goes on in a nucleus of an atom
are collections of protons and neutrons, and we can smash those, and we see there are quarks
underpinning all the protons and neutrons. So that's all good. But we haven't, as I say,
we haven't yet managed to succeed in combining these ideas with gravity. Now, the conventional
thinking behind that is that we need to get to even smaller distances before we can really understand
how quantum mechanics and gravity unify. There's a thing called the Planck mass, the Planck, sorry,
the Planck length, there's a thing called Planck mass as well, but Planck length,
which is absolutely tiny, 10 to the minus 33 centimeters. And the thinking is we've got to
get down to these even more fundamentally smaller lengths to understand that. If this picture I've
told you about with fractal geometry is right, and I do think it is at least logically correct,
then this paints a completely different picture on the way we should be going,
particularly with this idea of unification with gravity. Because these fractal attractors are really
about properties of the system as a whole. The geometry of the Lorentz attractor is not about,
one of the equations, it's something which is kind of intrinsic to the three equations together,
it says something about the global structure of the system. And if this interpretation of
Bell's theorem is right, then it's saying that we really have to understand
how the laws of physics operate on the largest possible structures of the universe,
as much as on these small scales. So in other words, kind of top down as much as bottom up.
Now this sounds, this to a lot of physicists will sound extremely, even cranky might be the word,
but I want to finish my talk with, I've already mentioned two Nobel Prize winners, one in
2022, three Nobel Prize winners in 2022, I've mentioned Suki Minabi 2021. I want to finish
with a couple of quotes from the Nobel Prize winner of 2020, Roger Penrose, who was a great
influence on me, he taught me relativity when I did my PhD in Oxford. So here's a couple of quotes
from Roger Penrose to make the point that this idea may not be so completely bonkers after all.
And this is a quote from his book he wrote in late 1980s, I think, no sorry 1990s.
My own view is that to understand so-called quantum non-locality, we shall require a radical new
theory. This theory will not just be a slight modification of quantum mechanics, but something
as different from standard quantum mechanics as general relativity is from Newtonian gravity.
So anyone who knows anything about general relativity means he knows that it's a complete
rewrite of Newtonian gravity. It's basing gravity not on forces which accelerate things,
but on the geometry of spacetime. And Penrose here is claiming that, you know, we're going to
need that sort of revolution to understand quantum non-locality, the bell, basically the bell
experiment. And from his more perhaps well-known book, The Emperor's New Mind, he says again,
something which appeals to me that a lot that it seems to me quite plausible that the correct
theory of quantum gravity might be a deterministic but non-computable theory, non-computable in this
Turing-Girdle sense of the word. And again, I would just remind you that these fractal attractors
are formerly of this non-computable type. So that gives us a clue that this might be in the
right direction. Who knows? Okay, so I think it's probably time to finish. I've taken a couple of
things from this book. I believe there might be one or two copies outside if people are interested.
I certainly write in a lot more detail about stuff I've talked about, and also a lot of
stuff I haven't talked about, broadly under the theme of uncertainty, uncertainty not only for
helping us make better decisions, but also understanding how systems become uncertain
actually helps us understand the systems themselves better. So I think with that point I will stop.
Thank you.
