Rhaodd am bwysig yn fnut emphasizeon!
Thank You both.
Mae'r cytro agn Campaign newspapers o'r dref, quite yn
bywyd cymdeit Audwg.
Mae'n dweud arnocharingin, ychydig yn gweinwyr
Dwy dda chi'r dyfanc yn diolch goingf 맞nyn
o gyfoethrof yng Nghymru.
It's hard to know how do you try to make the Krebs cycles sexy for people.
And I've done my best to do a kind of Douglas Adams question here.
You know, his famous question to life, the universe and everything.
And this is my question.
What is it that brings the earth to life and our own lives to an end?
And perhaps might make us conscious too.
So, the answer, I'm sorry to tell you, is not 42.
It's not 41 or 43 either. It's that.
And it is quite complicated, isn't it?
The one thing I think we could probably all agree about that is that metabolism is scary.
And this is a metabolic map of our own metabolism.
And all the little dots, the circles are molecules, different types of molecules.
And the lines that connect them up are enzyme catalyzed reactions.
And so these are the metabolic pathways and flux is passing through all of these things.
This is what makes us alive and it's enormously complicated.
So how on earth can we begin to kind of deconstruct it and make it simple so that I can understand it?
This is why I write books. I try to understand these things myself.
And if I can manage to make it plain to myself then I think you can all understand it very easily as well.
So, one thing to notice about this, which is what all biochemists immediately notice on these kind of charts,
is right in the middle of it there.
You'll notice there's a blue circle that kind of stands out and says, I'm different.
That is the Krebs cycle.
And you have to say, what on earth is it doing there? Why is it like that?
If you look really carefully you'll see across to the right-hand side, there's another cycle there which is almost concealed.
That was actually discovered by Krebs as well. That's the urea cycle.
But that's kind of less central to all of metabolism.
So biochemists as a rule do not like asking why.
They perceive it as a speculation, rank speculation, until relatively recently you were not allowed to ask why.
You would never get a job if you were to ask how.
How does that work mechanistically, what's going on?
And evolutionary biologists, they ask why.
I'm a biochemist who loves evolutionary biology and I look at that and I say, why oh why oh why?
Why is it so complicated? How can we deconstruct it?
Well, you start by looking at the bits and this is the Krebs cycle as it's normally presented in textbooks.
And it really doesn't get any better, does it?
I mean you look at the molecules themselves and these seem to be fiddling rearrangements of bits of carbon and hydrogen and oxygen.
And then there's all these details of the different types of enzymes that do these different jobs and you look at it and you think,
well I'm not going to become a biochemist so I'll go and do something else.
Krebs himself is of course famous. This is a painting of Sir Hans Krebs which was done for the Krebs Fest in Sheffield in 2015.
So this would have been 80 years after he went to Sheffield and he discovered the Krebs cycle in 1937 when he was in Sheffield.
And that's his blackboard drawing of the cycle he discovered back then.
It's very difficult to convey how little we knew and how difficult it is to, you know, you look at a cell down a microscope and you can see squidgy stuff really.
And now we can see proteins right down to atomic levels of structure.
It's extraordinary what we can see now but we still cannot see metabolism as it's happening.
We still cannot see these molecules as they're going through a cell.
They're really just too small to see in that way.
And so we have to imagine it and that's a really difficult thing again about biochemistry.
You never really see anything you have to try and reconstruct it.
It's a little bit like detective work.
So what do these look like, these molecules?
Well, I've pinned a few out here.
They look a bit like a beetle collection.
You know, I think it was JBS Haldane who was asked what has all this study of biology taught him about God.
And he said, well, God had an inordinate love of beetles.
I think that God has an even more inordinate love of carboxylic acids.
These are everywhere in cells.
This is basically, if you think that life is carbon based, this phrase carbon based,
that these are the carbon skeletons that life is made from.
These are really central to it.
I didn't bring my glasses and in any case you probably don't really want to know.
There are slight differences between these molecules.
These are molecules in the Krebs cycle and it says plus or minus 2h.
There's two hydrogen atoms have been pulled out or added in between those molecules
and you may think why on earth would you want to do that?
Well, I'll come to that.
This, though, is what most people come to the conclusion.
Medical students, biochemistry students, this is basically all they can remember about the Krebs cycle
and all they want to know about the Krebs cycle.
And so we tend to point poke gentle fun at it
and sometimes at Professor Krebs himself who did occasionally set himself up as a target.
This is what it's all about.
I'm going to spend a minute or two on this
because we're going to see this kind of thing a few times in this talk.
This is my attempt to simplify it down.
Everybody should know this and it is taught in schools.
What you're seeing here, down at the bottom it says glucose.
It doesn't have to be glucose, it can be food of any description.
And it's broken down into smaller bits and I've just marked up one bit there which is pyruvate.
Pyruvate's broken down a little bit more and it goes into the Krebs cycle.
I'm not going to try and attempt to explain what's happening in the Krebs cycle step by step.
I do do it in the book and I try to make it as engaging as I can,
but essentially you spin around the Krebs cycle and what's coming out,
carbon dioxide is coming out and hydrogen is coming out.
It's not coming out as hydrogen gas, it's not bubbling out of there.
I've written 2H and that 2H is stuck to another molecule called NAD,
H, nicotinamide adenus in there, nicotinamide adenine dinutriotide.
This is another problem with biochemistry.
All these difficult names, but actually all it's doing is passing on two hydrogen atoms.
Where's it passing them to?
It's passing them into the membrane surrounding that.
You can think of this as a mitochondrion or as a bacterial cell
or as not one of your cells because the mitochondria are inside your cells.
That's 2H being split up, I'll show you what happens in a moment,
but they're eventually reacting with oxygen.
That's what's generating all our energy in the form of ATP.
That energy, this reaction between hydrogen and oxygen,
you can think of it as rocket fuel really.
This is what's powering us, this is what's making us alive.
In this slide is what makes us different to a corpse.
There's no difference in information between a living person
or someone who died a moment ago.
The information content is exactly the same.
The difference is the flow of energy and the flow of matter continuously going through.
This is the core of all of that.
The Krebs cycle is spinning continuously in all our cells.
Notice there's a purple thing around the membrane itself.
I've got lots of little H plus signs there.
These are the protons.
These are the charged nucleus of hydrogen atoms.
What's happening, the energy released from this reaction
between hydrogen and oxygen is used to pump protons across a membrane.
Don't worry if you're a little bit scared of terms like protons,
but basically you've got a charge now on that membrane.
I noticed there was an email sent around by the RI yesterday.
It started out about Frankenstein and said,
We all think life is about electricity,
and actually no, it's not.
Nick Lane's going to come and tell you it's all about chemistry.
Well, no, I'm not.
It actually is about electricity.
Not quite like Frankenstein,
but this cycle, the Krebs cycle is linked to powering up a membrane
so you have an electrical charge on the membrane.
That electrical charge on the membrane is tiny.
It's 150 millivolts across the membrane, so it's not very much.
If you were to shrink yourself down to the size of a molecule
so that you were the size of, let's say, a carbon dioxide molecule
or something, the electrical force that you would feel there
is about 30 million volts per metre.
That's the field strength.
That's equivalent to a bolt of lightning,
which is what brought Frankenstein to life,
so we have this in Frankenstein's monster.
We have this going on in all our mitochondria
in all our cells all the time.
I've just drawn this circle to keep things simple.
This is what mitochondria actually looked like,
and you can see they've got these very thin membranes.
These are called the Christie membranes,
and this is where all this proton pumping is going on.
So if you were to iron out all of these membranes
from your own body,
it would be about four football pitchers' worth of membrane,
which is charged like a bolt of lightning.
That's what makes us alive.
That charge will flicker and die
if we're not keeping on turning the Krebs cycle.
So that's why the Krebs cycle is so central
to what's going on with life.
What I'm just showing down at the bottom there
is a cartoon of this process.
The two H, the two hydrogen atoms,
are split into the component parts,
into electrons and protons.
The electrons are passed in a kind of a wire inside the membrane,
so we have a current of electricity inside the membrane,
flowing to oxygen.
The current of electricity powers the extrusion of protons
across the membrane,
so we have this electrical charge on the membrane.
Then they flow back through, through a turbine, in effect,
the ATP synthase, which is at the right-hand side.
So it's basically like a hydroelectric dam,
where the membrane is equivalent to the dam,
the proton reservoir, if you like, is equivalent to the reservoir,
and the ATP synthase, well, it's a rotating motor.
It's an extraordinary protein.
This is another reason why biochemists don't like to ask why
how on earth does something with that majesty evolve.
It's plainly a product of genes and natural selection and so on,
but when I think about these questions,
I'm wondering about how did it arise in the first place.
It's a strange fact, but basically all life on earth works this way.
This way of generating electricity is as universally conserved
as the genetic code itself.
This is how cells work, bacteria work this way,
archaea work this way, plants, animals, everything works this way.
So there's something profoundly important about how it works,
and yet it's very difficult to wrestle with in terms of how does it happen.
These are two of the most important discoveries, in my opinion,
in the 20th century of science.
One of them, the mitochondria themselves and the bacteria work in the same way,
are basically electrical fuel cells, was discovered by Peter Mitchell,
and I want to say, and Jennifer Moyle,
because Jennifer Moyle did all the experiments.
Mitchell was a genius who thought things
that nobody else had really ever thought before,
but a lot of people thought he was a madman, insane,
and really would practically leave the room if he came in.
He really infuriated people.
It was Jennifer Moyle's experiments that made other people take Mitchell seriously,
and it's the sorry state of the world that Mitchell himself got the Nobel Prize in 1978,
but Jennifer Moyle was overlooked, which I think would not happen today,
let's put it that way.
The other person on there is Lynn Margolis.
She really nailed the idea that mitochondria were once bacteria,
and mitochondria are the power packs in our own cells,
once were free living bacteria,
and were acquired two billion years ago,
probably in the course of the evolution of complex cells,
and so these power packs that we have were once free living bacteria.
These are two of the most important discoveries again,
I think everybody should know.
But it suddenly gets a bit more messy,
and the cryptocycle is not only about stripping hydrogen out of food
and burning it in oxygen.
It's also used for making the precursors for everything else.
It provides the carbon skeletons for growth.
It provides the carbon skeletons to make amino acids,
and to make fatty acids,
and to make sugars,
and from those to make nucleotides, the building blocks of DNA, and so on.
So it's really central to biosynthesis, as well as to energy,
which is always recognised in the textbooks,
but it's a little bit messy and uncomfortable,
and it's put into a different chapter,
and we prefer not to talk too much about it.
But there's a problem here,
because if you have a problem with respiration,
it's not only affecting ATP synthesis, the energy currency.
It affects the electrical charge on the membrane.
If you can't have the flow of electrons going to oxygen,
then you don't have the electrical charge on the membrane.
Then the cryptocycle can't spin,
and then you can't make anything either.
So if you've got a problem with respiration,
you've got a problem not only with energy,
but with really everything, with growth and development.
Now, luckily this doesn't really happen very much,
and I'll come later in the talk as to why that is,
but the clue to what's going on actually came from cancer,
from studies on cancer about in the last 10 to 15 years or so.
Now, it turns out what you're seeing here
is that you can... I'm going to point to this.
This is showing one of the complexes.
It's gone into reverse, and we're taking the 2H,
instead of taking them from the mitochondria,
we're taking them from over there,
from the cytoplasm of the cell, from outside the mitochondria.
We're feeding them into somewhere else,
and that allows us to keep this electrical charge.
But notice what else is happening.
The Krebs cycle is going backwards.
It's flipped, and it's now taking carbon dioxide
and hydrogen from around it,
and converting it into the precursors for biosynthesis.
Cancer cells love this.
Cancer cells want to make copies of themselves.
That's what they do.
They need to grow and to divide.
You need to have more fatty acids for the membranes,
and more nucleotides for the DNA.
You need more amino acids for the proteins.
Cancer cells do this,
and it's become increasingly clear
that this happens quite a lot.
It becomes really very messy.
This idea goes back to Warburg.
Otto Warburg, a great German biochemist,
really in the 1920s he began talking about problems with mitochondria.
He wasn't bang on, and actually this picture of him,
he does look a little bit like Dr Frankenstein.
He was a very polarising character,
a brilliant biochemist, but extremely haughty.
He was in fact Krebs' mentor as well.
These ideas that are now very popular in cancer,
known as the Warburg shift,
the idea that mitochondria are effectively become biosynthetic
rather than producing energy,
go back 90 years to Warburg,
and suddenly they're in vogue again.
He wasn't quite right about everything,
but he was right about a lot, and I'll come back to that.
What I'm trying to say is it's not a cycle.
It's more like a roundabout,
a magic roundabout with things coming and going
from pretty much every junction.
This is the magic roundabout in Swindon.
I've noticed when you try and find pictures
of the magic roundabout in Swindon,
you always find the same picture.
It's quite an old picture.
You see those are quite old cars,
so we're still reusing the same picture of the magic roundabout,
probably because it's the only one where everyone was driving
correctly around it, I suspect.
I was there once, and it's a terrifying place.
It really is difficult to organise that kind of flow
so that it actually works.
Why on earth would life organise a system
where you're using the same cycle to generate energy
and to make all the precursors for growth?
It seems a mad kind of thing to do.
If something goes wrong at any part of this,
because everything works in series,
then the whole system goes wrong.
This seems like a mad way of doing it.
When things go wrong a little bit,
it changes the activity of the genes.
There's an epigenetic switch.
Literally thousands of genes are switched on or switched off
when things go wrong with the CREB cycle.
This is something which is, again,
being discovered over the last ten years or so,
that if the concentration of intermediates goes up or down,
then it switches genes on or off.
Far from just the power packs of cells,
this is really the beating heart of what's going on with life.
Why then do we use the same cycle for creating and destroying?
Not even a phoenix can do both at the same time.
This is not the answer.
I put this slide in because today was the last day
of a post-doc in my lab,
Glar in 1.1,
and he is going to take up a lectureship in Thailand.
He is leaving this weekend.
This is in Thailand.
I've got no idea where it actually is, but my God, it looks nice.
I think this probably is the correct answer
to pretty much every other question.
This is close to 42 as we're going to get.
But why do I say it's not the correct answer?
Because plants have misledders.
Because plants, the way that they do photosynthesis,
they're basically making sugars that way.
A lot of the chemistry took a long time to discover it.
It's kind of focused in the way that textbooks teach
and the way that we are all taught by a chemistry.
I was helping my younger son who's got his GCSEs coming up
and it says in his textbooks that photosynthesis makes glucose.
Well, no, not really.
It actually took the people who were trying to work out the pathway.
They couldn't understand why there was no glucose being made whatsoever.
It took them 10 years to figure out what was going on.
Well, now we know,
and so we've got this idea that photosynthesis makes sugars
and respiration burns sugars.
It all works as simply as that.
This is the correct answer.
It's not quite as nice, really.
It's definitely less than 42.
This is in Yellowstone.
These are green sulfur bacteria.
They're photosynthetic as well,
but they grow in a completely different way.
They grow in a way which is far more ancient.
This is probably at least one to two billion years
before the origin of photosynthesis as we know it.
Here's what they do.
This is the key to everything, really.
What you see in there is the Krebs cycle again.
It's a slightly extended version of the Krebs cycle,
and what's happening is going backwards as it happens in cancer cells,
and it's taking hydrogen,
it's taking it in fact from hydrogen sulfide in this case,
and it's taking CO2,
and it's joining them up to make organic molecules.
So one spin of the cycle takes up four carbon dioxide molecules.
This is about four times more effective
than the more familiar Calvin Benson cycle,
which you see in most plants, or all plants.
It was discovered in 1966,
and the first author on that paper was Mike Evans,
and there he is in 1964 with his car,
and that car really dates it, though.
When I checked up, I realised that the car
was actually already a vintage at the time.
It's a 1950 model, so it kind of gives a slightly skewed version.
But this is the reverse Krebs cycle.
It was discovered in 1966,
and it took literally 25 years before the field began to believe it.
Krebs himself never referred to it.
Krebs died in 1981.
He wrote a paper in 1981 about the evolution of metabolic pathways,
and he didn't once mention the reverse Krebs cycle.
I have no idea why not.
But this really explains a great deal.
Here was the original figure showing how it works
from that paper in 1966 at the left-hand side.
You'll see there, it says, reduced feridoxin.
Feridoxin. It's the red protein.
You can see just at the top, these are X-ray crystallographs
showing the electron density.
These are really beautiful, these figures.
You don't see them done like this very much anymore.
This is how they used to do them. This was a 1972 paper.
You can see the structure that they came to from the electron density.
Now, can you just make out there's some square a bit,
and you can see those little cuboid lattices in there.
Those are iron sulfur clusters.
There's four iron atoms, or irons,
and there are four sulfur irons in there.
It's a little cube structure, like a mineral in effect.
That is the bit in this molecule that does the work.
There's two places in the Krebs cycle
where it's really difficult to make this chemistry happen,
and it's the feridoxin which is driving it.
The entire cycle can go backwards.
It's not involved in energy, really.
It's involved in growth, in making things,
in making all the precursors that you need for life.
This also, 1966, was another paper.
This is perhaps one of the most important papers
that I've ever read, and probably Margaret Dayhoff.
Can we have a show of hands?
Who knows Margaret Dayhoff's name?
Margaret Oakley Dayhoff. Anyone in here?
John Allen does, but I know he does.
That's a real shame,
because she was described as the father and the mother
of bioinformatics.
This was a paper.
She founded this entire field,
which we're now all comparing gene sequences,
letter by letter, to say,
well, this from this bacteria compares
with this from that bacteria, and so on.
We can reconstruct an entire tree of life.
It all goes back to Margaret Dayhoff.
This is an absolutely gobsmacking paper.
I don't know if you can quite read the abstract,
but what she's saying there, I can't read the abstract
because I forgot my glasses,
but what she's saying there is that feridoxin,
this molecule that makes the Krebs cycle go backwards,
has a structure which is composed of smaller,
more repeating units.
In the end, it goes down to four amino acids,
which are repeated and repeated and repeated,
and it became more complex.
These are some of the most ancient amino acids.
She says in there, the bit that I've highlighted in red,
says that perhaps this goes back to a time
at the origin of life before there was even a genetic code,
or before the genetic code was fully formed,
which is one of the most thrilling lines
that I've ever read in a scientific paper.
What she's done there is a piece of detective work
of looking at the modern sequences,
deconstructing what makes them up,
realising the whole context for it,
and pushing it right back to the very origin of life.
It's one of the great things about science,
and that's a challenge then.
How could that work at the origin of life?
She had also pointed to some of the most ancient bacteria,
and things like that,
which grow from carbon dioxide and hydrogen
in pretty much the same way
as they don't actually use the reverse Krebs cycle,
but they use something very similar.
The reverse Krebs cycle is using hydrogen and CO2,
it's using ferrodoxin, this iron protein,
and they also need to have the electrical charge on the membrane.
They can't grow without this electrical charge,
so it's really simple chemistry that they're doing.
This is a tree of life built by, you might say,
Bill would probably describe himself,
Bill Martin here would probably describe himself
as a disciple of Margaret Dayhoff,
and he has a very similar view
that he's bringing in real biochemistry
and combining it with genetics.
This tree of life that he's got here goes right back,
you can see down at the bottom,
we have the bacteria and the archaea
that emerge independently from a hydrothermal vent
down at the bottom there.
Now, this was a radical, radical view
when he put that forward in 1999,
that's this paper,
and remarkably it's become, I won't say mainstream,
but it's become far more accepted now,
probably, than it certainly was when he put it out.
The bacteria and the archaea that are down there at the bottom
are growing from carbon dioxide and hydrogen.
The vents were discovered the year after that paper,
the kind of vent that he was talking about,
by Deborah Kelly, who was captain of the Alvin submersible.
The Alvin submersible had discovered black smokers in 1978,
so this was now moved forward to the year 2000,
and she discovered a completely new type of vent system
known as alkaline hydrothermal vents,
and they're not like black smokers
with smoke bellowing out of a chimney.
These are, in fact, active vents,
but you don't see very much happening.
They're more like a kind of Gothic cathedral or something.
They're really beautiful things,
and they're really rich in hydrogen gas.
Hydrogen gas is bowling out of these vents.
And they were predicted to exist ten years before their discovery
by a guy called Mike Russell, who's a geologist,
and he had found something on land,
kind of a fossil version,
and worked out what should be happening in the oceans
and linked it to the origin of life,
so amazingly lateral thinking.
And the key to how Mike Russell was thinking about this
is he was saying these vents have a kind of mineralised sponge texture to them.
It's a kind of labyrinth of interconnected micropores,
and the walls between them today in the ocean at Lost City,
discovered by Deb Kelly.
Today, it's calcium carbonate, aragonite.
But four billion years ago, when there wasn't any oxygen in the atmosphere,
they were probably made of other things.
The ocean chemistry was very different,
and there were probably a lot of iron sulfur minerals in there
with a structure which is very similar to the iron sulfur clusters
that Margaret Oakley was talking about
and involved in the reverse Krebs cycle.
They bubble hydrogen out of the ground.
The early oceans were rich in CO2.
We've got these iron sulfur clusters.
And because the alkaline vents going into an acidic early ocean,
we also have pH gradients,
so we have charges,
effectively electrical charge on these barriers.
So we have really, I think, the perfect set of circumstances.
It's almost too perfect to be believable,
and the scientists, we have to be sceptical and say,
well, am I seeing faces in clouds or something like that?
This is what gets me excited about it.
On the left, you're seeing a poor,
a kind of schematic of a poor in one of these vents.
It's alkaline inside. It's acidic outside.
There's a barrier around it.
It's quite a thick barrier compared to a cell membrane,
and it's got these iron sulfur minerals in it.
And on the right-hand side, we have a bacterial cell.
It's acidic outside. It's alkaline inside.
We've got a membrane, and it's got a protein in it
which is pumping protons out.
So topologically, it's really very similar.
And this is how I imagine it, at least.
So what I'm doing here is drawing it exactly as I've drawn the other things,
just to show you how the topology works.
So on the left-hand side, you're seeing the poor
with the iron sulfur barrier surrounding it.
It's driving hydrogen to react with CO2
in something amounting to the reverse Krebs cycle.
It may not be a complete cycle,
but it's basically driving this reaction.
And coming from it are the amino acids and the fatty acids.
Those are the easiest things to make.
The fatty acids will form together to make a membrane.
And on the right-hand side, you're seeing that this membrane has formed around,
and now everything's enclosed,
the concentrations are a bit higher,
the driving forces are the same,
and so we can go further through metabolism and make more things,
make even, perhaps, nucleotides.
That might seem like a bit of a far-fetched claim to make.
It's far less of a far-fetched claim, though, than you might think.
This is probably the most complex slide that I'm going to show you this evening,
and I'm not going to go through it in detail.
But all I really want you to take home from this is in...
I can't see it properly,
but in green, if I remember rightly, it says H2,
and in brown it says CO2.
Maybe it's CO2 in green.
Right.
These are the steps starting with carbon dioxide
and working through into metabolism as we know it,
into the Krebs cycle as we know it.
Hydrogen, hydrogen, hydrogen,
carbon dioxide, carbon dioxide,
it's just one after another.
It's exactly the same thing, repeating chemistry.
And you think, well, why is it doing this chemistry?
Again, I'm going to skip lightly over this.
It's doing this chemistry because it can't really do anything else.
When you think about what's happening with CO2,
binding close to a surface, to a mineral surface,
or to a cell membrane, perhaps,
or to a metal cluster or something,
electrons are being transferred from the hydrogen.
Where do they go?
Well, I'm not going to go through step by step,
but what I would like you to take home from this
is all I'm doing is transferring electrons
in the presence of protons,
and I'm going from carbon dioxide in each step
through to, by the end of this slide,
I've got as far as a methanol.
So we're transferring an electrons onto it,
and then picks up a proton and we end up with one hydrogen.
More electrons transferring on,
this is, the electron pair is moving onto the oxygen,
binds to a proton, binds to a proton,
we end up with methanol.
And we can go on. It's the same chemistry.
If you would like to know more, well,
I explain it more in the book.
But we've just taken it through here
in a few simple steps to pyruvate itself,
which I showed you at the beginning
is the lead-in to the Krebs cycle in our own Krebs cycle,
but these are all the intermediates.
This is the building blocks of life,
and it's almost inevitable chemistry,
and it's now being done in the lab.
Pretty much everything I've just shown you
over the last five years, five to seven years,
has now been done in the lab, and it really works.
So I've been talking about these ideas
for a long time, for more than 10 to 15 years or so now,
and for a long time it's a bit embarrassing
because I would say, well, in theory,
all of this should happen,
and it's very difficult to make it work in the lab.
And now, not just in my lab,
but in other labs around the world as well,
people are doing this chemistry. It really does work.
It is fantastic. It's a very exciting time.
So this is possible.
It's not proved, but it's possible.
I'm going to just say one more thing
before I move on from the origin of life,
which is that, well, to get beyond there,
this is an entirely chemical system
driven by the environment itself.
To get beyond there, well, you need genes.
You need to be a proper cell.
This is not a proper cell.
This is a kind of a proto cell with a non-coded metabolism.
Where do the genes come from?
Well, there are known interactions,
and I don't know quite how these work,
and I've just drawn some things for fun here, really,
but there are known interactions between the bases,
the nucleotides in RNA,
so the letters, if you like, of RNA,
and amino acids.
It's mostly about the hydrophobicity.
So if the hydrophobic amino acid
will interact with the hydrophobic base,
so water-hating amino acids and water-hating bases,
and the size matters as well.
What this means is that if we have these interactions,
if we have a high enough concentration inside the proto cells,
then we can introduce a random sequence of RNA,
just any old letters you want, meaningless,
no information content whatsoever.
But if that will template in some way,
a non-random sequence of amino acids to form a peptide,
and it's non-random because the biophysical interactions
say whenever you get this kind of hydrophobic base,
you'll get this kind of hydrophobic amino acid,
then you've produced a non-random peptide,
which can have function because it can either make
the proto cell grow faster or grow slower,
and effectively it is coded by that sequence,
and that sequence, when it's copied, can be passed on.
So I'm not going to say any more about that.
We can ask questions later on if you want,
but in effect there is no problem with the origin of information
in biology if we think that metabolism comes first
and that these kind of proto cells come first.
Everybody has to produce the building blocks,
but if you have just a pure RNA world
where RNA invents everything, it's really difficult to work out
where does all this information come from?
There's no problem in this setting.
So let's skip forward.
These cells have got genes now and they've left,
and it's interesting that cells have retained a structure
which is topologically similar to the planet itself.
So the inside of the planet, the core and the mantle of iron rich,
and iron is effectively saturated with electrons, you might say,
it wants to be rid of those electrons and become oxidised,
and the outside is relatively oxidised,
lots of carbon dioxide and water and so on,
and the carbon dioxide will pick up the electrons from the iron.
And these things that I'm showing in the membrane there,
these are hydrothermal vents, really, in the crust.
These are the connection between the mantle and the oceans and the atmosphere.
And the cells are basically exactly the same,
relatively negatively charged inside,
relatively positively charged outside,
and they're maintaining that difference.
It's important because for these cells to grow,
they need to get their hydrogen,
they always need hydrogen,
and they need to get it from hydrothermal systems.
And they can't get it from anywhere else, really, at this stage.
They can get it as hydrogen gas,
or they can get it as hydrogen sulphide coming out of these systems,
or even ferrous iron, so charged iron with 2+,
that can be oxidised to ferricine,
it can rust in effect,
and the electrons and protons can produce hydrogen.
So it works in all kinds of interesting ways,
but life is limited by the availability of the 2H
that I've been talking about, until photosynthesis.
And what photosynthesis does, these are cyanobacteria,
what photosynthesis does is take the 2H from water.
It uses the power of the sun to strip out from H2O,
it strips out the 2H,
and it puts them into making organic molecules,
and oxygen is the waste product.
And if you think about the earth as a battery,
as a giant battery,
then we're supercharging that battery,
the outside, the atmosphere, and so on,
is now becoming even more oxidised,
even more positively charged relative to the inside.
It really wants to draw electrons out.
And those electrons are now coming from water instead.
That led to a kind of catastrophic change
in the history of the earth
at the time of what's known as the Great Oxidation Event
2.2 billion years ago.
And this is just a beautiful picture of a banded iron formation.
I love these things.
They're not actually diagnostic of the Great Oxidation Event,
but they're beautiful to look at.
The point is that oxygen appeared in the atmosphere
around that time.
Not very much, I mean limited amounts of it,
but the oceans remained really very low oxygen,
probably zero oxygen,
for another billion years or so after that.
But the thing is that when oxygen levels rise,
we go, well think about what the Krebs cycle is doing.
For two billion years,
all these bacteria are just growing
by taking 2H out of the environment and so on,
and making the Krebs cycle go backwards,
and that's how they grow.
And then there's oxygen in the atmosphere,
and everything goes backwards, forwards, which way does it go?
I mean it flips direction and goes the other way.
How can you avoid a crash
when something like that is happening?
Well, the answer seems to come from the first animals,
in part.
So these are from around 560 million years ago,
and these are the first trace fossils that have been found.
So this is before the Cambrian explosion.
And these are little worm-like things
that crawled through the mud,
and the mud we know was full of sulphide.
It's a sewer gas, really, conditions.
And somehow they managed to...
They needed oxygen to do this,
but they managed to deal with these sewer gas-type conditions.
And it was a time when oxygen levels were rising and falling,
and quite unstable.
So how did they actually do that?
Well, it seems that they didn't use a Krebs cycle
as we know it's necessarily.
They actually have a two-pronged kind of Krebs cycle,
and a lot of bacteria do this as well.
So rather than running it as a cycle in either direction,
they kind of split it, and they keep a balance there.
So I won't go through the details of that,
but it's basically a way of keeping...
If you produce too much to 2H,
then you become kind of saturated in it,
and you can't work, and if you don't have enough,
you're unable to burn anything,
and so this is a way of keeping a balance,
so you have just the right amount.
Now, the interesting thing about these early animals
is probably the way that they succeed in doing it.
It took me a long time to see it.
It's blinding me, obviously, but it took me a long time to see it.
Bacteria, if you change the conditions,
have to keep changing their state,
because if there's lots of sulfide around,
you have to deal with the sulfide,
you switch these genes on, you switch those genes off,
you run your Krebs cycle this way, and you're okay.
And now it changes. Now there's some oxygen,
so you switch those genes off, you switch these genes on,
you switch the Krebs cycle, and you do that.
What animals can do with different tissues
is have this tissue doing one job,
that tissue doing a different job,
this tissue supporting that one, and so on.
So we have different patterns of flux,
different ways of making the Krebs cycle operate.
I think this was probably one of the things
that really made the Cambrian explosion possible.
This differentiation of tissues,
we think about them as doing different jobs,
but all of those jobs are supported
by the way that the Krebs cycle is working.
So this is a picture I've always liked showing
at the left-hand side,
so we don't really know what they were.
They're seasile filter feeders
stuck to the bottom of the ocean,
often 200 metres down,
so too deep for them to be photosynthetic.
They look a lot like plants,
but they're too deep.
It's pitch black 200 metres down,
so they're not plants.
And they all died out.
The reason we don't know much about them
is that they fell extinct right before the Cambrian explosion,
and they probably fell extinct because we know
that there was a time
where the sulphide levels rose around then,
and they probably just suffocated.
And those first animals that I showed you
crawling through the mud,
dealing with sulphide, were effectively pre-adapted
to those conditions.
They got different tissues that were doing different jobs,
and they were able to survive those changing conditions.
Oxygen levels rose
around the time of the Cambrian explosion,
and so suddenly
what we're seeing there
is predators and prey.
We're seeing armour-plated animals,
and they're scuttling around
and eating each other.
And you can't do that
without oxygen.
And the simple reason for that is
you can't really have multiple trophic levels
in the absence of oxygen
because of the efficiency.
So aerobic respiration is about 40% efficient.
And what that means is that
you extract about 40% of the energy
from the lunch that you eat,
and the rest is waste.
And then another trophic level
will extract 40% of the energy from that.
So an aerobic ecosystem
can support five or six trophic levels.
Whereas an aerobic one
where it's more driven by
fermentation, it's about 10% efficient
in comparison, so you can only have
two at most three trophic levels.
And that means predation really just doesn't pay.
You never have large enough population sizes.
So the Cambrian explosion,
we know from geological evidence,
and we know from the types of behaviour
that these Cambrian animals were predators
and would have had a crebs cycle
just like our own.
And would have had the same problems
that we have with it.
You can be fairly certain that they would have shown
signs of ageing and things like that.
So I'm showing you here,
again, the full crebs cycle
that I showed you before.
The full system where we have
we're eating food, glucose, whatever it is,
we're spinning the cycle in an oxygenated
atmosphere where charging is going to be
the trouble is you can't do that forever.
You are going to end up with
damage.
Just the turnover, the pace of life.
You will get damaged protein.
You can replace the damaged proteins, fine.
You can fix everything if you want to.
But this is the obsession
of evolutionary biologists.
You'll never see an evolutionary biologist
who is not obsessed with sex.
So how much effort do we want
to put in to sex?
How much effort do we want
to put in to sex?
And what you can see
behind this specific salmon,
they put all their effort into sex
and then undergo what's known as
catastrophics in essence. They drop dead right afterwards
in piles.
They put everything into it for the sake of their
offspring in effect.
Now we all do the same thing to some extent
not catastrophically, but we have to
make some kind of evolutionary decision
how much repair do we want to do
because the more repair we do
then the fewer offspring we're going to have
because we've devoted more resources to that
rather than this. You have to take the
pick to some extent.
And so different animals
make that decision in different ways.
Some put much more resources into
extending their lifespan and others
put much more resources into
sex immediately, if you like.
The problem is,
this is again, you've seen this before.
This is just showing if we're accumulating damage,
if we've made a decision
where we're going to put
most of our effort into sex and some into
surviving a little bit longer,
you're going to get damage and that damage
some of it's going to be in respiration.
And when you get the damage in respiration
then you're going to have a problem
with the entire system because it's all linked
in series.
And I showed you this before as well
with Warburg. Now it turns out
that this is not just specific to cancer cells.
This is more or less what's happening in
a lot of our cells as we get older.
And the reason is the damage.
So again, you can see
am I painting it?
I should have painted that one blue.
But anyway, if we have damage here
and we have some flux of protons back,
we're putting the Krebs cycle into reverse again.
I'd like to call this
a wiring diagram for being old.
Because what you're seeing here
is less energy
because we're cutting out the first
so instead of pumping 10 protons
or pumping 6 protons
so for every 2H that we have
we get less ATP
out. So we're losing energy
in comparison.
And we're spinning the Krebs cycle backwards
so we are beginning to put on weight.
We're fixing CO2 as if we were plants
or something. We're putting on weight
and
getting slower.
And that is
the essence of aging. Now also it makes us
more vulnerable to cancer and the diseases
of old age.
So rather than having a forwards operating
Krebs cycle, we're getting
something much more sluggish like that.
It's not necessarily pumping it out that way.
It's much more subtle than that.
And this can last for decades, this kind of state.
So
there are though some cells which
can't do that.
So these
are pancreatic beta cells
and this is amazing to me.
They need, they
detect glucose
when glucose levels rise in the blood stream
they put out insulin and
that lowers the
glucose levels again. How do they detect
glucose? Well they detect
glucose by effectively having
a flux capacitor system. So they
allow glucose to flow in freely
and they allow the Krebs cycle
to spin freely.
And that generates a membrane potential
so it charges up the electrical membrane
and if you have a highly charged
membrane, that's
the signal to put out insulin.
Now
if you have damage to respiration
and you cannot highly charge
your membrane, you get this glucose signal
coming in and you can't
be spinning the Krebs cycle in that way
so you
can't do it. So you don't put out the
insulin. So you end up with hypoglycemia
and you end up with diabetes. Now
it's not just those cells, it's also neurons.
Neurons love glucose.
They can get by
on ketones and things as well but
they're really reluctant to burn amino acids
or fatty acids or other things like that.
Why? Well
they have the same, regardless
of what the reason why is, I'll come to that in a moment,
they have the same problem as they get older
then you're going to be losing
power if you're not careful. Now if you
if you face that situation, if you stick
with glucose and you can't burn
the glucose because you don't have a full Krebs cycle
you won't be able to think.
So what are you going to do? Well
this is an idea coming
from
from
from Eric Schoen
and Estela Ariagomez
which is a very neat idea.
It's not a very popular idea in the field
I have to say but I think they're
on to something. What they're saying is
that you ramp up the calcium because the calcium
you can ramp up the
rates of respiration and the charge on the membrane
so pump some more calcium, if you don't
have enough glucose pump some more calcium
and you can charge up your membrane a little bit more
and it works except that calcium can be
damaging and it's especially damaging
to the place where the calcium sources
which are the membranes right next to the
mitochondria called the MAMS
the mitochondria associated membranes. Now
this is part of another membrane system
called the endoplasmic reticulum
and this is making proteins
and processing proteins and a lot of the proteins
that you'll be familiar with in Alzheimer's disease
so you know
you'll see plaques and tangles in the
brains of people with Alzheimer's disease. The plaques
are made from an amyloid protein
and the amyloid protein
is a small part
from a precursor protein
the amyloid precursor protein. All of that
chopping up proteins
and sorting them out is happening
in the MAMS, in these membranes
right next to the mitochondria and are damaged
by the calcium because the mitochondria themselves
are not working correctly. Is he right?
Is she right? I don't know
but it makes a lot of sense to me
but the other reason I like this
and this is the last few minutes now
the other reason I like this is it says
it's really important to have
a high membrane potential
when glucose floods
into a brain area. So you can see
on PET scans and things
the parts of the brain
lighting up when glucose comes in. So it's gated
the capillar is open the flow, glucose comes in
this part of the brain lights up
we're getting a big electrical charge
on the mitochondrial membranes.
And we seem to really need that charge.
Is it connected with things
perhaps even more important than just
thinking or just the mechanics
of thinking? Is it connected with consciousness itself?
It's a really beautiful idea
from Luca Turin.
Now Luca Turin is a biophysicist
and he's had all kinds of
interesting ideas
I'm not going to talk about most of them
but he came and visited me at UCL
a few years ago now and wanted to talk
about general anaesthetics and I knew nothing
about general anaesthetics but what he told me
is that well nobody knows anything about general anaesthetics
we don't know how they work
they all have different shapes
and they all have
different charges and none of them
interact in a meaningful way
with the kind of the
hand and glove type receptor mechanism
and that was what interested him.
Even Zenon he said
an inert gas which is basically
a sphere of electron density
it doesn't really have a shape it doesn't really have any chemistry
but it does have physics he said
and this physics involves
somehow, I don't really know how it does it
is able to transfer electrons
and what he had shown
using EPR
and techniques like that so
electron paramagnetic resonance
is that
oxygen is involved
the transfer of electrons to oxygen
Zenon speeds it up
and that is associated with
why it can put you under general anaesthesia
it short circuits
respiration
it can only do it in a very mild way
because if it did it in a big way it would kill you straight away
so it must be a very subtle effect
but if you get an overdose of a general anaesthetic
it will kill you
so there's some subtlety
probably these things are actually quite bad at doing it
and therefore are less likely to kill you
but they do it somewhat anyway
now we don't know
either many things
were really profoundly ignorant about
the electroencephalogrammes
we know that we can interpret it really well
but we don't know which structures in the brain
are producing the electrical fields
that are giving the EEG
we know it's neurons
and we know it's not just single neurons
it's networks of neurons because the signals
are sufficiently high that they must come from networks
but the assumption in the field
is that it's coming from the
axonal membranes from the plasma
membranes themselves which are depolarising
as a neuron is firing
but inside the neurons are mitochondria
and there's a lot more mitochondria
and the charges at least double the charge
on the plasma membrane
and we have these beautiful
I showed you earlier on these beautiful
Christie membranes
they're often parallel to each other
and we have an oscillating current in them
they do generate
electromagnetic fields
it's really difficult to measure them
I am trying to think of ways of doing it
other people are trying to think of ways of doing it
but
it's quite likely it seems to me
that the electromagnetic fields generated
that we're detecting with the EEG
are generated by the mitochondria
inside cells rather than the membranes themselves
and that they're interacting with the fields on the plasma membrane
and this is going on
so why mitochondria
and why electromagnetic fields
and this is the final slide that I'm going to leave you with
and this is the first slide
that I showed you pretty much as well
this system now think of it as a bacterium
and it's got the Krebs cycle
it's generating the amino acids
and everything it needs, all the precursors
and it's burning things in oxygen
and it's taking up glucose
or whatever from the environment
and it's charging up the membrane
and this system is working in series
so everything is connected in time
and as time goes by, as oxygen levels fall
then respiration will slow
the membrane potential will fall
and so moment by moment
in the life of a bacterial cell
and I'm showing you a bacterial cell here
the stream of consciousness is in effect
a real-time report
on the status of the cell
in relation to its environment
I'm not saying anything about the human consciousness
I'm just saying what
from the point of view of biophysics
is a feeling
if we feel
in love
or if we feel pain
or hungry
or whatever it may be
what is a feeling?
there is no answer to that
there are really two types of explanation for it
one of them is it's some kind of concoction
it's an emergent property of a sufficiently complex
central nervous system
but it still doesn't say what it is
and actually what that says is
there's some deceit going on
that it's not real
it's just a concoction to trick us into thinking
that we're conscious
as an idea
the alternative idea is that
well it's a property of matter
that there's an unknown law of physics
and the sun is conscious in some way or another
and so is everything else
and I don't find that really very believable either
consciousness strikes me to be widespread
across at least the animal kingdom
it seems to me anybody who has a pet
will recognise that it has
feelings
and
where do we stop then?
natural selection acting on
to embellish
consciousness going from
simpler animals to in the end
the majesty of the human consciousness
what is the simplest possible
form of consciousness that we can imagine
what is if you like a quantum of solace
what is the simplest
possible form
I think it's the electrical
charges on the membranes generated
by the spinning of the Krebs cycle in relation
to the environment as a real time report
on the status of cells
in relation to their environment
I'm going to stop there
I have to say thank you to my group
because they are doing amazing work
I haven't presented
any data this evening
I normally give
quite data heavy talks I have to say these days
they are brave
they're working on some of the most amazing
questions in science but they're not easy questions
and it can take a long time to make much progress
and that can kill a career
and that's why I say you have to be brave
if you do a PhD and you don't know papers
and every result you get over 3 or 4 years
is negative
well that's not great
you may be forced to leave science
so it requires some bravery
to do that and I'm really grateful
to them for coming
for this adventure and making this adventure
for me so much more thrilling because we are making
progress and I think we're beginning to understand things
and I'm going to leave just with
painting of the reverse Krebs cycle
by Audran O'El
as an Oroboros
I hope I've done that in time
yes, 80 o'clock
fantastic
