Geometria from the Greek Earth Measurement, geometria.
We derived the word geometry.
To the Greeks, this was something sacred.
Geometrists have it that on top of Plato's Athenian Academy were inscribed these words.
A geometritos mides yisito.
Let no one ignorant of geometry enter.
I hope by the end of this talk, we don't have to kick anybody out because you all love geometry.
Why is that?
Why was geometry so sacred to the Greeks?
We humans as a species, we evolved as geometric beings.
We perceived the world around us through geometry.
We have eyes that translate the perceptions of the world into our brain.
Every major civilization, the Chinese, the Egyptians, the Babylonians, the Indians, so
on and so forth, had some notion of geometrical understanding of the world around us.
This is the first perception that we ever get, and then formalizing this geometry in
some way or another.
For example, if I tell you something travels at a constant speed, now over a passage of
time, the distance traversed by that object is measured by the area of this rectangle.
Right?
It's okay.
That's totally cool.
After all, geometry is about Earth measurement.
It's a very practical thing.
But the Greeks did something different from the other civilizations because they had Euclid.
This guy here wrote 13 books called The Elements, nine of which are about geometry.
There's a little bit of number theory and a little bit of something else.
Here is the Oxyrhynchus papyrus in National Museum in Oxford, one of the only surviving
fragments from antipathy of this remarkable book.
I will tell you a little bit more about why there's only a little bit of this book left.
Now, in this book, this is a remarkable book.
There are two most read books in human history.
Try to guess what they are.
The Bible and The Elements.
This is what you want to be.
Up to the Victorian times, everybody, any learned person would have to read The Elements.
This is the first textbook of mathematics, and in some sense, it's still the greatest
textbook of mathematics.
In this 13 volumes, nine of which are devoted to geometry, Euclid is not entirely all him,
but he gathered what was known to the ancient world, all of that knowledge into these volumes
and formulated something.
Now, that something is very, very special.
The axioms.
Now the Greeks did something different.
Again, axiom from the word axioma, that which is worthy.
What a beautiful word.
So what does that mean?
What is an axiom?
So what Euclid did was to axiomatize mathematics.
So let's see what that means.
So it's like when you play a game, you have to start laying out some rules.
Now, if your game has 5,000 rules, it's just not going to be very interesting, right?
You have to memorize 5,000 rules, no, it's not too good.
Chess won't be so interesting if you don't, you know, there's so many pieces, a very simple
set of rules, and then you're done.
Like football.
I'm not a big football fan myself, but apparently football is called the, or Jogo bonito, the
beautiful game.
So hopefully by the end of this talk, you will walk away and say, no, the beautiful
game is not football, the beautiful game is mathematics.
And why is that?
Because mathematics starts using this tradition of Euclid with as few axioms, axioma as possible,
from which we derive, using the rules of logic, everything else.
So in other words, I'm going to tell you these axioms shortly, and every fact about
geometries of a plane of shapes and sizes, if you cannot reason them out through these
five axioms, then mathematics is pointless.
So let's go through these five axioms.
Axiom number one.
So this is kind of interesting.
My American friends would appreciate this, you know, the declaration of independence
in America.
We hold these truths self-evident, all people created equal, et cetera, et cetera, self-evident.
If these five axioms are not self-evident to you, then it's not so good.
So we're going to start with something that is self-evident.
Okay, so let's start, let's have a go.
And first one, axiom number one.
A straight line may be drawn between any two points.
Da.
Well, I'm hoping that at every one of the end of these, you're going to say da, right?
Well, yeah, fine, that seems pretty self-evident, right, fine.
Axiom number two.
Any terminated line, an interval, can be stretched infinitely on both sides.
Da.
Axiom number three.
Given any point, the center, and radius of any length, you can draw a circle, as well.
Axiom number four.
All right angles are equal.
You're given this commensurate measurement of what a right angle means.
Now, some of you may have object, I mean, just because most of my life I spend in six
to ten dimensions, I have not forgotten how to count.
There are four of these, all right, yeah, fair enough, right?
There is the fifth.
Now there's a reason why I have separated out the fifth, and I'm going to go back to
this.
Just bear in the back of your mind, you have these four obvious ones, which are, you know,
that, that, that, and that, right?
And then this fifth one.
This is a very special one.
I'm going to go back to this in a minute.
Well, we're going to go back to this over and over again.
So this says, I'm going to read out, this is a pretty, pretty lengthy one.
Well, partially I'm, you know, I'm, I'm subverting this one out because it's a very, very mouthy.
Lots of words here.
For any given point, not on a given line, there exists one line, a unique line, through
that point that does not meet that line.
Da.
Okay, that's right.
So this is called the parallel axiom.
This line is called the unique parallel line to a given line and a given point, not on
the line.
It's very important that this point is not on the line, otherwise your parallel line
will, will coincide with this line.
Okay, this is all fine.
Now the point is, if I cannot derive every single statement of geometry from these five
words, using only logic, then mathematics is pointless.
That's why it's a beautiful game.
So let's play a game.
I will give you a theorem from the Greek Theorema, that which is looked at.
It's beautiful words, you know, because you've got to look at this from that which is worthy
and then derive that which is looked at.
And we're going to look at this.
We're looking at it right now, right?
This is a theorem which is told, I think, I believe there's not a single person in this
room who does not know this theorem, right?
That the internal angles of a triangle sum up to 180 degrees, right?
What is surprising is that I, I've met first year undergraduates who do not know the fact
that this is derived from the five axioms.
I think somehow in high school education in this country and elsewhere, I think, increasingly
we're just told to, like, memorize this fact.
That's why mathematics becomes so boring.
You're told to memorize this fact.
You don't memorize this fact.
This is a theorem.
This is not an axiom.
So I must be able to play this game and derive this theorem, right?
So that's, that's, that's where it gets really exciting and fun.
So first of all, let me get rid of this 180 because, you know, why is the revolution
360 degrees?
Why is the full revolution 360 degrees?
That is a complete Babylonian artifact.
The Babylonians counted in base 60.
So their full revolution was 360 degrees.
And to them, you kind of coincided with 360 days of a year, so 365 years a year.
So it's kind of a cosmological reason.
But that's a complete arbitrary choice.
I mean, you could have called a full revolution 100 degrees if you wanted because it's base
10.
So let's restate that theorem in a more universal language.
The internal angles of a triangle sum up to one half of a full revolution, a full revolution,
whatever it is, in whatever units you want, Babylonian, Chinese, Egyptian, half of it.
And you've got to show that this angle, I'm going to call A, plus this angle, I'm going
to call B, plus this angle, I'm going to call C, needs to sum up exactly to that one
half of a revolution.
All right.
And we're going to prove this now.
You're like, oh, my God, I did not come on a Friday evening to go through some math proves.
But I promise this is only proof I'm going to give you.
And it's going to be fun because that's what math is.
It's fun.
It's a fun game.
So let's start with, I'm not going to give the full details of this proof, but let's
start.
Let's start.
Step number one.
I'm going to invoke the fifth.
I think my American friends would appreciate this.
You see my American roots.
I was like, oh, plead the fifth.
For geometers like us, when you plead the fifth, you're invoking something quite sacred.
You're asking for the parallel axiom of Euclid.
So let's go with the parallel axiom of Euclid.
I've given you this random triangle of drawn for you, right?
To every line and a point not on that line, there exists a unique line which never meets
it.
So I'm going to draw that line.
So that's the plead in the fifth.
I will use this in the court of law.
Step number two.
You notice that when you have two lines that never meet, any line that goes through it
will have the property that the blue angles are equal and the yellow angles are equal.
That's pretty cool, right?
Because if they weren't equal, the two lines would meet somehow.
So by definition of not meeting, this angle is equal to this angle, is equal to this
angle, is equal to this angle, and this angle, this angle, this angle, this angle.
They're all equal.
So what does that imply about step number one?
It implies that this yellow bit must be the same as this yellow bit because I have drawn
for you this parallel.
So two, this blue bit, we're equal to this blue bit because I have drawn for you this
parallel.
If they weren't equal, those two lines would not be parallel lines.
I'm done.
Step number three.
This is also called B and this is also called A. A plus B plus C forms one straight line.
Now you can go and tell your students in high school, don't memorize this fact.
You've just derived this from the five axioms of Euclid.
That is the point of mathematics.
If you cannot do that, then mathematics is pointless.
This is just one baby theorem.
Think about the thousands of theorems that you can say about geometry, Pythagoras.
You can deduce Pythagoras from these five axioms.
Of course you can.
You must be able to.
What we're going to do today is going to take, I don't know, catch me outside, I'm going
to explain that to you in a piece of paper.
That one's a bit funky.
It's actually a really, really, really beautiful proof.
The proof even has a name called the saddle of the bride.
It's very poetic.
If you construct it, a saddle of a bride, it doesn't look like a saddle of a bride to
me at all.
But first of all, I don't know what a saddle of a bride is, but it sounds cool.
It's a totally romantic way of saying that simply.
But you can construct a triangle and draw this thing and then use only the axioms of
Euclid to deduce the fact that everybody knows again the sum of the square of one side of
a right-hand triangle with the other one is the square of the third side.
That's a theorem.
Don't memorize that.
You must be able to deduce that.
Right?
So I've given you a baby one.
This is a really nice one, which is the fact that you can go home and be satisfied.
I now know the proof that the internal angle of a triangle must sum up to 180 degrees.
It's wonderful.
It's a very, I'll get a fuzzy warm feeling inside.
And then tragedy happens, right?
What about first century AD?
The great library of Laxandria was burnt down, 700,000 volumes of the entirety of knowledge
of antiquity just gone up in flames.
There are theories as to who did it.
I don't know.
I'm not a historian, but the fact is that it's gone.
Euclid, everything, all of the classical Greek writings is all gone.
And very, very little fragments are left.
So the oxyrhynchus papyrus that you saw, it's one of the last bits that survived from
this around about this time.
So this is the first major destruction of human civilization.
But we humans are resilient.
Just because one civilization has fallen, you could pick it up somewhere else.
And this was done.
And the great center of mathematics shifted from the ancient Greek world, the world of
Euclid and Plato, to the Arabic world.
Around about by the ninth century, what is now Iraq, was a seat of great learning and
great mathematics.
And I must emphasize this gentleman, Muhammad Ibn Musaar Qarazmi, who wrote this wonderful
book, the Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing.
It's so awesome.
Back in the day, books have beautiful titles.
I always try to get away with beautiful titles.
I always get rejected by editors.
But I try.
And I'm very proud that recently I wrote a paper with Thomas Fink, the director of the
London Institute, on a paper entitled The Flowers of Immortality.
So far, it's still the title, so we're still working on it.
So this gentleman is truly remarkable, because guess where, with this name, Al Qarazmi.
We get the word algorithm from his name.
But Al Qarazmi gave us something much more than just an algorithm, you know, like a methodology.
Today's world would be completely dysfunctional without algorithms, of course.
But in my view, Al Qarazmi gave us something much greater.
Now my Arabic is kind of rusty, actually it's non-existent.
But oh, by the way, I'm very grateful to my friend Mika and Tom Hodgkinson, the science
writer at LIMBS, for their Greek tutorials.
I can handle Latin, but not Greek.
But still, and of course, Roman, our designer for making this beautiful set of slides.
I would never be able to make these slides, you know, academics, we don't make slides
very well.
But going back to Al Qarazmi, this book, the book of completion and balancing, this word
here, the word balancing in Arabic is algebra, from which we get the word algebra.
And that is something different, right?
Somehow, you know, you get, the Greeks were masters at geometry, like that beautiful proof
by pictures, and somehow you needed to go east to see this abstraction of algebra.
So, and this is, of course, a, I think, a contemporary cover of this book.
Now just to reassure you a little bit, I'm just, it's a slight digression that Europe
wasn't completely sunk into the Dark Ages.
So around about 14th, you know, you think about 14th century, while the great empires
of China and India and Persia were doing great things, you think about the Dark Ages in Europe,
people were like rolling in mud or something, it's not entirely true.
So this, I put this slide on because I'm very proudly put on the crest of my own beloved
college, Merton College, Oxford, and I think some of my students are here in the audience,
because there was a small group of mathematicians in Europe, especially in Paris and Oxford,
doing the continuation of geometry.
So this is called the Oxford School, or the Merton Calculators, it's a great school, and
they were doing this, this is actually a group of theologians, like we had like, let's think
about some crazy stuff.
So one of the crazy stuff they did was to think about this problem, to remember that
diagram that I drew for you, this, the rectangle, that if you moved in a constant speed, then
the distance traveled is the area of this rectangle.
So these guys, William Hatesbury, and there were Bradwoodine, there were a bunch of them,
Bradwoodine then became the Archbishop of Canterbury, interestingly, because these are theologians.
So everything about, well, what happens if you don't have a constant speed, but if you
had a change in speed, but you change at a constant rate?
So this is something we'll call constant acceleration.
So the speed is not constant, but the rate of change of speed is a constant.
Why were they thinking about this?
I have absolutely no idea.
It's like, hey, why not?
And they would see, see, look, look, this is beautiful.
This is a, a, a 1335 edition of Hatesbury's regulars or vendors of his tomatoes on rules
of resolving sophistry, another beautiful title, right?
The sophistry they were thinking about, one of them is how to do this problem.
So in, in modern notation, this is the one half AT squared, which you may or may not remember
from school.
If you don't, don't worry about it.
We won't get into the details.
The point is, if you don't have constant speed, you don't have to compute the area of a rectangle,
which you need to come compute instead, it's the area of a triangle, right?
That kind of makes sense.
You have speed that changes constantly.
So in this diagram, which is kind of interesting, 1335, these guys were drawing diagrams like
this to reason out what must be the area.
They were almost doing integral calculus, almost, but of course we had to wait a very
long time before we get there, 300, 300 more years.
So matonians in the audience, you can share.
So this is, but that's pretty much it, you know, it, it, it was pretty much dark ages
except a few of these sporadic schools of mathematics.
And then we have to wait all the way to post renaissance for something dramatic to happen,
right?
Because what I, what, what have I talked about?
I've talked about the Greek geometry of Euclid, right?
And the algebra of the Arabic world.
Well, it's natural to like, let's put the two together, right?
Let's marry them.
And this gentleman did.
René Descartes, the guy of Cogito Egossum, a philosopher, introduced this marriage of
algebra with geometry.
Now it was called analytic geometry.
You might wonder why it's not called algebraic geometry.
I don't know.
That's a good answer.
That's a good question.
I, I work in the field of algebraic geometry, but that had to wait much, much, much later
for this field to mature.
But somehow this marriage of Greek geometry with Arabic algebra became known as analytic
geometry because it kind of, you're using sort of tools of analysis to, to understand
what geometrical shape is, right?
So what did Descartes do to Euclid?
He put a grid on it.
It seems so trivial, right?
But all the great ideas seem trivial.
So well, let's see, right?
So I told you about, you know, the five axioms that I keep on going back to, right?
It's about the study of shapes of these Euclidean, of the Euclidean plane.
Well, Descartes put a grid system on it, all right, fine.
So, you know, this is a very distinguished point, the origin.
And there's a point here.
I mean, this is like, this is how we navigate.
Like if you're, well, certainly not in this country because there's no straight lines
in this country.
But like if you go to, if you go to New York, right, all the streets are gridded like this,
right?
That's a fine.
I mean, the coordinate system of London is, God knows what it is.
It's a very straight line.
I'll get there, actually.
Well, I might get there.
But anyhow, so this point is five comma two because you've gone through five times here
and two, you know, two up, right?
And this point is minus three and minus four, so that's all good, right?
Oh, by the way, I love these old names.
The x-axis used to be called the abscissa, and the y-axis used to be called the ordinate.
I still use this, and I'll get away with the editors on that one, but this is a tribute
to Descartes.
So suddenly, the Euclidean plane becomes the Cartesian plane.
Why Cartesian?
Because the Latin for Renate Descartes is Renato Descartes, so the cartes, of the cards.
So Cartes becomes Cartesian.
Okay, if you say, okay, fine.
I've just made a grid system.
What's the big deal?
Okay.
So I've lied to you.
I'm going to give you a second proof.
Let's revisit our theorem, which says that the internal angles of a triangle sum to a
half of a revolution, okay?
So how are we going to prove this using the rules of algebra, okay?
In particular, using the rules of analytic geometry of Descartes.
Well, first of all, I can draw a pretty random triangle.
I can put, without loss of generality, I love this word, vlog, and put a q here, q0, that's
one of the vertices, 0s in one of these, and minus p0 here.
I can do that because Descartes told us, we've made this grid system, right?
That's okay.
Now the proof of this fact is this one line.
Well, okay.
This is a bit of a joke.
I mean, nobody's going to prove this theorem using this, right?
You can't do it.
I mean, this is really like killing an ant with an elephant gun.
You can't really use this very sophisticated, so if you want to use the inverse cotangent
of the tangent function, I remember that this, this, blah, blah, blah, blah, okay, whatever.
I'm not going to bore you with it.
I promise I'll give you one proof, but I'm not going to go into the details.
I always would be here all day.
But the point is the following, the geometry is gone, right?
I can now prove this statement using only symbols, and that's the power of algebra, okay?
And in particular, that is the power of analytic geometry, because I've translated the properties
of the geometrical properties of triangles and shapes of triangles to the analytic properties
of the function, which we call tangent and cotangents.
This is extremely useful because we evolved as three-dimensional beings.
We can't visualize beyond three dimensions or two dimensions, right?
So if you want to go beyond anything more than three dimensions, algebra will have to
come in.
And this branch that I work in, which is algebraic geometry, is exactly that.
I can use the rules of algebra like this to derive statements about geometry.
Totally cool, right?
So that's why Descartes is so, so nice.
So that's where, there we go.
So the proof isn't one line, because this is a joke that, you know, you don't really
need to make something this sophisticated to prove this theorem.
But hey, you know, but theorems have multiple proofs.
That's not a problem.
Okay?
We go on, right?
So Descartes marries east and west and creates this new analytic geometry.
But 100 years later, 50 to 100 years later, come these two gentlemen who put something
else into this analytic geometry, and that is calculus.
So what is calculus?
It's analytic geometry plus infinity.
The idea of the infinitesimal.
You guys should be very proud, because this guy is a Londoner, in Londoners here.
But I must emphasize that calculus was not just invented by Newton, but it was co-invented
independently by the German Gottfried Leibniz.
I'm very excited about Leibniz, because my PhD supervisor, which I think in the audience,
my old PhD supervisors, PhD supervisors, PhD supervisors, PhD supervisors, 23 generations
back was Gottfried Leibniz.
So that makes it for 22.
Well, to Leibniz.
So I have no claim to Newton, sadly, but Leibniz, hey, it's not too bad.
So it's like looking at a picture of my great, great, great, great, great grandfather, intellectually.
So we mathematicians, we're completely obsessed with genealogy.
There's actually, the only reason I know this is because there's a website.
You type in your thesis and your dissertation year, and it tracks every single one all the
way to like John of Constantinople in like 10.
So I think he's the earliest one.
But then you see, what's interesting, you can trace it up to John of Constantinople,
some dude, who is this guy?
And then before that, it's gone, because it's just, we don't have that tracking anymore.
It would be a very, very interesting piece of history to be able to track beyond John
of Constantinople.
Oh, sorry, yeah, I'm back to Euclid if possible, but we don't have that information.
So this is a piece of data that I beg people to provide me with and be fantastic.
In any case, grandpapa, Leibniz, and Newton did something else to Descartes.
They added the concept of the infinitesimal.
And that is truly remarkable.
So what is calculus?
It's the Cartesian analytic geometry, which is itself a marriage of the algebra of the
Arabic world with geometry of the Euclidean world, plus loads and loads and loads of coffee.
So just to illustrate a little bit of what calculus is in this setting.
So here, if you consider a curve like this, some red curve that goes on like this, you
can maybe imagine this is a trajectory of some particle like this or some planet, whatever.
I can pick a point here on the curve and I pick a point of here and I draw the chord
that links these two points.
The slope of that chord will measure the average speed that's taken for the dog or whatever
to travel from here along this curve all the way to here because the slope of this is the
average speed.
That's fine.
That's still analytic geometry.
You can put this in a Cartesian system and you can just literally compute that slope.
That's fine.
Now it gets cool.
I shrink it from this triangle to this one.
Now I consider this chord.
This measures the average speed in a smaller interval.
That's also fine.
Calculus is about taking this process infinitely.
You imagine this triangle getting smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller and the
triangle of course obeying all of the laws of Euclid and then until you can't see it
anymore but the slope of this line and now I'm using the first postulate can be extended,
any line interval can be extended infinitely.
I extend this, sorry, the second postulate, I'm extending this and so imagine this yellow
line to be the slope associated to the infinitesimal triangle which measures the average speed
of this, you know, of your dog.
That's calculus because you've taken a limit, an infinitesimal limit and then this chord,
this yellow one is no longer called a chord, it is called the tangent, right, from the
Latin tengere to touch because it just touches this curve.
But what is this line?
What is it supposed to be?
Well it measures the instantaneous rate of change, right?
That's something that the Greeks didn't have, the Arabs didn't have, that, you know, even
the Merton School almost had it but not quite, right?
But this instantaneous rate of change is extremely important because I mean as far as we know
in the world around us, right, we don't have ticks, right, our time, our passage of time
is not like in intervals, you don't suddenly see me disappear here and here in these intervals.
Everything seems to change smoothly, at least in the Newtonian world, everything changes
smoothly and instantaneously.
So you need that notion of the instantaneous change, right, that's why analytic geometry
of Descartes needed this extra kick by Newton and Leibniz.
Once you have that notion, you can write this book.
Again, you Londoners should be really proud of yourself because I would divide human civilization
to two parts.
It's pre-1687 and post-1687 and because in 1687 was published this great book, Principia
Mathematica Philosophy and Naturalis, the mathematical principles of natural philosophy.
Printed, let's see, I'm almost in the baddest direction, printed about 100 meters that way
in the Burlington house where the old royal society is, it's great.
This book, this book that changed humanity forever.
Why?
Because the marriage of all of that information plus this extra coffee kick espresso of infinitesimal
gave you a new tool and that tool is to understand the infinitesimal rate of change.
And with it, Newton was able to use his laws, what we call Newton's laws, to derive everything,
like I mean everything, right?
The planets around the sun should follow elliptic orbits.
It takes about, I don't know, five pages of derivation from all of these axioms of Euclid
and the analytic geometry of Descartes and the principles of calculus.
So this is why, this is so when we see here, the royal society, tied by the royal society,
which the old house was just right over there.
Well, if you write a book like this, you deserve a tomb like this, for sure.
And I encourage you again, Londoners, to go, who hasn't seen this monument?
Be still in my heart.
It's just Westminster Abbey, it's like 20 minutes that way.
Just go in there, like, just pay your homage.
At the foot of this great monument are two plaques.
One is Paul Dirac, that I'm going to mention later, and Stephen Hawking.
The mathematician's corner to Westminster Abbey.
And I mean, it's huge, it's the size, I mean, it's really the size of this wall.
And deservedly so, because for the first time, really, we can explain all of the natural phenomenon
using the principles of mathematics.
So that's why it's such a wonderful book.
And on the bottom here, there's a great Latin oration, but there's a little couplet by Alexander
Pope, which is very, very touching.
Alexander Pope wrote of Newton, nature, how was it?
Nature and nature's laws lay hidden in the night, and God said, let Newton be, and there
was light.
Great.
That's good as it gets, right?
If I die, somebody will die and I will be awesome.
So try to write a book like that.
So in some sense, Newton answered Galileo's question.
Galileo made this beautiful remark that mathematics is the alphabet with which God had written
the universe.
So that's the alphabet, and Principia was the first book written with that alphabet.
Crystallizing all of, building upon all of that knowledge.
When Newton says I'm standing on the shoulders of giants, he meant all the way from Euclid
to Akarazmi, Galileo, and all this Descartes to be able to build up this idea of calculus
to be able to write this book.
So note that, oh, by the way, Galileo died exactly the year that Newton was born.
I don't have his dates, but Newton was born in 1642, died in 1727.
So that's kind of interesting.
It's just perfect connection, if you believe in reincarnation.
I don't, but hey.
And of course, he didn't stop there, right?
I mean, Newton died in the 1720s, and it didn't stop, right?
Because the, as I said, the center of learning shifted back from the Arabic world to Europe,
and then there was this continuation in mathematics.
So I can't give a talk about geometry without mentioning or analysis or calculus or anything
without mentioning Euler.
So this is what Pierre Simon de la Place, one of the greatest French mathematicians
to the court of Napoleon said to Euler, read Euler, read Euler, he's the master of us
all.
How is, good praise.
So Euler is the most prolific mathematician of all time, he's written thousands and thousands
of papers, every, every one of them a gem, right, you probably know so many theorems of
Euler.
But what Euler really did was to kick up one more notch of this concept of calculus and
analytic geometry.
In this wonderful book, Introduction to the Analysis of the Infinite.
So this is the first analysis textbook.
So again, Euler was standing, I mean, I think we've got a whole stack of people standing
on each other's shoulders, but that's how mathematics works, right, it's this universal
enterprise throughout human history without borders, without anything, just trying to
build up from the axioms and try to build up this beautiful language, and it just so happens
that this is the language of nature.
That didn't have to be the way, but somehow it is, right, that's why Principia is so important.
Here's a bit of a trivia.
Now Leonhard Euler was born in Basel, he's a Swiss-German mathematician.
Where did Euler spend the most of his life?
The answer is actually on this slide, yes, well done.
So he spent most of his life in Russia.
If you look at this, so he's the richest professor of Berlin, and here, Academia Imperialis
Schiantiagrom Petropolitane, St. Petersburg.
So this is very interesting, and it's very fitting and touching for me personally, because
I work for the London Institute for Mathematical Sciences, and we are based behind this wall.
We are the resident mathematicians at the Royal Institution, and Thomas is the director
of this institute.
And this is an institute which just gets academics to do just research.
And recently, of course, because of the tragedies that's happening in Russian Ukraine, we've
gotten funding to 10 fellowships, we've just established 10 fellowships, to get all of
the Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, anybody, any mathematicians who are affected by the
current conflict.
So we have many of them join us right now in this room.
So this is, it's kind of interesting that Euler was hired by Peter and Catherine, the
Empress, to Russia, and it's come full circle that we're now getting the talents from Russia
back into this very building.
So it's very touching.
So to summarize, with Euler, and then, of course, there are loads of other names, I mean
I can't possibly list all of them, there's Euler, Lagrange, Laplace, Hamilton, and so
on and so forth.
What these guys have done is to build upon these pedestals that's been established over
the centuries, and establish what we call the Newtonian world, what's called the classical
universe, the Newtonian mechanical universe.
And that is pretty much, think about this tradition as Principia Plus, right, Principia,
super Principia, this entire tradition over Newton died in 1727, and Euler was late 1700s,
but then this tradition went on and on to give this beautiful crystal clear vision of
the classical understanding of the world.
And that is what we call Newtonian, the Newtonian geometric understanding of the world.
And this world is actually very simple, if you really want to get to the heart of it,
this world of Newton, the classical world that we see around us, is the calculus and
analytic geometry, Cartesian geometry, in R3 cross R, I'm even giving you a cool symbol
to play with.
So what does that mean?
R3, R is the real numbers, so R3 is this coordinate system, okay, that seems pretty reasonable.
We have a Cartesian system, remember, right?
We've gone a little bit beyond Euclid over the past thousand years or so.
So this is called R3 because each axis is a real axis, and that is what we are.
I mean, you know, in this room, I can, I suppose I'm at the origin, I can pinpoint any one
of you with a triplet of coordinates, right, so that's the R3 bit.
And here's the interest in bit, and there is this R, which is time, and this cross is
a direct product, meaning, so what does this symbol mean in mathematics, is that Newtonian
physics is about the motion of R3, which pinpoints every single one of us, in this constant flow
of time, right, so that's what this symbol means, R3 cross R.
If you do analytic Cartesian calculus in R3, going in this constant back flow of R, not
discretized, because we have this infinitesimal, then you can explain everything in a classical
Newtonian world, okay, happy, happy, right, happy, so that is actually quite, I mean,
it's a powerful statement, right, that analytic geometry in this space, this Euclidean space,
explains everything, from the tides of oceans to the motions of the stars, and to the apple
that never fell on Newton's head, right, and you can, I mean, of course, I'm not going
to bore you with the details of such calculation, but that is what our world that we see is,
it is the analytic geometry in R3 cross R, okay, this is a totally cool way to say it,
I mean, I know you can go home and tell your kids about this, your kids can, like, tell
their teachers, we're just doing R3 cross R, this is so awesome, right, meanwhile, geometers
be like, I'm getting this lingo from my kids, I have an eight-year-old who surprisingly
speaks like this, so what were the pure geometers doing, so that was a lot of physics that I've
gone with, it's not a tangent, I promise you, no puns intended, what were the geometers
doing, while this beautiful formulation of classical physics was done by people like
Euler, Hamilton, Lagrange, Laplace, what were the pure geometers doing, well, let's drop
the fifth, that's why I isolated the fifth axiom from the other four, this is kind of
interesting, it's a frightening thing to do, right, because you know, the fifth, remember,
let's go over again, axiom number one, axiom number two, axiom number three, axiom number
four, axiom number five is, hmm, given a line and a point not on a line that uses a unique
parallel, right, is it possible to derive this one from the other four, that's the first
question, because this seems like kind of unnatural, right, people thought about this, and indeed
the Arabic scientists were even thinking about this, so Alhazan, the polymath, and then
Omakayim, the poet, the poet of Urubaikon was working on this problem, is it possible that
Euclid missed something, is it possible to derive the fifth one from the fourth, isn't
it great, wouldn't mathematics be even a more beautiful game if he had four rules, not
five, right, and that troubled people for hundreds and hundreds of years, some of the
brilliant minds were trying to derive this fifth axiom, is it possible that he followed
from the other four by rules of logic, like bucket loads of tears were shed and sweat and
they just couldn't do it? I've got to wait for these guys to say, you can't do it because
it is impossible, and note the name, Likolai Lobachevsky, from the school of St. Peter,
because St. Petersburg, because Euler went there and founded this entire school of mathematics,
so it's kind of, you need to go east again, and Janusz Boljaj, who is a Hungarian mathematician,
these two gentlemen showed that no, you cannot derive the fifth axiom from the other four,
in fact, not only can you not do that, you can even create a system of geometry in which
the fifth can be dropped. That was an intended silence, I'm good, I'm like people like, it's
almost sacred, you're messing around with Euclid, why not, why not? So let's mess around
with Euclid and drop the fifth, well, here's a picture that already violates Euclid, well,
we know what this is, this is the globe, it's where we live on, we know where the north
pole is, and we know where the equator is. You may not have appreciated the fact that
every one of these longitudinal lines is at right angles to the equator, but they all
pass through the north pole, therefore, the fifth axiom is just simply violated in this
picture, right? We have an infinite number of lines which are parallel to each other
through a given point, but it's okay, it's okay, it's okay, we're not doing Euclidean
plane, we're doing it on this really funky shape called a bowl, right? But it's kind
of amazing, right? So you really have to redefine what a line even means now in this new geometry.
A line here, a line in the plane is pretty obvious, right? It's a line in the plane. But
if you do a line on the surface of a bowl, a line, the constant of a line is quite different,
you can't go through the bowl because you're only working on the surface of the bowl, so
you have to stay on the surface and still obey some kind of a definition of what a line
is, so these lines are called geodesics, and these are what we call longitudinal lines,
they are actually called lines, right? Longitudinal lines, but these lines are all parallel to
each other on a path through a single point, okay? So we have violated the fifth, right?
You can't plead the fifth any more, nobody pleads the fifth? So we only start with four
axioms and construct this new axiomatic theory of geometry, and now it's like totally crazy
things start to happen. For example, this theorem is just not true anymore. The theorem
that we spent so much time proving, again and again, using geometry and then algebra,
this is just not true. Here's an example of a triangle, like you fly to the north pole,
you fly down somewhere else, I don't know, here is, I don't know, this is like, I don't
know, London, and then this is probably somewhere in, I don't know, India, maybe? But if you
look at it, the internal sum goes 90 degrees here, 90 degrees here, 90 degrees here. This
triangle in this new geometry has internal angle sum 90 plus 90 plus 90, which is 270,
which is not half of a revolution. But you see the consequences, that's why mathematics
is so fun. You drop one of the axioms, you drop one of the rules, then some crazy stuff
just started to happen. This is crazy. Here's a triangle, which is called a spherical triangle,
which doesn't obey something so simple that you would take for granted. So now we're in
the world of non-nuclidean geometry. And these two guys, Cafeter Gauss, who is, by the way,
he's called the prince of mathematics. So after Euler, so basically, if you think about
all the greats, right, you think about Euclid, Al-Qarazmi, Newton, Euler, Gauss, and Riemann,
I'm pretty much it. And everyone else is just like, you know, Fudno, in an extremist way.
Gauss and Riemann axiomatized this properly, what Lobachevsky and Boliai were doing, this
non-nuclidean geometry, into this new geometry, which is called differential geometry. So
this is called differential because it's a tribute really to calculus. So this is like
analytic geometry plus coffee plus coffee squared, because you have this notion of redefining
what a line is, and redefining what the infinitesimal means on such shapes. And that's something
I work on. Interestingly, by the way, this is an entirely apocryphal story, but it's
so fun, I have to say it. Gauss killed Riemann. Well, at least this is what my differential
geometry professor as an undergraduate told us. And he said with such convincing gusto,
I took it for granted. I think it's a great story. So what happened was Gauss learned
of Lobachevsky and Boliai's things. I was thinking, oh my goodness, let's start to
reformulate geometry. This is after all, this course is on geometry. How far can I go? And
at around about the time, you see that he's much older, right? So Bernard Riemann was
up for his habilitation. So this in the German, in the ancient German system, you got a, when
he become a full chair professor, you have to go through another Viva in front of a committee.
So Riemann, as the tradition goes, you propose three topics, and the committee will select
one and they will examine you on that. So Riemann selected three topics. The first one,
he selected, is actually the zeta function, which led to the Riemann hypothesis, the greatest
open challenge in all of mathematics. That's a different discourse and a whole different
time. I'll tell you all about it. But the second one is something else. And as a sort
of, oh my goodness, I'm kind of running out of ideas. What should I talk about? I don't
know. The foundations of geometry. So he just wrote that as a, as a, like, why not? He's
never going to ask me that. But Gauss, because he was paying attention to Lopachevsky and
Bolyai, and saw the third one, he says, I want this guy to tell me about this. And Riemann
said, holy crap. And Riemann was like, okay, so this is a typical undergraduate feeling,
right? You got your exam tomorrow. I haven't even started reading yet. This course. So
that's what basically Riemann did. So to prepare for his habilitation, he took, and, but it's
an incredible document. It's called On the Great, On the Foundations of Geometry. Re-examining
Euclid in this, in this new way, inspired by Lopachevsky and Franz. And he worked so
hard he got, unfortunately, got tuberculosis and died. Shortly after he got the chair. Of
course he got the chair, but then he died. But at least that's the story. So he, but
he did die of this, of TB, sadly, as many people did at the time. But so in a way, in
a very twisted way, Gauss killed Riemann. One of the great mathematicians killed another
one. What's, what's all this got to do with physics? Got to go back to, right? I mean,
we've taken a bit of a tangent, right? So I've told you about how the triumph of the
classical world building upon the shoulders of, of Principia Mathematica through Euler
and, and, and, and Hamilton and Lagrangian Laplace in this, this understanding of the
classical world of R3 cross R, right? And in parallel, geometers, pure geometers were
just thinking about, what if you start messing around with Euclid, right? How, how far can
you get? Right? This is the beautiful story. This could have been two completely different
lines of thought, right? That's fine. You know, they're unrelated parts of mathematics.
But that's the magic of mathematics, and especially with mathematical physics. No
theorems in mathematics is ever wasted. Something beautiful must show up in this world. You
can probably tell I'm a complete Platonist, but anyhow. So this being the raw institution,
we cannot not mention Faraday, right? So while all of that's happening, you know, the classical
world was done to perfection in, on, on, on this analytic geometry of R3 cross R, um,
micro Faraday, who is the greatest experimentalist of the time, probably of, probably of all
time, in the basement right here, we're mucking around with light. So he was mucking around
with magnets and electricity. He was generating electricity. He just learned about electricity
from Volta, who visited here in 1799. Early, shortly after 1799, and he learned how to
generate electricity. So he was mucking around with electrical magnets. He's a, um, experimentalist,
but he didn't know any math, right? So he got his friend, the Scottish mathematician
James Clark Maxwell, and they kind of meet up, you know, bouncing up great minds. They
met right behind this wall in the rooms where the London Institute now occupies. So it's,
it's a very humbling thing for me to go to work every day. Like, you know, the flood
of tears every, every day is like, Oh my God, it's like, I see the ghost of Faraday and
Maxwell and all these people right, right behind as well. So in, in, in this, in this,
in this great, great space. So what Faraday and Maxwell realized were, um, was light,
that there's an electromagnetic phenomenon called light, where that light is the propagation
of electromagnetic waves. I'm not going to bore you with writing down the equations of,
of, of Maxwell, which, um, Faraday did not understand because he didn't take calculus.
He's apparently already some, some historical bit that, that his knowledge of mathematics
was up to algebra, but not beyond. But so you needed this input of this mathematician
to, to, to make sense of what's happening. Oh, by the way, you can buy t-shirts on this.
Have you seen t-shirts like this? Um, and God said, and then there's this Maxwell's equations
of light and then, uh, let there be light. Can buy, can, it's totally cool t-shirt you
can all buy. I think the R.I. should sell some of these, right? Why not? You know, this
is, this is Faraday and Maxwell, right? But this is what's so bizarre. And, and of course
I'm condensing the huge story here is, um, light does not obey Galilean physics. Light
is not Galilean. So by Galilea, I mean this Newtonian world. Somehow light is very special.
Light is the absolute limit speed. There exists in our cosmos an absolute speed limit. Why,
I don't know, but it just so happens. You cannot exceed this speed limit. But by putting
this speed limit on this gentleman, Einstein, realized that the entirety of Newtonian classical
physics needs to be abandoned. I need to be abandoned in this very beautiful way twice.
Special activity. Remember, I told you what the classical world Newtonian world is. That's
the world of R3 cross R. In this world, you need the concept of the space time continuum.
And in fact, special relativity is the study of R3 comma 1 and not R3 cross R1. I'm not
going to get into the details of what this means, but this comma is, this is Escher's
painting, of course, is exactly with the hyperbolic geometry. Distances are no longer measured
by signs and cosines, but by hyperbolic cosines and hyperbolic signs. So somebody once said
to Oscar Wilde, how was your day? Oscar Wilde said, oh, I did a lot of work. This morning
I put in a comma and in the afternoon I removed it. So in mathematics, a single comma could
mean the whole world as well. And of course, this is the first time and in the second time
Einstein's genius realized not only space and time is the study of a new type of geometry,
of hyperbolic geometry, but matter and gravity and everything there is is in this non-Euclidean
geometry and that is the geometry, the differential geometry of Gauss and Riemann. That's what
general relativity is. So if you want to know more about this, what modern physics is in
terms of a search for everything, I was very honored to be standing in this very spot talking
about this history of how to find this theory of everything. And that was in collaboration
with, of LIMS with the RI. So what modern physics is then, is a geometrization program
of translating everything that we know into this differential geometry of Euler, Gauss
and Riemann. And loads and loads of names, I'm not going to read them all out to you.
But what these guys are doing is to establish a dictionary for the universe. And I, you
know, I feel very honored and privileged to be part of this community. What do we, what
do I do all day? I try to write a dictionary for the universe. So everything on the left
is what we see and everything else on the right is the geometrical understanding, the
axiomatic geometrical understanding where the things are. So I'm not going to bore you
with a lot of these, but you know, everything that you're familiar with, what is light?
Well, light is the connection of a flat U1 bundle. And then you can talk to geometrizers
and that means, that has very precise geometrical meaning. And this dictionary goes on and this
is what modern physics has become. Modern physics has become the answer to Johannes
Kepler's great comment, where there is matter, there is geometry.
So don't listen to me babble on about geometry in this dialogue. I was very privileged to
first write, edit this book with and then for the oldest living Nobel laureate in theoretical
physics, Professor Sien Yang, in which we collected all of the field's medalists and
all the Nobel prizes we can get. There was like, yeah, I'm totally happy. He's a hundred.
Let's write it. And what these guys are talking about in terms of this dialogue, in this geometrization
program of translating the physical reality to the language of geometry. So, I end exactly
on this slide on the spot.
