Thank you very much. Thank you. Thanks for coming tonight.
So, yes, so thanks for introduction and for inviting me to come speak here.
So tonight, what I thought I would do is have a look at an exploration of the universe in which we live.
So tonight, I'd like to just zoom out from the earth to give you a perspective of what the universe looks like on the largest scales in both space and in time.
And then what I'd like to do is put that all together and show you what our model of the universe is and talk a little bit about how we go about building a model of the universe itself.
OK, so I guess the place to start, I think, is our planet, planet earth, which you'll soon see is just a mere speck of dust in the cosmos that exists.
And in fact, it's not just a speck of dust, but the little part of it that we inhabit, the few kilometres in the atmosphere above the earth's surface where we live, is obviously a very, very special place.
Our picture of the earth is a planet that rotates with pictures of it like this, taken by the Copernicus satellite.
It's obviously a very modern way to look at the earth, and it wasn't always like this.
So about 500 years ago, this was the picture of earth that we had.
This is a Waldseymuller map, and it's the first map with all of the continents sort of in the right place.
So back then people knew the world was obviously round, kind of knew where the continents were, where the oceans were, and that sort of thing.
And I would argue that our understanding of the universe as a whole is roughly similar to our understanding of the earth was about 500 years ago.
So we kind of have a picture of where things are. We don't know all of the details.
So moving on to astronomy, I'll just zoom out from our position on earth.
Obviously the most important astrophysical body for us is the sun, which obviously creates the energy that powers all of our lives.
So the sun is about a million times the size of the earth. It's pretty massive.
It's also very dynamic. There's a lot going on in the sun.
At its heart is a fusion reactor, surrounded by essentially a giant plasma with all sorts of crazy stuff going on.
And as you can see on the bottom right picture, where the earth is shown to scale against a close-up image of the sun's surface,
we would drop into the sun with barely a splash.
So we're not the only planet, obviously. We live in a solar system with other planets.
And just a bit of historical perspective, again, it's very easy for us to see ourselves in our solar system.
It's the third rock from the sun going around it with the other planets.
Again, this is a fairly modern perspective in the history of humans to understand that the earth is not the centre of the universe.
And the Copernican revolution that led to the Enlightenment essentially and the scientific revolution,
removing us from the centre of the universe to being just an average place in it, I guess,
was a major part in our understanding of our position in our universe and really the first understanding of cosmology.
So when we look at the night sky, so this is what the sky looks like outside of London if you ever get the chance to go outside,
we see stars everywhere. We see the Milky Way galaxy, which I'll come to in just a minute.
But the stars, if we actually focus on the kind of stars that exist, they exist all over the place.
The Milky Way is full of them. There's about 300 billion stars in the Milky Way.
And our sun is a fairly typical star. It's called the main sequence star,
which means that it's halfway through its life cycle.
It's about five billion years old, and it will live for another five billion years or so,
until it will swell up and become a red giant star like the ones that we see in this bottom graphic.
Stars are not only clustered in galaxies, but within galaxies they can cluster into things called globular clusters,
which is a picture on the top left. It's a sting of many, many thousands of stars in a fairly dense region.
Stars themselves are living dynamic objects. They're born from gas that collapses under gravity,
which we can see in different areas of the Milky Way that we see, so that's what we've zoomed into on the right here.
So stars themselves are living objects with a finite lifetime surrounded by a living solar system in many cases.
Putting everything together that we see in the night sky forms the Milky Way galaxy, which we live.
So here's a picture that an amateur astronomer took travelling all over the world,
piecing together many, many different photos of the night sky,
compressed onto this ellipse to show a whole sphere of where you would see the Milky Way all over the world.
So it's quite spectacular. There's a band of stars across the middle,
implying that the Milky Way itself is kind of a flat disk.
And as I say, it consists of about 300 billion stars, which is a fairly average number of stars for a galaxy.
Andromeda, our nearest neighbour, has about three times as many stars.
And it's kind of massive, so it's about the numbering kilometres is there, it doesn't really make much sense.
So we measure it in light years, the size of it, and it's about 100,000 light years across.
So that is when we look at the far side of the galaxy, the light that was emitted from there
has taken about 100,000 years to get here.
So just for a bit of perspective, that's from around the time when the Andothels were also sharing the planet.
The Milky Way itself, as we learn more and more about it, we zoom into the centre of it.
This is another common feature of galaxies.
When we zoom into the centre of it, it actually is, in the very centre is a supermassive black hole.
I'll come on to black holes a little bit later, but in the very centre is a black hole,
which is about 10 to the 6 million times more massive than our sun,
compressed into an area of about a million kilometres across.
And what we've zoomed into here is a picture taken by the Event Horizon Telescope,
which is a network of radio telescopes around the Earth,
which have created the first ever direct images of a black hole,
and what we see here is a giant accretion disk around it.
So our galaxy then, viewed from the outside, is the cartoon on the right.
It's a barred spiral galaxy, fairly normal kind of galaxy with the sun halfway out on a spiral arm.
It rotates, so it's a dynamic and evolving system itself,
so it rotates every 200 million years or so.
And as we zoom into the centre, there's another graphic made by the European Space Agency,
so people spend their time looking at the stars in the centre of the galaxy,
and then themselves we can actually see them moving on our timescale over years.
So over several years we can see the stars at the centre of the galaxy
moving around the central black hole that exists there.
So there's these two pieces of evidence for this central black hole in the centre of our galaxy,
both a direct image of its accretion disk,
which is essentially just stars which have been churned up and are getting sucked into it,
and the dynamics of the stars moving around it,
both indicate the same sort of mass of black hole in the centre.
And so the simulations that people can do now at the bottom left
is showing simulations of what will happen in the future to a cloud of gas
that's falling in towards that black hole,
so the simulations of what will happen in the coming years in the centre.
So that's our galaxy, that's where we live.
We're still not anywhere near cosmological scales yet.
So still looking at one galaxy, there are all kinds of different galaxies,
there come in many, many different shapes and sizes.
Here's a kind of random selection,
so our Milky Way looks kind of similar to the top central galaxy,
but they come in different types,
and they also come in pairs and triples and colliding galaxies
and all sorts of other things.
So here's some examples of top right, bottom left and bottom right.
We're all examples of galaxies that are in the middle of giant collisions,
and these collisions for galaxies take many hundreds of millions of years to go on.
So in fact, we see galaxies that have undergone collisions or undergoing collisions,
so we see that with the galaxies called the mice in the bottom left picture.
The two galaxies are actually in the process of colliding,
and we can now do simulations of these.
So giant computer simulations of galaxy formation,
so on the left we've got galaxies forming over several billion years of time,
flying through the centre,
and then on the right is what the galaxy looks like today in this simulation.
This is a fairly typical galaxy in a simulation that comes out to be similar to our Milky Way galaxy.
So by studying simulations of galaxies,
we can understand a lot about how galaxies form and how they live.
In fact, the simulations are getting quite sophisticated,
so here's an example of one where instead of looking at the stars in it,
we look at just the gas swirling around the centre,
falling in on itself under the gravitational force,
and then on the bottom right image is a blow-up of the central region
where all the star formation is happening.
So the violence and the rotation of this gas heats up,
stars form under gravitational collapse,
and over the billions of years that this simulation is taking place,
many stars are born in this process.
So understanding galaxies is a whole area of research,
I'm not going to say much more about that.
What I'd like to do is now zoom away from single galaxies
to see how they behave in their neighbourhood.
So this is our local neighbourhood in the universe,
so our local galactic group is highlighted in red.
It's part of a small cluster of galaxies.
We happen to be falling,
gravitationally falling towards the Virgo cluster in the right-hand side of this picture,
forming what's known as the Virgo supercluster of galaxies,
a few million galaxies which are gravitationally bound together.
That's our neck of the woods of the universe.
It's about 50 million light-years to the Virgo cluster.
So the light from then would be emitted at around the time the dinosaurs went extinct
when we look at the Virgo cluster.
That's really our nearest collection of galaxies in our local cosmological neighbourhood.
Now let's zoom out a little bit from that as well and see what we see.
We're now onto the scale of cosmology.
So this is a fly-through of a survey,
the slow and digital sky survey,
sampled a little bit of the sky,
I'll say more about that in a second,
and flying through all of these galaxies,
we see there are just millions of them everywhere.
The scale now, we're genuinely on cosmological scales,
we're into looking at things over the time scale of billions of years,
billions of light-years now.
So the light emitted from these galaxies
was emitted billions of years into the past,
and for reference,
the earth was formed about four and a half billion years ago,
the sun five billion years ago,
life started about three billion years ago,
and the dinosaurs went extinct about 0.1 billion years ago.
So just to put this into context, how far back in time
we're looking at when we look to these distant galaxies.
We can see just from this fly-through here
that they come in all different shapes and sizes, different colours,
many are spiraled like ours,
many are just blobs, elliptical blobs,
some are undergoing collisions and so on.
So just to give a sense of perspective on the scale
of what we're looking at here.
So on a practical level,
what we do as cosmologists is part of what we do anyway,
is to try and make maps of the universe.
In the same way 500 years ago,
people were trying to make a map of the earth,
a map of our local neighbourhood.
These days we try and make a map of our local universe
using galaxy surveys.
So on the top right is a spin around
of the bits of the universe that we've surveyed so far.
So when galaxy surveys happen,
generally a telescope points at the sky,
watches everything come past it
and finds where the galaxies are,
records their angular position
and their distance away from us.
And then from that one can make essentially a map.
And one thing to notice about this map
on the bottom left,
this is a 2DF survey,
this is quite a long time ago now this one,
is you can see that there's some structure
in the way galaxies are distributed.
The bottom left picture is a galaxy that's been observed
and you can see in the distribution
that there's some sort of structure there,
it's not quite random.
So as I say, we're still in the process
of mapping the whole universe.
This is what we've got to so far,
there's a number of satellites going up,
there's a satellite and some ground-based experiments
in the coming years,
which are going to hopefully fill in a lot of the gaps
so that we have a more complete picture
of our universe around us.
So that goes back,
those surveys go back about 5 billion years into the past.
What happens if we try and look further?
Well, here's a beautiful picture
taken by the Hubble Space Telescope
over several years called the Hubble Deep Field.
It's essentially staring at a very dark patch of the sky
with a very long exposure photograph essentially,
which we've got to fly through simulation of here.
Obviously it doesn't see this.
But it was able to see roughly 10 billion years into the past.
So looking at galaxies that emitted like 10 billion years ago,
way before our galaxy was even forming.
So it seems like there are just galaxies absolutely everywhere.
Everywhere we look, there are just galaxies upon galaxies upon galaxies.
There's thought to be about 1 to 2 trillion galaxies
in our observable universe,
which of course we've only measured a small fraction of so far.
So, what might the universe look like if we could see all of it?
Well, here's the result of a computer simulation,
a millennium simulation,
which reveals what we think the large-scale distribution of matter
will look like of galaxies.
So in this image, this is a simulation
of what's called a dark matter simulation,
where each point of light roughly is going to represent
where there will be some galaxies,
and where you can see particularly bright spots
in there would be clusters of galaxies,
like our Virgo supercluster, for example.
We can see that they're scattered about non-randomly.
It's not a random scattering
where the way galaxies are distributed.
And it's named a cosmic web
because it looks like just a large network of galaxies.
So superclusters are very bright spots
joined by filamentary structures
and very empty regions known as cosmic voids.
So this simulation
is roughly 2 billion light-years across, roughly speaking.
It's not as we would see the universe.
We'll never see the universe like this.
Because light takes time to travel to us,
we can never look at a patch of it all at once, if you like.
So it's completely inaccessible to us,
just because the light travels to us at a finite speed.
So this is what we think the universe looks like
if we could imagine it being able to see it all at once.
We can imagine it in computer simulations.
I'll say a bit more about that later.
But for the moment, let's continue our exploration of the universe
and say what happens if we try and look further than Hubble did,
further than the Hubble Deep Field was able to measure.
Do we just keep seeing more and more and more galaxies
ever into the distant past, or does something else appear?
Well, this is what the universe looks like
as far as we will ever be able to see it.
I'll explain why later.
So if we look 13.5 billion light-years away,
the universe changes completely
from what we've seen from Hubble, where there's lots of galaxies.
It becomes completely smooth.
There's virtually no structure of any kind.
So galaxies disappear,
and in fact, 13.5 billion light-years away,
the universe was completely smooth and just pure radiation.
And what we see on this picture is that radiation,
the radiation that comes to us today,
it's 2.725 degrees Kelvin,
with the last decimal place on that fluctuating over the sky.
So in every direction we look,
we can see this microwave background radiation
of 2.725 degrees Kelvin.
The next decimal place is a fluctuation,
which is plotted on this sphere.
And that temperature fluctuation,
we'll see, tells us an awful lot of information
about the Big Bang and actually late-time structure as well.
The universe then was very, very smooth,
13.5 billion years ago,
and 10 billion years ago,
it had loads and loads of galaxies in it.
And today, of course,
we know that it has gazillions of galaxies
forming this kind of cosmic web of structure.
So let's just put everything in place.
So this next slide zooms out from our location
with kind of galaxies put in their right position
from what we've seen.
So let's just go through that zooming out from us.
With galaxies that have been observed in the right place,
in a three-dimensional sense.
So in a short second, this is going to spin around,
and then we'll see just the very narrow slices of the universe
we've been able to survey so far.
So galaxy surveys work by targeting patches of the sky
where the Milky Way is particularly dark,
because we've got to see far beyond the Milky Way
to see these galaxies.
And essentially just mapping out in thin slices
where all the galaxies that we can see are.
So as we spin around,
you can see that there's relatively few slices that have been done.
There's quite a lot to fill in in this picture.
And then as we zoom out further from our position,
we're also zooming backwards into time here.
And zooming further out,
we get to this cosmic microwave background,
which you can imagine is a giant sphere around us in some sense,
in the sense that we have put our observations together in this way.
And so that's kind of the current state
of what we know about where stuff is in the universe.
So there's a little bit more to it, obviously.
And we come now to the next part of what we know about the universe,
which is that it's expanding.
So this is where modern cosmology really began about 100 years ago
with Edwin Hubble and George Lemaitre,
shown here in the two pictures at the top left.
And what they did was they were just studying galaxies,
so they were measuring galaxies' positions and their velocities.
So measuring their positions and velocities,
a natural thing to do is make a graph of that,
of the position of a galaxy and its velocity.
So a galaxy velocity,
you would think if it's moving towards us or away from us,
it would be fairly random.
But in fact what they found was actually there's a systematic trend
that the further away a galaxy is from us,
the faster it was moving away from us.
And so on this plot on the right,
where we have distance plotted horizontally
and velocity plotted vertically,
we can see the straight line roughly going through all of these data points
is telling us that the further away a galaxy is,
the faster it's receding from us.
So the implications of this are quite profound.
It means that the universe is expanding around us.
And because we assume that we're not at a special place in the universe,
we can assume that the universe is expanding for all other observers as well.
So an analogy that's commonly used is if you imagine a balloon being blown up
and dots drawn on it,
those dots are moving away from each other at the same rate.
So any dot will see all the other dots moving away from its particular position.
So this very important fact that the universe is expanding today
means that as we go backwards into the past,
all of the pictures that we saw going backwards into the past,
the universe was not only younger,
but it was also smaller as well.
So when we observe the past,
if we look billions of light-years into the past
or billions of light-years away from us,
it means billions of years into the past,
the universe was a lot smaller.
And if we look all the way to the cosmic microwave background for reference,
the furthest we can see,
so 13.5 billion years ago,
the universe was about one-thousandth of its size.
So it's something that was a kilometre,
or, let's say, something that was one metre at that time,
we now have expanded to be a kilometre in size.
So that's the last key piece of information that we need, really,
before we can start building a model of the universe
to understand how it came to be like that
and why there is structure on all of these different scales.
So before I get to how we go about building a model,
I thought I would just run through a kind of timeline
of the universe's evolution.
So in this cartoon,
we have 13.7 billion years of evolution,
with the horizontal direction being time from the Big Bang.
It went through different phases,
a phase called inflation, which I'll mention a bit more later.
Then we have this cosmic microwave background
that was formed when the universe was about 380,000 years old.
So very early on in the universe's history, this was formed.
The universe was very, very smooth at this time,
with these tiny fluctuations in the temperature.
Over time, those fluctuations grew under gravity
to form the first galaxies, the first stars.
That essentially started the kind of universe that we see today,
with lots of stars, planets and so on.
Then over 13 billion years of evolution,
more and more stars basically were formed.
There's obviously quite a lot that goes into that model.
Let me just put it into words.
So we start with a Big Bang, some sort of Big Bang,
which is when the universe underwent an inflationary period.
During that time, quantum fluctuations in the infoton field
seeded all of the structure.
So the tiny fluctuations that we observe in the cosmic microwave background
are essentially a blow-up of the quantum fluctuations
that happened during the Big Bang.
It went through then two kind of phases.
It went through a radiation era for the first few hundred thousand years,
where radiation was a dominant gravitational component.
The universe then was just a plasma,
essentially of protons, electrons and radiation.
It ended with the cosmic microwave background formation.
I'll say a bit more about that later.
It's just to put things in a kind of timeline
to understand what's coming.
It then went through a matter era, where galaxies and things formed.
It seems to be today transitioning to a dark energy-dominated era,
where the expansion rate of the universe is actually not slowing down,
but speeding up.
I'll come to each of these things in turn,
but let's just briefly start with how we go about finding out this information.
We started from looking at the universe and saying where everything is.
In the parlance of young people on Love Island,
they might be like, well, it is what it is,
but we maybe want to try and do a bit better than that
with scientific method,
which is to come up with ideas about why it might be like this.
We then test those ideas by confronting them with the data that we've observed.
For example, in cosmology,
can we make a prediction from our model about the distribution of galaxies?
Can we make a prediction from the model
about what the cosmic microwave background is going to look like, for example?
In reality, of course, the scientific method is a long-running argument
with people with competing theories, competing observations,
trying to sort out what is actually reality.
In fact, in cosmology,
there's been a long-running argument
about what the actual expansion rate of the universe is today.
People haven't been able to agree on this for the last 60 years or so,
and everybody converges onto their own separate answers.
That's the way we go about it.
We start from observations that we just take for granted,
come up with theories, argue about it,
and try and come to some sort of scientific consensus
about what's really going on.
How do we go about modelling the universe?
The first thing is to identify what the most important force
acting on cosmological scales is,
and the most important force once we zoom out to galactic scales is gravity.
The universe is neutral,
electromagnetism only plays a very minor role.
The main force that's going on is gravity,
and things falling in on themselves under gravity.
How do we go about that?
We use Einstein's theory of gravity.
Einstein came up with a theory of gravity in about 1915,
known as the General Theory of Relativity.
The equations for it are in the bottom corner.
It envisages gravity not as a force,
so the Newtonian picture of gravity is that there is a force
pushing us down onto the floor right now.
There is a force attracting the earth to the sun,
the moon to the earth,
and everything in the galaxy to each other.
Einstein's theory completely does away with that picture
and reimagines it as space-time itself being curved,
a curved manifold in which we all live,
and objects falling on that curved manifold
on effectively straight lines.
There's quite a lot to take in,
but a good analogy that's often used
is if you imagine you're an ant walking on the surface of an apple,
just because you're an ant,
you don't know that an apple is a curved surface.
Two ants walking from the equator up to the core
would find themselves walking towards each other,
even though both of them are walking along straight lines in their minds.
Whatever minds that they have,
but they might interpret that as being dragged together
through a force of nature that they don't quite understand.
As they move around the core of the apple,
they might interpret that as a peculiar force,
doing all sorts of very strange things,
when, in fact, we can see that they're just ants
walking on a curved surface.
The imagining of space-time that Einstein came up with
was to imagine that space-time is curved in a similar way,
and that objects like the Earth are freely falling on this space-time.
The key thing for us when thinking about cosmology
is that it allows for a dynamic and expanding universe,
and it gives us a framework in which to build a model of the whole cosmos.
So what does it look like?
Well, these are Einstein's field equations.
Obviously a bit complicated to try and understand.
You need to do a physics degree to get the hang of these.
Essentially, there are equations that balance
the energy density of all the matter in the universe on the right-hand side.
Take everything, churn it all up,
shove it into the equation on the right-hand side.
The left-hand side represents a space-time geometry
that reacts to the matter in it.
So, as we move around this room,
the space-time curvature reacts to our mass
and the energy contained within us.
Obviously a very, very tiny amount for objects tiny like ours,
but for objects the size of the sun, solar system, the galaxy,
it becomes quite a significant space-time curvature that changes.
So, general relativity has very important predictions,
which confronting with observations has led us to believe
that it is genuinely correct or nearly correct theory of nature.
So, some of its predictions are that space-time bends
and it moves under motions of mass.
So, the conventional picture is kind of on the bottom right.
Imagine a rubber sheet with some heavy balls on it.
That's kind of the same sort of idea.
The rubber sheet will change in reaction to the weight of the balls.
The 3D picture is more like the mesh shown on the left.
In order to realise this as a force,
objects travelling on that curved space-time
travel on a curved path,
which is actually a straight path,
or the shortest possible path in space-time.
So, our earth falling round the sun in free fall
is actually travelling on the shortest possible path in space-time,
given that the sun is there, curving space-time around it.
So, that's kind of the picture for massive objects.
A really important prediction from Einstein's theory,
which was later observed by Eddington,
shown here in the bottom,
was that light itself is also bent by a gravitational field.
So, this is a big divergence from Newtonian gravity,
which doesn't have this prediction.
For example, in fact, the experiment that Eddington did
was that stars that are just behind the sun,
or just near the sun's position on the sky,
will actually have the light deflected
by the gravitational field of the sun,
the space-time curvature around it,
and the star will actually move its position
when the sun moves around it.
So, this was observed in 1919 or so,
verifying Einstein's theory,
and actually made Einstein a bit of a star at the time.
So, that's one key prediction that light
is deflected by a gravitational field,
and in fact, when we go back to cosmological scales,
it gives us a phenomenon known as gravitational lensing.
So, gravitational lensing is kind of the collective process of this
by large objects such as clusters of galaxies.
So, the top two images here
are images taken by telescope, Hubble,
and the James Webb Space Telescope.
And what we can see is, in the centre of these images
is cluster of galaxies,
and then the galaxies behind that cluster
have actually had their light completely distorted
by the sheer gravitational mass
of that cluster in the middle.
And so, on the bottom right is a simulation of a cluster
moving past a distant star field
and seeing a distant galaxy field, sorry,
and the shape of those galaxies getting distorted
by the mass of the cluster in front.
So, this is another important prediction of Einstein's theory,
and as we can see in the top right,
it creates all sorts of weird effects
of galaxies being stretched out in funny ways.
Another prediction of Einstein's theory
that was developed over many years
was the prediction that black holes must exist.
If objects are sufficiently massive
and start collapsing under their own mass,
it's been proven that there is no way to stop that collapse
all the way down to a singular point.
So, this was predictions by Roger Penrose
and Stephen Hawking back in the 60s,
essentially asserting that black holes have to exist
if Einstein's theory is correct.
So, if sufficiently massive star dies,
the pressure can no longer keep it up
against its gravitational mass,
and it starts collapsing and nothing can stop it
till it gets to a singular point.
These objects are surrounded by what's called an event horizon.
The gravitational field of these objects,
as you approach the singularity,
gets so strong that light can't get away from it, basically.
So, you can go in, but you can never come out again.
The point at which, at the point of no return,
is the event horizon for that object,
and that's known as a black hole.
These things come in all sorts of different sizes
from roughly about the mass of our Sun,
all the way up to ones found in the centre of galaxies,
which are about a million to a billion times the mass of our Sun.
And so, they're gobbling up all sorts of stuff,
shown in the simulation,
and observed by the event horizon telescope
in those two top circular images.
These are actual images made of black holes that we observe.
The top left one is from our centre of our galaxy.
The other one is from the centre of Andromeda.
So, these are quite amazing observations
that have been made just in the last few years.
So, the final prediction of Einstein's theory
is of gravitational waves.
The gravitational field is no longer
a kind of static forces kind of thing,
but actually a dynamic manifold in which things happen.
When two black holes meet each other
and start to spiral around each other
and collide together, shown in the simulation,
they release huge amounts of gravitational radiation.
Essentially, the spacetime responding to those objects moving
radiates that information outwards
and contains enormous amounts of energy in doing so.
In the top right, this kind of creepy picture
moving about, is showing how the actual wave travels
through spacetime.
So, if it comes towards you,
it would make your head oscillate in opposing ways.
And in fact, gravitational waves have now been detected
the first time a few years ago
by the LIGO Observatory.
This is a picture of Virgo in Italy,
which is part of the network of gravitational detectors
that are being built around the Earth.
And so, what they've been able to observe
is kind of the following situation.
So, this is a simulation of two black holes
that were thought to have been observed by LIGO.
They spin around each other.
Shown against a star field,
we can see the spacetime curvature is so strong
shaking the stars behind these two black holes
as they spiral in towards each other.
They're both about 30 solar masses of very, very large black holes,
and yet they're only a few kilometres across.
So, a few kilometres across with a mass of 30 or 40 suns each.
And as they spiral in together,
they emit gravitational radiation,
which you can see is a shaking of the star field behind it.
So, in this simulation, it's slowed down massively,
and in fact, this happened over a period of less than a second.
So, what they observed was two separate detections
in different parts of America,
where they have these two detectors,
indicating that they had found the first black hole merger
and really solidifying Einstein's theory
as a correct theory of gravity.
So, a really impressive achievement
and a gravitational wave binaries
as they're called are being observed all the time now.
Okay, so let's get back to cosmology.
Let's see how we can go about using the fact
that we now have a gravity theory that we can trust
to build a model of the universe
and understand the large-scale dynamics of the universe itself.
So, a simple question is, the universe is expanding.
How fast is it expanding? How long has it been expanding for?
Well, let's go back to Einstein's equations.
We're balancing the energy density of matter on one side,
the dynamics of the spacetime curvature on the other side,
and what this means is we need to know what's in the universe,
what the proportions of the cosmic stuff in the universe matters.
So, what is in the universe?
Well, putting everything together,
you can have a pie chart of stuff in the universe,
if you like, if you mashed everything up
and worked out its energy density.
The surprising thing about this picture
is the proportion of heavy elements.
So, that is everything that we know in our world
makes up the tiniest fraction of a percent
of all the stuff in the universe.
So, elements heavier than helium
form basically no energy content to the universe.
So, we're really very insignificant part of it.
Next comes stars.
Stars, you would think, make up most of the mass.
In fact, they don't.
They make up about half a percent of the mass of stuff in the universe.
Next up is free hydrogen and helium,
which has actually been left over from the Big Bang
and hasn't yet collapsed into stars,
but yet could in the future.
That makes up about 5% of the energy density
of stuff in the universe.
And the rest is made up of things that we don't know what it is.
One component is called dark matter.
Another component is called dark energy.
Dark matter, we have a fairly good idea
of kind of what it's like.
Dark energy, less so.
Let me just go through pieces of evidence for both of these
to persuade you that we're not completely crazy.
Dark matter, evidence for dark matter
comes in many different forms.
The first discovery really was from the way galaxies rotate.
So, we saw in the simulations of galaxies rotating
over the course of hundreds of millions of years.
We can measure that rotation quite accurately
in galaxies in our neighbourhood.
The expected way that they rotate
if they just contain the stellar matter that we see
is shown in their yellow curve,
but the observed way they rotate
is shown in the green curve.
What this suggests is that galaxies themselves
don't just consist of what we can see in them,
that is, the stars,
but actually as they live in a halo of dark matter
which is larger than the galaxy itself.
The galaxy that we see actually extends much further
but with material which is completely dark.
We also see dark matter in gravitational lensing.
So, this is an important picture
of one of the first gravitational lensing events
by a cluster that was taken.
So, the arcs that you can see in that image
are the lensed image.
The central part contains a large cluster of galaxies.
By examining the arcs and the bending
of the galaxies in the background,
one can work at the mass of the cluster.
The mass of the cluster from gravitational lensing,
which is purely gravitational effect,
does not equal the mass of all of the visible matter
in that system.
This is true for clusters all over the universe that we see.
This is another piece of evidence
of why we think dark matter exists
on the scale of clusters.
So, another piece of evidence later.
Dark energy is much more mysterious.
It shows up in the very large scale dynamics of the universe
and it shows up because it seems to be making
the expansion rate of the universe accelerate
rather than decelerate.
If you imagine if you take a bunch of galaxies,
send them flying apart,
their combined gravitational attraction,
you would imagine,
would slow down that expansion over time.
In fact, it seems that the expansion of those galaxies
moving apart is getting faster over time
and not slower.
This has been going on for the last five or six billion years
in the universe's history.
Dark energy is very peculiar.
It acts in an anti-gravity way.
It doesn't work in the normal way we think gravity works.
It also has very strange properties like
if you compress it, it doesn't get any more dense.
So, it's a very peculiar kind of thing.
Again, we have lots of separate pieces of evidence for it.
One of the first was measuring supernova.
So, supernova are special types of exploding stars
that we can see to very large distances
and we have a good idea of how bright they are
so we can work out how far away they are.
And continuing Hubble's diagram further
allows us to see kind of the expansion rate
of the universe over time.
So, this key piece of information
actually led to the Nobel Prize a few years ago
for understanding that the universe's expansion rate
is accelerating over time.
And so, there's a lot of effort underway
to kind of keep observing these exploding stars
known as supernova.
So, now that we know what's in the universe,
the composition of the cosmos, dark energy, dark matter,
a little bit of all the other stuff that we actually understand,
we can put all that together into Einstein's equations,
solve them and work out the dynamics of the universe over time.
So, pictured here is what's known as the relative scale
of the universe relative today.
So, as we go backwards in time,
the universe is getting smaller, going backwards in time.
How fast is it getting smaller?
And at what point did that contraction reach zero size?
So, these curves on here show us different universe models
for different amounts of these different cosmic materials
that go into making up a model.
And you can see you can have universes
which do all sorts of things,
we collapse upon themselves, expand forever,
the expansion rate getting faster and faster.
Our curve is the one that's kind of green,
just a transition between orange and blue on the background,
implying that there's a big bang singularity
about 13 billion years into the past.
So, this is a very large scale simplified model of the universe,
smoothing everything out in it, just what is the expansion dynamics,
how old is the universe,
will it expand faster into the future,
which is what we think it is.
So, if we understand how the overall dynamics work,
can we explain this cosmic web of galaxies that we see?
And can we explain the cosmic microwave background
kind of at the same time, because they're sort of related to each other?
This cosmic web is known as large scale structure in the universe,
how does this large scale structure evolve?
So, the seeds of structure were laid down during inflation,
kind of initial conditions.
Big bang set off this quantum fluctuations
which exploded up to classical scales.
So, that's a little bit speculative that area,
but seems to be the case.
So, the early universe was radiation dominated until about 380,000 years
after the big bang that went through a matter dominated era.
During the radiation era, the universe,
the stuff in the universe oscillated.
You can actually picture it a little bit like the interior to the sun,
mostly hydrogen, a little bit of helium,
with sound waves propagating through it,
and gravity acting upon those.
Essentially, what happened is over dense regions collapse into galaxies,
and the material that led to their collapse
comes from these void-like regions at late times.
And so, at a very simplified level,
that's really all that's happening,
is slight over densities at early times
just get heavier and heavier and gravitationally collapse
at the expense of the slightly under dense regions.
Obviously, there's a bit more to it to that.
So, let's look at the radiation era.
The radiation era was relatively simple.
The universe was incredibly smooth.
Because it's smooth, it's actually really easy to model
for a physics point of view.
So, the physics of what was going on at this early time,
less than 300,000 years or so, after the big bang,
we just have a soup of photons, mainly radiation,
matter particles, protons, and electrons.
The universe is very hot, it's above 3,000 degrees Kelvin.
It's much, much smaller than it is today.
And because it's above 3,000 degrees Kelvin,
that's the ionisation temperature of hydrogen,
means that there are no atoms.
The protons, electrons are free,
bouncing around in a big plasma, just like in the sun.
This also means that the photons are trapped in that plasma,
not free stream, they bounce off charged particles.
And so, that's kind of what's going on in the early universe.
There are sound waves propagating,
and those sound waves are oscillations in the plasma,
and the dark matter particles respond to the gravitational pull
of those oscillations, even though the dark matter itself
doesn't interact directly with the protons and electrons
and photons electromagnetically.
So, those are dragged by gravity.
And we actually observe the end of the radiation
in the cosmic microwave background.
So, what happened then is as the universe is expanding,
it's cooling down all the time.
If you take a gas, you expand it, it cools down.
So, as it cooled down below 3,000 degrees Kelvin,
the ionisation temperature of hydrogen,
suddenly, all across the universe,
protons and electrons combine together to form neutral hydrogen.
Neutral hydrogen no longer scatters photons,
so the photons were free then to free stream.
The universe, all of a sudden, almost instantaneously across the universe,
went from completely opaque to completely clear.
And one way to think about how we can now see
that cosmic microwave background,
those photons free, able to free stream 13.5 billion years
till today, we can actually observe them,
is a bit like when we look at a cloud.
Inside a cloud, photons are bouncing around
of all the water molecules.
Photon gets to the edge of a cloud,
and it can free stream towards our eyes.
And so, we perceive it as a surface.
And so, a very similar kind of physical process is going on
when the university's temperature cools below 3,000 Kelvin.
So, it releases in the cosmic microwave background.
And here, on the bottom right,
is the map of the cosmic microwave background
made by the Planck satellite, shown in the bottom left.
And it's a whole sky, but compressed into an ellipse,
so we can see it on one picture.
The fluctuations on this map are one part in 10 to the five.
So, it's an incredibly smooth surface,
much smoother than the smoothest billiabol you'd find, for example.
And when we take a mathematical transformation of that,
we show the graph on the top left.
Now, when we look at the map,
you can see that the red spots representing slightly warmer regions
and blue bits representing slightly cooler regions
are kind of the same size all over that map.
And you can see by eye
there's a kind of characteristic scale in that map.
When we do a mathematical transform of it,
see, the big peak in the middle of that transform, the function,
represents those scales we can see at about a degree scale on the sky.
So, about that size on the sky.
It's a characteristic scale in that map.
And so, that characteristic scale
actually tells us an awful lot of information
about how the universe was at those early times.
So, it tells us, firstly, the shape of the universe,
whether it was curved or not, seems to be flat.
It tells us the age of the universe.
It tells us proportions of dark matter to hydrogen to helium.
So, if you vary all of these in the models that we make of the early universe,
it changes the way this cosmic microwave background looks.
And one can just do a best fit analysis
to see what it kind of looks like.
And it also contains information about what happened in the Big Bang.
So, there's huge amounts of information that we've been able to get
in this map of the very early universe in this cosmic microwave background.
And so, how do we get from that to this cosmic web?
Well, one can do some work analytically.
Typically, it has to be done in simulations.
So, simulations look something like this.
Take a box, factor out the universe's expansion,
give it the initial condition to the cosmic microwave background,
watch everything collapse.
And when you watch everything collapse,
you'll see that gravity does all of the work for us.
And the simulation just shows us this.
It produces a cosmic web just because that's the way it is.
And so, we can then take the results of those simulations
and then compare them with the galaxy surveys that we measure.
So, here's an example where in blue, I think,
is real universe maps that are made.
Red are analogous things which are made purely from simulations.
And one can try and match the statistics of those two things
and decide which model fits the observations best.
And so, by looking at structure in all of these different scales,
one can work out what's called the power spectrum of density fluctuations.
So, essentially, these functions encode the statistics in the cosmic web
that we can see by eye.
It's difficult to see by eye the differences that come from all of these changes.
But in mathematical functions, we can do it.
And so, these simulations become quite sophisticated.
The previous one was just dark matter simulation,
just throw away all the actual stuff that we think is important.
But modern simulations can now model the gas in these,
the hydrogen and helium, star formation rates,
watching things explode as things go on and so on.
And they become quite sophisticated on these small scales.
So, on the left is a dark matter.
On the right is all the gas, which is hydrogen, helium,
making stars and things exploding.
So, dark matter is absolutely crucial for this picture of structure formation.
It's the final piece of the puzzle.
So, it's not just gravitational lensing,
not just rotations of galaxies.
It's the whole shebang, the whole distribution of the cosmic web,
the cosmic microwave background,
that requires dark matter for the model to work.
But we still have very little idea of what dark matter itself is,
because we only interact with it gravitationally,
which means it's very hard to discern what it might be made of.
There's obviously a lot of work underway
trying to understand its particle nature,
how it interacts with what's called the standard model of particle physics,
which is everything that we know that we see around us.
Dark energy is also an important part of this model,
because we measure the expansion rate speeding up.
But we really don't know what this is.
It's actually contained in Einstein's field equation,
through what he called the cosmological constant.
So, in his field equation there are unknown constants,
speed of light, which we can measure,
gravitational constant g, which obviously we can measure.
But there's another one called the cosmological constant,
which is there by the nature of his field equations.
It's mathematically allowed,
but we can't measure it on day-to-day scales.
We can only measure it on cosmological scales.
Seems to be there, seems to be non-zero,
but it doesn't have a satisfactory fundamental explanation for it.
So, a lot of work is underway to try and determine
if the cosmological constant is constant,
or if it's evolving.
Or perhaps Einstein's theory is not the correct theory
to be using on the very, very larger scales.
Perhaps a modified theory of gravity is required.
So, one way to determine it
is actually in the large-scale distribution of galaxies,
the characteristic scale that we saw in the cosmic microwave background,
those hotspots and cold spots which looked about one degree across,
that characteristic scale is preserved
as we evolve further into the future, into the cosmic web.
So, the cosmic web picks up that same scale,
and by comparing that scale at late times and early times,
one can understand, through quite a lot of work,
whether the dark energy itself is evolving or not.
Is it a cosmological constant,
or is it something even more strange?
So, just a picture of what dark energy constraints look like.
So, this is the sort of stuff you get in scientific papers about this.
One tries to parameterise dark energy,
say it's evolving, what might it be evolving by,
parameterise that by saying,
giving it some functional form,
and then constrain those parameters with observations.
And a key goal is to determine
whether it's a cosmological constant or not,
and then one produces error bars on that, et cetera, et cetera,
can say with certain confidence
that it's certainly not doing something else.
So, another aspect of this model,
which seems to be also peculiar,
but also seems to be required,
is the period of inflation right at the beginning of the universe.
So, I've kind of glossed over this,
mainly because I don't really understand it very well,
but during the Big Bang,
the universe seemed to go through another anti-gravity phase,
where there was something driving the expansion of the universe
at an exponential rate,
so it's known as an inferton field,
and it seems to explain a lot of things about the universe
that touches why it's flat,
it explains the nature of the perturbations
or the fluctuations that we see in the cosmic microwave background,
and also explains why the universe is uniform,
which is also something that you wouldn't just expect
in a randomly created universe.
So, inflation itself might be a prediction
that, in fact, there are other universes,
and we form part of a larger multiverse of universes as well.
By observing these things,
we can maybe try and find answers to those questions.
So, just to finish off,
I mentioned that the map of the universe is not complete,
it's a long way from being complete,
and there's many surveys underway
to try and fill in our understanding of the cosmic web.
So, Euclid and the square kilometre array in South Africa,
Britain is both well involved in,
another one, the large synoptic survey telescope
will measure millions of supernova,
try and fill in the Hubble diagram out to further and further distances
and in more and more detail to try and understand the expansion dynamics.
In fact, there's new avenues opening up with what's called the Einstein Telescope,
which is a super gravitational wave detector,
which is supposed to, if they get round to building it,
detect all gravitational wave merger events that happen.
So, there's a huge amount of stuff going on
for the next generation of surveys,
and the questions that we need to answer,
what is dark matter,
these get progressively more complicated,
what is dark energy,
what is inflation,
and what happened in the big bang itself.
Related to that is probably what's at the heart of black holes,
they're probably related questions.
Are there other universes?
That's a question we might try and be able to answer.
And then, of course, there's a bigger question,
like why does anything exist at all?
So, it's kind of like, I guess that's going to be harder to explain,
if we just reflect back on where we were 500 years ago,
just trying to make a map of the Earth itself,
we've come a very, very long way.
So, I'll leave it there. Thank you very much.
