So tonight I'm going to take you through some of the highlights of my new book,
this is the lovely front cover, the spike and epic journey through the brain in 2.1 seconds.
So if you're all sitting comfortably then without a further ado start with the brain itself,
so behold, so your brain. So you can tell which end is the front because that's where the eyes
are located. And as you probably know your brain is made up of neurons. In fact your brain is made
up of many, many neurons. Our best estimate is that your brain is made up of about 87 billion
neurons. So you'll forgive me that I couldn't quite get all 87 billion on this slide.
And it is these 87 billion neurons talking to each other, sending messages to each other,
that underpin everything that you do. They underpin everything you perceive, everything you think
and everything that you do to act. So it's these neurons talking to each other that have underpinned
the literary outpourings of the Bronte sisters, of Shakespeare, of Dickens, and of course the
incomparable literary genius that is Dan Brown. These neurons talking to each other have underpinned
all the greatest creative acts of our best painters, of our greatest mathematicians,
and of course these neurons talking to each other have underpinned all the greatest
physical prowess, including of course some of the greatest footballing minds that we have.
And of course these neurons talking to each other and the messages they pass each other
have underpinned all the deepest insights of all the deepest thinkers throughout history.
So everything our brain does is carried out by these 87 billion neurons talking to each other.
In the one language the brain understands the passing of these electrical impulses,
these spikes of my title will come to in a minute. So we want to understand the brain,
we need to understand that language. So I'm going to tell you tonight about the language of the
brain but who's doing the talking and what it means when they do. So let's begin by reminding
ourselves of the thing that's doing the talking, so the neuron. So the neuron is made up of three
major parts that you need to know about in order to understand what's going on here. So at the top
of the neuron are the dendrites. The dendrites are these big tree-like protrusions that stretch out
away from the neuron, sending these protrusions out into the rest of the brain to collect the
inputs from other neurons in the brain. But those neurons connect to those dendrites.
And those dendrites send all that input down into the neuron's body. That body is where all
these inputs meet. It's where these inputs are added up, integrated, summed together.
And should that neuron want to send its own signal out to bring up its own inputs to another neuron,
it sends that signal down its axon. This long cable that stretches away from the neuron to
connect to neurons both near and far and send its own signal onwards. So those signals are these
things I've been calling spikes. So we neuroscientists call them spikes and partly because they just
look spiky. They're a rapid jump and fall and voltage that look very much like this when you
see them on a oscilloscope. They last about two milliseconds and they are the thing that sweeps
down the axon of the neuron to go and connect, send messages to other neurons.
And the creation of a spike is quite simple. So two are neuron. A whole bunch of neurons will
send their spikes. Those spikes will arrive at the end of their axon and connect to the dendrites of
that neuron. But they won't jump onto the other neuron. There's a little gap between the axon
and the dendrites. So the spike arrives, causes a little chemical cascade across this little gap.
And on the other side, on our main neuron that we're looking at, there will be a tiny
flicker of its voltage. And then if there are enough flickers of its voltage upwards to a certain
point, to a certain threshold, then that neuron will in itself create its own spike that will be
sent down its axon. So that means really we need two things to make a spike. We need
lots of spikes arriving at that neuron, coming from lots of neurons. So a spike then being sent
by one neuron is really measured saying, I have received lots of input just now, roughly at the
same time, and this needs to be communicated to the rest of the brain. So spikes are how neurons
talk to each other. Neurons talking to each other then are, as we said, how you do anything. So
sending receiving spikes underlies this thinking, the planning, the feeling, the sleeping, the eating,
moving, breathing, your heart rate, everything that you do and your body does for all.
So which means that you live a life in spikes. So your cortex, that sheet of neurons that lives
around the outside of your cerebrum, contains in humans about 17 billion neurons.
And we estimate that on average, each of those neurons is sent about one of these spikes every
second. So as you'll see later actually, numbers send rather, rather more than that,
and numbers send rather less than that. But on average, it is one spike every second.
Now the UN tells us that the average lifespan of a human on this planet right now is roughly
70 years. So that means that during the average human lifespan, in cortex alone,
one lifetime means about 34 billion, billion spikes. And it means, of course, many, many
billion more in all the neurons that are not in cortex, all the neurons blow in the rest of the
brain. So this is a truly staggering biography. It's a biography of everything that you do
is lived in through these 34 billion billion spikes in your cortex and billions below.
And those 34 billion billion spikes in cortex are such a huge number, they are in fact bigger than
the number of words ever printed and published in English since the invention of the printing press.
Then all is a magnitude bigger. So they are quite the extraordinary biography of your life.
So in my book, round right there, the entire biography of 34 billion, billion neurons sent
over 70 years, concentrated on just two seconds. And in those two seconds, there are still then
these 34 billion spikes being passed through your cortex. So even that was quite an undertaking.
But tonight I'm going to tell you about three of the arguments I raised in this book.
The first one is that knowing spikes is messages passed between neurons is essential
to understand the brain. So I'm going to, if I'm not convincing you that already,
I'm going to shortly take you on a tour of cortex to look at three different ways in which
understanding spikes has been essential to understanding how bits of the brain work.
And if we accept the premise that knowing spikes is essential to how the brain works,
then it follows that to always understand how the brain works, we need to solve
many of the mysteries of spiking, of how spikes are created and what happens to them and what they
mean. I'm going to draw on a couple of those later on. And if we accept the premise that
knowing spikes is essential to understanding the brain, then it follows then that there are some
fundamental limits on how well we can understand your brain, the human brain. And at the end,
I'll explain what I mean by that. Right. So let's begin. We're talking about why spikes,
knowing spikes is essential to understand the brain. I'm going to do that by talking about
what a spike means in three things that you do every day. So seeing and deciding and remembering.
The case of remembering short-term memory, things we just hold them in mind for a brief
period of time. So to do that, I'm going to take you for a little tour of cortex. So here again is
your cortex. Now divide it up into five of the sections that we typically use to describe bits
of your cortex. And we're going to start with seeing. And seeing involves a bit of the cortex
that sits right at the back of your cortex here in the visual cortex. Now, instead of a scenario where
your eye falls upon something that you really, really want. So for example, that it falls upon
a really delicious looking cookie by the head of you. So photons are going to bounce off this cookie,
come into your eye, crash into the retina at the back of your eye. And the job of the retina is to
turn those photons into spikes. So it turns them into spikes and those spikes are spanned out of
the retina into the rest of cortex. Now in your cortex, there are going to be neurons in your
first bit of your visual cortex that are looking at every kind of little pixel of that image.
So here I've drawn a tiny little white square on the image, which is just the top of one of these
chocolate chunks. Indeed, those are the horizontal lines on top of one of those chocolate chunks
in that cookie. And correspondingly, there will be neurons in the first bit of visual cortex
that can see just that pixel of the image. So if we then go and record neurons in that
through the brain and see what spikes they send, then we'll see something like this.
So as we show them lines of different angles, so if we show them a line that is vertical
and then which slowly rotates around to the horizontal before rotating back around to the
vertical again, it will send a different amount of spikes according to the angle of the line
we're showing it. So if we show it a purely vertical line, it sends almost no spikes whatsoever.
And slowly as we rotate that line back to the horizontal, it'll send more and more spikes.
And as we rotate it past again, it'll send fewer and fewer. So what this means is that this neuron
will send its most spikes when it sees a horizontal line in the tiny pixel of space that it gets to
look at. So in this case, it's looking at a tiny pixel of space where there is this horizontal line
or this time it's a chocolate chip. So we expect there to be in that the neurons looking at a
bit of space, a whole bunch of them who really like these horizontal lines will be sending a lot of
spikes. So the very first neurons in visual cortex, what their spikes mean, is that there is an edge
of the type they like, in this case horizontal line, in the part of space that they happen to be
looking at. Of course, all parts of the image you can see will have their own sets of neurons
looking at them. So here I've drawn just nine of these little pixels. You have to imagine, of
course, the whole image that you can see in front of you will be tiles, that there'll be lots of
pixels close to where your phobia is looking, really concentrated on, and fewer further away.
And each of those bits of space will have neurons in them that are responding to
edges of different types. So the first set of neurons respond to an edge in that part of space,
what are the next neurons responding to? So imagine that
we have two pixels of space, those two squares drawn on the left hand side here,
and we have just at the moment two neurons looking at them. So we have the neuron at the top,
you can see the top pixel of space, the neuron at the bottom, you can see the bottom pixel of space.
Neuron at the top, he really likes edges like this. So kind of edges that lean a bit to the left,
the bottom left hand corner of its pixel, and it will send lots of spikes when it sees that kind
of edge. Neuron at the bottom, it really likes edges which are back here in its pixel of space.
So slightly towards the right, kind of in the middle of the pixel.
So now we imagine those two neurons, they converge on another neuron further along in the visual
system. So perhaps in the second region of visual cortex, which we commonly call V2.
So imagine now that those two neurons are sending spikes to this neuron that they both
converge on. If that neuron itself then sends a spike downstream, what does that spike now mean?
Well, it means that that neuron at the top saw the edge that it liked, and that neuron on the
bottom saw the edge that it liked. So by this converging set of spikes on this neuron, that
neuron now means there's a corner. And this reinforces this idea that meaning is really
spikes from many, many neurons. The meaning here of a corner is a collision of spikes from across
a whole range of neurons looking at different pixels, which are sending lots of spikes about
the fact that they can see the edges they like in those pixels, and they converge on a neuron
which puts that information together to say it's a corner. And then you can imagine that extrapolates
then out to more and more neurons further than further into the visual system. So if we put
together little edges into corners, into longer lines, into curves, and then those neurons that
are sending spikes saying there's a corner or small edge or long edge or a curve, and those
are combined together, then we can start getting the outlines of objects. And if we have lots of
edges or lines at the same angle across an image, that's a texture. And then if we can
neurons respond to the fact there is different colors, so here green, then that's color. You
put together edges and textures and color and you have objects. So you can see then that spikes from
neurons at ascending parts of the visual system going from meaning simply an edge to meaning
corner to meaning objects is how the visual system seems to carry information in the spikes
from its neurons. Okay, so that was a very brief example of how the visual cortex,
neurons in the visual cortex can carry meaning in their spikes. Let's hop up now
to this region called the parietal cortex. And here we're going to look at neurons,
which seem to be involved in making a decision. Now there's lots of different neurons in parietal
cortex respond to loss from things in the world. So we're going to concentrate on the ones that
seem to be involved in making a decision. Okay, particularly the kind of decisions
which involve some kind of accumulation of evidence, some kind of
situation where you are adding up the evidence for or against something in which you need to
make a decision about it. So in the lab what we typically do to help you measure making a decision
is we have humans and animals look at something which has got a random motion of dots on it.
So a little circle in which lots of dots are moving around. So in this schematic what I'm
showing you is that in this case, more or less half the dots are moving to the right. So if the
dots are at the start of the white circle, they move to where the black circle is. And all the
human or the animal looking at this moving dots has to do is decide whether the movement of the
dots is mostly to the right or to the left. So when we ask that question of humans, that's very
simple, they just have to press a button that's on the right or press a button that's on the left
to make their decision. When we give this task to animals, we have to ask them to look to the
right or look to the left. Once they have watched this long enough, accumulated enough evidence
in order to make the decision of whether it's going to the left or to the right.
One reason why we use this random dot motion task is because it's really easy to change whether
it's an easy task or a hard task. So I'm going to show you two examples of what this stimulus looks
like. So this is what it looks like when it's easy. So hopefully what you can see in this slightly
flickery gif, apologies for the flickers, is that if you look at it, your brain can quickly
see that a whole bunch of the dots moving are moving rightward. So this is really easy. It's
really easy because these dots are really coherent. So in this case, I think about 50% of the dots are
moving to the right. So it becomes very easy for our visual systems to work out under private
contexts to work out. So it's moving to the right. However, we can make it a lot harder. I'm going to
show you another one and then I'm going to see what you think whether it's moving to the left or the
right. So watch this for a while. It's got a loop again in the moment. There we go.
So left or right. The answer of course is neither. This is as hard as it gets. So here,
none of the dots are coherently moving either to the left or the right. They're moving
or completely randomly. I would like to throw in these cheat ones for animals and humans because
when we throw this in and we force them to make a decision anyway, force them to make a decision
about whether it's going right or left, then whatever is happening in the brain in this process,
we ease the decision of going right or left because there is no actual physical perceptual
evidence of it going to left or right. So we'd be able to see what's happening in the brain just
making the decision. Okay. So that's how we, one of the many ways, the most popular way I'd say,
of how we examine a decision, simple decision in the lab. So what happens then if we record
from the neurons in parietal cortex when we're doing this? Right. So we're going to record from
a bunch of neurons looking at these moving dot displays. So imagine the moving dot display is
showing dots mostly moving to the right. Okay. And we're recording from a neuron that really likes
things moving to the right. Then what we'll see when we record from it, record from it a lot,
record from lots of these neurons and then we average over them, is we'll see something like this.
So on the bottom axis, it says time until decision. So that zero is the time at which
the decision was made on every viewing of the video by the animal.
And then we're plotting the activity, the spike sent by that neuron up to that decision time.
So what you can see, that y-axis is rate of spikes, the number of spikes is sent per second,
is that the number of spikes these neurons send on average,
consistently goes up until a decision is reached. As soon as the decision is reached,
I move to the right or the left, then in this case, we'll move to the right because
this is a neuron that likes the right, then it will drop, the activity will drop almost a zero.
So it looks like all these neurons' spikes are standing for, they're standing for the
accumulation of evidence as it's saying, watching the stop motion picture. It says though, it's
counting up the number of dots you can see moving to the right and going, yes, I think they're moving
to the right, I think they're moving to the right, yes, yes, yes, I'm definitely sure they're moving
to the right. What happened though if we recall from a neuron that didn't like right-wit ones,
what happened if we recall from a neuron that liked things moving to the left instead?
Or in that case, what we see is something like this. We see that number of spikes it sends
slowly, slowly, slowly falls and then suddenly falls on average, average over many neurons,
average over many, many views of this stimulus. And that looks all the world as though it's a
neuron that's looking at the evidence against its hypothesis, against the fact that it's moving
left. So we now have examples of two neurons, one that looks like accumulating evidence for an hypothesis,
the hypothesis being it's moving to the right, and neurons accumulate evidence against hypothesis,
the hypothesis that is moving left. Another way we can check that this is actually
something like accumulation of evidence is of course, as I showed you earlier, we can make this
harder or easier. In fact, what you're looking at there for this rightward looking neuron,
the stuff in gray, the one that's accumulating up, is actually what it looks like when we give it
the hardest decision to make. When the dots are not actually moving in any direction,
that's what it looks like when it makes the decision to go right anyway.
And then the more coherent we make the dots, the easier we make the task, the faster the
activity will go up like this. So in blue at the top there was the increasing activity I already
showed you. So it goes up and up and up and up and up, number of spikes being sent, increases and
increases and increases up to the top. And then the colors going down and down to the yellow
correspond to the making easier and easier. So more and more dots are moving in the same direction
until the easiest one in yellow there is when it's 50% the easiest thing I showed you at the start,
one that's really obvious. As you can see, what happens is,
is that extremely easy, the number of spikes per second goes up extremely fast and makes the
reach of those sort of, it seems to be a threshold for the decision almost immediately.
And how do you make it the slower the evidence is accumulated, which is exactly what we hope to see
if we really thought that these neurons were accumulating evidence. Because of course,
there should be accumulating faster, the easier it is to do the task.
So we believe then that neurons in parietal cortex, some of the neurons in parietal cortex,
their spikes mean accumulated evidence for a decision.
Okay, that's the second stop on our tour. That's spikes that mean things about a decision.
The final stop in our tour, a little tour of cortex, is going to be in the mysterious zone
front here called the prefrontal cortex. And here, we're going to be talking about
keeping things in mind. Okay, so the kind of short term memories kind of where you're holding
things in mind, things like where you put your keys just now, did I lock the door or
what number someone just said to me was, what the phone number someone just said to me was.
So in prefrontal cortex, we can find neurons whose spikes seem to stand for these kinds of
short term memory. I'm going to show you an example of that now from some work that we did in my lab.
So this work was done by my postdoc, Sylvie Mangy, who may well be called tonight,
in collaboration with our great friend Adrian Peres, who did the experiments about to show you,
which we then analyzed. So in Adrian's experiments, he had a rat learning to get
reward on a Y maze. So I know it doesn't look much like a maze. And so neuroscientists call
anything with walls on a corridor a maze. But this is what we call a Y maze. So in this Y maze,
the rat's task is really simple. So he has to wander up to this point here, decide whether to
go right or to go left. Once his decision gets to the end, it makes the correct decision,
he gets a reward. And what the correct decision is, that's what he's going to find out.
So the first time these rats enter the maze, the correct decision is to go to the left.
So they run up and down the maze many, many times, and it's goes to the left.
And every time they go to the left, they get the reward. In this case, it's not actually cheese,
it's chocolate milk, because rats adore chocolate milk. Once they've learned to go to the left,
what they then have to learn is a new rule. So unbeknownst to them, the rule is changed.
So they then have to go instead to the arm, left or right arm, where the light is switched on.
So the lights are on a random order, left or right. So it has to go to where the light is on.
So no matter what his choice was, though, what his edit reward, what it's got to do,
it's got to turn around and trudge all the way back to the start again,
in order to be allowed another chance to make his choice.
So every time it runs up, goes to the left or goes to the right,
he has to turn around and trudge all the way back in order to make his choice.
So we took advantage of a slight flaw in the rats behavior here
to ask this question. So what was he thinking about on the way back? So while the rats were
doing this, Adrian had been recording the whole time neurons in their prefrontal cortex,
something between 12 to 55 neurons at the same time in prefrontal cortex,
the spikes coming at them. And as we already know from various experiments, the prefrontal cortex
should be the bit where we hold things in mind, because, for example, we can remove dopamine
temporarily from that prefrontal cortex and animals doing task bomb short-term memory
unable to do them for a while. Then we could ask, okay, those neurons were recorded from
in prefrontal cortex, can we look at their spikes they're sending and work out what
he was thinking about on the way back, if anything? What's really nice here is that
although the rats ran up really, really quickly when they went up to make a decision to go left
or right, took about four seconds, on the way back, it took over a minute, typically. So we had
over a minute's worth of spikes being sent by these neurons to have a good look at and see
all that time. What was he thinking about on the way back? So, for example, what's he thinking about
whether he'd got reward or not? So he might be trudging back really, really happy,
having just made the correct choice and got some reward, just drunk his chocolate milk,
trudging back thinking, excellent. What was he trudging back thinking? Oh, I got nothing,
and having to walk all the way back again. So what we wanted to do then was what we wanted
to look at, the spikes being sent by these groups of neurons that had been recorded in
prefrontal cortex. So here I'm showing you three neurons for illustration. Of course,
as I said, we recorded somewhere between 12 and 55. Well, Adrian recorded between 12 and 55.
So what we wanted to ask was, could we find if there was a way of reading out
what he was thinking about? For example, could it be that as it was trudging back after it had
just got a reward, these three neurons here were sending a pattern of spikes like this.
So the first neuron was sending lots of spikes, and the other two neurons were sending a few
spikes while I trudging back after it had got a reward. And then after it had not got a reward,
oops one way, after it had not got a reward, were those same three neurons sending different
pattern of spikes. So now with the first neuron sending only a one or two, and the other two
are sending considerably more than they did after it got a reward. So we wanted to ask was,
can we look across the spikes and put all of these neurons and work out whether or not it had just
got a reward as it was trudging back to the start. So I'm going to show you what we found.
So to do that, for testing for a memory of reward, we divided the maze up into five chunks so we
could look at how that memory changed as you walk back. So actually this graph I'm going to show
is the maze on its side. So we need to turn the maze on its side like this. So the reward,
bit where it gets its reward is at position one, the bit where it made its choice is at
round position three, and the bit where it gets back to the start again, position five, such as to
show you that again, but reward at position one, the choice point three, gets back to the start,
position five. So walking back, it goes one, two, three, four, five. Right, you shove that underneath
so you can look at it for reference. So what we're going to ask in each of these five locations,
we're going to ask, how would we do? If we take across these groups of neurons, so say one of
the recordings where they had 32 neurons in it, we looked at the spikes from each of those 32
neurons, could we tell whether the animal had just got reward or not, just by looking at the
pattern of spikes sent? Maybe in terms of the details, we use a thing called logistic regression
to do this. We use it like classifier, which predicted whether or not it had got reward or not
from the patterns of spikes across those neurons. The first thing we had to establish then, of course,
is how well would we do if we just guessed? If we just guessed we had got reward or not, we do
pretty well just guessing because, obviously, there's only two options, reward or not.
So we can run some simulations with the data to work out what's the absolute best we could do
if we guessed, and that is what we could do if we guessed. It's slightly above 50%.
So that's guessing. So how would we actually do? We actually try to take the activity,
the spikes sent by these groups of neurons, and work out whether or not it just got reward.
So in that first maze position, we could do phenomenally well. So this blue dot is the
average over all the rats all the time they went on the maze. It was still up close to about 85%
of the time we could decode whether it had just got reward or not as it trudged back to the start.
Of course, in many of the individual recordings that we had from individual days of running on
the maze, we could perfectly tell you whether it had just got a reward or not, just from looking
at the spikes sent by these groups of neurons in each prefrontal cortex. As it trudged back to
the start again, going from maze one, position one, always maze position five, the ability for us
to decode that fell quite dramatically. And it went no better than guessing by time we got back
to the start again. So that meant that, yes, we could decode this, but we could also see
the memory of it fading away, the memory of the reward faded away by the time we got to the start
again. Of course, reward wasn't the only thing that was interesting here.
So that's what happens when we got reward or not. Other things around it that were really useful
for understanding and holding in mind in order to solve the problem of understanding what the
rule was, it had to learn, included whether it had just gone left or right. So if you remember,
the first rule you had to learn was just go to the left, no matter what other things it was
interesting, just go to the left. So it stands reason then that a useful thing for it to remember
is not only how to just go reward or not, to remember whether that was a good choice or not,
but what the choice was that it made. Did I go left or did I go right? So we could do the same
trick, taking those same neurons and the spikes that they sent as it trudged back to the start.
We could ask, can we, from the spikes that they have sent, tell the difference between
whether it had just gone to the left or whether it had just gone to the right? Was it thinking about
the choice it had just made? And the answer was yes, absolutely. So again, far above guessing,
the lining gray, at every position in the maze, I said when we got back to the start,
we could tell you whether the animal had, whether the rat had just gone left or gone right
from the spikes sent by neurons and prefrontal cortex as it was trudging back to the start.
And of course, there was another really silent feature in that maze, which was whether the light
was on or off the arm, because come the second rule you had to learn, it then had to learn
whether to go to the, to go to the arm where the light was on. So it had to then realize
that the light was a really relevant bit of information. So we asked again, from that
same set of neurons in prefrontal cortex, from the spikes sent by this group of neurons,
could we tell whether the light was on or off at the end of the arm? As in, did the rat even notice,
could we tell from the rat's memory, had he even noticed whether the light was on or off?
And what we found then, through the same tricks was, yes, but only really,
brief while, just as it turned around and started walking back again. And then that
memory seemed to fade pretty quickly. So put all together. Okay.
What we're looking at here then is pretty compelling evidence that in the prefrontal cortex of these
rats, the spikes from these neurons meant things held in memory. In fact, meant multiple things
held in memory for a brief period, meant both whether they got reward or not, whether they
got their chocolate milk or not, and they got to the end of the arm, whether they had chosen
to go to the left or the right, and whether the light was on or off at the end. But those
memories lasted for different lengths of time, even though they were sent by spikes from the
exact same neurons. Okay. Okay. Before we move on, let me recap. So a little tour of cortex.
What does a spike mean? So I've just shown you that
let's start there in visual cortex. The spikes from neurons in the first
parts of your visual cortex mean edges at a particular position, a particular place
in the world around you. Okay. There are edges in each and in each tiny pixel of the world that
your eyes can see. Up in bridal cortex, I've just shown you there are neurons whose spikes seem to
stand for the evidence for a decision. In this case, the evidence for a decision of whether
these dots are moving to the left or moving to the right. Then in prefrontal cortex, we've just
shown you that a whole group of neurons sending spike at the same time seem to stand for multiple
different times of memory, multiple memories of multiple things that have just happened to the
animal. And what's good here to notice is that all these neurons are sending spikes.
Indeed, there's all same types of neurons in the brain. There's all these pramble cells in cortex.
So these spikes are the common language of the brain. But what they mean depends on where they
are sent and who's sending them. Okay. So that's something of what we know about spikes in a
visual stop tour to convince you that knowing spikes is key to understanding how a brain
does what it does. But there are many, many mysteries of spikes that I promised you.
Many things that we don't know about spikes. So in the book, I talk about many of these key
mysteries, which I'll round through now. Right. First, these mysteries is a simple existential one.
It's why do we have spikes at all? Why do neurons send these little blips of voltage to each other
rather than talking any other way? After all, when these little blips of voltage, these spikes,
at least the end of an axon, they get turned into chemistry, they get turned into molecules
floating across, which get turned into little blips of voltage rather than these big pulses
against them to each other. So why do we have spikes at all? A second mystery then is how many
spikes does it take to make a new one? We know it takes a lot, but exactly how many depends
a huge amount on the details of the neuron that is receiving the spikes. There's actually the
state for its dendrites, for example. What is the brain not explode with spikes? So if
neurons are sending spikes to each other constantly, and you have many spikes making
one new spike, and that spike gets sent out to other neurons that were sending it spikes,
and the brain is full of feedback loops, why is it that spikes do not forget more spikes,
we get more spikes, we get more spikes, and the whole brain just explodes with spikes?
So why do my spikes fail? It passed my favorite mystery book,
other than the one I'm about to tell you about, that most spikes, despite all this
process of sentiment, despite the fact they seem to be essential for how the brain works,
most of them fail to do anything. So there are papers that show that in the cortex and the
hippocampus, if you recall from an individual connection between two neurons, then the neuron
that's sending spikes, on average, 75% of its spikes will not get to the other side,
will cause nothing to happen. So only 25% of its spikes will cause anything to happen
at that connection, which is supremely weird. Other mysteries include how do spikes gain
information about time? How do spikes gain information about the order of events in the
world? And then another favorite mystery, how does a brain make its own spikes?
How does, how do spikes appear in the brain if you have some input from the outside world?
But the one I'm going to tell you about in depth tonight, but all the ones that come in the book,
is this one of my favorites called the dark neuron.
So to tell you about the dark neuron problem, I'm going to show you
what it looks like from one of those recordings I was talking about in prefrontal cortex.
So what I'm going to show you then is a whole bunch of neurons in prefrontal cortex
that are sending their spikes at the same time. So I think a picture of 52 of them
sending at the same time. So what you're going to see is you're going to see lines of vertical
dashes. Each vertical dash is a spike, and the lines are going to be ultimately gray and black.
So each gray line is a neuron sending spikes, each black line is a neuron sending spikes,
just so you can differentiate them by eye. So this is about four seconds of recording
in prefrontal cortex. This is what they look like. Here we go.
There we go. So as you can see, each vertical dash, little tiny dash, is a line, is a spike.
Each line of dashes going across there is the spike sent by one neuron. Okay, let me show that again.
Let's see here again. Four seconds.
There we go. Off they go and spike. The reason I'm showing you this
is that if you look at the top, you'll see that there are a handful of neurons that seem to be
sending so many spikes. You can't even see the vertical dashes. They're like solid blocks of
color in this one second. But as you look further and further down, you see that the spikes are
getting more and more infrequent. Indeed, I've ordered it by the average rate of them sending
spikes in this recording. So you get to the bottom and there are actually neurons there.
You can only see lines. There are no vertical dashes. There are neurons that send no spikes at
all in this window of time we're looking at here.
So to illustrate this dark neuron problem to you, I'm going to build you a little
graph, a little histogram of how active the brain is. So I'm going to start by doing that by
just giving an example of this prefrontal cortex recording here, these 52 neurons.
So what we're going to do, we're going to take each neuron in turn, count how active it is,
and put it on a little histogram. So this neuron here is sending just a few spikes in a very long
period of time. Indeed, if we count the number of spikes it sends per second over a whole half an
hour of recording. It's actually sending less than half a spike per second, as in it sends one
spike every two seconds also. So we put a little dash, let's grab here, put a little cross here,
half a spike per second, and then doing a histogram here. So the y-axis is the count of
the number of neurons that send this many spikes per second. So we're going to put a little bar
there. We've counted one neuron so far that sends less than half a spike per second.
So let's take a second neuron. This neuron from the same recording prefrontal cortex is
a lot more active. It sends a lot more spikes in the period of time we're looking at.
So in fact, the number of spikes per second it sends is actually about two and a half spikes
per second. So we're going to make a count then of, we found now one neuron that sends its spikes
about two and a half times per second. And then let's take another neuron, a far more active neuron,
this time in fact so active that its activity is right out here. It sends about 19 spikes every
second. So now we found one neuron that's 19 spikes every second. We're going to add a count of one
there. So so far we've seen three neurons, one that sends half a spike per second, one that sends
it two and a half spikes per second, one sends about 19 spikes per second. And we're going to
then do that same trick for all 52 neurons. We're going to look at them, each of them,
find out how many spikes per second they send and add them as a count onto here.
When we do that, what we end up with looks like this.
So what you can see is that at the far right hand side, we have just a handful of
neurons, indeed five that are sending more than 15 spikes per second. And most of them
are sending much less. Indeed, the majority of them are sending less than one and a half
spikes per second, or even one spike per second. So this extreme imbalance actually means that
10% of the neurons, these just five up here, are sending three quarters of all the spikes sent by
this entire group of neurons. Now, to show you that this is common, what I'm going to do is
going to show you lots of these histograms. To do that, I need to do a little trick. So I'm going
to turn it on its side like this. Okay, I realize it's already fuzzy. I just want to look at the
shape. So on its side, you can see at the bottom that big, big set of zeros down here,
and then go up, you can see there's little, there's few neurons that sending lots of spikes.
And we're going to plot that same histogram here. So this is prefrontal cortex population.
And on the y-axis here, the y-axis, we have the number of spikes per second,
as you have in the histogram. So if I, and this is that same histogram, but just shown as a
symmetrically around the center here. So this is all those spikes there in that bin. That's this
one here. That's all those neurons that are sending almost nothing at all. Those five neurons there,
that's those here at that tail of the histogram. So now I'm going to show you the same kind of
histogram, same kind of distribution of how active neurons are across a whole bunch of different
regions in cortex. So these not very revealing acronyms. So A1, that's the primary auditory
cortex, the first bit of cortex in your brain that receives all that input from your ears.
B2 is the second part of visual cortex, PFC, that's the prefrontal cortex. OFC is the orbital
frontal cortex, the bit of cortex that sits just behind your eyes. M1 is the primary motor cortex,
the bit that seems to be most involved, particularly in our detrus movement of our
limbs and fingers and hands. And then the ones in color, again, auditory cortex,
orbital frontal cortex, and the second part of motor cortex, M2. Those are going to be histograms
of what happens when the animal's doing something. So we're thinking black is when we're recording
from those regions and it's not doing it very much, it's just actually just sitting or waiting
for something to happen. And in red, it's when they're doing something. So the one in A1 is when
it's being played a sound, the one in orbital frontal cortex in blue is when it's making a
decision, and the one in M2 is when it's moving an arm. So for all these different brain regions,
whether they're doing something or not, we're going to build these histograms,
okay, and they look like this. They all look basically the same. They all look as though
there's only a very, very tiny household of neurons, this lot up here who are sending
lots of spikes every second. And most of neurons are sending one spike per second or less.
So most spikes sent by handful of neurons. So in all these cases, that top 10% of neurons
are sending at least three quarters of all the spikes in those groups of neurons.
Or in each of these brain areas, no matter whether they're sitting quietly or doing something,
about three quarters of the spikes are sent by just 10% of the neurons.
So this then is what I'm calling the dark neurons. These are the neurons that
make up the bulk of the population, but send less than a quarter of all the spikes.
They're really sending very few spikes. And indeed, it's actually worse than this.
So all these recordings are done by electrodes lowered into the brain.
When we lower electrodes into the brain, the only way we know that those electrodes are recording
from neurons is because those neurons are active. We can't see the neurons. We can just hear them
on the monitor in the lab or see them on the oscilloscope on the amplifier.
We can see the spikes. We can hear the spikes. So the only way we can record
neurons that are in the brain using electrodes is because they are spiking.
And that means there's a really fearful bias because it means that we automatically see
active neurons when we record them using electrodes. But if we record them using other
methods, for example, if we record them using a method called patch clamping, which is where we
lower a tiny glass electrode deep into the brain and instead of just having an electrode sitting
in a big metal mesh, we have this tiny glass pipette come down and actually touch a neuron
physically go to the outside of it and stick to it really strongly.
Then what we can see is much of the time when you connect to a neuron directly,
that neuron isn't sending any spikes at all. Indeed, there are some estimates that when you
do that to a neuron, about half the neurons you're going to attach to will be sending
less than one spike a minute.
Yeah. So in fact, there are probably in the brain, the dark neurons are the vast majority.
The ones that are sending one spike per second or vastly less down the way to one spike per minute
are going to be the bulk of the neurons in cortex, in particular in your cortex.
The big mystery here then is what are they for? What are these 90% of neurons who are doing or
more who are doing almost nothing? What are they for? Because after all,
brain is really unjustly expensive. We know that your brain uses up about 20% of your energy,
which means that for an adult human male, you need to eat two miles per day just to drive your brain.
In the book, I go into a number of reasons why we would, of why the dark neurons may exist.
So I'm going to talk to you briefly about one now using what are called the parable of Jenny's
teeth. So to understand the parable of Jenny's teeth, we're going to go back to
we're going to go back to thinking about the visual world again, about the visual system,
visual cortex, the bit where we're looking at, neurons that like edges. So imagine that you
are a neuron and you like edges like this. So this edge is defined by the combination of that
black and white smudge here, right? Black smudge here, white smudge here.
That edge is the bit lying between. So the black and white is the contrast that defines that that
edge exists. So you're a neuron that likes an edge about that thick in that part of the bit of
space you're looking at, right? Imagine you're surrounded by neurons also looking at that little
bit of space, the same little bit of space in the world. But those neurons, they like different
edges, right? So these two neurons that sit next to you, one of them also likes that kind of thickness
of edge, but it's slightly up and flipped over. And the one on top there, this one up here, what
it likes, the ends of things. It doesn't like anything up here. It likes the ends of an edge
in its worldview. Now let's extrapolate that, right? So imagine that you're now surrounded by
neurons like any kind of edge that is every kind of thickness of edge, every kind of angle of edge,
edges that end in that space, all kinds of rotations and widths. So one would have something
looks like this. So around you in this bit of visual cortex is full of neurons that like all
these different kinds of edges. And they will send their spikes when they see that kind of edge
in that pixel of space, in the same pixel space that you're looking at, right? That brings us
neatly to Jenny. So here is a lovely lady called Jenny. I don't know where this picture came from.
Now, you mentioned that the pixel of space that you were looking at as your neuron is
that little red square on Jenny's teeth there. Now teeth are quite interesting in terms of their
shape, right? They have some curves, some lines, interesting texture, but when they meet the gum
is a little bit curved. But even with that very interesting combination features,
they're only a tiny subset of all possible edges are in that space. So only the little,
only the neurons that are showing up with their edge here will be sending any spikes at all.
So across that top row there, there's four neurons that will be sending spikes because they can see
their edge right now in that space, which means that almost all the neurons, the ones we just looked
at, these ones here, almost all those neurons will be sending no spikes at all because their edge
isn't in the bit of space that they're looking at and indeed won't be for a long time.
So perhaps one of the reasons that we see so many dark neurons in the brain is simply because
we don't give them anything interesting to do in the lab. The only reason we're going to be able to
find them is if we give both really rich tasks that more reflect the real world to the animal
and we're able to record neurons for a very long period of time for days and weeks and months
continuously to be able to pick up what it is that these neurons are interested in.
Right. So let's add the dark neuron problem to all those mysteries and then move on to the final
the final part that I promised you. So I promised you, I talked a little bit about
why we need to understand spikes is placing a fundamental limit on how well we can understand
the human brain. And indeed in many respects that the human brain, many aspects of the human brain
are something of a black hole in neuroscience because what we struggle to understand in many
aspects of what the human brain does is what the spikes meaning you. Everything I've showed you so
far in that 12 cortex within animals doing simple tasks, in visual cortex looking at simple pictures
or maybe movies, in parietal cortex looking at dots moving on the screen, in prefrontal cortex a
decision whether to go left or right. And all those kind of simple tasks we can easily give you,
we do indeed give lots of humans images to look at in labs, we give them lots of dots moving
randomly on the screen to look at in labs, we ask humans to choose to go left and go right or
press left and right buttons in labs all the time. And we can be pretty confident that if we get you
to do those same tasks then there'll be neurons in those same areas of cortex in your cortex that
will be sending the same kinds of spikes meaning the same kinds of things. That's because of course
the animals we do the experiments on are all mammals, the mammalian brain is pretty well
conserved, these regions all exist in those brains we would expect the neurons in your brain to show
this similar pattern of spikes. But what about human things? So for example what about language about
speech the generation of this complex grammar that we use and on its beat the generation of it of
course but the understanding of it when we are listening to it. What about reading and indeed
of writing itself this miraculous process by which these tiny scratched black marks on a page
go here into letters that go here into words that go here into sentences, go here into meaning in
our heads of all sorts of our sharp concepts that we can transmit it to us simply by looking
at scratched black marks on a page. What about maths and all the other creative sciences?
Indeed Matthew you know this kind of stereotypical head spinning Hollywood nightmare.
How is that done by the human brain? What about all the creative stuff that we do all the art
sort of music, sculpture, painting, poetry, prose writing all of this.
The human are pretty unique to the human brain. Obviously I could probably be complicated social
interactions so obviously while there are animals that have really complex social groups
are seen to be perhaps among the largest in the natural world and of course
what happens in our social interactions obviously is culturally specific. We learn
over our lifetime about how the culturally appropriate ways of interacting with people
and the various levels of interaction both strong or weak interactions that we have with people
over our entire lifetimes and this incredibly complicated cultural milieu in which we live
and then there's the nuclear human stuff about our subjective experiences about both
our complexity by emotions and about our moons and of course then there's the ultimate sort of
thing that seems to be that is potentially uniquely human which is the depths of our
consciousness okay the ability not just to be aware but of course that we are aware we are aware
the sensations of things around us. So these are all these things which are
potentially or genuinely unique to humans but our ability to understand how the brain
generates them is really limited. So the best way that we have of looking inside the
healthy living human brain is using neuroimaging so this is an MRI machine with someone on this
table about to be loaded into it to have their brain scanned and then fMRI which is the scanning
of the live activity in the human brain we often see as a result pictures look like this
so we see a picture where we have in gray a picture of the cortex here the human cortex
showing to the left here to the left sorry turn to the right rather to the top and to the left
and we see last sections of that cortex colored in to indicate where there has been neural activity
during some kind of task. Now I've already told you the human cortex has in its 17 billion neurons
that means that each of these colored in patches contains hundreds of millions or billions of
neurons and not only that but those colored in patches are made up of tens of thousands
of tiny cubes okay so cubes that are smaller than the pixelated scale of that image so that's
image a little pixelated inside each of those pixels is many many many of these tiny cubes
indeed in that image is probably in that colored in patch there's going to be like 20,000 30,000
something like that in each of those cubes has about 100,000 neurons in each of those tiny
dots of color stands for the 100,000 neurons and it doesn't stand for the spikes of those 100,000
neurons it stands for the amount of extra oxygen rich blood that's in that region where those 100,000
neurons are. Now the reason that's interesting is because this is an indicator of the use of energy
so as we see an extra amount of oxygen rich blood turning up in a region of the brain
you think uh-huh that bit of the brain needs more energy it needs the oxygen to burn the ATP to
create energy so it stands to reason then that we see this demand for this oxygen rich blood in
a certain region of the cortex it means that in the cubes where we see it these cubes 100,000
neurons those 100,000 neurons are doing something they're sending or receiving more spikes because
as we talked about earlier spikes take up a lot of energy but that's the best way that we have a
seeing inside the human mind it's oxygen rich blood around 100,000 neurons in each of those cubes
100,000 neurons sort of huge scale and not spikes what we know and I've just spent what 55 minutes
telling you that spikes is how the brain does stuff spikes are how neurons talk to each other
how they generate meaning of representation computation and that means that we have what I
call the explanatory gap problem so the explanatory gap then is that we have this huge gap between what
we can record in the human brain and what we would like to know about the human brain in an ideal world
and this explanatory gap causes all sorts of problems it means that we don't know anything at
all literally nothing about the spikes happening in your brain when you are producing language
understanding it when you're reading when you do maths or science when you're doing the creative
arts or any of our subjective experiences because we cannot record spikes from neurons in a living
human brain an internet explanatory gap falls all kinds of strangeness so speculations about
what consciousness is which are not rooted in any understanding of how the brain works because we
cannot record the spikes from a living human brain so we do not know anything about how the
neurons are talking to each other in terms of the language they speak during any aspects of
subjective experience we get into lots of difficulties understanding how things of the mind the
domain of psychology map onto things of the brain the domain of neuroscience for example we don't
know how attention is things quite obvious to us that we pay attention to stuff I think of the mind
maps onto what's happening in the brain of humans because we cannot record from spikes
neurons from from neurons spikes from neurons in humans
and internet explanatory gap falls most most obviously the kind of speculation that goes
under the title of neurobolic right where we put the word neuro in front of any
noun to make it sound more smart and brainy and though it's informed by neuroscience so things
like neurocriticism and neuro law and neuro marketing like as though we knew anything at all
about how the spikes pass between neurons helps you decide which particular brand of
fizzy brown soft drink you prefer or which fast food franchise you're going to order up and
deliver or just eat this evening we know nothing about that this fundamental limit this fact that
we cannot record spikes at all from the living healthy human brain means that there's both
these explanatory gap which is a warning about how we well we understand the brain but also
something that is an optimistic thing for the future means that your brain and its 87 billion
neurons remains the ultimate challenge for us means that much of how your brain human brain
works is terra incognita and we really want to understand the spikes in the human brain
underline is uniquely human things and that will surely drive us on we'll drive the development
of the technology the technology we've already made knowledge we already developed not just
fmri but how the way we record the neurons in the animal brain try this development so that one day
perhaps we will be able to record the spikes from individual neurons in the healthy human brain
and if we can do that then we can truly know your life in spikes
so to read all about this about why spikes are essential to understand the brain
but the mysteries are spiking other limits or we can know and not know in my book
the spike and thank you very much for your time this evening
