Tonight, I'd like to offer you a choice. To get to your destination, there's the long way.
It's going to be rather laborious, repetitive, take you a long time, might even be a few
dangers on the way that will kind of waylay you, might not actually even get to the destination
because of the dangers that there are. But there is a second way, a second way that I'm going to
offer you, and that's the shortcut. A sign saying to go off to the side, seemingly going in the
wrong direction, maybe to start with. But I'm going to promise you some exciting journeys on this
way, some interesting views, and the promise to get you to your destination quickly and more
efficiently than the long way. And to help you, I've written a new book, Thinking Better,
The Art of the Shortcut, which gathers together a whole suite of exciting ways of thinking cleverly
about problems so you don't have to do the boring, long, laborious work that the other people are
doing. I actually learned about my first shortcut when I was about 12 or 13 at my school. The
mathematics teacher told us a story, a very famous story now, about the young Carl Friedrich
Gauss. Any mathematicians out there will know probably the story that I'm going to tell you.
The mathematics teacher in Carl Friedrich Gauss's class challenged the students with a problem. He
said, I want you to add up the numbers from one to a hundred. I think the teacher thought that this
would take the students so long that he'd be able to get a little bit of a rest. And sure enough,
the students started adding one plus two plus three. It was going to take them a long time.
However, the young Carl Friedrich Gauss, even before the teacher had finished posing the
problem, had written down the answer on his slate board and slammed it down in front of the
teacher. The teacher thought he was being impudent, but when he looked at the slate board, there was
the correct answer, 5,050. And the teacher said, well, how did you get that so quickly? Did you cheat
or something? He said, no, there's a shortcut. See, all my fellow students are starting at the
beginning of this journey and just plodding through the numbers one after another. It's going to
take them ages before they get all the way to a hundred, and I'm sure they're going to make some
mistakes on the way. But I took a step backwards and I realized you can combine the beginning
and the end of the journey. You can add one plus a hundred, and that gives you a hundred and one.
Two plus 99 also gives you a hundred and one. Three plus 98, a hundred and one. So he realized
that there are 50 pairs of numbers, all adding up to a hundred and one. So the answer was 50 times
a hundred and one, 5,050. Now, what I love about this shortcut is that even if the teacher had
said, okay, I'm going to make it really difficult for you, young Carl Friedrich, I'm going to ask
you to count the numbers from one to a million. He could still use the same trick. Once he dug
that tunnel, understood the kind of shortcut to understanding this problem, it worked really
however large the numbers were going to be. And for me, this was the moment when I realized the
subject I wanted to dedicate myself to, because my mathematics teacher said, this is what our
subject is about, mathematics. It is the art of the shortcut. And what I'm going to do over the
next few years is to teach you the extraordinary shortcuts that we mathematicians have come up
with over the last 2,000 years. And being a lazy teenager, I said, oh, wow, that is the subject
I want to dedicate myself to. So my dream began to become a mathematician. And it's interesting,
I'm not trying to give the impression that these shortcuts are going to stop us doing any work,
because actually as a mathematician, I quite enjoy the work I do. But it's important to me that I
can choose the work I want to do. So it's interesting that Aristotle already had identified two
different sorts of work. Praxis, work for its own sake, the work that you kind of enjoy doing. And
then poesis, the work just for the goal, for the outcome. You just want to get to the end. You don't
really mind how you get there. And if there are shortcuts to get you to that goal, you're going
to take them. So the shortcuts I want to offer you tonight and that are in my book, are shortcuts to
stop you having to spend all your time doing the work for its outcome, the poesis, so you can get
to the work you really love doing, the praxis. In a way, this was Karl Marx's ideal for communism.
He always said, in a higher phase of communist society, labour has become not only a means of
life, but life's prime want. So my hope is my shortcuts are going to help you to do the things
you want to spend your life doing. And Karl Friedrich Gauss actually is a companion throughout my
journey of these shortcuts. His biography, somehow he seems to be involved in many of the
shortcuts I talk about in the book. So he starts the journey of the book at the tender age of
eight and nine in the classroom. But I found that he had a part to play in many of the shortcuts
that I'm going to talk about. So I'm going to give you a little bit of a tour of a few of the
shortcuts we can take on the way to our destination. And it's interesting that, actually, nature has
been taking shortcuts for a long time before mathematicians started to find them. And I think
nature, a bit like my lazy teenage self, is itself lazy and loves finding clever ways to get to
solutions. So the first shortcuts I'm going to talk about, we sort of discovered that nature is
doing them. So for example, the honeybee. Why does it make its hive out of hexagons? Well, this is
actually a shortcut because we've discovered now, mathematicians have proved that the hexagons are
actually the shapes that, when you put them together, use the least amount of wax in order to
make shapes which will contain a particular volume of honey. If you make squares or triangles, for
example, which are also an obvious lattice, you actually use more wax. And for a honeybee, actually
making wax is expensive. It's hard work. So it wants to find a low energy solution, an efficient
way of making the hive such it can contain the honey but use as little wax as possible. So nature
found this incredible shortcut to using as least wax as possible. Bubbles as well. Interesting, when
you blow a bubble and it wobbles around, but eventually it forms this beautiful spherical shape,
why does it form a sphere? Because, again, nature is looking for the low energy shape. Just as a
same way as if you put a ball on the top of a hill, we'll roll down into the valley, the low energy
place. A sphere turns out to be the shape which uses the least amount of energy to contain that
volume of air. So the surface area of the bubble is proportional to the energy needed and the sphere
is this shape with the smallest surface area. And so if you form interesting shapes like this
frame here and put a bubble over it, what the bubble does, nature finds the most efficient way
the low energy state to fill the frame with that film. And humans have taken advantage of this.
If you've ever been to Munich and gone to the Olympic Stadium there, a really beautiful building,
very kind of organic looking. And Friotto, who built the Munich Olympics, used the idea that
bubbles will find you the low energy solutions to how to put a canopy on a frame to be able to
choose the designs for the Munich Olympic building. And so these are actually large-scale versions of
the bubbles that he made on the small frames that he made in his studio. And because they are low
energy, it meant that there wasn't too much stress on the material that was put on top of this frame.
So in science we actually have this idea that nature is lazy. In everything nature is thrifty,
once said Morperius. The idea that nature seems to want to find the solutions, the most efficient
way of getting to the solution. A very interesting example of this is actually light. Light always
tries to find the fastest way to get from its source to its destination. So this is what causes
this strange effect that if you're in a swimming pool, your legs seem to be very short. In fact,
if you put a ruler in, you suddenly see the ruler is bending. That's because the light realizes
that the speed it can go in the water is slower than in the air. So it tries to get out of the
water quicker so it can speed along in the air and gets to its destination as quickly as possible.
Now, I was kind of curious how on earth does light do this? Because how does it know where it's
going? And it seems that it's exploiting quantum physics in order to be able to try out all the
different paths, but it collapses into the path which is the quickest way through the water and
the air. But what about us humans if we are challenged with a similar sort of problem? So
here's a problem where a lifeguard has to go and rescue somebody out at sea, but the lifeguard
can run faster on the sand than he can swim in the sea. So what's the optimal point to choose to
be able to get to the drowning swimmer as quickly as possible? Well, if you can run faster on the
sand, then maybe you want to just run to the perpendicular point from the swimmer, but then
actually you'll be wasting a little bit too much time. So there is a sweet spot, a point where the
light would equally find its way through these two different mediums, the two different speeds it
goes. But how do we humans find that sweet spot? Well, we've come up with a clever shortcut which
is the calculus. I would say one of the greatest shortcuts humans have come up with, which enables
you to take a situation where there are multiple scenarios and the calculus enables you to focus
in and find the solution which maximizes or minimizes whatever it is you're trying to look at. So
this tool of the calculus has been incredibly important, for example, in understanding economics,
how to maximize profits. But in this case, it would also be able to tell you that point at
which you will get to the swimmer the quickest way possible. And of course this shortcut was
created by Newton and Leibniz, and they actually used it to solve a very curious problem at the
time which was perplexing the mathematicians, which was if you've got a ball and you want to
create, say, a roller coaster ride where the ball or the train has got to get as fast down as
possible from the top through to the station at the bottom, what is the curve that will get you
the quickest using gravity from the top to this point at the station at the bottom? Maybe it's
just a straight line which goes from one point to the other, or perhaps a quadratic equation which
sort of comes and levels out at the station. But it turned out when they applied the calculus to
this and looked at all the different possible curves, what was the curve that would get you
quickest from A to B? It was a very curious curve, a curve which perhaps you wouldn't have found
without this shortcut of the calculus. It turns out actually the curve you need to go down below
the station and use the gravity and the speed that you've built up to shoot back up to the
destination. And the curve you need is something called a cycloid. So what you need to do is to
take a bicycle wheel and you put a pin at the bottom of the bicycle wheel, and then you wheel
the bicycle wheel along, and the curve that the pin marks out is this thing called a cycloid,
and then you want to turn this upside down, and this is the curve which gets your roller coaster
fastest from the point at the top to the station at the bottom. So differential calculus is an
extraordinarily amazing shortcut, so you can look at a scenario and work out what the most
efficient way is to get to your destination without having to try all the different possibilities
out, like it seems perhaps quantum physics is using to find the light to its destination. So that I
would say is one of our greatest shortcuts. But what about our modern age? We're being kind of
bombarded with so much amounts of data. We're leaving so much data around us. How can people
pick up signals and information from this data? Are there ways to take data and in this enormous
mass of numbers find shortcuts to find the secret information that's inside there? Well, yes,
there are, and this is one of the shortcuts I learned at university, the idea of a statistical
sample. When is that good enough to be able to tell you a lot about a large sample? And there was
always an advert which I used to watch as a kid, which I found very curious, and it took me some
time to understand that there was a shortcut hiding behind this advert. It was for cat food,
some of you might remember this, whiskers cat food, and the advert very boldly claims that
eight out of 10 cats preferred this type of cat food. Now, this is very curious to me because we
had a cat at home, and I do not remember anybody coming and asking my cat what sort of cat food
it liked. So I was curious how they can make such a bold claim. And it took to get to university
to find out that there's something like seven million cats in the UK. I mean, how many cats
would you need to ask? You don't have to ask them all. That's fair enough. So maybe our cat was
just unlucky not to be asked. But how many cats would you need to be asked to give you a really
good sense that you can say something as bold as, yeah, eight out of 10 in the large sample,
the seven million, will seem to be preferring whiskers. So that's the kind of challenge. You've
got this large population of seven million. What sort of number do I need to take to be
confident about a claim in the larger sample? It turns out to be really small. You just need
to ask 246 cats, and 19 out of 20 times, this will be within 5% of the true value in the large
population. Now, that was staggering to me when I learned that. Just a few as, you know, just under
250 cats gives you that kind of insight. And for me, this is a very powerful shortcut to
no to be able to know, I only need to sample this amount. Of course, you have to be careful here.
You have to make sure your sample is truly random. And there've been some very classic examples
where the sample has kind of favored a particular part of the population. Very famous one in America,
very early on when they were doing political polls, they decided they were going to phone everybody
up to ask them what they wanted to vote. But at the time, you had to have a lot of money to be able
to own a telephone. So they got a very biased selection. So one of the challenges with sampling
with a small sample size like this is to make sure that you're sampling truly randomly and
independently. Another interesting case where how much data do I need to know in order to be able
to make a decision is in one of these classic game shows like deal or no deal. So probably everyone
knows how you play deal or no deal. A number of boxes, each box containing a sum of money,
and you gradually select more and more boxes. And at some point, you have to make a deal
and go with the next box or the box you've got. I'm going to make it slightly more complicated
in deal or no deal. You know the different sums of money from $1 to maybe a million dollars.
In this game, you don't actually know what the values are in the box. So suppose there were, say,
26 boxes. You don't even know what the maximum prize is possible in these boxes. What sort of
number of boxes would you have to open up to get a feel for what these prizes are looking like,
such that you can make some sort of decision about when you're going to opt for, yeah, okay,
I'm going to keep this box. So this is actually very similar to a dilemma we have quite often
in life, where we're not really sure what's out there, and we're going to have to start to make
a decision about when we take the plunge. For example, when you're looking for a flat to buy
or something, and you go and look at the first flat, and it's wonderful, but you have this one
terrible sneaky feeling that maybe there are better flats out there, cheaper flats, or I think
the classic one is your partner for life, your girlfriend or boyfriend from school, just wonderful,
but you have this kind of just worrying feeling, well, yeah, but I maybe I need to see who else
is out there. And so, you know, how much of the scene do you have to sample before you take the
plunge and say, yes, this is the one I'm going to marry. So can maths help you as a shortcut to
know, you know, how many girlfriends or boyfriends you need to have before you take the plunge,
or how many boxes you need to see? Well, yes, indeed, there is a clever shortcut. It involves
one of the most famous numbers in mathematics. So probably top of the pops of mathematical
numbers is pi to do with circles, but maybe number two in the top top numbers is E, this number
connected with Euler and natural logarithms 2.71828 and then goes off to infinity, rather like pi
with no patterns to them. But it turns out that this number is also the key to understanding when
you should make your mind up and take the plunge. Because if you look at these different sorts of
problems, what they all have in common is somehow having to take a proportion of the data, how much
do you need to see before you can then try and make the best decision? Turns out you have to
consider one over E of the population and then make a decision after that point. So one over E
is about, I think it's about 37%. So you need to see about 37% of the data. So in the case of that,
those boxes on deal or no deal, you don't know what's in the boxes, you've got to see 37% of
those boxes. And then the strategy is that you must take the next box that beats all of the boxes
that you've seen up to that point. Now clearly this is not going to guarantee you the best box,
but one in three times this will guarantee you the best box. And this turns out to be the best
you can do in this particular game scenario. So looking at one over E of the proportion of the
boxes, choose the one that beats everything you've seen up to that point, one out of three times that
will get you the biggest prize in all of those boxes. And so the same also applies to your partner
for life. So you've got to look at about 37% of the kind of options out there and then go for the
one that's beaten all the ones you've seen up to that point. But on your wedding night, please do
not show your workings out when you show her or him why you made the decision you did. But there
seem to be great shortcuts in understanding in this huge data onslaught that we're having how
to understand information hiding inside there. One of the other great shortcuts I love is drawing
a picture. A diagram is a very powerful way of capturing the essence of the information that
you're trying to understand in a particular problem. Now there's a danger here and it's
something I should perhaps point out. These shortcuts I'm trying to offer you, they're not
about cutting corners. This is about genuinely getting you to your destination. I mean, if you're
building a building, you don't want the shortcuts which are going to mean the building's going to
fall down in 10 years time. Now these shortcuts, I really genuinely want you to solve your problem,
get to your goal, get to your destination. But in a way, the diagram shortcut has a little element
of cutting corners because it's about saying, hey look, there's information here which is not
important. I'm going to throw it away and kind of distill the things which are really important to
try and understand how to solve this challenge. I think one of the most exciting diagrams which
really changed things politically was, for example, Florence Nightingale's rose diagram,
which showed jet deaths during the Crimean War. She was out there trying to tend to the soldiers
that were being brought in, injured to the hospital and she was horrified to find that
actually most of the people, the soldiers that died, were not dying from the injuries they'd
sustained in warfare, but were dying from infectious diseases that they were catching
in the hospital, things that could be prevented. And when a sanitation committee came out to the
Crimean battlefield and looked at the hospitals, they understood that they were so dirty that this
was what was killing the soldiers. And so they cleaned out all of the latrines and sterilized
these things. And after they'd done that, the drop in the number of casualties because of
infectious disease and things was dramatic. And Nightingale went back home and wanted to try
and persuade government about this new insight that it wasn't war that was killing soldiers,
it was bad health. And so she tried to explain to politicians what was going on and people
weren't listening to her. And then she decided the only way to do this is to show them a picture
in the eye what was going on. And this rose diagram that she produced,
first sort of pie chart that was created, was her way of persuading government. So
in this picture, the red and black petals correspond to deaths of soldiers due to warfare,
but those large blue petals, those are the ones that correspond to
preventable deaths from disease in the hospital. And you can see the moment that the Sanitation
Committee came in, so all the terrible cases are on your right. And then the Sanitation Committee
came in and suddenly the number of deaths dropped dramatically from February onwards. And this
diagram was the one that convinced government eventually that they had to change policy and do
something about the sanitation in hospitals. There's a similar story actually that I discovered
which was relevant to our particular period of the pandemic. A few years ago, I invited
to Oxford to give my annual kind of public science talk, Ian Lipkin, who advises the
U.S. government on preparation for pandemics. And he, some years ago, about a decade ago,
was trying to persuade the U.S. government that he needed to do something because there's a real
palpable threat from pandemics. And so he wrote a 200-page document which he sent to
politicians in the U.S. and this document never got read. And then he realized, okay,
it's just far too much data there. He distilled it into a two-page PDF which he then sent
politicians still didn't get read. So he said, what am I going to do? I'll have to
take a different approach. And he used a visual approach and a storytelling approach because
he actually then became the advisor on the film Contagion with Matt Damon in. And that film was
then sent to politicians and they suddenly woke up to the importance of preparing. Well, I'm not
sure they really did wake up. Ian actually said to me when he came over, the science was incredibly
accurate in this film. And many other scientists praised the science. But the one thing they
criticized him for, he said, yeah, it's all great science. But in that film, you got them finding
a vaccine within a year. I mean, that's just ridiculous. That would never happen. And so
he's been very, he wrote to me just recently, so I'm very pleased to say that, you know, we've
now proved that even that is possible. But it's true. In the past, it didn't seem to be shortcuts
to be able to find a vaccine other than trying things out for years and years to be able to.
But we do seem to have found some shortcuts, at least for getting us a vaccine within the year.
But, you know, you have to be careful with the diagram. The whole point about a diagram is,
you know, you don't want all the information there which gets cluttered. So that's the power of
a diagram is deciding what to throw away. But there's a rather nice story that Lewis Carroll once
wrote. It's called Sylvie and Bruno Concluded. And in this land that he talks about, they've created
this wonderful map of the country. And you think maps are in some ways as well, fantastic diagrams,
shortcuts to navigating your way around a country. But this map, they just couldn't decide what to
throw away. They felt everything was quite important. So eventually they said, we actually made a map
of the country. It was on a scale of a mile to a mile. The narrator said, well, have you used it
much? Well, it's never been spread out yet. The farmers objected. They said it would cover the
whole country and shut out the sunlight. So now we use the country itself as its own map. And I
assure you it does nearly as well. So it's important to be able to throw information away, because if
you keep all the details, you just can't see what's going on. And I think some of the greatest
diagrams we've come up with have enabled us to understand, you know, the very big in our universe
and the very small through drawing a picture that we can draw on a piece of paper. So Copernicus is
great insight about the idea of a sun-centered solar system. He wrote, you know, very long
hundreds of pages about his idea. But what really convinced people was this little diagram he put
at the beginning of the book. And it's not a true diagram representing the solar system. The
planets don't do perfect circles. They're not evenly spaced like in his diagram. But it captured
information that he was trying to communicate, the idea of the sun being at the center. And any
chemists amongst you will, of course, be drawing these little pictures of molecules with letters
and lines joining them. Particle physicists understand the interactions of particles
using these wonderful diagrams, the Feynman diagrams. And these truly are a wonderful shortcut,
because what they represent are actually very complex mathematical equations, path integrals,
which if you look at the mathematics, very hard to navigate your way through what is possible
with these particle interactions. And Feynman himself was struggling with the mathematics
and eventually came up with this clever idea of these little Feynman diagrams, which is now
the tool that most people will start with in order to understand what a particle might be doing.
Actually, a diagram I didn't include here, a very famous diagram, was the double helix structure
that Crick and Watson had in their nature paper. And actually, I've seen a picture of Crick and
Watson's first attempt to draw this double helix. And they couldn't resist rather like that map of
the country, putting all the extra details that they found about the molecular makeup of the
double helix. And it was cluttered and confusing. And eventually, Francis Crick took this little
image that he tried to make back home to his wife, Odeal Crick, who was an artist. And she was
the eventually the one who said, well, what's important about this little picture you've drawn?
She was mostly, her art was mostly about drawing portraits, but she then helped Francis draw a
really beautiful picture of that double helix. And it's actually Odeal Crick's diagram,
which is the one that was published eventually in the nature paper. So the powerful combination
of art and science and being able to communicate, shortcut the information and tell you what's
going on. But diagrams can be very dangerous. You can use diagrams to confuse and to try and
give people information that really isn't there. So some of the classic examples of abuse of diagrams
to try and communicate information. For example, take these ones. The diagram on the left
was actually the one that Fox News used to try and explain all the tax cuts that Bush
had in place. If they get removed, this is going to be the change in your, the taxes you're going
to be paying. So you see that diagram, it looks terrible. You know, I've got all my taxes going
to grow enormous if these tax cuts are taken away. But what was very sneaky about Fox News was,
of course, where did they start the graph at 34%? Not at zero. So if you actually put it at zero,
what does it look like? It doesn't look that big a change, actually. So, but that's, you know,
not what they were trying to, they were cheating and trying to communicate something different. So
always look and see where your graphs are starting, because they might be trying to
use that diagram to trick you. Here's another classic one. Company C is trying to show that its
profits are so much bigger than its competitors, company B and company A. But what they've done,
you see company A, only a million profits, company B double that, two million, company C, five million
dollars. But that's just the height, of course, what they've done is also bulked out the width.
So you need, actually, 25 copies of company A to cover what looks like the profits of company C.
So that's another classic abuse of a diagram. So I'm always a little bit nervous of this diagram
shortcut, because it can kind of lead you astray. I mean, I always like Descartes' sort of idea of
sense perceptions, often sense deceptions. So I quite like, in my work, trying to change
things into kind of algebra as my sort of shortcut. But we live in a very networked world at the
moment, trying to navigate lots of different networks out there, friend networks, internet
networks, trying to find a way quickly from one place to another. And mathematics has come up with
some great shortcuts in order to help us to navigate some of these networks that are out there.
And actually, the beginning of our journey into finding clever ways to work our way around
networks happened some centuries ago. A very famous problem, I think the challenge of adding
up the numbers from one to 100 that Gauss was given, I'm not sure even that story is true,
but it's one of our fairy tales that we tell. One of the other mathematical fairy tales we
love to tell our students is about the challenge of the bridges of Kernigsberg. Eighteenth-century
citizens in Kernigsberg used to like to try this Sunday afternoon challenge of trying to cross
all the bridges in the city once and once only. Because they had this lovely, this river Pregel
came in with two branches, then it formed around an island at the center of the city and then went
out in a single branch out to the Baltic Sea. These seven bridges across the city,
was it possible to cross all of the seven bridges once and once only? But however hard they tried,
there was seem to be one bridge left over, but they were always worried, well, maybe we haven't
tried all the different possibilities. So that's the long way, of course, try all of the different,
list them all out and show that you can't, that none of them achieve the goal. But there is a
shortcut and this is the shortcut that another of the gate shortcutters of mathematics, Leonard
Euler, came up with when he was told about the challenge of the bridges of Kernigsberg. In fact,
he used our diagram shortcut to find out a clever way to think about this problem.
He said, well, it isn't really important what the geometry of the city is, what the bridges look
like or anything like that. What's important is just how the city and the different islands and
sides of the city are joined together. So he replaced this kind of geometric map with a new
sort of map that we now call a topological map. So this just reduced all the land masses to single
points and then there were bridges collecting those land masses, they were then lines joining
those points. So this idea of topology, drawing a diagram which shows the way things are connected
together, of course, some of you may have come tonight to the Royal Institution on the London
Underground. Of course, that was a wonderful diagram, a topological map of the way the
stations in London are connected together. It's not a geometric map. The distance from
Caledonian Road down to King's Cross is much larger than the distance from, say,
Piccadilly Circus to Leicester Square. Yet on the map, they look the same distance. But you
don't care about that because you just want to know that there is a route getting you from
one to the other. And this was Beck's great insight when he made this map of the London
Underground in the 1930s, which before that map, people were very reluctant to go on the
underground because they just couldn't understand it with this geometric map. But the topological
map just laid very clear, became their shortcut to being able to take the underground wherever
they wanted to. So this is a kind of little overground map of Königsberg. But the point is
that Euler realized this challenge that they were trying to achieve of crossing all the bridges
once and once only is the same as trying to draw this diagram without taking your pen off the
paper, but never going over a line twice. So can you draw this little picture in that way?
And so I can see some people shaking their heads, no, you can't. And the reason you can't is that
if you're drawing this picture, then in the middle of the journey, if you go into a point
on one line, then you have to go out on another line. So it means that most of the points in the
map have to have an even number of lines coming in and out of them because there are only two places
where you can have an odd number. That's at the beginning of the journey where you start at a
point and go out. And perhaps the end of the journey where you then finish on a point. So it
turns out that any map where there are more than two places with an odd number of lines coming out
of all of the points is going to be impossible to draw. And if you look at this map here,
well, every point has an odd number of lines coming out of it. And so this is impossible.
Now, I don't think it would have taken too long for the citizens of Königsberg actually to list
all of the possible paths around it. It's not that complicated. But what if I had, say, 45
bridges and I drew a whole network of how they were connected together, then it'd be much more
difficult. And there's an interesting example of a place with 45 bridges with different areas of
land and the challenge of whether you could walk all of these 45 bridges. And it's actually the city
of Bristol. So a mathematician in Bristol drew the map of the 45 bridges and discovered actually
this past Euler's test that there were only two places which had an odd number of bridges coming
out. So he knew that that was where he had to start and end. And on one day he spent 11 hours
mapping out the journey. He knew that it was possible to cross all of the 45 bridges
and achieve that possible path. So I think this is a beautiful shortcut that Euler came up with
because it just means you can take as complicated as map as you want and then you just count the
number of lines coming out of each point and that's going to tell you whether it's possible or not.
You do not have to try all the different possibilities. I actually had the chance to go and visit
Königsberg and have a look at these bridges a few years ago on a trip I did with BBC when we were
making the series The Story of Maths. The town is no longer called Königsberg. It's now part of
Russia. It's a Russian exclave because it's actually a little bit of Russia surrounded by other
countries. It's called Kaliningrad now. But modern-day Kaliningrad doesn't have all of the old
bridges. A few of them still remain but most of them were bombed during the Second World War by
the Allies. But a few have been rebuilt. So there's a dual carriageway which runs through
the town and over the islands. There's now a new railway bridge and you can actually walk
across the railway bridge. So the BBC team that I went with thought this was such a
miserable place Kaliningrad. They really hated it. But for me it was like going to mathematical
Disneyland. And so I insisted that we spend at least the afternoon considering the seven
bridges of Kaliningrad. And what's wonderful is if you draw them now the little map, the diagram,
of how these bridges are connected, the seven bridges of Kaliningrad, it is possible to walk
them all once and once only. So we spent an afternoon walking the bridges to prove it's
possible but with Oilers shortcut you could know already in advance that you were able to do it.
So very nice. Now possible to do the seven bridges. So networks, these idea of how to navigate a
network, very important in our modern age. The internet for example. I think we have this extraordinary
tool Google for example to navigate very quickly. Huge number of websites. If you want to know
where to go to, you type in your idea. You know, Gauss biography and up comes the biography of
Gauss. I mean how does that work? That's amazing. You know, it's not little Google elves at the
other end go, I want some biography of Gauss. No, it's an amazing piece of mathematics. Again a
shortcut we teach our undergraduates at university. Something called the eigenvalue of a matrix
enables you to find a very fast way to navigate the internet and come up with the
places you want to visit. And this was a shortcut that Larry Page and Sergei Brin when they came
up with Google when they were students had learned about and exploited for the shortcut that we used
to navigate the internet. And what about our friendship networks? You might have heard of
this thing called the six degrees of separation. That if I choose one of you in the audience and
perhaps one person randomly watching from Sacramento, you know, could we find a connection
between these two people with just friendships, you know, a link of friends? Maybe I've actually
narrowed it down because if anyone who's watching the RI and here at the RI you've probably got or
we could probably do it in three or two or something. But what about randomly? If I choose
two random people in the world, it turns out that our network of friendships have a very strange
property that, yeah, we seem to be able to always find a way to connect through a friend of a friend
of a friend of a friend. It just takes six friends to connect two people on the planet. Now, that's
extraordinary. What an amazing network that has that kind of possibility of a shortcut to get from
one place to the other. And we call these sort of networks that have this property small world
networks. And we've understood what it is about a network that gives it this kind of quality of
being able to get from one place to the other in such a short number of steps. And it turns out
that, you know, your local, your friendship network mostly consists of people that you know
around you, your local friends in your neighborhood, your school, your workplace. And then you'll have
a few sort of global friends, people you know, maybe in Sacramento or in India. And these, you
just need a few of these long range connections which join up the local friendship networks
to be able to create networks that have this property being able to move very quickly from
one place to another in just six moves. So our friendship network seems to have that quality
to it. But another very important network that seems to have this small world property are our
brains. So here's an example actually of one of these small world networks. So for example, here are
20 friends, for example, each knows the one next to it, but we just join a few together
across the whole network. And this will have the property that you can get around it very quickly.
So these are what we call small world networks. And as I said, the brain, it turns out, seems to
tap into this quality. So we have a lot of local connectivity in the neurons. So they can talk
very quickly to things nearby. But we also seem to have a few, quite a few global connections
across the brain, which enable the brain then quickly to talk to another part of the brain,
which might be quite far away from it. And it seems that the way the neurons are connected also
have this kind of small world property. This is actually Gauss's brain. Gauss, when he died,
decided he would leave his brain to the university in Göttingen, where he worked,
so they could investigate what was so special about his brain that made him such a good
mathematician, such a good short cutter. And it turns out that it does seem to have a rather
special quality that it seems to be more kind of folds in it than a normal brain, as if it's
trying to make connections that the rest of us have to go some kind of the slow way around.
So yes, in fact, his brain got mixed up with somebody else's brain for a while, and it was
only when they took a scanner to this, and this image had been made kind of when the brain had
been donated, and they realized it didn't match up with the brain they got in the museum, and so
they had to find one which did look like this one, and so eventually they got put together.
But so we found wonderful ways to get around these networks. Now one of the other qualities
of this book is I thought, well, it's kind of celebration of mathematical shortcuts,
but I also was quite intrigued to see whether other professions had their own sort of shortcuts
that they exploited, and were they ones that I recognized from a mathematical perspective,
or were they new ones that I might be able to use in my own field? So part of the book, I take what
I call pit stops between the shortcuts, and went and talked to lots of people in different professions
about whether they had shortcuts, or perhaps their profession, there were no shortcuts that
they could take advantage of. So for example, I went and talked to Natalie Klein, one of my
favorite cellists, that I was particularly keen to ask about shortcuts, because I spent the last
two years trying to learn the cello, and I thought, I'd love a shortcut that could get me to play the
Bach suites without having to do hours and hours of practice. And alas, she said there aren't really
shortcuts to becoming an international cellist or playing, and she had an interesting sort of reason
for that, which is basically you're trying to change your body, you're trying to get a kind of
muscle memory going about how your fingers run around the cello, and that actually takes time,
it takes time actually to retrain the body, to be able to have that muscle memory,
to be able to play those pieces. And it's a bit like she said, you couldn't become an
international athlete without putting in the hours of training, changing your body.
And so that was interesting. But she said, we do use some shortcuts, and the reason I persuade all
my students to learn their scales and arpeggios is that they are great shortcuts. And they actually
tap into one of the shortcuts I talk about in the book, which are pattern shortcuts. If you can
see a pattern, that often helps you to shortcut perhaps reading the pattern into the future,
or perhaps once you've seen the pattern, you don't have to read each number individually,
because the pattern already tells you what's going on. So she finds that that's actually the case
when she's reading a piece of music for the first time. What she'll look at is see, actually that
pattern is just a scale going up and down, and I know how to do that. So she won't have to read
each note individually. And so she taps into a lot of these pattern shortcuts and being able to
play things very quickly. She compared it actually to reading, that you don't look at every letter
because you see the word. And so for her, that shortcut of the scales and arpeggios gives her
a way of reading music like words rather than individual letters. Another place where shortcuts
sometimes aren't possible. I talked to Suzy Orbach about therapy. Are there shortcuts in therapy?
My wife is actually a therapist, and she was horrified at my idea of writing about shortcuts,
because she says no, it takes years to actually get somebody through the traumas they might have had
during childhood. And it's certainly true. There are some cases where therapy does take years,
because again, you're really rewiring the brain. You're changing the brain. Suzy Orbach described
it. It's like unlearning English. I mean, that is very difficult. Learning a language is difficult,
and I talked to somebody about trying to learn languages and shortcuts. But unlearning a language,
almost impossible. So there are certain therapies that will just need time. However,
you might have read about the death just recently of a beck who came up with cognitive
behavioral therapy, not the same beck as did the London Underground map. But cognitive behavioral
therapy is an amazing shortcut in eight weeks to be able to change perhaps behavior, to be able
to cope with not descending into depression every time, but understanding the algorithm of thought
and seeing that there's one point in the algorithm that where if I can identify I'm there, I can take
a different path and avoid deep depression. So there are some sort of therapy where
you're able to rewire the brain quite quickly in just eight weeks. The other guy you see,
two guys here are Brent Hoberman, who is a startup king. He helped set up LastMinute.com,
and I was intrigued what was the secret to the millions you've made. His secret was breaking
the law. So that was his shortcut. Now that was interesting because actually I recognize that
shortcut because one of the shortcuts, best shortcuts we have had in mathematics is coming up
with a square root of minus one, an amazing number which enables you to do quantum physics.
We use it in early radar. Complex numbers were used to land planes when using normal numbers,
the planes would have crashed by the time you've done the calculations. But that was kind of breaking
a law. Before that, imaginary numbers, every number when you square it is positive. What's
the square root of minus one? There isn't a number, but we broke that law and came up with
this amazing shortcut. But sometimes you don't want a shortcut, and Robert McFarlane, who's the
other person in my picture here, he loves walking. He's a mountaineer. He loves taking days to get
to the top of a peak. And if you offered him a helicopter to get to the top of the peak,
he would say, I don't want that sort of shortcut. And I think that goes back to my idea of this
praxis and proesis. Yeah, there are certain times when you don't want to shortcut the experience,
because the experience, the time taken is the thing. I love going walking with my family,
and I remember taking our family once, we went up to the Lake District, we rented a little house,
and we set off across the field on a day's walk in the hills there. And my son, I think he was
about 10 at the time, suddenly he saw this little path going back across another field down to the
house that we were staying in. He said, Dad, I found a shortcut. We can get back to the house
really quickly. And I made me realize, sometimes it's about going to A to A, but taking a long time
about it. But Robert actually told me about a wonderful shortcut that he did use when he was
on a mountain, and the night was coming in, and they had to get off the mountain very quickly,
else it was not going to be safe. I learned this new word, maybe you know this word, but he said,
we were about to be benighted. There's lovely words where the night is about to engulf you,
to be benighted. And so he came up with an incredibly clever shortcut to get off the
mountain quickly. It was snowy, and they decided to create a mini avalanche, which got them down
the mountain. They just rode this avalanche down to the bottom of the mountain, and they arrived
quickly, safely at the bottom. So there's a kind of exploration of other people's shortcuts there
as well. The final shortcut is actually about an impossible shortcut, because it turns out
that there are some problems in mathematics that we think may not have a shortcut beyond
just trying every single possibility, the long way. What I love about mathematics is it's able
sometimes to turn on itself and show its limitations. Sometimes Fermat's last theorem, it showed that
there are no solutions to this equation. And the classic problem that we have, where we think there
are no shortcuts to just the long way of trying all the different possibilities, is a classic problem
called the traveling salesman problem. So this is where a traveling salesman has a lot of cities
they've got to visit, roads between the cities with distances on them, and the challenges, which
is the path around all the cities, which is the shortest distance. So this is actually a map of
the stages at Glastonbury. So I do an event in the circus and theatre tent kind of math show there,
but I always love after doing the show, trying to go around all of the venues once and once only
in the quickest way possible. And I produce this little map of the Glastonbury stages,
and it's taken me some time to find the shortest path, because we believe there is no fast algorithm,
like the one, you know, Euler could take a map and say, well, when is it possible that she took
across all of the bridges? You need to try all the possibilities, very clever algorithm that says,
no, I just need to count the number of odd points, places with odd lines coming out. But this problem
we think that there is no way beyond trying all the possibilities. And in fact, there's a million
dollar price for anybody who can prove there is no shortcut. So this is technically called P versus
NP. You actually win the million dollars if you do find a shortcut. So we don't know at the moment,
there may be a shortcut. But our belief is these quality of problems that they don't have shortcuts
about them. So there's a kind of challenge out there, prove there are no shortcuts. But you know,
all of these shortcuts, as I said, the purpose of them is to get you to a point where you want to
do what you want to do. And I think Gauss rather summed it up nicely in a letter that he wrote to
a friend towards the end of his life, that he said, when I have clarified and exhausted a subject,
when I've worked out how to do everything, then I turn away from it, it doesn't become interesting
anymore. He's done that. What he's excited about is in order to go into the darkness again, to look
at all of those problems he hasn't found the shortcuts for, to find all the new shortcuts.
And that for him was the exciting challenge of doing mathematics. Yeah, sure, he'd learned
all of the old shortcuts that helped him to get to this new place where he could look into the
darkness and try and find the new things out there. So I hope this evening's presentation and
copy of the book, which will be available afterwards, will be your opportunity to learn
some of these amazing shortcuts that mathematicians have put together over the last 2000 years.
The kind of tunnels that we've already dug out so you can get to the point where you too can go
into the darkness and discover your own shortcuts. Thank you very much.
