Imagine we're traveling towards a black hole, like the one in this image, so the image behind
me. Imagine we're actually going there. If you like it, we're in a starship, if you're
so inclined, a small starship going there, or if you're so inclined, we're in a broom
flying in the interstellar space. I've chosen to travel toward this black hole here, which
is Sagittarius A star, because we have a picture of it. This is a picture that was on all the
front pages of the newspapers a few years ago. Plenty of black holes. There are millions
of black holes, billions, in fact, of black holes. I would say that this is a both surprising
and most beautiful discovery of the last years, that the universe is actually filled with
black holes. We didn't know that. When I was a student, nobody even imagined that. In fact,
people didn't believe that black holes could actually exist in the sky. So I could have
chosen a much closer black hole. There are much closer black holes to go to, but this
one is big. It's big, and we have a picture. We have a picture because it's big. It's far,
the center of the galaxy, so it's a long way to go there. But I want to take you there,
and I want to take you next to it, and then into it. So what we are going to see if we
get close, of course, is something like this image that you see, and you have seen in newspapers.
This image was taken by radio telescopes. In fact, some of you may know that, by having a number
of radio telescopes on Earth working together, all around the Earth, half a dozen or more
telescopes working as a single radio telescope. So like a radio telescope as large as the Earth,
and combining all the data, and the more it's large, the antenna, the more you can focus on a
small angle, so we could see something like that. So if we go there, if we are going there,
we're going to see something like that, of course, without the need of a huge radio
telescope, because we are going closer and closer and closer. But when we go closer,
we see it better, and that's what we're going to see. That is exactly the same images as the
previous one, except that this one, the one we actually have seen, is autofocus, because so far
that the radio telescope cannot focus better. If you use more on focus, or what we expect to see
with a technique for getting images gets better, is this one. In fact, this one, this image was
computed, was what was expected, was theoretically predicted before the observation. And this is
why when we saw this one, it was so spectacular that this is clearly something like that autofocus.
So why a circle? The reason is a circle, it's far from obvious. First of all, just to make it
clear, it would be a circle from whatever direction you would look at it. So it's not really a
circle, it's an optical effect due to the funny way light moves around the black hole. Light around
the black hole bends, because that's what light does next to masses, and that's how Einstein
theory that predicts all that, that tell us how all this works was first confirmed by measuring
the bending of the light by the star. And it bends in such a way that an array of light could
actually bend so much to be on an orbit around the black hole, in any possible angle, whatever
angle. So around the hole, the hole is actually smaller than the ring. The ring roughly is only
one and a half times the radius of the ring, one and a half times the radius of the black hole inside.
So you imagine, black hole, imagine for a moment like a black sphere, and around there's actually a sort
of sphere of light, which is all the light that come from all over that start making some rotation
around. So if you have around this thing, there's a lot of matter, attracted by black holes,
by rallying, doing funny things, and being becoming very hot, just because there's friction,
this thing clashing, yes, one another. And imagine you have some light coming from here,
this is black hole, you get the light directly, but you also get the light that bends around
the black hole roughly at one radius and a half and then gets to our eyes. And light from
here, you get the direct one, and the one come here. So you get a little bit of light from
all over, and a lot of light from tangentially to that sphere, wherever you are. So wherever you are,
you see this ring, which is the sort of meridian or equator of this sphere from which
tangentially the light comes to you from wherever. So this is the optical effect that we see when we
go there. So we get closer and we start seeing more clear this beautiful ring. We also approach
all this matter moving around, but let's imagine that our starship or whatever is sufficiently
solid, that we're not going to be disturbed by that, and we get closer. We get closer and
let's do it slowly. We have rockets, we can hold, there's a pool of the black hole, but we can
hover at certain distance from it by keeping the rocket firing. So we're keeping height and we can
look down, and down there is the hole. And this is big. This one, say, the actual dark thing is
the size of the orbit of the moon. It's a huge thing. It's big, big things. It's bigger than the
sun. And we keep at a distance. We look down. Most of us are black, and we see things falling.
Now, more precisely, imagine we're in our starship. We open a window, sort of. We let a
stone fall down. We close rapidly because the stone fall down. We see what it goes down.
What do we see? We don't see the fall entering the black hole, right? We see the stone slowing,
slowing, slowing down, and never getting to the bottom. Slowest, slowest, slowest, slowest,
slowest, slowest, slowest, slowest, okay? Not only that. The light that comes from the stone,
there's light there because it's all just burning things. It becomes dimmer and dimmer and dimmer
and more red, more red. So like the wavelength that light gets to us is more and more long,
which means the frequency, it's slower and slower. It's like not only the stone is slowing
down, but even its atoms are vibrating more slowly. And in fact, if you throw a clock down,
I'll never throw my father's clock. But if you throw a clock down, we would see the clock
slow down, slow, slow down, slow and slow and slow. We're almost stopping at some point
when it goes there. Now we are there, since it's slow. Now suppose we look back. We look up
from Earth, from where we came. And imagine, for instance, that from Earth we are getting
messages. Say every day we get a message from our friend's home. How is it going? Is it beautiful
there? Okay? Once every day. Okay? We get a message once every day, but when we are a distance
from the black hole, we start getting messages every 20 hours. Then we come down a little bit
toward the black hole and we get messages every few hours. And then we come closer and we get
messages every minute. And then we get closer again and we get one message every second.
But from Earth it was sent once a day. So we see the future. Okay? We come closer and closer.
We get all these messages. These messages from 100 years in the future, 1,000 years in the future.
The American pie is finished. I mean, Congo is dominant. It's the most prosperous piece on Earth.
Everybody's loving everybody. It's the future. Maybe. So that's time dilation. That's exactly
the same phenomenon that on Earth we can measure in a laboratory. When we take two clocks, we move
one half, wait a bit, come down. And the clock up measure a little bit more time. The clock down
measure a little bit less time. Okay? That's done in a laboratory. Except that on Earth it's just
a teeny, teeny, teeny fraction difference. A fraction, a fraction, a fraction, so a millisecond
that can be measured near a black hole, which is a huge mass. This is enormous. But time dilation
doesn't mean, of course, we're in the rocket, hovering there. For us, everything is normal. Time goes
normal. Clock beats normally. My heart beats normally. But what we see closer to a black hole,
we see it slower. What we see far away, we see it faster. Okay? Fine. But I didn't take you all
the way down just to stay outside. We want to go in. Take you down because I'm going soon
into the side of the black hole. So let's decrease our rockets and start getting inside the black
hole. Now, wait a minute. In the textbook, all the textbook of physics today is written that if you
enter a black hole, that's it. You can never come out forever. So we still want to get down. We're
going to die. We're also going to die if we stay out because we're going to die anyway. But we have less
time to leave if we go in. I'm Italian and the greatest Italian poet, Dante. Dante Ligieri has
written this marvelous sort of mind travel book, which is a divine comedy, in which he goes into the
hell. And then actually, this incredible story. And when he gets to the dark portal of hell, it's
written there, perdete ogni speranza, voi che entrate, which means give up any hope. You who come
in, tau who come in. But he goes nevertheless. So let's go in nevertheless. He's going to come out. So let's
go down. We enter the black hole. Good. So we're in. We're inside the black hole now. And we're in. And
let's look around. First, nothing particular has happened. Crossing the horizon, going into the
black hole is the same. We are the same as before. Our starship is the same as before. If you look back at the
stars, there's still the stars. All sort of out of position because light goes funny turns. But the lights
come in and we see the star. But something is different. When we're outside, sort of hoovering
around, there was a sphere around the black hole, another sphere, another sphere. And everything was
there static. And in the center of this field, there was this black hole, big, but certain size. Now we're inside.
Imagine we can look around and see what is the geometry there. What we see is still there are spheres
and spheres, but below us is not just the volume we would expect. It's an immensely big volume. So
spheres and spheres and spheres and spheres and spheres and spheres. Down, down, down, down, down, very far.
The black hole, it's, you know, these fairy tales that, you know, the two brothers, the sister brother walking
the wood. And then there's this little hat. And there's a door. They go in. And inside is a huge, huge room.
And another huge room. And then a garter fountain and so on. And black hole is something similar. It has a size
outside. But inside, there's much more volume of what we are talked at school, you know, the sphere of this radius.
What is the volume inside? You can compute it. Okay, I never believe what they tell you at school. It's not true.
There is a sphere in which the volume is much more than what they tell you it's inside the series. Why?
Because space is distorted. That's what generativity described. The distortion of space is enormous.
So inside is sort of, you see, imagine that this is a, whoops, this is a two-dimensional model.
Imagine that this is the sphere around the black hole, the actual black hole. We were before, we were here.
Now we move inside, we are in. And inside is much more than you would expect if this was flat. Okay?
It's longer, longer, longer, longer, longer. It's this long, long tube, enormously, enormously long.
The more the black hole is old, the more the tube is long. Okay?
If there's some person in the public here or watching through a camera who is, who knows generativity very, very well,
might ask what I'm talking about. I'm describing a black hole in a peculiar affiliation, which is the one I think is best to understand what's inside of the black hole,
which is the affiliation that maximizes volume and covers the entire black hole.
So the first surprise is that there is this pit as well, very, very profound, but that's not the biggest surprise.
The biggest surprise, what we see there, is that it's moving. While outside, nothing was happening, we could have been hoovering there forever,
inside is changing. The geometry of space is changing, space around us is changing. And two things are happening.
One is that it's becoming longer and longer and longer and longer with time.
So that's why a black hole is bigger, because with time this becomes longer and longer and longer. It keeps growing, growing, growing, growing.
We're not talking of kilometers, we're talking about millions of light years. There's a huge, huge immense space inside an old black hole.
Sagittarius A star, presumably, is at least 10 billion years old, it's very old, so it's a total cosmological age, so it's an immense thing.
But the other thing is that it's shrinking. It's becoming longer and shrinking.
Now the fantastic people here at the RA build this beautiful thing, which actually becomes longer, but I didn't know how to make it shrink at the same time.
Maybe the next time I'll get it shrink. So if you are here, we are getting the sphere on us closing up on us.
A speed which is pretty worrying. I mean, we don't have much time. This is closing around us.
So here is a picture of an idea of an inside a black hole.
And by the way, at the end, in this picture, you see a little dark spot at the end.
So down here, I said it's very long, but it doesn't say it's infinite. It's not infinite. It's finite.
And at the very bottom here, if some of you think there's a singularity, forget about it. There's no singularity out here.
What is here? Here is a star that initially collapsed to form the black hole.
So if there is some matter that at some point, most black holes we see, probably not this one.
But most stellar black holes that we see, the smaller one, are big stars that when they burn all the hydrogen,
they cool down because they stop burning. They don't have fuel anymore.
And by cooling down, the pressure of the heat that was sort of keeping the star open, diminish.
So the weight is very big. The weight is so strong that they crush everything,
and no rock would resist that weight, and they crush, crush, crush, and form the hole.
So create this hole, goes down the horizon, create the horizon, goes down, and the star is still there.
Remarkably, millions of years later, this star is still there.
But remember, times depend on what you are.
So this is us falling down.
We don't fall down all the way. We're not going to get to the star. It's far, far away.
We've got to fall down, and everything is closing around us, slower and slower and slower.
And we're going to be crushed. But remember, we are mind-traveling. We're not doing this for you.
So imagine that we're so strong that we resist this pressure.
The space is closing around us. We've been pulled in this direction, crashing this direction.
At some point, the space around us becomes very, very, very small. What's going to happen next?
That's where I want you to get it. Because everything I've said so far is things we know very well.
We have very high confidence in it. All this follows from the theory of Einstein's general relativity,
written in 1915, which has predicted these black holes, and we have seen the black holes exactly as it was predicted.
It has predicted gravitational waves, and we have seen the gravitational waves.
It has predicted the expansion of the universe, and we have seen the expansion of the universe.
It has predicted Mercury to behave in that way that contradicts the Newton equation, and Mercury to behave that.
So we have enormous confidence in this theory.
And the theory tells us not only that black holes exist, but also what happened inside,
and also what happened to the very moment in which everything is going to get squeezed, but not next.
Why? Because the more we are squeezed, the more we are pressured, the more there is a curvature,
because the space is curved, and we know that when we are in that conditions, we cannot disregard quantum mechanics anymore.
Quantum phenomena become crucial.
And quantum phenomena, I thought I had a copy of a paragraph in a paper by Einstein in 1916.
In 1915, Einstein writes this theory, which is our best theory.
The most beautiful theory for physics, said Leven Landau, are the theory of generative space and time.
In 1916, Einstein writes a paper in which he says, of course, my theory, it's wrong, because it does regard quantum phenomena.
And the last line says in German, die neue gravitation theory must be corrected because of quantum phenomena.
So he knew, and we know, that the theory is incomplete.
It doesn't describe what happened to space and time when curvature is so high.
So there, we don't have Einstein's theory anymore, which means that we lost our guide.
We don't know anymore what's going to happen.
Dante, when he goes down into hell, goes all the way through, and then all through his path is guided by Virgil in his poem.
And he's very much attached to Virgil, because Virgil explained him how to do, what everything happened.
Dante's afraid of being in hell, all the devils and so on, and Virgil tells him what to do.
But at some point, Virgil says, I cannot accompany you more, because I don't have the right to go to paradise.
And so Dante's alone, not in an easy place in the other side of the universe.
And he's on his own, and we are on our own, down there.
We don't have a theory anymore that tells us what to do.
How do we behave when we lose our stars that tell us our masters?
And I think that's beauty of life, perhaps.
When we're on our own, and we lose our master, our guide, that's when Dante says, qui si parra la tua nobilitate.
Here's where you're going to show what you're capable of doing.
I've spent all my life, and that's why I wanted to take you to the center of Black Hole,
trying to construct a theory with other, with many colleagues, of course, to understand how are the quantum properties of gravity.
So to change the theory of Einstein, generativity, to keep into account the quantum phenomena.
And the theory of development with colleagues, it's loop quantum gravity, which is a tentative theory of quantum gravity.
A tentative means that we haven't yet made measurement, observation, to confirm that that's a good theory, like we have so much for generativity.
And I think it's crucial, when scientists talk today, to distinguish what we know with confidence from our speculations.
It's wonderful to speculate. That's what scientists are supposed to do.
This is what a place like that is meant to be for.
To think and try to think where we don't know, and walk a little bit outside the realm of our knowledge to learn something new.
So to go through that final passage, which is called the singularity, the singularity is not the center of the Black Hole.
So the light is what's going to happen when everything shrinks down. We need quantum gravity.
Okay, so what is quantum gravity telling us? What is loop quantum gravity telling us in particular?
Loop quantum gravity is a quantum theory. So like all quantum theories, it predicts two things, which are going to be crucial here.
One is that things are granular.
Light, we can describe light to some precision as a wave, continuous, but to a better precision, light has a granular structure.
It's made by photons, but it particles of line. Line arrives on my hand, depositing energy continuously,
but if I make precise measurement, what really happens, I see little dots one after the other one coming.
In fact, if we dim the light, and we have a precise screen, that is exactly what we see.
We see one dot forming, another dot forming, another dot forming. This is the grain, the photons, one by one arriving.
So this is granularity and all things. That's all over quantum mechanics.
The energy of harmonic oscillators is granular. One, two, three, the orbits around the atoms are discrete.
One orbit, another orbit, another orbit, and so on.
So the main result of loop quantum gravity is that space is granular. Space itself is granular.
So between my hands, again, at school, they tell us there's a continuous space.
So again, don't believe what they tell at school.
The space, if you keep into account the quantum property of gravity, and if you believe this tentative theory,
it can be divided in half, in half, in half, but not forever.
At some point, you get to the bottom. You get to the individual grains of space.
So this granularity of space, that's a calculation that one does in loop quantum gravity,
have a certain size, very small, extremely small, but finite.
Which means, if you go back to the black hole, that this thing cannot shrink forever,
because at some point the granularity is going to hold it. You finish.
You cannot continue shrinking forever. You cannot go to the singularity.
Before something might happen, what is going to happen?
Now, second input from quantum mechanics, jumps, the quantum jumps, the quantum leaps.
Jumps were at the very beginning of quantum mechanics. They're calling quantum mechanics.
Tunnel effect is a jump. Quantum jumps, quantum leaps.
Quantum mechanics was born when, in Copenhagen, Niels Bohr made his first model of atom,
and understood that the electron on an atom could only be in orbit on certain discrete quantized orbits.
An electron could go roughly this way or this way, but it could jump from one to the other.
And when it jumps, it emits one photon, one grain of a jump down or jump up.
If you put some energy, some photon arrived, jump up.
And in between, that's the magic of quantum mechanics. It's not really like a particle.
It's something funny. We don't have a good intuition of what happened from one quantum value to another quantum value.
That is quantum jumps. And these quantum jumps can take you from one orbit to a different orbit.
So you can view them from one classical solution to another classical solution.
So the shrinking black hole is like one classical solution.
So we go there, it becomes narrower, narrower, narrower, and maybe it can jump.
But to which classical solution? Maybe it can jump to something else. But what could happen next?
Now, the black hole was formed by a star falling into itself.
We went to the black hole by falling. It was turning off the engine and letting ourselves fall down.
The shrinking of space itself is like falling.
So these are all solution, nice equation, classical, and are falling.
What happens if something falls typically at the end of a fall? It bounces.
And what is the trajectory after the fall?
Well, this is going down. If you film it going up, it's like filming going down and reversing the film.
It's the same, but sort of time-reversed, with the velocity reversed.
Careful, the acceleration is always down, right? Because it goes faster and faster and faster and faster.
Velocity down, acceleration down. When it jumps up, the velocity is up now, reversed,
but the acceleration is still down because it goes slower, slower, slower, slower.
So you change the velocity.
Now, the black hole becomes longer and longer and narrower and narrower.
If you change the velocity and make it bounce, what does it do?
It becomes longer and longer and longer, and then it becomes shorter and shorter and shorter.
And it opens up.
Now, is there a classical solution of the Einstein equation that described that?
Is there a solution of Newton equation that described this moving up?
Is there a solution of the Einstein equation, classical, that described this peculiar geometry?
Something very, very long and narrow that becomes shorter and larger.
And instead of things going up, things going out, yes, it's white holes.
White holes is a solution of Einstein equations, sort of like black holes, a solution of Einstein equations.
So it's a possible happening, compatible with Einstein equations, predicted with Einstein equations,
where you have an horizon, but not this horizon where you can only enter.
It's an horizon from which you can only come out.
And we're inside, you have this enormous tube, but instead of becoming longer and narrower,
it's becoming shorter and opening up.
And that's predicted by Einstein equations.
So we are back in the terrain which we're confident that could exist.
It's okay for what we know about nature.
The difficult part was a jump, only the jump, only that particular moment.
That's where the Einstein equations do not hold, but that's what Einstein knew the Einstein equations would not hold there.
And that's what quantum mechanics tell us it is possible.
So here is the hypothesis of what could happen.
Every line here, it's one possible moment of time, some slicing of time.
The black hole forms, becomes longer and longer.
There is this quantum jump, this quantum tunneling effect also, and then you come back.
And what is next is a white hole.
From the outside, what do you see?
Well, you see the outside of a black hole, and then you see the outside of a white hole.
And this is the magic of just classical Einstein theory.
The outside of a black hole, this was actually the technical key that allowed us to realize that this is possible.
Which is strongly counterintuitive, but it's mathematically correct.
The outside of a black hole is the same thing as the outside of a white hole.
From the outside, you don't distinguish. You always see the surface.
Remember that I told you that if I look from the outside, I throw a stone, I don't see it falling down.
I just see it, you know, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing.
And if it's a white hole, I throw a stone, I just see it slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing, slowing.
Exactly the same.
The difference is actually on the surface itself.
If I am falling into a black hole, I go through.
If there's a white hole, I don't go through.
What happened?
I mean, time slows down for me.
So I go very, very fast to the future until the white hole is finished.
It's not there anymore.
Or until something come out of the black hole and clashed against me.
So outside is the same. Nothing happens in the same.
Nothing out of the outside.
Inside, there is this...
That's the magic is in the jump.
In the jump, and this is quantum gravity.
Something in which Einstein, in which Dante is left alone by Virgil.
It's alone, it's a moment of...
He says, oh, Padre mio, my father, because it's a respectful thing with this great point of antiquity.
His kid is alone, he knows his own.
But in that moment, he sees Beatrice, which is his great love.
Dante hasn't been in love with this woman all through his life.
And he sees there, and there's joy, light, colors, fantastic.
This is a beautiful moment of the poem.
So there, in the moment of his light and desperation, he finds his great love.
For me, it's been the same.
Going there, in the moment in which we lose Einstein's theory,
that's what quantum gravity is.
This is what I've been looking all my life to.
And I think the beauty and the hard part also to understand is this jump.
Because this jump is not a movement of space or evolution in time.
And it's not a jump of an electron from here to here.
Space remains space, time remains time.
It's just a funny electron that does funny things.
It's time itself and space itself, a jump from one to another, create another trajectory.
So we have to conceive a way of thinking about physics
where you can describe a phenomenon, a normal phenomenon of the universe,
not as happening in space-time.
But space-time itself does something funny.
That's it.
So here's a picture.
Here's a complete picture.
Star collapses.
Wackle forms come very long.
Quantum jump, white hole, and slowly it comes out, everything comes out,
and the entire process is finished.
Now, first question.
How long does it take?
I think you're quite on board in the fact that how much time is a funny question here?
It's a tricky question.
How long does it take?
If we're outside, it might take very long.
In fact, it might take extremely long.
When we started doing these calculations of the quantum jump,
because the classical part is just Einstein's equation.
It's just technical.
We use quantum gravity to the calculation.
We realized that the probability jumps happen with certain probability,
quantum mechanics, about probabilities.
The probability for jump to happen,
seen from the outside,
is completely negligible if the black hole is big.
It's only possible if the horizon is small.
Now, this seems to be a big problem because, oh my god,
but most black holes we see in the sky, they're big.
They're not going to happen there.
But black holes become smaller with time.
That's a big discovery of Stephen Hawking that black holes evaporate.
If you keep feeding it, it becomes bigger.
But at some point, they eat whatever they used to eat.
At some point, they're isolated and slowly they emit energy.
And they become smaller and smaller and smaller and smaller.
So if you wait long enough, even in such a star, you say star,
which is this gigantic black hole.
Even the biggest one, the billion solar masses black hole,
are going to shrink, shrink, shrink, shrink, shrink and become very small.
Once they're small, the probability of jumping is very high.
In fact, it becomes the order one and it jumps.
So the correct story, cosmologically or astrophysically,
the likely story is that whatever black hole you have,
it's going to take some time,
and the time was computed by Hawking,
to become small, then it jumps, and then becomes a white hole.
The white hole is teeny, teeny, teeny, because it's at the end of the operation.
But careful, it's teeny the bottleneck.
The inside is big and takes a long time to come out the inside.
That's the full story.
Now, the question is how long does it take?
Well, a black hole, you have to wait for it to become small.
It was computed by Hawking's.
It's for a black hole of the size of Sagittarius.
It takes much longer than the life of the universe.
Long, long, long, long.
So this happens, and there's billions and billions of years.
But, remember, I said we went inside, inside the black hole,
we go through the things, we're in the white hole,
the time it takes in Sagittarius, a star,
from the moment we cross the horizon.
For us, we're inside the starship, we're going down.
Again, assuming that we're not squeezed and squashed.
We have a super powerful kryptonite starship
that is going through all quantum jumps.
The time it takes for us to go to the jump is minutes for a big black hole.
For a small black hole, seconds, even less.
The jump is instantaneous,
and the time to get out from the white hole is very short, again, minutes.
So outside, the time is billions of years,
inside is just seconds and minutes.
Which means that the full process is something
that lasts billions of years for a clock outside,
minutes for a clock inside.
Which means if you want to see what is the universe,
billions for you in the future, just jump to black hole
and you'll get in a moment.
Again, assuming you're not squeezed and squashed in this story.
One way of viewing what a black-white hole is,
is considering it as a shortcut to the future.
You go in and you come out in the future.
There, in the same place.
You go in and you come out from the same hole
long, long away in the future.
That's this enormous time distortion.
It's the same kind of time distortion of my clock,
except that it's gigantic, right?
Another way of thinking about that
is to think that what is really going on
is that you have a star.
It goes down, collapses, bounces, come up.
But because of this time distortion,
you're seeing this at a slow motion.
Unbelievable slow motion.
For billions of years, just wait, wait, wait.
But it's you who are seeing its slow motion
because of the time dilation.
So that's a picture of the likely picture
of what is going on.
Now, one question is, do we believe this?
Can we check this?
How can we check this?
How do we hope to see if this is right or wrong?
And as I often say, I've been working this for the last years,
sometimes I'm completely sure it's right.
Usually on Mondays, I'm completely sure.
Usually on Fridays, I'm totally desperate.
No, no, it's not going to work.
How do we check this?
But if this is right, what could we do to find out it's correct?
One thing is that we might see some indirect effect of that.
And once we could actually see these things directly.
So the indirect effect, in fact,
let me make a small parenthesis about black holes.
The first evidence, the first time astronomers could see something in the star
and they thought, well, that's maybe a black hole.
It was in the 70s, but it was just a free astronomers.
Nobody was taking them seriously.
There were some stars that were wiggling.
We could see the Doppler effect then moving back and forth,
like if we're rotating around something.
But there was nothing around which to rotate.
And somebody says, maybe it's a double star and one of the two is a black hole.
John Wheeler had a beautiful image.
John Wheeler is another generation, a couple dancing the waltzer
and he's dressed in black and she's dressed in white and it's very dim.
You only see her moving around like that.
But you know there should be somebody else.
So the white dressed girl is the star that you see.
The black is the black hole.
That was the 70s and still in the 80s nobody would believe black holes.
It's only really this century that people, the scientific community at large,
started taking the idea black holes are real seriously.
I say in the book that when I moved from America back to Europe,
the director of my department in France,
who was not a relativist, was a practical physicist,
in 2000 told me you don't really believe black holes exist.
So still in 2000 many very serious, very good scientists wouldn't take this seriously.
Now of course it changes mind, but that's not a criticism of him, not at all.
Because changing mind is what science is about.
I mean it's exactly the best of science.
Now why am I saying all this?
Because in the 30s, much, much, much before,
this guy constructed this antenna because he was working for the Bell Laboratory
for studying noise in communications
and he picked up a signal from a point in the star, in the sky,
which was in the center of the Sagittarius galaxy, the constellation,
and was called at the time Sagittarius A star.
He was seeing the black hole.
The signal, the radio signal of the black hole,
was received for the first time on Earth by somebody in the 30s.
Much, much before anybody even thought that that could be a black hole.
It took half a century to recognize that that was a black hole.
So it is not totally impossible that white holes is something we have already seen.
And in fact, imagine that in the early universe,
we know the early universe was very hot and very agitated.
And there's a lot of speculations that in the early universe
a lot of black holes could be formed at the time.
They're called primordial black holes.
Or imagine even there's a lot of speculations that Big Bang was not the beginning.
There was a big bounce.
So a previous universe compressing and bouncing.
And in fact, the bounce of the universe is a phenomenon
which is sort of vaguely similar to the bounce of black holes that becomes white holes.
So imagine that either before or in the early universe many black holes formed,
these already become white holes.
Now, small white holes.
Because as I said, the transition happens only when they're small.
So imagine there are a lot of these small white holes.
The mass we can compute it.
The mass, the theory gives this.
It's a plank mass.
It's a fractured microgram which is the weight of my hair.
So one hair to hair.
That's a plank mass.
So a white hole is something which has a weight of this.
Much, much smaller than my hair, but has the weight of that.
Which means it's a gravitational attraction like this, tinny.
Which you couldn't see it because it doesn't interact electromagnetic.
You could not touch it because touch it is electromagnetism.
But you could, in principle, see it's a gravitational force.
So imagine there was many of these tinny, tinny, tinny things in the universe
formed in the past and were floating around.
They would behave like matter because attractions have gravity,
but they would be dark because they don't interact with light.
So they would be dark matter.
Dark matter?
Astronomers see around galaxies halos of something that they call dark matter
which only interact gravitationally, doesn't interact electromagnetically
and behaves exactly as if it was many little tinny things with a plank mass moving around.
So could it be?
And this is not something we know, it's a speculation, it's a possibility.
Could it be that perhaps we've already seen these things?
These zillions of little white holes which are ancient black holes that have bounced
and now are these tinny things and they're detected by the astronomers
and that's what they call dark matter, which nobody knows what it is.
It's one of the greatest mystery of contemporary astronomy and science
that in the universe we see stars, we see galaxies, but then we have clear evidence,
very strong evidence that there is something else because we see its gravitational effect,
these clouds, big clouds around galaxies larger than the galaxy
of this sort of powder that only interact gravitationally.
Okay, so maybe we've seen then how do we get convinced that this is the case?
That's the way science works, slowly in a complicated manner.
We have to make a model of how they were formed before the universe, in the early universe,
how had they interacted with the full story of the universe, cosmology and so on and so forth.
Are there alternatives for dark matter?
One alternative until short ago was supersymmetic particles, but that was wrong
because supersymmetic particles don't exist of that kind, that particular kind that was expected.
One of the great, I shouldn't go late at the time, I stay within one hour, I shouldn't go.
But let me say that some physicists, even in this room, have been talking about the crisis of physics
and recently, because what they expected didn't happen, for instance, supersymmetry.
But you know, crisis physics is like a big defeat in a battle, in a war.
The French talk about the big defeat of Waterloo, but the other side of the channel is not big defeat of Waterloo.
The crisis of somebody is good news for somebody else.
So when supersymmetry was not found, my part of the community was just jumping around, yeah.
It's a little bit more than that because for many people, the next frontier of physics should be the theory of everything.
I think that the theory of everything is a bad idea.
We don't know what's out there. There's so much more about the universe which we don't know.
I don't think it's a good idea, it's a good scientific program to write the final theory of everything.
We should solve the problems one by one, like Faraday was doing, or Maxwell or Einstein.
We don't have a quantum theory of gravity, we should find a quantum theory of gravity
because we don't know what happened when gravity becomes quantum, that's a concrete problem.
So let's solve that. Let's put together quantum mechanics with general activities.
It's complicated enough because it's a quantum property of space-time, it's changing the way we think about reality.
I think we are in a spectacularly good positive moment in their physics.
What we have learned about the universe, black hole gravitational waves, about gravity and cosmology, is wonderful.
Science is going very, very well. It's not in a crisis, not at all.
It's a crisis for those who ask the wrong questions.
I think trying to figure out the quantum property of gravity and what happened to black hole, what happened to the universe,
these are the right questions we should address.
I said one possibility is to work out all the cosmology and maybe convince ourselves we are not convinced at all.
It's one possibility that this dark matter is, in fact, this white hole.
The other possibility is to make an actual detection. So could we see one of them?
Well, let's see. Imagine this is a really dark matter. We can compute how many they are
because we know how many dark matter are. Astronomers know exactly how much dark matter there is.
There's more dark matter than matter, sort of a few times more in a galaxy.
So the density should be comparable, a bit higher, but dark matter is more diffused.
So we can compute how many they are. We know the weight of these little things.
I just told you, a fraction of a micro. So we know how many they are.
And so it's a simple calculation to see how many of these little things there are.
And the result is that presumably in a room like this one, every once in a while, I mean, one goes by.
So maybe there's no one going by with this. We couldn't see it. We couldn't touch it.
The only interaction would be gravitational, the pool.
So if we had something extremely sensitive, imagine we build a machine, a detector,
where something goes by, so intuitively, a little pendulum, something goes by, well, start pendulum.
Okay, pendulum mechanics is complicated, but maybe something electronic,
something quantum electronic that could detect very...
That's one of the things I'm doing right now, trying to try to figure out what's the best chance we have
to build a detector that could detect one thing flying by.
Is this going to happen? I don't know. I'm working on that.
What I know that when I became a faculty at Pittsburgh in the 1990,
and my friends were saying, we're going to build a gravitational wave detector, that seemed really crazy.
And they did it, and they got an overpriced.
So it doesn't mean that all project is going to work. Many projects don't work, but some do work.
So in principle, yes, it's all possible to detect.
In principle, it's possible to detect one of these things.
So in principle, it's clearly possible to detect them.
Practice, build a machine, and there, as I said, one particle flying by every once in a while is not a lot of them,
so it's not easy to detect.
Now, let me go over the conclusion.
I've asked you to follow me inside the black hole all the way to the center,
in the sort of land we know, strange but known, through the jump, hypothetical,
one we don't know, and then out of the white hole, and then we're back to the stars, like Seydante.
We came back to see back the stars.
What is this? This is mind traveling, right? It's traveling with the mind.
And it's what Dante does. Dante takes us to this incredible trip into hell, purgatory,
paradise, through all the forms of morality, through all the stages of human psyche and mind.
Beautiful. But I think it's also what science does.
What the best science does, the best theoretical science.
Science is made of all sorts of things.
The mathematicians are very good equations.
There are the people who do experiments, there are people who find out experiments,
but then there are the people who think the new, like Faraday, who invented the fields.
Just create something completely new.
And how do you do that? You mind travel.
Think for a moment.
I'll give you just a few examples in my last minutes.
Alexander, which is one of my great passions, great thinker in the 26th century ago,
who figured out that Earth is like a stone floating in the nothing, right?
Before, people thought the sky is above us.
He understood that the sky is all around us.
And Earth is just a thing, like there.
How did he do that?
He mind traveled outside it. He saw it from the outside.
In fact, he, same Alexander, is credited in antiquity to be the one who invented
the geographical maps, which is funny, you know, because people have been traveling
and trading and traveling long distance for centuries, millennia.
Nobody thought of taking a piece of paper and writing a map.
Why? Because it needs to be creative to change perspective, to imagine what is a map.
A map is how the land would look seeing from an eagle super, super high.
But take imagination to think you're an eagle and grab there.
Or to think you're, you know, just like the astronauts on moon looking at Earth from somewhere.
He did that.
So he was capable of mind-travelling.
Iparcus, the greatest astronomer of antiquity,
is a calculation of the distance of the moon, which is, it's a subtle geometrical argument,
very, very beautiful.
But it starts by saying, imagine the Earth, there's a sun there,
and there's a shadow of the Earth, there's a cone.
And imagine to go to the tip of the shadow of the cone of the Earth and look back.
And then there's a geometrical eye of the angle you would see.
I mean, I'm not time to go into that.
So again, his mind-travelling to the interplanetary space, this is two millennia ago,
thinking how would sun and Earth and moon would look from the tip of the space.
And Copernicus imagined the solar system seen from the sun.
That's what he did, changed perspective on the solar system.
And Kepler, Kepler has this fantastic book, he wrote his book all through his life.
It's called The Dream, the title, and was published after his death,
in which he tells the story that he and his mother are taken by a demon to the moon.
And then he goes to the moon and describes the moon
and describes how the solar system looks from the moon.
So what the hell is he doing?
Well, he's doing something fantastic.
He's taking out a different perspective and see how Venus and the Earth
looks from a moving body, the moon, to convince us that what we see on Earth
is nothing else than something seen from a moving body.
So it's an argument, it's a profoundly rhetorical, powerful argument for Copernicanism
based on changing perspective.
Because when you change perspective, who cares how the solar system looks from the moon?
That's not the point.
When you change perspective, you realize that your own perspective is partial.
That's the point about changing perspective.
In science, like in politics, like in economy, like in everything,
you put yourself in other shoes somewhere else,
so you realize that what you usually think might be wrong, because you have a different point of view.
And so on.
Einstein famously talked about traveling on a ray of light,
riding a ray of light or falling in an elevator.
Maxwell also had a demon, right?
Maxwell thought of being small like a molecule,
and this demon seeing the individual molecules, what Maxwell's demon is called,
opening, closing the door, letting the molecules go in his work, not on atomities,
his work on the kinetic field of gas and thermodynamics.
But how do we mind travel?
How do we know what's going to see from a different perspective?
I think the answer is to stay on a subtle balance between what we keep with us,
the Einstein equation that tells us up to there,
what we keep with us is the knowledge that tells us something, and what we leave home.
Because to make a step ahead, we have to leave home something, right?
Einstein leave home simultaneity.
Kepler leaves home the circles.
Copernicus leaves home the idea that the Earth is the center of the universe.
We left home the idea that you can always describe things in space and time.
Something basic, okay?
How do we know?
How do you know what to bring yourself and what you leave home?
That's, I think, there's no method in science.
There's no recipe for that.
Science is just trial and error.
You keep walking on the boundary of what we know.
We know quantum mechanics.
We know general relativity.
We know what happens in the black hole up to there.
And you keep turning things around until you find the little holes that allows you to put together a puzzle in a different manner
in such a way that it makes sense.
And there's a possible step ahead.
And then, you know, experiment, tell you whether it is right or wrong.
So I think this mind-traveling is science a bit better.
And I think that science is imagination, besides just being calculation and numbers.
And in this, science is very similar to Dante, a poetical imagination,
and to the rest of our life, which is a rife of emotion, of imagination.
And I think this part of science is always, is often forgotten.
Science has an image of coldness, but this is science, I think.
Thank you.
