I think it's a great opportunity to share some of the information about the room.
I'm going to be right back with you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
It is so nice to be back in the finest science lecture theatre in the world.
And I've been giving talks here for over 20 years now, I realise,
but I don't think I've ever had a crowd quite like this.
So I feel very flattered and a little bit nervous tonight.
Yn gywch chi i', sgwn y mod
a iawn cy terrorists,
ond gallwch hynny r reinstfer inedon
cyllelf anabledur,
a baelodd rhagwyr
ar flynyddoedd am hof desde blzd
gwneud fy skleunwyr
Ym hyfrnwyr addyn nhw o bryd
i weld ysgrifеш yr ei proffeli wider Ready
Adegwyrch g Persian
i'w radd y Hob.
Fe wych ei weld beth sydd ddod
a ally yw rhoi lyfr
y cwestiwn oedd y ddweud,
ond nid oedd ymwneud o'r ddweud.
Rwy'n gweithio ar y cwestiwn,
oedd y ddweud yng Nghymru Bialogist JBS Haldane
yn eich bod yn ystod o'r 1947
yma'r edrych ar y tair,
ac mae'n cymhysgol yma.
Felly mae'n gweithio'r cwestiwn o'r ddweud,
mae'n gweithio'r ddweud,
ac mae'n gweithio'r ddweud,
ac mae'n gweithio'r ddweud,
ac mae'n gweithio'r ddweud.
Ac mae'n urch yn ystod
hefyd i feithio'n adon.
Mae'n bobl sequence mawr
a'u bobl a'u bobl yn ymateig.
cedd yringaeth ddylu Yначu Bialogist Queen
On-Tanner a Francis Crick
Rydyn yn 1953
a Wrathio Crick I'r falch a'ioh políticaa
fe giants lwyf unrhyw ar gyfer lag.
Llyfr Edward Rock mwy wedi y jack.
Fun yn y byd i ddim.
aide i siwethaf a'r gyfaceb
datblyg, beth domains
mewn effeictol drwer Mahies
yn ei cefnog honau 1968
C Davil Helix
That two Chen Will
Moecule
that he and Cric
had just deduced the structure for
the DNA, the double Helsinki
of the DNA molecule
shirt
and Watson wanted us to believe
clearly, he understood
this was the secret of how life works
DNA was then widely thought
not by everyone
but very widely thought
to be where the genetic information
is past between generations is stored.
In this double helical structure,
Cric and Watson had seen how it can be that our DNA
is able to store this genetic information.
Each of the twin strands of the DNA double helix
is a string of a succession of just four different chemical building blocks
which we denote by the initial letters of their names,
C, G, T, aeth.
Yn hyn, they said,
that acts like a code,
just like the strings of binary digits,
the ones and zeros
that were then being used
to encode information on the magnetic tape
that was used by digital computers.
So, each of our genes then
is a short segment of this code,
and we have many thousands of these genes
in the string of letters,
mae geniad wagers strclaideg ar ër tyfnig
a Findiy'r geni.
Felly, ddweud hwnna portsettiaeth dwy rank Hyun Pod dydd wleid,
d resilient thing yna y llyg.
Ïb Pepperiodadur dysgu ei fodственно yr hyn fydd ym ystod
os y cynnu wedi'i eu wrando.
Mae'r ddweud dim yn diolch arhyf i gyfblig,
beth mae'r ddweud yn rhyddedig i gadlu gor Champ Dal.
Pwycyn rydych chi wedi'i sut ei fodionedd yr oedd hynna Eurofaniai am shift o'r feel,
Ac wallpaper was done in the human genome project, which began in 1990 and was completed, at least, as a rough draft, by the turn of the millennium.
As Bill Clinton said when that draft was first publicly announced, today we are learning the language in which God created life.
Here it is, our instruction booklet as it's often called or our blueprint or the letters of the human genome which you can go and read should you be inclined in these 109 volumes held in the Wellcome Collection on Euston Road.
Is this, then, the secret of how life works?
Some people have questioned whether this blueprint or instruction booklet metaphor is really the right way to think about the genome.
ymlaen o'r ffysiologiologist genes noble
yn ymdweud y gallu bod yn ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud.
A mae'n oed yn ymdweud yn ymdweud.
Felly, ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud?
Felly, mae'n oed yn dweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud.
Ond yw'r amser?
Ym dweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud ymdweud个fair
Gydy hwn Tyler Jason Fajffax when he was once implemented
by Aelunadrol resonance by Tyr Police,
after a concert he gave, who came up and said
Your violin has such a beautiful tone
and Hayf scenes picked up his instrument and said
I don't hear anything.
And his point, of course, was that that beautiful tone
doesn't just happen, it's not inherent in the violin.
bod ni eISC yn llawer werthar yichts i llawer hyn wneud…
…um yw alsoach ify ty yw myndol yn —
Ify dydych chirekwy pa gwaith yn Majesty,
flyny'n ni ddim yn budtwch computing.
Fysiód iddo rydych, le dyna.
Cymru clients i gyrsio isiol ar gyfer allgrenf perni—
ac er mwyn 09Ád, mae'n medafor gennych nhw sut rydych chi yw sy'n iawn.
Ac mae'n helpu iілw sydd o aethetな ffall syniad ap na syniad a lakai am gondol…
of the music, but that different musical scores, when played by an orchestra, account in some sense for the differences between the music so that they will make.
So the problem with saying that the genome is the secret of life is evidently that the genome is not what makes life happen.
Sure, life won't happen without it, just like Beethoven's Third Symphony wouldn't happen unless Beethoven had prepared a score,
but what we're really saying is that for life to happen, the genome needs to go into an already living system.
So it's really the story is...
Oops, sorry, I'll move it quickly on from there.
Ah, it was hovering over the music.
So this is really the right way to tell the story.
Life is, in other words, a genome plus life.
Or, to put it another way, this is the picture that we're often given.
And we're told what goes on in this black box is so horrendously contemplated that you're probably better off not looking inside it at all.
But just rest assured that scientists are working on it and one day they'll have it all sorted out.
However, that advice neglects this inconvenient fact.
So, to understand how life works, I'm afraid that yes, we really do have to take a peek inside this black box.
And I'm going to try to give you a little glimpse of it inside tonight.
And, you know, I won't deny that in all its glory it really is horrendously complicated.
But I hope, all the same, to persuade you that we can make some sense of it.
What's more, that over the two decades or so since the Human Genome Project was completed,
the sense we've made tells a rather different picture from the one that we have traditionally been told in the genomic era.
Well, Francis Crick opened up that black box a little bit and this is what he saw.
This is what in the late 1950s he called this central dogma of molecular biology.
Now, that's an odd name, isn't it, because science isn't meant to have any dogmas.
It's meant to be provisional and subjective revision, right?
But Crick later admitted that he called it that because he didn't really know what dogma meant.
But all the same, calling something a dogma in science is a bit like a red flag to a bull
because it has goaded a lot of people to devote a lot of time and energy to trying to argue
and to show that Crick's central dogma is wrong.
I'd say that a better way to look at it is that it's not so much that it's wrong,
but it's a bit like the Holy Roman Empire, which was once famously said to be not holy,
not Roman and not really an empire.
So the central dogma is not so much wrong as that it's not a dogma and it's not really so central.
But let's take a look at it.
It sums up what was already thought to be the case and what was soon proved to be the case,
a genes really encode, is instructions for making these molecules called proteins.
And you probably remember that the usual cliche about proteins, they are the workhorses of the cell,
which means that they're the molecules that make the cells' biochemical reactions happen,
generally by acting as catalysts that help to convert one biological molecule into another.
And the way the code in the genes is read out and turned into proteins is a two-step process.
So the first step is that the code in a gene, a given gene, is copied and the technical word is transcribed
into a very similar molecule to DNA called RNA.
So just that little bit of the genome is transcribed into this so-called messenger RNA molecule
and the mRNA moves off and is seized by another piece of molecular machinery in the cell called the ribosome,
which uses the information that the RNA encodes to put together a particular string of amino acids
in a so-called polypeptide chain, which then folds up into this compact shape and that's the protein molecule.
So the protein has a particular shape and this is the process called translation.
And there are thousands and thousands of these proteins in every one of our cells.
Here's a snapshot of the inside of one of those cells.
And this isn't just a sort of computer cartoon of what it might look like.
This is a computer-generated image using actual data from inside a cell.
So this is what it's like inside every cell of our bodies and you can see it is insanely crowded.
But no matter the usual story goes because each of those proteins has, as I say, a very particular shape,
which fits together like a lock and key with the molecule that it's meant to transform.
So it will only go to work on that molecule and it will ignore all the others.
And through this series of highly specific molecular interactions, proteins somehow put together us.
Well, here's how that will be expressed within the context of Crick's central dogma.
So this fancy word here, phenotype, basically it just means all the traits we have.
What forms we take, how tall we are, what colour our skin and our eyes are, even what behaviours we have.
The phenotype is basically our individual cells and in this picture it all comes from what's encoded in the genes,
in the so-called genotype.
And since the human genome project was completed, more and more complications and problems with this story have emerged.
And I want to tell you about some of them.
So I said that we have thousands of genes and they make thousands of different proteins.
How many genes exactly do we have?
Well, a banana has 36,000 genes.
Now, think very carefully before you answer this question.
Which organism is the more complicated?
So, it sounds to reason that I'm going to need more than 36,000 genes, right?
When the genome project started, a common figure that scientists would give for the estimated number of human genes was around 80 to 100,000.
So I've shown it in dotted line here because it's just an estimate.
But we pretty soon got a sobering wake-up call because as we started getting into the project, those numbers fell dramatically.
And when we actually started getting real data, the solid line here, we found that it is much lower,
that it was something like 20,000 genes that encode proteins.
And now some scientists think it might be even slightly lower, might be as many as 19,000.
So that's about as many as a tiny soil dwelling worm called the nematode has.
And it's scarcely half what a banana has.
And these numbers are often paraded now as a comic example of how wrong expert opinion can be.
But I think the really important question is why they were wrong.
Did we perhaps have the wrong idea about what role genes were playing?
Well, here's another thing. In the 1990s, there were one or two genes for which biologists didn't seem able to find the corresponding protein.
And in the end, they had to conclude that that's because there aren't any.
These genes simply make RNA.
And not the messenger RNA that gets translated by the ribosome into a protein, the RNA itself is the end.
It has some biochemical function.
It does the kind of things that we thought proteins do.
And these RNA encoding genes, and I've just marked them in red here, they're called non-coding genes.
Not clearly because they don't encode anything, but because the genes don't encode proteins, which is what we thought all genes did.
Well, okay, but biology is full of weird exceptions, right?
Except that these weren't exceptions.
Over the past two decades, the number of these non-coding genes kept creeping up.
And eventually, just a few years back, that number exceeded the number of protein-coding genes.
And what's more, current estimates are that it's just going to continue that way,
that actually it's going to turn out that there are lots more of these non-coding genes,
that they vastly outnumber the protein-coding genes.
And the picture is actually even more transformed than that,
because these are just the pieces of the genome that encode these relatively long non-coding RNA molecules that qualify as genes.
But it's been discovered that there are actually lots of other bits of the genome, our genome,
but also those of other large animals like us called metazoans,
that encode lots of smaller RNA molecules.
And there are all these different families with these fancy names that do all sorts of tasks in the cell, protein-like tasks.
So, you know, the genome is full of things that don't encode proteins.
So you can see the genome isn't really what we thought it was about.
And yet somehow we still seem to be telling, certainly hearing, the same story about it,
that was being told back in the 1990s, or even the 1970s.
That can't be right.
It's rather as if cosmologists were to have said, after discovering that four-fifths of the matter in the universe
is made up of this so-called dark matter that we can't see and about which we know nothing,
as if they just sort of shrugged and said, this change is nothing.
Fortunately they didn't say that.
Well, it's actually even worse than this.
Crick's central dogma said that genes encode proteins.
By that we mean that the genes actually program the proteins with particular shapes
so that they can go and do their specific jobs.
But here's one way in which this picture is now modified.
It didn't mean, it doesn't mean that each gene encodes a particular protein.
In fact, each of our genes can typically be used to make several different proteins.
On average, each can make about six different proteins,
but some genes can encode dozens or even hundreds of different proteins.
So we have many more proteins, and no one knows exactly how many more,
but many more than we have protein coding genes.
How is that possible?
Well, it's because, as was first discovered in the 1970s,
the messenger RNA that is transcribed from a gene
is typically chopped up and edited before it is translated.
So there's another piece of molecular machinery,
this thing called the splicisome made up of several different proteins,
that gets hold of the messenger RNA, chops it into fragments,
throws away some pieces called introns,
and stitches together the remaining fragments called exons back in various orders.
What decides how this editing and splicing occurs
is typically information coming from a higher level of the system.
Say, for example, from the overall state of the cell in which it's happening.
So a gene in one tissue might produce one type of protein
and in a different tissue might produce a different protein.
In other words, the information flow here isn't,
as the central dogma at least implied, isn't all from the bottom up,
from DNA to RNA to proteins.
Some crucial information for making the proteins
is coming from the outside in some sense.
And this is just one of the ways in which, in order to build us
and to keep us alive all these years,
information doesn't just flow upwards from the genes
to higher levels of organisation,
but flows up and down and in between
and in all sorts of directions among them.
It's an open informational system, not a closed one.
And here's another change to the picture.
In the analogy of the genome to a musical score,
we might say that the score is what prevents the orchestra
from just playing a whole load of random notes, right, making a racket,
because it tells each musician exactly which notes to play and when.
And that's the equivalent of the way a protein's gene-encoded shape,
like this one, tells it what to do in the cell,
which molecules to grab hold of and which to ignore.
So I mentioned earlier this lock and key aspect.
But we now know that for many of our proteins,
including some with some of the most important jobs in the cell,
the DNA score isn't like this at all.
It's much more open to interpretation.
And what I mean by that is that some genes encode proteins
without assigning them a structure.
It leaves them loose and floppy,
or, as biochemists say, they are intrinsically disordered.
And this isn't some failure of the genome to give proteins a proper shape.
It's clearly a deliberate feature that evolution has, so to speak, chosen.
Because, you see, there's much less of this intrinsic disorder
among the proteins of simpler organisms, like bacteria.
So evolution clearly was fine giving proteins all a very specific structure.
But it seems that it has found it useful, or perhaps even necessary,
to give proteins disorder in order to make more complex,
multicellular, multi-tissue organisms like us.
Given that so many of our proteins, perhaps a third to a half,
or maybe even more of them, have parts or holes that are disordered in this way,
given that it seems a little odd that we didn't really know about this
until the past few decades.
But that's because the methods that scientists have in the past used
to look at protein structure generally only work well
for the kinds of proteins that are ordered, that have a fixed structure,
and so they'll pack together and form nice orderly crystals,
which are what you need for those methods.
It's a bit like the way we overlooked non-coding genes for so long.
We tend to see only the things that we expect to see,
and we tend to study only those things that we have techniques for studying.
So proteins with this intrinsic disorder, these floppy proteins,
are far less choosy about which other molecules they stick to.
They're rather indiscriminately sticky.
That's to say they're quite promiscuous in their molecular unions.
So that old idea that the molecular chaos of the cell
is somehow kept orderly and tamed because each of the proteins
is highly selective about what it interacts with, that idea doesn't really work.
And let me show you a particularly important example
of this kind of molecular promiscuity in action.
So the standard argument for how we get to be so complex
with so few protein-coding genes goes something like this,
that we say, well, it arises from the complexity
of all the different interactions between those molecules
that interact in these really horrible-looking networks
where each of these blobs represents a protein,
and it looks pretty horrid, doesn't it?
If you open a copy of nature at random,
you're bound to see pictures kind of like this,
and it's tempting to think of them as cartoons
of what all the various molecules are actually doing moving around the cell.
But once you remember how complicated a cell really is inside,
you have to wonder how on earth a complex dance of molecules like this
could be orchestrated.
Or the same, the idea is that this molecular crosstalk
explains how it is that, for example,
different genes are turned on and off in different types of cell in our bodies,
making heart muscle cells different from skin cells or liver cells,
even though they all have the same genome.
The idea is that proteins made by one gene could, for example,
act as a kind of switch to control the transcription of another gene,
so that it turns on or off whether that gene is transcribed and translated,
and that process is called gene regulation.
Now, we've known for a long time, since at least 1960s,
that gene regulation happened.
It was around that time that the French biochemists Jack Mono
and Francois Jacob showed how this process worked
for one particular type of gene regulation in the bacterium E. coli.
E. coli can digest two different types of sugar,
it can digest glucose and lactose,
but it's not very efficient if the bacterium is constantly making
both of the two enzymes needed for those two processes
when there's only one sugar or the other around.
And so there's a switch which Mono and Jacob call the LAC operon,
a switch for turning on and off the production of the so-called LAC enzymes
that are the ones that digest lactose.
So, in short, this is what happens.
There's this protein, this green thing here,
that can recognise and stick to a little patch on the DNA,
this yellow patch, just before the LAC genes themselves.
And if it sticks there, then it blocks this pink blob,
the RNA polymerise that produces transcription, that produces RNA.
It blocks it and sort of kicks it off so that it can't do its job
and so it stops the transcription of the LAC genes.
So, it's like a nice simple digital switch.
There's a transparent logic to it.
And for a long time, molecular biologists figured that gene regulation
in organisms like us follows the same kind of principles,
effectively wiring our genes into a network,
a bit like a digital circuit like we have in microelectronic devices.
Well, you can probably guess what I'm going to say.
That's not how it turned out.
Very often, gene regulation in metazoans like us is much more complicated.
These proteins that interact with parts of DNA to control gene expression
are called transcription factors.
And it turns out that many of our transcription factors
are intrinsically disordered proteins,
which aren't so selective as these bacterial proteins
in what they bind to,
maybe in which bits of DNA they bind to or which other molecules.
And the bits of DNA that regulate our genes,
like this sort of yellow section here,
there are lots of them in our genes,
and they're not all next to the genes they regulate.
Some of them, weirdly, are a long way away on the DNA strand,
somewhere else entirely.
And these are regions called enhancers
that somehow control the extent to which the gene is switched on or off.
So, gene regulation in us tends to involve a whole bunch of different components.
Transcription factors and other molecules often including
some of those non-coding RNA molecules.
Most of them are regulatory.
They have functions in gene regulation.
And then there are other things.
There are all these bits of DNA that are controlling the process somehow,
some of which, because they are so far away,
they are brought close by pulling out these big loops of DNA
and sort of looping them back around,
like tugging out a piece of wool from a tangled ball.
And all of these components fit together into this kind of gigantic regulatory assembly
that isn't something that just kind of clips together neatly.
It's a loose disorderly blob, a dense cluster,
sometimes called a condensate,
which forms like a kind of liquid droplet,
a bit like a blob of vinegar in the oil of salad dressing.
So, you know, it looks like a really messy way to do this job.
It's as though gene regulation in us is done by these loose committees of molecules,
all talking to each other rather indiscriminately.
And it really is pretty amazing that somehow all of these components
still manage to make a reliable decision about whether to switch gene expression up or down,
despite all this fuzziness amongst their interactions.
This sort of fuzziness, and the way it produces collective decisions
rather than simple digital logic that we see in bacteria
based on precise molecular unions,
this fuzziness is a characteristic feature of our molecular biology.
We don't quite understand how it works,
but I think we can start to see why it is that for us life does work
in this fuzzy, analogue and rather open-ended way.
You see, once you start to think about it, the more complex an organism is,
the more a blueprint or an instruction book approach to controlling how it works
starts to look like a terrible idea.
If the organism working correctly depended on each of those instructions
being executed perfectly at just the right place and just the right time
in some sort of complex clockwork manner,
then it's just not going to happen, not least because the molecular world
isn't like clockwork machinery, it's full of randomness and noise.
It would be like expecting a mechanism like this to go on working perfectly
if you were to immerse it in the bath and shake it around.
It's not going to happen.
I mean, sure, you can, and this was often the story that was told before,
you can build in contingency plans, so if one bit fails,
there's another way for the same thing to happen.
So the idea was that in these complex networks, there's more than one route
to the same end, so that if this route fails, there's always this one.
But when you think about it, that's not a great way to solve the problem.
The answer to the fragility that comes from something that's very, very complex
if it has to all work perfectly, the answer to that problem can't be to just
give it more complexity.
Instead, you need to use totally different design principles for making it.
And that's surely why we have these fuzzy molecular mechanisms
where the details often don't really matter.
The committees can still come to good decisions,
even if some of the members are absent or asleep.
What these principles really amount to, what this idea really amounts to,
is taking the responsibility for the correct functioning of the whole thing
off the lower levels of the system and handing it up to some higher level.
In other words, we work in a way that is designed to take the pressure off our genes,
to make them in general no longer the real cause of our traits and behaviours of our phenotype.
Mistakes and malfunctions at the lower levels can be compensated for higher up.
This happens at other levels in the stratum, in the hierarchy of the way complex organisms like us work.
For example, if cells during the development of an embryo
don't quite end up where they're supposed to, often there's a way to compensate for that
further down the developmental line so that you still end up with a perfectly viable organism.
Let me give you briefly a couple of examples of how these higher level principles
that help organise our tissues and bodies reveal this kind of dispersal of responsibility
so that they involve genes without, in any sense, being blueprinted by them.
The surfaces of our intestines are covered with these little finger-like protrusions called villi,
which hugely increase its surface area so that it can absorb nutrients sufficiently into the bloodstream.
These are basically bulges in the surface layer of tissue called the epithelium,
and their growth is triggered by a protein that rejoices for roundabout reasons
in the slightly silly name of Sonic Hedgehog. Don't ask.
But this doesn't, by any means, imply that this Sonic Hedgehog protein, or the gene that encodes it,
is a gene for villus growth. In fact, Sonic Hedgehog is a general purpose, embarrassingly to some extent,
it's a general purpose ingredient that keeps cropping up again and again in development.
And in this instance what happens is that in effect it has the effect of switching the cell types in the epithelial layer
so that some can keep on growing while others stop.
So this is basically what happens. You have this layer of tissue, and if some of the cells start emitting Sonic Hedgehog protein,
if by chance a little bulge develops in that tissue as it grows, then this concentrates the Sonic Hedgehog protein
to a point where it can trigger this switch and stop some of the cells growing
so that they just continue growing at the base of this unit.
And the rest of it just then gets sort of pushed up further and further into this sort of finger-like protrusion.
And it's a self-amplifying process. The more it gets constrained, the better a trap it is for the Sonic Hedgehog protein.
So the real cause of these villi is therefore really a mechanical one.
It involves changes to the rigidity of the epithelial layer.
Here's another example. We generally have five fingers on each hand, right?
But there's no gene that specifies that. Certainly no gene that specifies this number five.
The way our fingers are now thought to grow is that in the paddle-like bud of the developing limb in the embryo,
there's a small set of, again, general-purpose developmental proteins that interact with one another
in a particular complex way, a way that was first talked about by the British mathematician Alan Turing in 1952.
Turing showed how it's possible for a soup of reacting chemicals to spontaneously segregate
into stripes of different composition, different concentration of the ingredients.
And that's what seems to happen in the development of the fingers, that stripes, radiating stripes,
develop in this bud of the growing limb.
And these concentrations, these stripes, in turn trigger the growth of bone that becomes the finger bones.
And the reason that there are five of them is that the stripes have just an intrinsic width
that depends on the properties of the proteins.
And they happen to grow at just the stage where five of these stripes will fit within the embryonic limb bud.
Now, the whole growth process is more complex than this. It always is in biology.
But it seems that only a little tweak in the growth conditions or in the timing of it
might be enough to generate more or fewer stripes.
And that's possibly what we see in the way for ray finned fish.
They have more of these stripes that develop in their fins.
So you can see here that genes are providing resources for the body plan.
But that plan doesn't exist in any meaningful way within the genome itself.
The key genes and proteins involved in both these processes and in many others
are just general purpose developmental proteins, as I say.
They're not proteins for developing any particular body type.
The story isn't really about them as such.
It's about the cells and tissues of the developing organism
being triggered to make those proteins in just the right time and place and sequence.
And this shift in the location of true causes in biology,
it's not just a metaphorical way that I'm using to talk about what's going on.
It's something we can measure.
When the primary causes of the behaviour of some complex system arise,
not at the lowest levels as they do for clockwork with all the cogs having to fit in the right way,
but if they appear at higher levels of organisation,
that's something that scientists call causal emergence.
And we can see it all the time in our social structures.
For example, in the way a company can still operate if some of the workers are off sick
because there are usually ways that the others can kind of compensate for their absence.
And we can see it in the flocking of birds, for example,
so that if there's a kind of a centric or a tired bird somewhere in this flock
that's doing something different, it doesn't cause chaos and confusion among the whole.
The larger scale organisation is robust against any little disturbances at the lower levels like that.
And there are ways of measuring the amount of causal emergence in complex systems.
And when a team of scientists applied those methods to look at the mechanisms
that are used by simple organisms like bacteria, so-called prokaryotes,
and at more complex, so-called eukaryotic organisms like us,
they could see a clear difference.
We eukaryotes have more causal emergence.
And I call this causal spreading.
And it's spreading rather than just a shift in where the causation is happening
because the cause really is spread across a range of levels.
So there are still some traits like diseases like cystic fibrosis
that can really be pinned to a single gene.
There are some traits that are in a meaningful way caused by that gene.
But most of our traits are caused at higher levels, above the genes,
even though the genes can still influence them.
Perhaps the ultimate expression of this causal spreading is the brain.
In the selfish gene, Richard Dawkins sounds almost affronted that our behaviour
sometimes seems to go against what a selfish gene picture should make us expect.
But I think this is precisely the point of a brain.
You see, the challenges faced by bacteria and the decisions they have to make
really aren't that diverse.
Where's the food? Where's the moisture? How do I have to move to get there?
They tend to live in single environments and they tend to die if they go outside them.
But we get everywhere.
And every day we face situations and challenges that we have never encountered before
in quite that way in our lives or that our ancestors have ever encountered before.
So no genetic programme is going to tell us what we should do in the face of every eventuality.
And the responsibility for that decision must be passed up to some higher level to our brains,
which don't have a kind of programme that is able to compute exactly what we should do
in any given circumstance, but is able, crucially, to improvise in the face of the unexpected,
to improvise using fuzzy rules of thumb, not some precise digital computation.
And this way of behaving, so not through totally automated and predictable machine-like stimulus response,
but by genuine cognitive processing, this isn't just a good analogy for how life works at all levels,
even down to the level of single cells.
Some biologists argue that actually it literally is like that,
that all living things should be genuinely considered cognitive systems.
As the biologist Mike Levin and the philosopher Dan Dennett have put it,
life is cognition all the way down.
And this doesn't mean that the bacteria have some kind of mind worthy of the name,
let alone any kind of awareness.
Cognition doesn't have to require consciousness to be genuine cognition.
Well, however you feel about this way of thinking about life,
I think it does capture one important truth about the way life works,
and that is that the best metaphors for talking about it aren't ones that come from technologies, clockwork or computers,
but are metaphors that are drawn from life itself.
What really distinguishes living things from any machines that we've yet made
is that they're not automata, but they have real agency.
And what I mean by that is that they're able to manipulate and alter themselves and their environment
in order to try to attain some self-determined goals.
Now, when we recognise that organisms have goals,
we usually sort of say, well, the goals for all organisms are to survive and reproduce, right?
But while an awful lot of behaviour can, of course, be explained that way,
I don't think it's enough.
I'll hazard the guess that the goal you set yourself in coming here tonight
wasn't about eating and reproducing,
and if it was, I'm afraid you're probably going to be disappointed, although who am I to say?
But I think that we're not the only animals in having agendas and purposes of our own
that we decide that are not obviously linked to evolutionary imperatives and aren't wholly predictable.
Even single-celled organisms and single cells of our body set their agendas to some degree,
so that, for example, what can seem like identical cells might behave in different ways
to an identical stimulus, because there is some internal setting that they have
that determines that.
If you like, they've sort of made up their own minds, they have their own goals.
I think that displaying agency is actually a more fruitful and more general way
to think about what living organisms are than to try to come up with some kind of checklist
of what life is, like reproduction, metabolism, homeostasis and so on.
That's why, to have an overarching view of how life works,
I think that biology needs an understanding and ideally really a theory of agency.
What are the basic ingredients that would require?
We don't really know, although this new book by the neuroscientist Kevin Mitchell
makes a superb stab at starting that conversation,
and along the way shows how it is that what we call our own free will
is really just an aspect of the kind of agency that we, as complex, cognitive and conscious beings, possess.
I do think that we might be able to see some of the things that agents are probably going to require.
For example, they need to make predictions about their environment,
so that they're not constantly wasting energy coping with things that they might have anticipated and avoided.
In order to do that, an agent needs some kind of memory in which it can build up and store information about its environment,
which amounts in the end to a kind of representation of, a crude model of its environment.
We all have that. If you leave here tonight and you were going back to Green Park Tube
and you start heading north along Albemarle Street,
then you haven't really stored a good internal representation of your environment because it's the other way, it's south.
You've wasted energy, which in that case is not a matter of life and death,
but sometimes making the right prediction could be.
OK. This new view of how life works is, I think it particularly matters when life isn't working so well
and when we want to put it right, it matters for medicine.
This issue of causal spreading matters for medicine because if we want to affect some change to a system,
we do best to intervene at the place where that outcome is caused.
Is the cause of such and such a disease some gene that we should be targeting?
You see, what we tend to hear about in discussions of gene-based medicine are the exceptional cases,
where cause really is situated in a given identified gene.
For example, in the recent announcements of the use of gene editing,
gene therapy to treat sickle cell disease,
which is primarily caused by mutations to a single gene
so that we can in principle use genome editing to go into that gene and to put it right.
But I think it's a fairly well-kept secret that most of the regions of the genome
that are found to be associated with most common diseases aren't even within genes at all.
They're found within the non-coding regions that are presumably involved somehow in gene regulation.
And it's often very hard to make effective interventions at that level anyway,
for one reason because the genetic effects tend to involve lots of very tiny effects
spread across lots of different regions of the genome.
But I think ultimately the reason why it's hard is because the real causes of these conditions
operate at some higher level of organisation than genes.
For example, in the functioning of the immune system, that's a common one.
So we might still see associations of the condition with particular bits of the genome,
but in a sense all that we're seeing there are weak echoes of the genuine causation
sort of coming down from higher levels.
That may be why genetic-based approaches to cancer treatments in particular
have been so disappointing.
You see, because cancers, we know that cancers can arise from mutations
that can happen to our genes perhaps just because we get old
or because we've been exposed to something in the environment that causes them.
And so it used to be thought that we could find cures by looking at the genetic roots of cancer.
But it seems increasingly that the most effective levels of intervention are higher ones.
And again, in particular, intervening in the immune system to help the body itself fight cancer.
As the cancer biologist Michael Yaffey said in 2013,
we spent fruitless years looking for cancelling genes,
not because we ever really had any reason to think they were the key to developing new treatments,
but because we had the techniques for looking for them.
As Yaffey said, like data junkies, we continue to look to genome sequencing
when the really clinically useful information for cancer therapies may lie someplace else.
This broader view of what governs the behaviour of our cells and tissues and bodies
I think also matters for understanding the kinds of things that they can make.
For example, we've discovered in the past two decades that our cells can be tweaked to switch between different states.
So that cells in our bodies that have already developed into a mature tissue type,
a particular tissue type, can be turned back and switched to a stem cell-like state
from which they can develop into any tissue type.
I've experienced this myself directly.
I've had cells of my skin taken from my shoulder reprogrammed into that stem cell-like state
and then developed into neurons that grew into structures a bit like this called brain organoids,
which look a little bit, not just in colour and size and so on,
but actually in anatomy look a little bit like developing embryonic brains.
This looks like a normal embryo.
Actually, this is like a normal mouse embryo made from mouse cells,
but this is something, a structure that has assembled spontaneously from stem cells.
No egg or sperm was involved in creating this so-called embryo model.
So what our cells can make is not prescribed or preordained.
I think it's better to think of them as being imbued with the potential to assemble into forms.
And if we can understand what those higher-level principles of assembly are,
then who knows what new forms we might be able to make.
But there's surely also good reason to understand these questions,
to understand how life works, simply to make us appreciate all the more how astonishing life is.
The idea that what makes living matter alive and different from a rock
is simply that it's being programmed to be alive is not just incomplete, but it's a bit boring.
One of the sobering things about a gene-centred view of evolution and of life
is that it turns out to make a puzzle of why organisms exist at all.
Richard Dawkins has called this the paradox of the organism.
Now, I don't know about you, but if my theory of to explain the profusion of wondrous life forms
ended up implying that those life forms shouldn't really even exist,
then I wouldn't so much call it a paradox as go back and think, where have I gone wrong?
There are ways to think about this paradox within the selfish gene view of life,
and it's interesting to do that, but I think it's not too hard to see ultimately why this paradox arises.
If you have taken all of the genuine agency that exists in real organisms
and squeezed it into genes to make them look like little organisms in their own right,
all existing and competing with each other in some undifferentiated pool,
with an agency they don't possess, then it's not really any surprise
that you no longer seem to need real agents at all.
The idea that an account of life is to be found by this gradual increasing of the magnification
until we arrive at molecules is a fantasy, and that's something that the Nobel Laureate biochemist Albert St Georgie understood very well.
When he said this, he said, my own scientific career was a descent from higher to lower dimension,
led by a desire to understand life.
I went from animals to cells, from cells to bacteria, from bacteria to molecules.
On my way, life ran out between my fingers.
What this comes down to then is looking for an explanation of how life works
that really does justice to the truly amazing nature of life itself.
Saying that life is just a machine made by genes or a computer running a program
is not only wrong from the perspective of what modern biology is now telling us,
but I think it banishes life altogether from biology. It sterilises it.
The eminent physicist Michael Berry told me recently that he was once asked the question,
what is the biggest unsolved problem in physics?
He figured that the question was probably expecting him to come out with some standard answer like dark matter or quantum gravity,
but he found himself saying that if, as we think, all matter is described by quantum mechanics,
then where does the aliveness of living matter come from?
Now, he didn't mean, thank God, that it must have some quantum explanation,
but he meant that living matter is profoundly different from other kinds of matter,
and we don't really know why.
Parts of the universe, all of these parts, have become aware of themselves and their place within it.
Biologists should never forget that what they're really trying to do is to understand and to explain that.
No wonder, it's really hard, but I believe that we should refuse to accept too cheap an answer to this question,
the most profound question in science. Thank you.
APPLAUSE
