Lecture 5 Foundations of Ethics – Theories of the Right
In this lecture, as in the last one, the issue is the foundations of ethics.
What grounds ethical belief?
What is ethical belief built on?
What makes ethically right actions right?
As indicated last time, there are two clean and pure theories of what ethics is all about.
One is a pure theory of ethics that's built on the concept of the good.
The structure of theories based on the good, you'll remember, was a hierarchical one.
At the bottom are good states of affairs, states in which we have the greatest good
for the greatest number, perhaps.
There are a number of levels on which we make ethical evaluations, but in good-based theories
these levels are all in a sense derivative.
We talk of actions that are good, but in a good-based theory, their value is derivative.
Good actions are just those that lead to good states of affairs.
We talk of people acting rightly, or of people doing the right thing.
In good-based theories, the value of right action is derivative too.
Right action is just action that's motivated toward good consequences.
We talk of good people, and we talk of virtues, or good traits of character.
In good-based theories, the value of these is derivative in the same way.
Good people are just those who produce good results, or at least who are motivated toward
producing good results.
And virtues are just traits of character that are directed toward good consequences.
So in good-based theories, you have these different levels of evaluation.
States of affairs, actions, people, and virtues, but they're all derivative in that they are
all recognized as ethical, as ethically good, as ethically right, because they are directed
toward producing good consequences.
Good-based theories like that are powerful, and consistent, and beautiful in their simplicity.
As we saw last time, however, no good-based theory can possibly be the whole story about
ethics.
There are in particular pervasive and perennial problems regarding justice, regarding individual
rights, and regarding the binding force of commitment.
Good-based theories seem incapable of properly capturing any of these aspects of ethics.
And that's what I mean in saying it looks like they can't be the whole story about ethics.
In this lecture, I want to outline the other pure theoretical approach to foundations.
The alternative is a theory according to which the foundations of ethics lie not in good results,
not even in good actions, but in right actions, that the foundations of ethics lie in particular
in right motives.
In right-based theory, what makes an action ethical is first and foremost the motive with
which that action is done.
As we shall see, this theory is also powerful, it's also beautiful in its simplicity.
Here again it will turn out that we have a pure theory that can't possibly represent
the whole truth about the foundations of ethics.
This radically different approach to ethics, founded not on the notion of the good, or
not on the concept of the good, but founded on the concept of the right, this approach
to ethics gets its purest denunciation in the work of Immanuel Kant.
Here's a quote that goes straight to the heart of the matter from Kant's Foundations
of the Metaphysics of Morals, published in 1785.
Kant says, nothing in the world, indeed nothing even beyond the world, can possibly be conceived,
which could be called good without qualification, except a good will.
Intelligence, wit, judgment, and other talents of the mind, however they may be named, or
courage, resoluteness, and perseverance as qualities of temperament, are doubtless in
many respects, good and desirable.
But they can become extremely bad and harmful, if the will, which is to make use of these
gifts of nature, and which in its special constitution is called character, is not good.
It is the same with the gifts of fortune, power, riches, honor, even health, general
well-being, and the contentment with one's condition, which is called happiness, make
for pride and even arrogance if there is not a good will to correct their influence on
the mind.
The good will seems to constitute the indispensable condition even of worthiness to be happy.
For Kant, then, the foundation of ethics is not maximization of good, he is an arch-anti-utilitarian.
For Kant, the foundation of ethics is simply the good will.
Kant's a primary example of a philosopher with a rich inner life, a passionate intellectual
life evident in the torrent of philosophical works he produced, and yet almost no sign
of an outer life.
Kant was born in Königsberg in East Prussia in 1724.
He died there in 1804.
He graduated from the University of Königsberg.
He took his master's degree at the University of Königsberg.
He was eventually appointed to the Chair of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of
Königsberg.
Kant almost certainly lived and died a virgin.
The closest we get to a personal anecdote is the fact that his daily walks were so regular
that the people of Königsberg could set their watches by Kant passing by in front of their
windows.
He is, however, a model for what can be accomplished late in life.
Kant's important philosophical work began after he was 60 years old.
Kant's great work is the critique of pure reason.
It was 10 years in the making.
It was eagerly anticipated among his friends and his philosophical colleagues.
But when it finally appeared, it produced more bewilderment than admiration.
Kant's writing can be some of the most obscure, some of the most difficult in all of Western
philosophy.
Now although there are a lot of things about Kant and about Kant's writings that are not
very clear, there are a lot of things that Kant's not clear about, he is perfectly clear
about the foundations of his moral theory.
The foundation is not good consequences.
The foundation is the concept of a good will.
Let me give you another quote from Kant.
This is Kant again, the good will is not good because of what it affects or accomplishes
or because of its adequacy to achieve some proposed end.
It's good only because of its willing, i.e., it's good of itself.
And regarded for itself, it is to be esteemed incomparably higher than anything which could
be brought about by it.
This is still quote from Kant, even if it should happen that by a particularly unfortunate
fate, this will should be wholly lacking in power to accomplish its purposes.
And if there remained only the good will, it would sparkle like a jewel in its own right
as something that had its full worth in itself.
Goodness or fruitlessness can neither diminish nor augment its worth.
For a theory based on the good, of course, like considered last time, a good will is
derivatively good.
It gets its ethical value from the value of what it brings about or what it strives to
bring about.
For Kant's theory, based not on the good but the right, the good will's value is derivative
from nothing.
It is of inherent value in itself.
What's important is not what a good will can bring about.
Not what a good will aims at.
What's important is the good will itself.
That's the central idea of the theory.
But how can it work?
In reading Kant, it looks like he himself starts with just that pure idea and continues
writing as he tries to figure out how such a theory could work.
It's as if he started with the idea of basing an ethical theory not in the concept of the
good but in the concept of the right, and then tried to figure out how that kind of
theory could be broad enough, could be wide enough, could be powerful enough to be a theory
adequate for ethics as a whole.
What Kant ends up offering is a series of ideas.
They're intended to lead from one to the other like the links of a chain, and from
the notion of the good will, Kant goes to this as the second link.
If the foundation of ethics is to be the good will alone, what is it that makes a will a
good will?
The core of the good will, Kant proposes, is the concept of duty.
The good will is a will that acts out of a sense of duty.
Not out of inclination, not out of feeling, not out of trying to produce some end, but
acting on duty just because it's duty.
So what gives an action moral worth, Kant says, is simply that it's action from duty.
Here's Kant again, duty is the condition of a good will in itself whose worth transcends
everything.
So we go from the concept of a good will to what makes a will a good will, Kant thinks
is the concept of duty.
We've gone from good will to duty, Kant's third link is this.
Duty as Kant conceives it is action on principle.
The idea of principle, however, is the idea of something universal.
A principle in his sense is a universal principle.
Something that will apply universally everywhere and to everyone.
Action on principle is not something that will vary with situation and with circumstance.
It's action in accord with some law that will apply universally.
It's action in accord with a moral law.
So let me restate the first three links of Kant's chain of reasoning.
First, the only thing good without qualification is a good will.
Second, the core of the good will is the concept of duty.
And third, duty is action in accord with some universal principle.
Now that all sounds pretty abstract.
How does that give us any moral content?
How can we get any guidelines from a theory like that as to how to act morally?
And this is actually where the best part of Kant comes in.
The fact that the moral law will apply everywhere and to all agents Kant proposes, that by itself
will be enough to give it content.
Because the moral law has to be universal.
Any action in accord with the moral law has to be universalizable.
It has to be something that could be done by everyone everywhere.
And that, Kant thinks, is going to be enough.
The universalizable actions are the right ones and thus the ones that we ought to do.
Those that can't be universalized are morally wrong.
The result is Kant's categorical imperative.
He actually gives that title to four fairly different principles in the course of his
work.
But here's the first and the most important form.
So here's Kant on the categorical imperative.
Quote, I do not therefore need any penetrating acuteness in order to discern what I have
to do in order that my volition may be morally good.
Inexperienced in the course of the world, incapable of being prepared for all its contingencies,
I ask myself only, can I will that my maxim become a universal law?
If not, it must be rejected.
So Kant's chain of reasoning has led to what he offers as a litmus test for moral action,
the categorical imperative.
Those actions that you can universalize are ethically permissible.
Those that you can't universalize are wrong.
So the idea is you're considering some course of action.
You're asking yourself, is it right, is it morally right, is it ethically right or wrong?
And Kant says, well, try universalizing it.
Consider the prospect of everyone everywhere acting that way.
You're thinking of doing a certain thing.
Consider the prospect of everyone everywhere acting in the way that you're considering
acting.
Kant says that your will will contradict itself if the action's wrong.
Now Kant gives a few examples of how this is supposed to work.
He gives a very few examples.
One example turns on promising, precisely the problem that we identified in the last
lecture for good-based theories.
So Kant asks, may I, when in distress, make a promise with the intention not to keep it?
And Kant's answer is a firm no.
Where I to universalize that action, where I to universalize the idea of promising with
no intention to keep the promise, I'd have to say that it's OK anywhere and everywhere
for anyone to make a promise with the intention not to keep it.
But says Kant, that proposal contradicts itself.
Where everyone to do that, where everyone to think they could make promises with no
intention to keep that, promising would have no sense.
The words I promise would mean nothing.
And there would be no institution of promising.
That's where the contradiction comes in.
Kant says, with such a law, there'd be no promises at all.
Thus my maxim would necessarily destroy itself as soon as it was made a universal law.
The only actions that are right, the only actions that are in accord with duty, and
thus the only actions that are in accord with a good will, Kant says, are those that one
can consistently will as a universal law.
That's the categorical imperative.
If willingly action as a universal law leads to a contradiction, like the promises contradiction,
that law cannot be in accord with duty, and so it can't be morally right.
Promising is a great example of how this is supposed to work.
You really can't imagine everyone breaking their promises whenever they want to.
If you try to imagine a world or a society in which everybody breaks their promises whenever
they want to, you're really imagining a world or a society in which there aren't any promises
anymore.
So that's the way in which the contradiction appears.
You want to be able to make a promise without breaking it, but if everybody did that, you
couldn't do that because there wouldn't be any institution of promising to rely on.
Kant argues that lying is wrong for the same reason, that universal permission to lie would
destroy the very conventions of truth-telling that lying assumes.
One can't consistently will that everyone at their convenience lie as they wish.
If they did, truth-telling could no longer be assumed.
The fact that someone said something to you would mean essentially nothing because there
would be no assumption that they'd be telling you the truth.
But if there were no assumption that telling somebody something was truth-telling, if there
were no background assumption like that, lying would no longer be possible.
In the case of lying too, then, Kant argues that one can't universalize without contradiction.
In another example, Kant argues that suicide is wrong because one cannot universally will
kill people to kill themselves.
That's Kant's theory, an ethics based on the good will, based in action on principle,
and on universalizability as a litmus test, the categorical imperative as the litmus test
for ethical action.
And what of the other concept, what of the good?
In a theory like Kant's, the good is derivative from the right rather than the other way around.
In theories of the good, it's the right that gets its value from the good, from motivation
toward good states of affairs or good ends.
In Kant's theory, the whole intention of Kant's theory is to reverse that so that the value
of the good is dependent on the value of the right rather than the other way around.
What about happiness, the thing that was so central to the utilitarian tradition?
Happiness plays a vanishingly small role in Kant's theory.
It appears as only a trace element.
It slips in through a side door.
It slips in through a side door in duty.
Kant says that to secure one's own happiness is at least indirectly a duty just because
extreme unhappiness contempt one to violate other duties.
You see how peripheral happiness is in this kind of a theory.
It's not that the good action is one that produces happiness, it's that happiness gets
its value just because if you're unhappy that may distract you from pursuing other aspects
of your duty.
So it's not the good of happiness that makes pursuit of it right.
It's the rightness of pursuing it that makes a thing good.
What makes good things good is that we have a duty to pursue them.
Kant's is a valued attempt at a pure theory based not on the good but on the right and
there is something intellectually beautiful about it.
It's beautiful ethically because there does seem to be a sense in which moral worth lies
in the purity of the action itself rather than in its result.
It's beautiful conceptually because it would be so phenomenal to be able to deduce the
concrete content of morality.
What one really ought to do from the abstract form of morality itself and that's what this
theory tries to do.
It tries to take the form of universalizability, the form of duty, squeeze that and get the
real moral content of what you ought to do out of that formal aspect.
It would be like being able to deduce all of physics or all of astronomy from the mathematics
alone.
The beauty of Kant's attempt has driven some later theorists to try very much the same
thing.
But the truth is that virtually nobody working in ethics today thinks this really succeeds.
Let me outline some basic problems.
A first problem is this.
Suppose I'm considering doing something and according to Kant, I'm to ask myself, can
I will that my action become a universal law?
Can I consistently will that everyone do that?
The first problem is, well, do what?
The problem is that universalization requires a particular description of my action.
And whether the answer comes out that the action is permissible or that it's not may
depend on the description of the action that's chosen.
So suppose I'm considering discontinuing life support for a parent.
Suppose my mother's existence since the accident was an existence of pure pain until she sank
into a full coma two years ago.
Suppose the doctors tell me there was a major interruption of oxygen to the brain and that
the condition is permanent.
I can give two very different descriptions of what I'm considering doing.
The first description is this.
I'm considering the prospect of allowing a parent to die with what I regard as dignity
when they're beyond all hope of regaining consciousness and would return to a consciousness
of nothing but pain if they did regain consciousness.
Now can I consistently universalize that?
Can I apply that categorical imperative?
Can I consistently will that anyone in that situation, in the situation that I am, do
such a thing?
Well, perhaps so.
The action passes the categorical imperative.
It would come out as ethically okay.
But here's another description.
It fits too.
I'll receive a significant inheritance when my parent dies.
And what I'm doing is I'm considering doing something that will result in their death.
Can I consistently universalize that?
Can I will that anyone who will receive a significant inheritance when their parent dies do something
that will result in their death?
Well, certainly not.
So one action could be universalized.
One certainly could not, and the problem is that they're the same action.
All that has changed is my description of the action.
So what's doing the work then is not the action, but the description of it.
Kant has his judge actions by universalizing them, but you can universalize actions only
if you universalize them under some description.
The categorical imperative gives no rule for deciding which is the right description.
The argument, therefore, is that it doesn't tell us enough.
The categorical imperative doesn't give us enough to tell right actions from wrong ones
because things can seem universalizable under one description and not under another.
That's one problem, the description problem, that the same action might be under multiple
descriptions that might be universalizable under one, not universalizable under another,
but that the categorical imperative itself doesn't tell us which description to use.
A second problem is pointed out by the philosopher R. M. Hare.
According to Kant, the test of rightness is universalizability.
But what Hare says of a fanatical Nazi?
The Nazi thinks that Jews are a threat to the master race and ought to be extinguished.
Can he universalize that?
Of course, we can expect our Nazi to universalize that.
We can expect him at least to think that all Jews should be extinguished, and that looks
like universalization.
And what if he finds that he himself has Jewish blood?
What if he finds that he himself is a Jew?
The really fanatical Nazi, Hare says, would still universalize.
He'd say, yes, were I to find I was a Jew, I would think that I should be extinguished.
Yes, if I'm a Jew, I too should be killed.
The problem here is that Kant's universalizability tests are supposed to show us when an action
is wrong.
And the problem is that the fanatical Nazi we've imagined has passed all those tests.
Despite the fact that he's passed the universalizability test, what the fanatical Nazi proposes is
morally monstrous.
So Kant's tests, therefore, don't seem to be sufficient to be able to tell us right
from wrong.
One problem, then, is the description problem.
A second problem is illustrated by the fanatical Nazi, that universalizability doesn't seem
to be enough.
It doesn't seem to be a sufficient test for wrongness.
A third problem is this.
Kant's goal is a pure right-based theory.
The only thing good without qualification, you remember, is a good will.
The theory is not supposed to be based in considerations of good consequences.
The idea is to squeeze moral content out of the mere form of duty.
The form of action on principle, the litmus test, is a contradiction test.
And one consistently will that one's action become a universal law.
As we said, Kant gives very few examples of how this works.
The best examples in support of the theory seem to be precisely the ones that he gives.
The examples of promise keeping and lying.
And for those few examples, the theory may actually work.
Because of the nature of institutions of truth-telling and institutions of promise keeping, you can
perhaps get a contradiction in assuming what if everybody did that, as we outlined before.
But those are about the only cases that seem to work that way.
In other cases, the closest you get is that it would seem radically undesirable if everybody
did that.
Not a contradiction in terms like Kant demands, not an inconsistency of the will like he demands,
but when you imagine everybody doing that, it just seems really bad.
Suppose, for example, that I consider a little low-level embezzlement.
I want to skim $100 off the top every month.
According to Kant, I should apply the categorical imperative.
What if everybody did that?
What if everybody skimmed $100 off the top?
Does that give you a contradiction?
No, you're just imagining a lot of petty theft.
If we universalize an action and find out that it would be awful if everyone did it,
but it doesn't give us a contradiction, then the categorical imperative isn't squeezing
morality out of the formal structure of duty, it's just serving as a kind of magnifying
glass.
We're saying, what is the ethical character of the action that you propose?
But what if everyone did that?
That kind of thought experiment may show you that what you propose is not ethically acceptable,
but it may show you that for the same reasons that the good-based theory would emphasize
that the consequences would be so bad if everybody did that.
A pure right-based theory, then, despite its appeal, seems to be inadequate.
In applying the categorical comparative to cases beyond the easy examples, you end up
with a magnifying lens or a magnifying glass of ethics, but what it magnifies are still
considerations of the good rather than pure considerations of the right.
The conclusion, then, is this.
In these two lectures, we've considered two attempts at pure and simple theories of ethics,
pure good-based theories evident in ancient philosophy and ably represented by the utilitarian
tradition, and pure right-based theories with Immanuel Kant as the prime example.
Neither pure theory seems adequate.
Without a principle regarding descriptions, Kant's right-based theory doesn't really
give a decision procedure.
In some cases, moreover, it seems to legitimize action that's clearly unethical.
Often its results seem to smuggle in considerations of good consequences.
It ends up something less than a pure theory after all.
A pure good-based theory, on the other hand, also leaves out something of major ethical
importance.
It distorts the ethics of promises, for example.
It seems blind questions of justice.
So any better theory that we build is therefore going to have to incorporate both the good
and the right, both considerations of consequences that guide the utilitarians and the considerations
of duty and principle that appear in Kant.
Any adequate theory of ethical foundations is going to have to be messier and more complicated
than these pure theories.
Now in talking about the foundations of ethics, one of the things we haven't mentioned is
religion.
To some people, that may seem very strange.
How can one talk about values, about ethical values, for example, without talking about
religion?
That's the topic we'll take up in the next lecture.
