Lecture 11, Cultures and Values, Hopi, Navajo and Ike
The last lecture focused on an apparently simple question that turned out to be anything
but simple.
How do we define our values culturally relative?
In the course of that examination, three importantly different positions were distinguished.
The first is descriptive relativism.
Descriptive relativism is the claim that cultures differ in their fundamental beliefs
about value.
Ethical relativism is the claim that an action that is really right in one culture may really
be wrong in another.
It's not just a statement about beliefs.
In unqualified or universal form, it's the claim that there are no universal moral truths.
And prescriptive relativism, the third position we distinguished, claims that it's always
wrong to condemn or pass judgment on those with different cultural values.
In this lecture, I want to concentrate on just one of these, the question of descriptive
relativism.
This may seem to be the easiest form of relativism.
Of course, values differ across cultures.
Of course, beliefs, ethical beliefs differ across cultures.
Of course, different cultures differ in their ethical beliefs.
On reflection, however, it becomes clear that what we are interested in is fundamental
ethical disagreement.
The fact that two cultures announce apparently divergent values won't be of much interest
if the differences turn out to be merely superficial.
We don't want to be misled, for example, by apparent disputes that turn out to be nothing
more than different cultural applications of what are essentially the same ethical values.
It may look initially as if two cultures diverge on ethical values, but in fact their valuational
deep structures are essentially identical.
This is true, I think, even of some of the classical examples.
There's a passage in Herodotus.
It's retold in Montaigne.
It's known as the experiment of Darius.
Darius asked the Greeks how much he'd have to pay them to eat the bodies of their deceased
fathers, and they react in horror.
How hideous!
He then asks the Colossians of India how much they'd have to be paid not to eat the
bodies of their deceased fathers, cremating them in the Greek manner instead.
They react in horror at the very idea of burning their dead rather than eating them.
Despite their dramatic contrast, the experiment of Darius may not reflect a difference in
genuine ethical beliefs at all.
Suppose, for example, that the Colossians hold that it's right to honor the dead, that
perpetuating their spiritual substance is a way of doing this, and that eating part of
the bodies of the dead is a way of perpetuating their spiritual substance.
Against that background, it's clear why they would think of eating their dead as a sign
of deep respect, and it's clear why burning their dead would seem the deepest of insults.
Now, if that's the cultural background, and in fact we have strong reason to think it
is, then the different reactions that Darius records may reflect only differences in belief
about spiritual substance and modes of perpetuation.
The difference at issue may thus be more like factual disagreements than real disagreements
regarding value.
The value of honoring one's dead may be the same in the two cultures.
The disagreement is just a quasi-factual disagreement about what the spiritual universe is like,
and thus of how it's appropriate to honor one's dead.
If the two cultures agree regarding the importance of honoring the dead, we have unanimity rather
than divergence at the level of fundamental ethical values.
I think that the primary examples that were offered in the last lecture like this, too,
usury were to become widespread, would have threatened the economic breakdown of the entire
seniorial system, the medieval economic system.
The prohibitions against usury, then, were prohibitions against a radical threat to the
entire economy.
Our economy is different.
In fact, our economy is founded on precisely the practice that was a threat to the seniorial
system.
But we certainly share this value.
We certainly share the value that practices that would wreck the entire economy aren't
to be taken lightly.
So despite the fact that this looks like a case where something that's genuinely wrong
in one culture is genuinely right in another, it may not reflect any deep difference in
values.
It may reflect merely a contextual difference in how the same values are displayed.
The same reasoning applies to the Trobriand case.
Both our culture and theirs holds that children should be cultivated and cared for.
That doesn't differ.
The system of care providing is what differs, in part perhaps because of different factual
beliefs about how children come to be.
What obligations I have as an uncle depends on the whole system of care provision.
And once we understand that, it looks like the differences that issue are differences
in care delivery systems rather than any deep and fundamental disagreement as to basic values.
So we don't want to be misled by these kinds of apparent differences that are not deep
differences of ethical belief.
If we're looking for the deep differences, we want to know are there fundamental differences
between cultures that can be explained only as fundamental differences in ethical belief?
The two most notable attempts to answer that question have been by trained philosophers
sent to do anthropological fieldwork, John Ladd and Richard Brandt, both important ethical
thinkers in their own right.
In trying to track down the question of descriptive relativism, John Ladd worked among the Navajo.
Richard Brandt worked among the Hopi.
The Hopi and Navajo are neighbors, not always happy neighbors, in the American Southwest.
But they're very different cultures.
Indeed the languages of the Hopi and Navajo belong to two very different linguistic groups.
The Hopi language is related to Nahwadel, the language of the Aztecs.
The Navajo language is Athabaskan, related to that of the Inuit or Eskimo.
So we've got two trained philosophers doing anthropological fieldwork, both are trying
to find out whether it's true that there are fundamental ethical differences, differences
in fundamental ethical beliefs between cultures.
So let's start with Richard Brandt and the Hopi.
The traditional Hopi culture is very different from ours.
They have four cardinal directions, north, south, east, and west, as we do.
But for the Hopi, the traditional Hopi, each is deeply associated with color.
West is always yellow, south is always blue.
According to Hopi tradition, people are built with a series of vibratory centers along
their backbone, a vibratory center at the soft spot at the top of your head through
which you communicate with the creator, the brain just below it, a vibratory center in
your throat, and the seat of the creator in your solar plexus.
That's a very different view of anatomy.
In the Hopi worldview, people were formed from clay and saliva by spider women and emerged
with the help of the ant people through holes in the sky into a series of three worlds.
Eventually in this world, the fourth world, they crossed on a series of islands from the
west into Central America.
The traditional Hopi are quite adamant, for example, that they didn't come into the Americas
across the Bering Strait.
With a culture that different from ours, one might expect to find some very different views
about people's obligations, very different views about right and wrong.
The question is, are there any genuinely fundamental differences, differences that aren't to be
explained away in terms of differences in scientific or metaphysical worldview, like
the experiment of Darius?
Differences that aren't to be understood merely as reflections of contextual differences
in social arrangements, like the different obligations of the Trobrianders.
Brant spent four years of sporadic fieldwork among the Hopi attempting to answer that question.
And here are his conclusions.
First of all, the Hopi do have a harsher disapproval of intoxication than is typical
of contemporary America.
But Brant thinks that's easily accounted for by their historical circumstances.
Alcoholism has been a major problem in the history of cultural interaction for almost
all Native American peoples.
The Hopi also have a much stronger disapproval of sexual relations between cousins of the
same clan than we have of people who are biologically related in the same way.
But Brant thinks that that reflects differences in social arrangement rather than any fundamental
difference in ethical beliefs.
The clan structure creates patterns of interaction which sexual relations of that kind would
threaten.
On such an analysis, that case is very similar to the Trobriand example, reflecting differences
in social form but no deeper difference in fundamental ethical belief.
In the end, however, Brant does conclude that there is at least one fundamental difference
between us and the traditional Hopi.
This is a difference that he thinks can't be accounted for simply by difference in social
structure that can't be accounted for, cannot be accounted for simply by difference in factual
or religious belief.
Here's the difference.
The traditional Hopi don't seem to feel nearly so strongly about cruelty to animals as we
do.
It isn't that they regard animals as Descartes did, as unconscious automata or as insensitive
to pain.
Indeed, the traditional Hopi seem to think of animals as closer to people than we do.
Animals have thoughts, Brant's informants told him.
They just don't speak.
So he quotes his informants as saying, animals sometimes worry, quote, dogs or horses have
as much sense as a human being, yet they can't talk.
If they could speak, they'd be as smart as humans, end quote.
Now, despite that, the Hopi seem to tolerate cruelty to animals in cases that we would
not.
When catch birds and swing them around on strings, and the quote from the informants
is, sometimes they get tired and die, nobody objects to this.
Burrows and dogs have been executed for sport at dances.
Brant reports that the audience was much amused when it took several blows with an axe to
kill a squealing burrow.
The Hopi also play a game that we might call chicken polo, a chicken's buried in the sand
with its head sticking out, and competitors run or ride by at full speed and try to grab
it by the neck.
After the chicken's pulled from the ground, there's a fight for the body, and victory
goes to the person who ends up with the biggest piece of chicken.
Brant looked for differences in factual belief that might explain these differences in the
treatment of animals, but he was unable to find any.
No one thought that chicken didn't feel pain, oh yeah, that chicken feels a lot of pain.
No one thought that animal pain was different from the pain that we feel.
Sure glad I'm not that chicken.
So what?
Chicken polo is still a lot of fun.
The interesting point is that this is all that Brant comes up with.
Despite a range of obvious cultural differences between traditional Hopi and contemporary
Anglo-American culture, different attitudes toward animal cruelty were the only candidate
for fundamental ethical divergence that he could find.
Now if I stopped there, it would look like there was evidence for some difference in
fundamental ethical beliefs between cultures, but not a great deal of difference.
John Ladd, however, the other philosopher doing anthropological field work, John Ladd
had an equally good philosopher doing equally solid field work, came up with radically different
results.
In working with the Navajo, Ladd claimed to have found a great deal of fundamental ethical
difference.
In Ladd's reconstruction, the Navajo moral code is essentially teleological or indirect.
The Navajo code enjoins and forbids actions entirely in terms of whether they promote
or avert a particular state of affairs.
The ends in terms of which actions are prohibited or prescribed, however, on Ladd's account,
are entirely egoistic.
The goal of moral action in the Navajo code, Ladd concludes, the goal of moral action is
just the personal welfare of the agent.
The welfare of others, the common good, general altruism, those things just aren't considered.
Now things do get a bit complicated.
Since the traditional Navajo believe in vengeful ghosts, for example, one reason not to kill
anyone is that their ghost would come back and give you trouble.
But it's only because it would impact you that you shouldn't kill people, not because
it's wrong in itself to kill people, not because you should care about other people.
The core of the Navajo code, as Ladd portrays it then, is egoistic through and through.
When compared with our code, that would seem to represent a sweeping difference in fundamental
ethical belief.
Why is there such a divergence in the philosophically informed anthropological fieldwork of these
two men, of Brandt and Ladd?
One possibility is there's a difference in the fieldwork because there's a difference
in the people.
One possibility is that the Navajo and the Hopi are simply very different people.
And there is indeed a long history of conflict and mistrust between Hopi and Navajo.
It's also true that in that period in which it was fashionable to label cultures as guilt
cultures or shame cultures, the Hopi were classified as a guilt culture, and the Navajo
were classified as a shame culture.
But there's also another possibility here, a possibility that reflects not just on the
cultures, but on the attempt to study those cultures.
Because Brandt and Ladd approached their fieldwork in very different ways.
I believe that these differences show us that the attempt to answer even basic questions
about ethical differences across cultures raised some deep philosophical problems regarding
methodology and regarding our category of the ethical, what counts as ethical.
Brandt and Ladd's goals, what they were out for, were precisely the same.
They wanted to study a different culture, to reconstruct its moral code, and to compare
it with ours with an eye to fundamental ethical disagreements.
Both thought that that should give us some real evidence as to the truth or falsity
of descriptive relativism.
But that's where the similarities in their fieldwork end.
Brandt wanted an average moral view.
He wanted to reconstruct the average moral view of the Hopi, and therefore he worked
with a range of informants.
John Ladd picked a single individual as a Navajo moralist, Badaga, son of many beads,
and he worked entirely with that single informant.
Both of them faced the problem of how you identify ethical codes or moral beliefs, and
how you identify ethical beliefs or moral beliefs without confusing them with something
else, without confusing them with religious beliefs or factual beliefs.
There's a perpetual problem that anthropologists face regarding categories of description.
If we study a culture for the first time, we tend to want to know things like this.
Do they have a form of marriage?
What's it like?
Do they have a legal system?
What's it like?
In order to answer that kind of question, however, an anthropologist has to be able
to identify a form of marriage when he sees one.
How like ours does a cultural treatment of mating behavior have to be in order to qualify
as a form of marriage?
Does the anthropologist say, yes, they have a form of marriage, it's marriage by capture,
in which one group raids another to seize wives?
Or does he say, no, they don't have a form of marriage, they merely raid other groups
in order to seize mates?
The question is, does that count as a form of marriage or not?
And that's a reflection on our category of marriage as much as it is on the facts of
the cultural behavior.
Now for our discussion, the question is a question of categories too.
Here the question isn't how you identify a form of behavior as marriage, but how you
identify a belief as an ethical belief.
How do you recognize something as an ethical belief rather than as a religious or a factual
belief, for example?
Both Brandt and Ladd tried to be very explicit about criteria.
That's one point at which their training as philosophers was particularly valuable.
The care they take to list explicit criteria for cultural categories is not, I'm afraid,
characteristic of the ethnographic literature in general.
So let's look at the way they did it.
In an Outlining Criteria for Ethical Belief, Ladd took himself to be following the famous
sociologist Emil Durkheim.
According to Durkheim, quote, all morality appears to us as a system of rules of conduct,
end quote.
So Ladd concentrated on explicit pronouncements.
He was looking for the rules of conduct, so he concentrated on explicit pronouncements
by his informant, Bedagas, son of many beats.
On Durkheim's analysis, quote, moral rules are invested with a special authority by virtue
of which they are obeyed simply because they command, end quote.
That's the authority of ethics, which Ladd interprets in terms of priority and legitimacy.
The basic idea in Ladd is that the ethical has some kind of trumping priority.
Ethical considerations take priority over other kinds of reasons for action.
The ethical also has a legitimacy, which makes it equally binding on different people.
So a moralist who announces a moral prescription must be passing on some principle which extends
beyond his own case.
He's passing on a principle that's intended to bind the listener as well as the teller.
So what Ladd found in interviews with his single informant was a code that had precisely
this Durkheim character.
It was a set of unounceable rules, they were treated as of predominant importance, and
they were expressed as intersubjectively valid, as being valid for the listener as well as
for the teller.
And it was also a code consisting entirely of egoistic prescriptions, like don't drink
too much.
If you mess with someone else's wife, don't let them know about it.
So following that explicit methodology, Ladd concluded that the Navajo have a fundamentally
different moral code, one that's egoistic through and through.
That was Ladd's criteria for the ethical, that was Ladd's methodology for identifying
the ethical beliefs.
Now turn to Brandt.
Brandt's criteria for identifying ethical beliefs were importantly different.
To begin with, Brandt didn't limit himself to pronounceable rules the way Ladd did.
Brandt speaks instead of effective reactions, where reactions may include explicit statements,
but they may also include attitudes reflected in indignation, or shock, or feelings of guilt
and remorse.
So Brandt isn't looking just for unounceable rules, he's looking for general reactions,
effective reactions.
Brandt is as marvelously explicit about his criteria as Ladd is, and he goes on to specify
a definition for ethical reactions.
In order to qualify as ethical, a reaction must first of all be to something that's seen
as voluntary.
It must be about, quote, a voluntary act, or a motive, or a trait of personality, supposed
to be at least partly under the voluntary control of the person who is judged about,
the person judged about.
In order to qualify as ethical, a reaction must also be disinterested.
Something doesn't count as ethical, quote, unless it's disinterested, in the sense of
not being causally dependent on any of the individual's personal desires or attachments
for particular persons.
So Ladd follows Durkheim in looking for intersubjectively valid, pronounceable moral principles.
Brandt looks for disinterested reactions, reactions regarding voluntary actions and
motives and traits of character that are applied consistently regardless of the particular person
at issue.
That difference in their theoretical outlines of what counts as ethical goes a long way
toward explaining why Brandt and Ladd come to such different conclusions regarding the
Hopi and Navajo.
The two peoples at issue are indeed very different, but the categories for which Brandt and Ladd
were explicitly looking, those were very different as well.
Perhaps if he took Ladd's criteria and applied them to Brandt's Hopi, perhaps that would
have made them look more egoistic.
And perhaps Brandt's criteria applied to Ladd's Navajo would have filtered out egoistic beliefs
because they didn't qualify as disinterested, and thus would have resulted in a portrayal
in which Navajo ethics appear significantly less egoistic.
I've followed this example in some detail because it points out the subtle difficulties
in attempting to establish the truth regarding even descriptive relativism.
The simple question of whether there are fundamental ethical differences between cultures raises
questions not only about other cultures, but about our own categories.
What counts as fundamental?
What kind of belief counts as ethical?
It's the best candidate for a culture which seems to hold a set of beliefs radically different
from our own, is the Ike, described in Colin Turnbull's book The Mountain People.
Turnbull is a British anthropologist, he's known for a book about the Congo pygmies
whom he clearly loves, the book's called The Forest People, as well as for a book about
the Ike whom he tries desperately and unsuccessfully not to despise.
Turnbull didn't go looking for the Ike, he went looking for the Tuso, a group of African
hunters and gatherers who were nomadic across an area of Uganda, Kenya, and the Sudan.
But as a result of political forces on all sides, the Tuso had been forced into the mountains
and they had been forced into subsistence agriculture, and there they had reconstituted
themselves as the Ike, so he went looking for a group of nomads and he found the people
restricted to the mountains.
He went looking for hunter-gatherers and he found them consigned to subsistence agriculture
by political forces beyond their control.
The philosopher Thomas Hobbes speaks of the state of nature as a free-for-all fight, as
quote, a time of war where every man is enemy to every man.
And that's what life for the Ike seems to be like.
An Ike feeds himself first and foremost, with no apparent concern for the sick and the aged.
The Ike regard the unfortunate people among them as a joke.
They abandon their children as a nuisance and they laugh and snatch food from their
aged parents as they try to eat.
Messengers sent to get government food for the village stuff themselves with as much
as they can on the way back and they arrive in the village only to vomit it before the
others.
Love and concern and compassion and self-sacrifice seem simply to have vanished from the cultural
life of the Ike.
The Ike are perhaps the best candidate for a people with an entirely different set of
fundamental values from our own.
But even here there are some open conceptual questions.
At one point, Turnbull gives the following outline of the Ike terms, the terms in the
Ike language, morang and morangik.
So here's a quote from Turnbull.
In this curious society, which seems to have bypassed Karl Marx and economics, there is
one common value apart from language to which all Ike hold tenaciously.
It is nagag, food.
This is not a cynical quip.
There's no room for cynicism with the Ike.
It is clearly stated by the Ike themselves in their daily conversation, in their rationale
for action and thought.
It's the one standard by which they measure right and wrong, goodness and badness.
The very word for good, morang, is defined in terms of food.
Goodness morangik is defined simply as food.
Or if you press, this will be clarified as the possession of food, and still further
clarified as individual possession of food.
Even if you try the word as an adjective and attempt to discover what their concept
is of a good man, Iak anamorang, hoping that the answer will be that a good man is a man
who helps to fill your own stomach, you get the truly Ikean answer.
A good man is one who has a full stomach.
There is goodness in being, but none in doing, at least not in doing for others.
That portrayal does indeed make it appear that the Ike have a twisted and viciously
egoistic ethical code clearly expressed in the deepest fundamentals of their ethical
language.
But as the philosopher W. V. O. Quine has emphasized, translational hypotheses are
always undetermined by anthropological data.
In other words, it's always possible to offer very different translations for the same
foreign term.
Contrary to the portrayal of the Ike as having a twisted egoistic ethics, is Turnbull's linguistic
translation of the term merang as good.
And perhaps that's simply a mistake.
Perhaps it's a mistake to translate merang as good and merangic as goodness.
It's the translation of these as good that makes it appear that the Ike have a distortedly
selfish ethical code.
And perhaps these shouldn't be translated as ethical terms at all.
Perhaps merang might better be translated as in one's interest, or for one's pragmatic
benefit.
If you did a thoroughgoing translational revision of that type, we might end up seeing
the Ike not as possessing a peculiarly twisted ethical code, but as lacking any code of ethics
at all.
Where other cultures have an ethical code, the Ike may have a self-serving individualistic
pragmatics instead.
So subtleties of translation might thus make all the difference between seeing the Ike
as having a particularly distorted ethical culture and seeing them in the course of their
horrible history as having lost the ethical aspects of their culture altogether.
In the case of Turnbull's Ike, as in the case of Ladd's Navajo, as in the case of
Brandt's Hopi, what looks like a simple factual question, are there fundamental ethical differences
between cultures, turns out to be a conceptual question as well as a factual one, and turns
out to be far from simple.
In the next lecture, I want to address questions for ethics that are raised not by cultural
differences, but by issues of evolution.
