Lecture 20 Free Will and Determinism
The last lecture focused on choice and chance and the problem of moral luck.
This lecture is about the wider problem of free will and determinism.
If the universe is, as we conceive it scientifically, a deterministic universe that operates entirely
in terms of causality and natural law, then how can we really make choices?
And how can there be such a thing as free will?
At the core of the problem of free will and determinism are two clusters of intuitive
considerations.
Both of these clusters are fairly well developed in theory.
Both form a part of our everyday thinking about the world, but they collide head on.
One group of considerations forms the core of our ethical thinking about choice and responsibility,
about praise and blame.
The second group of considerations characterize our understanding of a universe that follows
natural principles, determined enough to make rational action possible.
Our lives couldn't be what they are without either of these clusters of concepts.
And the problem of determinism is that the two conceptual clusters seem to contradict
each other.
I have a confession to make.
I'd like to be able to tell you the truth about free will and determinism.
But I can't.
There are easier problems, or at least what appear to be easier problems, and then there
are the mind breakers.
Free will and determinism seems to me to be one of the mind breakers.
It's a problem for which I don't have a tidy solution and for which I don't expect
to ever get one.
I'm quite certain that the problem will outlive me, and perhaps it will outlive thinking
beings entirely.
I'm not alone in thinking that this is a hard issue.
Kant thought so too.
In the critique of pure reason, Kant has a set of antinomies.
These are paradoxes, paradoxes that Kant thinks reason will forever be unable to solve.
The antinomies appear in Kant with opposing arguments and parallel columns, as thesis
on this side and antithesis on the other side.
Kant thinks that reason supports the argument on both sides.
The antinomies therefore represent cases of rationally, irresolvable, conceptual conflict,
and Kant's third antinomy is the problem of free will and determinism.
William James takes up the issue in an essay called The Dilemma of Determinism, and he
too sees it as a radical conflict.
Here's a quote from James, the issue it will be seen is a perfectly sharp one, which no
eulogistic terminology can smear over or wipe out.
The truth must be on one side or the other, and its line with one side makes the other
false.
Unlike Kant, William James comes down on one side of the issue in particular.
He thinks that real freedom exists, but he gives up on any attempt to explain how that
can be true.
And that's the real problem.
Jean-Paul Sartre built his entire existentialism around a similar commitment to freedom.
What Sartre says is that the essence of consciousness is freedom.
The essence of being is the realm of determinism.
But Sartre leaves entirely unexplained how a free consciousness is possible if it is
also a form of being.
And that's the real problem.
Relativism, like relativism, is generally presented in the form of an argument, a line
of reasoning intended as a logical proof of a conclusion.
The premises of the determinist argument seem compelling.
The transitions seem plausible.
But the conclusion is one that we couldn't possibly live with.
There are those who accept the argument in its entirety, their only problem, is how to
make that unlivable conclusion seem somehow livable.
Most philosophers, however, think there must be something wrong with the argument.
Their line of approach is that the philosophical problem is to figure out what.
Now, on that line of approach, in this kind of approach, the truth about determinism would
be a truth that let us see precisely where an extremely tempting argument goes wrong.
What I want to do in this lecture is to outline a strategy, a strategy of that sort, a strategy
for defusing the deterministic argument against free will, a strategy for showing that the
argument doesn't go through.
So I'll show you some logical missteps in some of the elementary forms of the argument.
The hypothesis is that there must be some similar missteps in the harder forms of the
argument, too.
Now it's important to realize what this strategy will and won't do, even if it succeeds.
If this strategy succeeds, it does not prove that there is such a thing as free will.
It doesn't explain how free will works in a deterministic universe.
What it does show, what it would show, is that the standard deterministic argument doesn't
logically compel us to abandon a cluster of concepts on the freedom side of choice and
responsibility, on the freedom side, like choice and responsibility, like praise and
blame, concepts that lie at the core of our values.
So if it works, this kind of strategy shows that the deterministic argument can be resisted.
Let me start with a brief outline of the way we really do think, day to day, about freedom
and responsibility.
I think this is important because it's this cluster of notions that the deterministic argument
attacks.
In the previous lecture, we used concepts from law to introduce the issue, and that
works here as well.
Legal cases are one area in which we worry seriously about freedom and responsibility.
We worry about whether people in particular cases should be held responsible for murders
or assassinations or bank robberies, or whether they shouldn't, whether they should be held
not responsible by virtue of insanity.
Let me give you two examples.
Patty Hearst was kidnapped in 1974 by a revolutionary group that called itself the SLA, the Symbionese
Liberation Army.
She later acted as a full and participating member of the group, and she was eventually
tried for bank robbery and assault, and for shooting out the windows of male sporting
goods with a machine gun.
But all of that was a result of her initially being kidnapped against her will.
Had that kidnapping never happened, she would never have participated in the bank robbery.
She would have never have participated in the male sporting goods assault.
So was she responsible for her actions or not?
Here's another case.
John W. Hinckley writes a love letter to Jody Foster, at that point a starlet for whom
he has developed a perverse infatuation.
Hinckley then walks to the Washington Hilton and fires six shots in an attempt to kill
Ronald Reagan.
He hits policeman Thomas Delahante and secret service agent Timothy McCarthy.
The bullet that hits press secretary James Brady leaves him with permanent brain damage.
And one shot bounces off the car, hits Reagan in the left side, bounces off a rib, punctures
his left lung, and stops about three inches from the president's heart.
A scan of Hinckley's brain shows widened solsci and widened solsci correlate with schizophrenia.
So is he responsible for the attempted assassination or is he not guilty by virtue of insanity?
In both the law and in the ethical values that the law reflects, there are two basic
grounds on which we excuse people from responsibility.
The first is a mentality clause.
We don't consider epileptics culpable for the damage they may do in the course of an
epileptic seizure.
We don't consider children as fully responsible for their actions as adults.
In the common law requirements for criminal prosecution, this ethical stance is reflected
at least roughly in the mens rea requirement.
It is that legally culpable action requires an appropriate mental state.
So one of the things we look at in talking about responsibility is mentality, the mentality
clause.
The other class of cases in which we excuse people from responsibility are cases of coercion.
If I manipulate your body like a marionette, or if I wrap your fist around a knife and
I make it plunge into the chest of a victim, it's not you who are the murderer, it's me.
In the law, these are cases excused under the requirement of Actus Reus, which demands
that a voluntary act or omission be performed.
The classic example is the ship that's blown into territorial waters by a hurricane.
That's not a ship that has voluntarily entered illegal waters, and so it can't be prosecuted
as such.
If what you do is like a ship blown off course, if it's less what you do than what happens
to you, reflecting not an action on your part, but the consequence of something external,
then you can't be held criminally responsible.
We also treat other cases of coercion as responsibility eliminating.
If I hold a gun to your head, what I force you to do on threat of death is not treated
as something for which you're responsible.
You had no choice, we say, although, of course, you certainly did have a choice.
You had a choice between doing what I commanded or being blown away.
The two conditions under which we commonly excuse responsibility then are the mentality
clause roughly reflected in Men's Reia and the coercion clause included under Actus Reus.
In the Patty Hearst case, the defense appealed to both mentality and coercion as exculpatory
circumstances.
The defense in the Patty Hearst case didn't enter an insanity defense.
What they did claim is that she was brainwashed.
And the interesting thing about an appeal to brainwashing is that it combines both aspects
of responsibility reduction.
If you are coerced into a particular mental state, you may qualify as less than responsible
for your actions under both the mentality and the coercion clause.
But brainwashing was not a legal term in California at that time, and it's not in any state now.
The defense failed.
Now let's return to the general issue of free will and determinism.
In standard form, the problem is offered as a short argument that ends in a flurry of
rhetorical questions.
The determinist argument is intended to convince you that there can be no free will.
And it goes like this.
Let's get serious.
In the end, we're all just biochemical conglomerates that react to our environment.
Everything we do is therefore determined by two factors.
One, our biochemical makeup, for which we're not responsible.
And two, our environment, for which we're not responsible.
But if everything I do is determined, how can you say I ever act freely?
If everything I do is determined, how can you hold me responsible for what I do?
The determinist argument challenges our common ethical distinctions between culpable and
non-copable behavior, between things for which people are held responsible and things for
which they're not.
I want to outline a strategy for dealing with at least simple forms of this kind of argument.
I think we can show that the reasoning doesn't logically compel us to accept the conclusion.
Now that doesn't prove the existence of free will, but it does defuse the argument against
it.
The determinist argument appears in Aristotle's De Interpretationi as an argument regarding
truth and falsity.
The problem in this form appears to stump even Aristotle.
He flips back and forth between two radically different positions.
The argument as it appears in Aristotle takes this form.
Because that Martin killed his mother today, then it's true that Martin killed his mother
today.
It follows that the statement, Martin killed his mother yesterday will be true tomorrow
and that Martin will kill his mother tomorrow was true yesterday.
What goes for Martin and his mother, of course, goes for anything that occurs.
The idea is that any claim once true is always true.
You may express that claim before or after the fact using variations in tense.
If X occurs for any X, it has to be true after the fact that X did occur, and it must likewise
be true before the fact that X will occur.
This principle about truth, it should be emphasized, doesn't depend on what we know, that it was
true before the fact that X would occur, that need not entail that anyone knew that X would
occur.
Indeed, the fact that it's true once X did occur, that it has occurred, that need not
entail that anyone knows it later.
Truth and knowledge are importantly different.
The principle on which this form of true false determinism turns is a principle just regarding
the truth side.
For anything that happens, it's true after it happens that it did happen, and it's likewise
true before it happens that it will happen.
So using that principle, the determinist argument, in this simple form, in the form it appears
in Aristotle, using that principle, the determinist argument can be phrased as follows in a series
of steps.
Step one, if Martin killed his mother today, then it was true 500 years ago that he would
kill his mother today.
Step two, so it was determined that he'd kill her.
Step three, so how can you say that he acted freely?
How can you hold him responsible?
Now what's wrong with that argument?
Well, you first of all might attack step one.
You might attack the once true, always true principle that the argument's based on.
You could argue that if something hasn't yet occurred, it's not yet true whether it'll
occur or not.
And we do speak of things coming true or failing to come true, and that's one of the positions
that Aristotle puts forward.
So one possibility for resisting this simple deterministic argument based on truth is to
deny its initial premise.
Deny that if Martin killed his mother today, it was true 500 years ago that he would kill
his mother today.
But that may not wash.
It can also be argued that once true, always true should hold as a principle regarding
truth.
Suppose that I write this on one slip of paper.
In the year 2050, there will be a President of the United States with the initials R.D.
On this paper I've got, in the year 2050, there will be a President of the United States
with the initials R.D.
Suppose I write this on another slip of paper.
In the year 2050, there will not be a President of the United States with the initials R.D.
This says in the year 2050, there will be a President with the initials R.D.
This says in the year 2050, there won't be.
Surely, one of these must be true and the other false.
Simply because in the year 2050, there must either be a President with those initials
or not.
It doesn't matter whether we know it today or not.
That's the other position that Aristotle also seems to hold.
There's a different strategy that I want to emphasize.
Here's the argument again.
Step one, if Martin killed his mother today, then it was true 500 years ago that he'd
killed his mother today.
Two, so it was determined that he'd kill her.
Step three, so how can you say that he acted freely?
How can you hold him responsible?
Look at that crucial second step.
That went so it was determined that he would kill her.
What precisely does determined mean here?
We've said that one of the standard conditions that excuses responsibility is coercion.
But one thing that determined clearly doesn't mean in that second step of the argument is
that Martin was compelled or coerced or forced to kill his mother.
Putting in the simple story of Martin killing his mother indicates that there was someone
else forcing Martin's finger against the trigger or holding a gun to his head.
So determined doesn't seem to mean coerced.
Another thing that that determined clearly doesn't mean in step two is that Martin was
acting in an epileptic fit or under the effect of hallucinogenic drugs or in any other mental
state that would excuse his action under a mentality clause.
The point is that if determined did mean either of those things, coercion or mentality, the
argumentative move from step two to step three from it was determined to he was not responsible
would be both clear and legitimate.
If Martin had been in that kind of mental state or if he had been coerced, we'd have
a real argument that he shouldn't be held responsible for his action.
If determined does not mean either of those two things, it's not clear that we do have
a legitimate move from step two to step three, from determined in step two to not responsible
in step three.
I'd like to suggest that the plausibility of the deterministic argument rests on a particular
word, a weasel word.
Technically, philosophers call this a fallacy of ambiguity.
There's a particular word that makes an illogical transition seem logical, and that word is
determined.
In this case, in the beginning of the argument, we are tempted to understand the word determined
in one way, a way that makes the transition from step one to step two legitimate.
By the time we get to step three, we are led to understand the word determined in another
way, a way that makes the transition from step two to step three legitimate.
But unfortunately, the two ways that we understand determined are radically different, and there's
no one interpretation which legitimates both the move from step one to two and the move
from step two to three.
If determined means coerced or not mentally responsible, then step three does follow from
step two.
We couldn't hold Martin responsible, but you can't get that sense of determined from step
one, that it was true 500 years before an act that it would happen doesn't show that
it was coerced or that Martin was acting in some kind of epileptic fit.
Let me give you a thought experiment that I think proves that the word determined doesn't
mean coerced or not mentally responsible in any sense that follows from step one in this
form of the argument.
Suppose we have a case in which Martin really has been forced to kill his mother.
There stood Al Capone with a gun to his head threatening to blow Martin away if he didn't
put his mother out of her misery.
Suppose we have a second case in which there's no Al Capone.
Martin plots the demise of his mother carefully, deliberately, amassing the needed arsenic in
the woodshed and plotting the details of the poisoning on a computerized spreadsheet.
In the once true always true principle, both of those cases, the Al Capone case and the
planning the arsenic case, both of those will be cases in which it was true 500 years before
the fact that Martin would kill his mother.
True 500 years before fails entirely to distinguish the two cases.
So from the fact that it's true before the fact that Martin will kill his mother, nothing
at all follows as to whether that action will be coerced or uncoerced under the effect
of drugs or not in a mental state of clear intention or in a fog of hallucination.
Cases like this show that we're working with two different concepts.
One is the concept of whether it was true before the fact that Martin would do it.
The other is the concept of free and unfree action, the distinction between whether Martin
freely chose to do it or whether he didn't.
And the problem with the argument on this analysis is that it proceeds as if these two
quite different concepts were the same.
They're not.
That's why you can't legitimately move from it was true 500 years before the fact to he
was not responsible for what he did.
What makes it look like a rational argument is that the word determined masks the difference
between these two very different concepts.
The crucial switch in concepts is disguised by a piece of leisure domain.
Now I can sum up what I've done as what philosophers call a compatibilist strategy.
It goes like this.
If the argument were legitimate, it would be because these two things were strictly contradictory.
It was true 500 years ago that Martin would kill his mother today and he acted freely.
If the argument were legitimate, those two things would contradict one another.
If the first is true, it was true 500 years before that he'd do it.
The second can't be true.
That's precisely what the determinist argument demands.
But the strategy is, but wait, they could both be true.
Martin could have acted freely in choosing to kill his mother and it could have been true
years before that he would act freely in choosing to kill his mother.
True before the fact and freedom of action are just two different concepts.
They could both hold their compatible.
By the compatibilist strategy, then this first form of determinism argument fails.
There was an ancient form of the deterministic argument.
That one was an ancient form of the determinist argument and a fairly easy one.
In Boethius, writing about 500 AD, you find a theological form of the argument.
Boethius' first premise isn't if Martin killed his mother today it was true 500 years before
that he would kill her today, but he uses instead as this.
If Martin killed his mother today, God knew 500 years before that he would kill his mother
today.
Instead of it was true before the fact, we have God knew it before the fact.
But that's not going to change the argument in any way that a compatibilist strategy like
this can't handle.
There are contemporary forms of the determinist argument that seem more troublesome, however.
Consider a form of the argument that invokes causal or natural law.
Something that happens happens because of A, earlier events in accord with B, causal
laws, laws of nature.
So if Martin killed his mother today, that was because of earlier events, events even
before his birth in accord with laws of nature.
So it was determined that he'd kill his mother today.
So how can you say that he acted freely?
How can you hold him responsible?
The philosophical problem is the same as in the other cases.
What's wrong with that argument?
We might attack the first premise that everything that happens happens in terms of earlier events
and causal laws.
And as a matter of fact, our physical evidence is that that first premise is not true.
This is the story of quantum mechanics.
Suffice it to say that on the standard outline of quantum mechanics, there are indeed events
that occur without any background cause.
The emission of gamma rays from unstable atoms of uranium are like that.
Those are the events that produce the familiar clicks on a Geiger counter.
We have a statistical law that says how often this will tend to happen in a lump of uranium
of a particular size.
But there's no explanation for why that particular electron did its thing just then.
Seeing any further into quantum mechanics would be a digression.
The empirical evidence for the theory, however, is overpowering.
And what the theory says is that there are events that occur without antecedent cause.
So doesn't quantum mechanics offer a loophole for free will and responsibility?
I don't think so.
What quantum mechanics claims is that atomic decay is a random phenomenon.
And where's the responsibility in that?
If my actions are coerced by outside forces, I'm not acting freely.
But if my actions are determined by random events, I'm not free either.
If quantum randomness gave us free will, then we could have a robot with genuine free will
just by building it around a randomizing device.
Build a robot around a decaying lump of uranium.
You do that and you'd still have a robot.
It wouldn't suddenly have free will and it wouldn't suddenly be responsible for its
actions.
So I think the quantum mechanical challenge to the first premise is of little help.
Indeed, we could just formulate the argument in such a way as to include it.
So here then is a more powerful contemporary form of the determinist argument.
It's in four steps.
Step one.
Let's say everything that happens is a result either of quantum randomness or earlier events
in accord with scientific laws.
Step two.
So if Martin killed his mother today, that was a result of quantum randomness earlier
events and the necessities of natural law.
Step three.
His action was therefore determined.
Step four.
So how can you say that he acted freely?
How can you hold him responsible?
Can I use the compatibilist strategy to diffuse this argument as well?
Maybe so.
Again the argument depends on that weasel word determined to confuse two very different
concepts.
If the word determines means that Martin was forced or coerced, then the conclusion would
follow.
He didn't act freely.
But the fact that an action was in accord with the physics of the universe doesn't mean
it was coerced.
Here are the two very different concepts that the word determined disguises even here.
One's the concept of something being in accord with the laws of the universe.
The other is the concept of unfree action, coerced or compelled action as opposed to
freely chosen action, the distinction between whether Martin acted freely or whether he
was coerced.
The determinist argument is a deliberate effort to scramble these two concepts.
By using the compatibilist strategy, I've tried to show that the determinist argument
doesn't succeed.
But let me also emphasize what I haven't even tried to do.
Does the compatibilist strategy prove that we do have free will?
No.
Even if successful, it just diffuses the counter argument.
Does it explain how free will works in a universe governed by natural law?
No, it doesn't do that either.
In one regard then, the determinist succeeds.
If the purpose of the argument is to show that we rely on a principle of responsibility
for which we have no proof and of which we have no complete understanding, then the determinist
argument succeeds magnificently.
But if the purpose of the determinist argument isn't to raise a question, but to settle one,
to prove that free will doesn't exist, then it doesn't succeed.
Here's perhaps the ultimate refutation of the deterministic argument against free will,
the fact that we can freely choose not to buy it.
The topic of the next lecture is something entirely different, images of immortality.
