Butcher 23, Moralities in Conflict and in Change
Questions of value are some of the deepest questions we face.
It's no surprise, then, that questions of value play a major role in our literature.
Tolstoy and Dostoevsky are famous for trying to work out questions of value in their novels.
In American literature, it's easy to find the moral questions addressed in Nathaniel
Hawthorne's The Scarlet Letter, issues of guilt and shame, personal integrity, and social
pressure.
Herman Melville's Moby Dick is, among other things, a moral allegory on good and evil.
Melville's Billy Budd is a much more concrete examination of integrity and victimization.
We talked in a previous lecture about Mark Twain's reflections on individual conscience
and social mores in the Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.
Because deep questions of value show up in literature, we've used literary examples
throughout this series of lectures.
But books are not our only popular media.
Movies have taken over a large area of that realm that was once occupied by literature.
Sometimes movies are merely light and entertaining, just as some of all literature has always
been merely light and entertaining.
But sometimes they can address deeper issues.
In this lecture, I want to talk about a movie that does address those deeper issues, though
one wouldn't at first suspect it.
The movie is a classic western, directed by John Ford in 1962, starring Jimmy Stewart,
John Wayne, and Lee Marvin as a particularly drunk and despicable Liberty Valance.
Let me give you the plot.
The movie opens with an older Jimmy Stewart returning to the town of Shinbone as a senator,
coming back to this little hick town.
He's coming back for the funeral of the down-and-out John Wayne character.
A reporter asks him why a high-ranking senator would come to this little hick town for the
funeral of a nobody.
The rest of the movie and the real story is presented as a flashback.
The Jimmy Stewart character, as it happens, first rose to prominence in that little town
as the man who shot Liberty Valance.
That's what the movie is about.
It was the philosopher Alastair McIntyre who first brought my attention to the moral themes
of this classic western.
What the movie is about is the conflict, the collision between two moral worldviews.
One moral worldview is the rule of law, the rule of laws established by a legislature
voted by citizens enforced by the people's representatives, and it's Jimmy Stewart as
a young lawyer who's attempting to bring that rule of law to the West.
But there's already a moral code in place.
It's the code of the cowboys.
One aspect of that code is loyalty and allegiance, an almost feudal allegiance to the leader
Liberty Valance, for example.
The central focus of that code, however, is on the individual.
Honesty is primary.
A man's word is his bond, whether written in the legal sense or not.
Also primary is individual courage.
In that code, a man settles his own disputes.
Disagreements are settled by testing one man's metal against another, by open gun battles
in the middle of the street.
Now, the real West wasn't like this.
But that doesn't matter.
It wasn't like this on either side, either on the law-abiding Jimmy Stewart side or the
cattle baron Liberty Valance side.
Hey, this is a movie.
It's like a piece of literature.
John Ford can explore the moral themes he's after without thinking he has to be a slave
to real history.
On this outline of the movie, then, there are two basic moral codes in conflict.
Jimmy Stewart is trying to bring law to the West.
Liberty Valance is acting entirely in accord with the cowboy morality, and he's acting
to defend it.
Only one of those moral codes can eventually try him.
There's another figure that features in the movie, the John Wayne figure.
He's a cowboy imbued entirely with the cowboy morality, but he becomes a friend to Jimmy
Stewart.
There's also a woman, but I'll leave that part out.
The core question of the movie is how this kind of conflict between radically different
moralities, conflict between moral worldviews, how that kind of conflict can be resolved.
How can a person or how can a society move from one moral code to another?
How can one moral code be replaced with another one?
How can the collision of moralities lead to real moral change?
Now, the movie doesn't just pose an interesting question.
It also poses an interesting answer.
In the movie, things finally come to a head.
Jimmy Stewart is trying to establish a rule of law.
He's challenged to a showdown and is called out into the street by a drunk Liberty Valance.
Now at that point, this is what's happening.
Liberty Valance is imposing the cowboy form of conflict resolution.
It's not the legal form.
And even recognizing that form of conflict resolution as legitimate, Jimmy Stewart is
compromising his own moral scheme.
But he walks into the street for the showdown with Liberty Valance.
Valance first shoots out a light over his head.
Jimmy Stewart cringes and Liberty Valance laughs.
Finally, Liberty Valance is tired of toying with him.
The next one will be right between the eyes, he says.
Jimmy Stewart draws his gun and both man fire.
Despite his skill and fame as a gunfighter, Liberty Valance takes the bullet and falls
dead in the street.
So Jimmy Stewart triumphs in terms of the old codes resolution scheme.
And on the basis of that, on that basis, is instrumental in bringing in a new moral scheme,
the rule of law.
He's universally applauded as the man who shot Liberty Valance.
As the new territory becomes a state, he serves multiple terms as governor and then as senator.
There's only one hitch and that's the hook of the movie.
The Jimmy Stewart character was not the man who shot Liberty Valance.
He couldn't have shot Liberty Valance.
Liberty was an ace gun slinger.
Jimmy Stewart was a green horn lawyer.
He should have just died with a bullet between his eyes and that would have just left the
old code in place.
Liberty Valance was not shot by Jimmy Stewart.
Liberty Valance was shot by a shadowy figure back in an alleyway.
Liberty Valance wasn't shot in a fair fight.
He was shot by a man with a rifle, firing from cover, hidden from view.
The man who shot Liberty Valance was the John Wayne character.
Jimmy Stewart knows it, but he doesn't tell.
John Wayne knows it, but doesn't tell.
That's their secret together and that's why Jimmy Stewart is back for the funeral.
So how does one moral code replace another?
John Ford's answer in the movie seems to be through people who are willing to violate
both codes.
The only person who did not violate his code was Liberty Valance.
The Jimmy Stewart character rose to influence.
He succeeded in establishing law on the territory.
It might look like he did it in terms of both codes, that he settled the dispute by the
old means and then put in the new.
But that was a lie and he knew it.
Jimmy Stewart, the Jimmy Stewart character, violated his code of law and order by, A,
bowing to a form of conflict resolution that was illegal in his code, B, by keeping silent
when he had witnessed a murder, a killing that was improper by either code, and indeed
see by taking credit for something he was not, the man who shot Liberty Valance.
That too was improper in either code.
So the Jimmy Stewart character violated both codes.
The John Wayne character was a man of the cowboy morality.
He violated that code by shooting a man from cover with a rifle no less.
By the cowboy morality, that was cowardice and murder.
But it wasn't acceptable in the code of law either.
Here, too, it was murder.
So John Wayne's actions violated both codes, too.
In neither form of morality was it acceptable to hide the truth.
That violated both codes, too.
So Liberty Valance stuck by his moral code.
But both the Jimmy Stewart and the John Wayne characters ended up violating both codes.
What John Ford seems to be saying is that it's only individuals willing to violate
all codes who are capable of changing them.
It's only from outside both moral codes, Ford seems to say, that a major change of morality
can happen.
Interestingly, a major mechanism in the transition was friendship.
That is itself a psychological relation between people.
This has positive moral overtones in both moralities.
I think this is an interesting literary or filmic take on the issue of moralities and
conflict and moralities and change.
I'm not sure it's ultimately right, though I think there is something right about it.
Let me set up the problem now in full philosophical garb.
Consider colliding moral worldviews.
A moral worldview, if fully elaborated, would be a normative view of everything.
It would be a view that gave people a particular value in particular social roles.
It would outline the obligations bearing on particular people in particular situations.
It would be a view that interpreted all actions of all participants in a particular way, as
good or bad, as right or wrong, as obligatory or permissible.
It would be a view that interpreted all events in a particular way, as fortuitous or unfortunate,
as furthering important moral lands, or as frustrating those ends.
So in a complete moral worldview, everything would come tinted with the value assigned
it on that worldview.
It would repeat its values inexorably.
It would be a complete moral worldview.
Now could a complete moral worldview like that be refuted?
How?
In one of our first lectures, we emphasized Hume's is-ought gap, the fact that no statement
of value will follow from purely factual premises.
Now because this is a moral worldview, and because there is an is-ought gap, no factual
considerations would be sufficient to refute it.
But because it's a moral worldview, complete and consistent into itself, no moral considerations
would have any foothold against it either.
If a moral claim was in accord with the moral view, it would simply reinforce it.
If a moral claim was made contrary to the view, it would be seen as an immoral claim,
and the person who made it would be seen as immoral as well.
Any conflicting moral claims would just be rejected in the moral worldview.
They might not even be recognized as a moral claim.
They might be thought to be simply crazy.
Now suppose you had two different moral worldviews in conflict.
What could resolve the dispute between them?
No factual claim could resolve the dispute.
No moral claim could resolve the dispute.
Any moral claim on one side would simply be rejected as immoral on the other.
And that seems to exhaust the possibilities.
It therefore appears that no resolution of such a conflict would be possible at all.
No change from one such morality to another.
At least no change that precedes by the changing of minds would be possible at all.
That's the kind of setup in which John Ford is proposing that change can occur only from
outside the process.
Only by an action like John Wayne's, for example, which is immoral on both codes.
There's an interesting parallel to this philosophical problematic concerning not morality but science.
It's a problem that has plagued philosophy of science throughout the second half of the
20th century.
In an older picture of the history of science, science was viewed as cumulative.
The history of science on such a view is like the history of stocking a pantry.
We get more and more facts, more and more explanations, more and more understanding.
We have an inverted pyramid of acquired knowledge about the world.
It's small at the historical bottom, it gets bigger with this accumulation of facts and
theories and understanding as it goes up.
We accumulate more and more scientific knowledge.
The idea is that's scientific progress.
Thomas S. Kuhn is famous for having effectively called the bluff on such a view.
When you really look at it, the history of science does not look cumulative in that way.
The history of science does not look like we just add facts on top of previous facts
or understanding, add understanding to previous understanding.
Science works in terms of theories that replace other theories.
Newtonian astronomy didn't just add to Ptolemaic astronomy, it wiped it off the field, it replaced
it.
Einsteinian physics doesn't just add to the things that Newtonian physics told us.
Einsteinian physics shows that Newtonian physics was fundamentally wrong.
Other theories replace earlier theories, hence the name of Kuhn's book, The Structure
of Scientific Revolutions.
Part of what Kuhn emphasizes in that book is a holistic picture of scientific theories.
His term is actually wider, a holistic picture of scientific paradigms.
According to Kuhn, science at any point in time is ruled by a particular paradigm.
At its core will be a body of scientific theory, but the paradigm doesn't perpetuate itself
merely by explicit theory.
The paradigm at a time appears in how we train scientists in our universities.
It appears in how we judge how good scientists are.
The paradigm dictates what experiments are worth doing and what experiments aren't worth
doing.
The course of normal science, Kuhn says, doesn't challenge paradigms, it perpetuates paradigms.
And one of the things that a paradigm does is color one's take on experiments.
For Kuhn, even perception is theory-laden.
What you see depends on what you think is happening.
Even what you see is dictated by your background paradigm.
Now, if there were a way of resolving disputes between scientific paradigms, it would be
experiment.
But interpretation of experiments is theory-laden, and those people with different paradigms
will simply read the experiment as supporting their own theories.
It's not clear how far Kuhn wants to take that.
I don't think it was even clear to Kuhn how far he wanted to take it.
But if you take it far enough, if you envisage the history of science in terms of paradigms,
where paradigms dictate even how experiments are read, then this becomes a major question.
How can there be any rational transition from one paradigm to another?
Since its theories supply at the core of these paradigms, how can there be any rational means
of establishing one theory in place of another?
If reality is always filtered through the conceptual scheme of a particular paradigm,
how can there be any objective measure of real progress in science?
Sometimes Kuhn suggests, and often his followers have suggested, that there is no answer to
that question, that there can be no rational transition from one paradigm to another.
All transition must therefore be irrational.
At one point, Kuhn uses the image of religious conversion.
In changing from paradigm to paradigm, he says you don't make a rational move.
You just suddenly see things different in terms of the new paradigm.
Now I think there is something to John Ford's take on ethical conflict and ethical change.
I think there's something to Thomas S. Kuhn's portrayal of the history of science in terms
of paradigms.
But I also think there's something wrong about these portrayals.
And what I think is wrong about them is their wholism.
It looks impossible to change from one morality to another if the moralities are portrayed
holistically as a whole, as tainting everything that comes within their reach.
Once you have sketched the rivals as complete moral worldviews, as we did before, then it
does look as if there could be no resolution between them.
It looks impossible to change from one scientific theory to another if the theories or the paradigms
are portrayed holistically as tainting everything that comes within their reach.
If all experimentation is theory-laden, for example, there will be no experiment that
decides between two rival theories.
I think that in both of these cases what we have is a philosopher's problem.
One of the really powerful aspects of philosophy is the ability to abstract, to deal with issues
on a level that filters out the inconsequential bits and pieces of concrete cases.
But that's also a philosophical danger because a full abstraction can generate problems that
aren't there in the reality from which one's abstracting.
Take the science case.
People do hold particular scientific theories to be true.
And that fact does govern the questions that they take to be important and the questions
that they don't.
That fact does guide research.
And at least for some experiments it may color the perception of what has happened in that
experiment.
But resolution of scientific disputes between theories looks impossible, only if we abstract
from that to complete paradigms which govern every perception in every experiment, only
if every perception is theory-laden in a total and complete sense.
I think that's an abstraction gone awry.
Resolution of scientific disputes looks impossible, only if one's dealing with these holistically
complete abstractions.
Scientific change and scientific progress are not impossible if the real theories or
paradigms one is dealing with are not quite that complete.
Not quite that exceptionless.
Not quite that loaded into every perception in every experiment.
I think something similar goes wrong in the moral case.
People do have moral views, and these are culturally inculcated, and they do taint how
one sees actions and events and claims made in support of or against those moral views.
But only if there were moral views that were complete, fully consistent, airtight and impervious
to external input, only then would this raise an impossibility problem regarding moral resolution
and moral change.
In the case of both science and morality, I think, the apparent impossibility of conceptual
change stems from an overblown philosophical abstraction, an abstraction of complete and
consistent moral worldviews, or of totalitarian scientific paradigms.
I don't think that either of these things really happens, and it's a good thing that
they don't happen for precisely the reasons we've outlined.
If they did, there wouldn't be any prospect for moral change, and thus there'd be no prospect
for moral progress, nor would there be any prospect for scientific change, and thus there'd
be no prospect for scientific progress.
It's a good thing, then, that totalitarian scientific paradigms and complete and consistent
moral worldviews are a myth of philosophical abstraction.
One of the things that goes along with Cuny and Holism we've noted is the idea that perception
is theory-laden.
In a nutshell, the idea is that your beliefs influence what you see, that your perception
is tainted by your belief system, and in lots of cases, that may be true.
In order to pose an irresolvable problem for scientific change, however, it would have
to always be true, and it would have to be true in a very strong sense that you could
never see anything that contradicted your pre-existent beliefs.
That in turn would demand that our brains not be modularized or compartmentalized.
That would mean that the belief part of your brain would have to influence the perception
part of your brain entirely.
There couldn't be separate belief and perception modules in your computation.
The philosopher Jerry Fodor uses a simple example to show that that's not the case,
that your brain is more modularized than that, that your beliefs don't influence your perceptions
that much.
The example is a familiar optical illusion.
Perhaps you're familiar with the top hat illusion.
In the simplest form, it consists of two perpendicular lines, a vertical line that meets a horizontal
line below it in the middle.
You can draw this yourself.
You draw a horizontal line exactly two inches in length.
You mark the midpoint.
Then draw a vertical line from that point exactly two inches in length.
So you've got a horizontal line two inches long.
From the middle of that, a vertical line extends two inches up.
Now look at what you've drawn.
You know that the vertical and the horizontal lines are the same length because you drew
them that way.
But the vertical line will look longer than the horizontal line.
It really does look longer.
Here's Fodor's argument.
Take any example of that sort.
When you look at it, the vertical line looks longer.
You know it's not longer because you measured it when you drew it.
But that doesn't change the fact that it looks longer.
You can check your work, go back and measure both lines with a ruler.
Yep, the same length.
But the vertical line still looks longer.
Here's Fodor's point.
If belief influenced all perception, our knowledge that the two lines are the same length would
make them look the same length.
But the vertical line still looks longer.
If belief influenced all perception, that wouldn't be true.
If your brain didn't have separate modules for belief and perception, that wouldn't be
true.
And if all perception were theory laden, that wouldn't be true.
So even though scientific theories do influence practice, and even though some observation
is theory laden, at least to some extent, the paradigms are not so airtight that scientific
progress becomes impossible.
And the same kind of thing is true in terms of moral systems.
I'm not sure they're always consistent.
I'm not sure they're ever consistent.
Often they have precisely the same structure that ours does, discussed in the last lecture,
a set of conflicting values of different kinds.
Often also they work in terms of analogy like ours does.
Despite an initial moral verdict on a case, we can sometimes be convinced by analogy that
our initial moral verdict was wrong.
I think that's how much of our moral progress has been made in terms of race, gender, and
sexual inclination, for example.
Racism is clearly wrong because it involves treating people in terms of something that's
morally irrelevant with regard to either their character or their actions, their race, if
in fact that's any real category at all.
But gender is like race in that regard.
Much of the argument against sexism in the 1960s is explicitly phrased in terms of that
analogy.
If racism is wrong because it's structured in terms of a morally irrelevant category,
how can sexism be anything but wrong?
On one side, the argument that continues today regarding homosexuality uses the analogy of
sexual inclination to questions of gender before it and of race before that.
That bespeaks a possibility for moral change within a moral code by means of internal dynamics.
If a moral code were completely consistent with a set answer to every case, it couldn't
progress in that way.
The saving grace for moral progress may be precisely that our codes are not consistent
and complete in that way.
A similar lesson applies to moral codes in conflict.
If moral codes really were hermetically sealed, consistent, complete, impervious to factual
input, and fully labeling with regard to any moral claim, then there could be no resolution
between them.
And to the extent that they are hermetically sealed, there is a problem in resolution.
Here's the reality of that kind of problem.
There are groups that have been in conflict so long that every event that occurs is reinterpreted
by each side in their own way, indeed events that don't occur are invented by each side
in their own way.
I have in mind the Protestant and Catholic camps of Northern Ireland.
I have in mind the Serbs and the Croats.
I have in mind the Palestinians and the Israelis.
I have in mind the Sunni and Shiite camps in Iraq.
I could go on.
In such cases, each side sees itself as the victim.
Everything that happens is woven immediately into the narrative of their own victimization.
The same act is seen as long overdue retaliation on one side.
It's seen as a further outrage on the other.
The same act may be seen as an unfortunate mistake by one side and a malicious attack
by the other.
In that kind of situation, trust has so decayed that truth itself becomes a victim.
It becomes enough that an event is rumored to happen and enough for its character that
it fits with the continuing narrative of victimization.
The hope for resolution is the hope that the moralities in conflict are not consistent
and complete, that there is still room for events the interpretation of which is not
already given.
I think there's also a mechanism for change here that's not fully conceptual and not
merely a matter of moral worldview.
That mechanism is also one that John Ford includes in the Man Who Shot Liberty Valance.
It even appears in Huckleberry Finn.
There and sometimes in reality, personal friendship can be an important force for moral change.
I'll use the next and final lecture to summarize some of the questions we've raised in this
series of lectures, some of the sources we've used, and some of the conclusions we might
be able to draw.
