Lecture 24, Summing Up
Immanuel Kant ends his critique of practical reason with these words.
Two things fill the mind with ever new and increasing wonder and awe.
The more often an intensely reflection is drawn to them, the starry heavens above me
and the moral law within me.
Kant had a right to mention both of these.
In 1755, he was the first to propose that our solar system had formed from a gaseous
nebula pulled by gravity into a disk and eventually coalescing into the sun and the
surrounding planets.
That was one of the first speculations as to the formation of our solar system and it's
essentially the same theory that's held today.
Our concentration in these lectures has been on the second half of Kant's emphasis, the
moral law within me.
Ethics has been an important core of our work, though our discussion has been wider, a consideration
of values in general.
There's a further line in Kant's closing that's not often quoted, but it's equally
important.
He says that two things fill the mind with wonder, the starry heavens above me and the
moral law within me.
Immediately after this, he says that neither of these has to be treated as if they are
shrouded in obscurity or beyond his horizon.
He says, I see them before me and connect them immediately with my existence.
That too has been a characteristic of these lectures, a conviction that even the deepest
issues regarding values connect immediately with our existence and as such are open to
careful, critical and productive thinking.
In the opening lecture, I mentioned Wittgenstein's idea that a line of philosophical thought
is like a rope.
The strength of the rope need not be in any single strand.
The strength of the rope and the strength of the philosophical inquiry results from
the overlap of many different strands.
I outlined the course at the beginning in terms of overlapping philosophical strands,
so let me outline those major strands again detailing some of the specific topics we've
addressed in each one.
One strand running through these lectures has been a family of questions regarding the
basic nature of value.
In an early lecture, we talked about facts and values, in particular about Hume's is-ought
gap, the claim that one cannot derive an ought from an is.
That important distinction has reappeared several times throughout the later lectures.
In two early lectures, we concentrated on the two major candidates for pure theories
of the foundations of ethics, good-based theories like utilitarianism and Kant's valiant but
ultimately unsuccessful attempt at a pure right-based theory, a theory based on the
concept that the only thing good without qualification is a good will.
We also devoted a lecture to the relation between religion and values.
Questions in this category, questions of the nature of ethics reappeared again in
considering the objective side of value with G. E. Moore's thought experiments and the
magic button that would give us all our ideal subjective existence at the mere cost of separating
us from reality forever.
Our reflections on rationality and rules was another lecture keyed to the nature of value,
as was the lecture last time on Moralities in Conflict and Moralities in Change.
So that's one strand of our work, has been the nature of values.
A second strand of our philosophical inquiry has been a set of challenges to the very idea
of value.
Those challenges include skepticism and questions about ethical knowledge.
How can one know right from wrong?
We addressed that head on in a lecture on knowing right from wrong and in a different
way, in a later lecture on ethical knowledge and rationality and rules.
Problems of skepticism are also evident in the lecture last time, phrased in terms of
the abstract issue of incommensurable moralities and the metaphor of the man who shot liberty
balance.
So one challenge we've addressed is skepticism.
Another challenge is that of determinism.
If everything is determined in a deterministic universe, how can we act freely?
And how can we be held responsible for what we do?
We examined forms of the deterministic argument since Aristotle, and the core of that lecture
is the outline of the compatibilist strategy for diffusing determinist arguments.
So we've got skepticism, determinism, a third challenge is that of relativism.
There's no universal right and wrong, is there?
Doesn't it just depend on our culture?
We devoted two lectures to that issue, trying to emphasize what was right about the position
as well as what was wrong about it.
Here we invoked serious anthropological work by Richard Brandt among the Hopi, John Ladd
among the Navajo, and Colin Turnbull among the Ike.
The third strand includes questions geared to specific issues of value as they play out
in the real world.
Sometimes these turned on concrete examples.
The lecture on the cash value of a life used a case of cost-benefit analysis and the exploding
pinto gas tank.
The Dax Cowart case appeared in reflections on the idea that someone could be better off
dead.
The issue of disparate punishments for murder and attempted murder was a focus in the lecture
on moral luck.
And the death penalty was a major topic of importance in the lecture on theories of punishment.
Sometimes the specific issue was still an abstract one.
This was true of the specific examination of evolution, ethics, and game theory.
It was also true of the picture of justice, a sketch of John Rawls's theory and against
the background of the social contract tradition in Hobbes and Rousseau.
The final strand that I outlined early on in the series of lectures, the final strand
I outlined when we began, was an emphasis on values in a life.
As emphasized in the very first lecture, that's what makes our study a study of axiology rather
than just ethics.
The question we return to again and again has been, what makes a life a good life?
What makes life worth living?
We focused on the good life in an early lecture by examining the difference between lives
we envy and lives we admire.
Another lecture on priorities in a life, the challenge was simply to make priorities explicit
to figure out what really is most important to us.
Issues of the good life were also clear in the lectures on the cash value of a life.
In the graphs of lives that we considered in the lecture on life and death, and in the
lecture on religious and anti-religious reactions to life's horrors, they're also evident in
our reflections on immortality, revealed in the conditions we'd put on the prospect
of living forever.
I tried, from the beginning, to structure this series of lectures in terms of topics,
this twisted rope of overlapping topics regarding value.
I've brought in major philosophical contributions for I thought they might be helpful, or suggestively
right perhaps, or suggestively wrong.
It wasn't part of my intention to cover the history of ethics, or the entire history
of value theory.
In light of that, it's a little surprising to me, looking back over the previous twenty-three
half hours that the lectures have, in fact, covered so much of the philosophical history.
With regard to Plato, we've drawn ideas from the Republic, the Apology, the Crito,
the Philebus, and the Euthyphro.
Does God do what He does because it's good, or is it good merely because He does it?
Now, that's not bad coverage of Plato alone.
We've talked about determinism in Aristotle's De interpretazione, and we've repeatedly
come back to the Nicomachean Ethics.
We work with Epicurus and the Epicureans.
We work with Lucretius.
We touched on Epictatus, Seneca, and the Stoics.
We spoke of Sextus empiricus, and the classical skeptics.
Boethius appeared briefly in the discussion on determinism, and Augustine and Aquinas
made cameo appearances at a couple of times.
From the Renaissance, we use the work of Montaigne.
We work with both Hobbes and Rousseau, the classical exponents of a view that ethics
is founded in social agreement, social contract theory.
We work repeatedly with Hume, using both the Izzat gap from the treatise of human nature
and his formulation of the problem of evil in the dialogues concerning natural religion.
We return to Kant again and again, using his groundwork for the metaphysics of morals when
we were talking about right-based theories of ethics, using his metaphysical elements
of justice in outlining the retributive theory of punishment, and using his critique of pure
reason in talking about determinism.
We of course spent time on the utilitarians on both Jeremy Bentham's greatest pleasure
for the greatest number formulation and John Stuart Mills' greatest good for the greatest
number.
John appeared again in our discussion of punishment.
Kierkegaard appeared only briefly in an early lecture, but Nietzsche got his own lecture,
much of it negative, but also with the positive kernel that the history of our ethical views
can be of crucial importance to how we think of them.
Both William James and Jean-Paul Sartre appeared in the context of determinism, with James
appearing again because of his view of ghosts.
In the 20th century, we also devoted serious attention to several aspects of Morris'
Principia Ethica.
We mentioned Bertrand Russell at one point, used Ludwig Wittgenstein at another, and spent
some time on A.J. Ayer's emotivus theory of ethics.
W. D. Ross's theory of prima facia duties was the focal piece for our reflections on
ethical rationality and moral rules.
From the more recent literature, we talked about the anthropological work of philosophers
John Ladd and Richard Brandt.
John Rawls' theory of justice was offered as a contemporary picture of justice, but
we also mentioned the criticisms in Robert Nozick's Anarchy, State, and Utopia.
Thomas Nagel and Bernard Williams were used repeatedly, and among contemporary philosophers,
we've also drawn from the work of Alastair McIntyre, Jerry Fodor, Michael Ruse, Derek
Parfit, Philip Kitcher.
So had my original plan been a series of lectures that covered the history of philosophy, at
least a history of ethics, I probably couldn't have done much better.
We've drawn from virtually all the major figures in all historical periods.
I hope that these will continue to be a resource for you.
John Ruskin was one of the most important art critics of the 1800s, a champion among
other things of the almost abstract skyscrapers of Turner.
One of Ruskin's most influential essays at that time was of King's Treasuries.
What he holds out as of most value there, a value far greater than the contents of any
King's Treasury, is the resource of books.
What if you had the wisest people of all time waiting expectantly to talk just to you?
What Ruskin says is that you do, quote from Ruskin, there is a society continually open
to us of people who will talk to us as long as we like, whatever our rank and occupation.
Talk to us in the best words they can choose and of the things nearest their hearts.
That's the world of classic authors and classic works on which we've drawn.
We've drawn from a wide range of different disciplines.
We've drawn from history starting with Herodotus, running through the history of usury in the
seniorial system up to Patty Hurst and John W. Hinckley.
Our sources have also included theoretical economics, game theory from John von Neumann
and Robert Axelrod's work on cooperation.
We've included bits of theoretical biology and sociobiology using E. O. Wilson and Richard
Dawkins' work on altruism and evolution.
We even took ideas from physics regarding quantum mechanics and determinism.
Sociobiology was crucial to our work on relativism and in talking about rules we drew on the psychological
work of Piaget and Lawrence Colberg on moral development.
We've also included literary sources in our net, so at various points we've used work
from Charles Dickens, Peter S. Beagle, Fyodor Dostoevsky, Ursula Le Guin, Mark Twain and
Rice, Jorge Luis Borges, and even John Ford's movie The Man Who Shot Liberty Valence.
So in case you've missed the point, philosophers are not snobbish about where they draw their
source material.
There's another aspect of these lectures that I'd like to emphasize beyond the topics
addressed and the sources drawn on.
That aspect is philosophical methodology.
One thing I hope has come across in these lectures is that there is such a thing as
doing philosophy.
It's not formalized in terms of any stock procedure, but philosophy certainly does have
established techniques and does exhibit a characteristic form of intellectual approach.
First and foremost, the concentration is on concepts.
Philosophers want a sense of the conceptual territory.
We want to know what the deepest concepts are, how those concepts can be justified,
how those concepts work.
What is at issue are our concepts, our concepts of fairness, concepts of justice, of rights
and obligations, for example.
Because of that, philosophers often talk about the language that's used to express these
concepts.
That opens philosophers up to the charge that it's mere semantics or that it's all about
words.
But that's a mistake in the sense that philosophers are after, there's nothing mere about semantics.
What philosophers want to understand and explore and expand are the concepts that are expressed
in our words.
What philosophers want to understand and maybe even change are the fundamental ways in which
we conceive the world.
Often these lectures have been phrased in terms of conceptual problems, of clashes between
concepts or conceptual paradoxes, apparent inconsistencies.
Those are problem cases and philosophers concentrate on those problem cases because they are potentially
the most revealing.
That's where the conceptual action is.
The hope is that those clashes of concepts will make possible a deeper conceptual understanding.
One of the philosophical techniques that you've undoubtedly noticed is the use of thought
experiments.
So GE Moore has you imagine a universe with only one thing in it.
I have you imagine a button that would convert us instantly into brains in vats.
A familiar technique in both mathematics and physical experiment is to test the extremes.
Testing the extremes doesn't give you the final result but it does give you a good working
idea of what you're dealing with.
And thought experiments are intellectual probes of exactly that type regarding concepts.
We may use a concept every day but may get a real understanding of that concept only
when we see how it works in an extreme case, only when we test it in some outrageous thought
experiment.
Crucial to all philosophical work, finally, is the role of argument.
Philosophers are looking for the truth regarding deep questions about fundamental concepts.
Philosophers are searching for reasons to think that this claim is true of value or that
this claim is not.
Reasons for thinking that our choices are ultimately determined, for example, or reasons
for thinking that we are essentially free.
When formulated as tightly as possible, these reasons take the form of arguments.
Such arguments are intended to be rationally exportable.
Argument is intended to bind the listener as it binds the presenter of the argument.
Of course, that doesn't mean that all arguments are sound.
It's because arguments are so important that the critical analysis of arguments is equally
important in philosophy.
So in all these ways, in concentration on concepts, in emphasis on conceptual problems,
in the use of thought experiments, in focus on arguments, and analysis of arguments, in
all these ways, these lectures have been intended as examples of doing philosophy.
Okay, what about conclusions?
Each lecture was designed to have a point to drive toward at least a suggested conclusion.
I didn't design the course as trying to establish some overall thesis.
But looking back, I think there are a number of conclusions that emerge from the lectures
as a whole.
One theme that's emerged repeatedly is the pluralism of our values.
There isn't just one single thing that we value.
There's not one single thing we value in ordering our life's priorities.
There's not even one single thing we value when we restrict the question to ethical values.
Instead, there are a plurality of different things we value, both in ethics and in life
in general.
In life, we value pleasure and human interaction and achievement and contact with reality.
In ethics, we value human flourishing, but also commitment per se and justice per se.
Every attempt we've considered that tried to unify these into a single overriding value.
Every view of ethics is trying to maximize some one thing, every utilitarian view, every
Kantian right-based view, every view in terms of a set of distinct rules, every one of those
has turned out to be a failure.
No utilitarian view can do justice to our sense of commitment to other people or to our
sense of justice.
On the other hand, no Kantian view can accept that consequences can matter.
No single set of rules seems adequate to the irreducible plurality of incommensurable things
that we value.
A second point that emerges from the lectures as a whole, a second thing in the category
of conclusions, is this, that that plurality of values doesn't in any way entail any abandonment
of values, even though we are left with important questions.
So we've examined important questions about human choice and coercion and compulsion.
We've seen that there are important questions about degrees of responsibility.
Those are deep and persistent questions about our values, but they don't ultimately threaten
our values.
For example, we've seen that the determinist argument can be resisted.
It's not ultimately coercive.
There are also important questions about the role of culture in values.
We've pursued some of these questions with reference to the Navajo and Hopi, but also
in terms of questions about moralities and conflict, moralities and change.
Here again there are questions, important questions, but the questions aren't a threat.
The relativist argument that there is no right and wrong, that there are only cultural influences,
doesn't go through.
There are also important questions about the character of our ethical knowledge, how we
could know what we think we know about right and wrong.
We've seen that there are similar questions regarding our mathematical and scientific
knowledge.
Any skeptical implication that we can't have knowledge regarding values ends up being unsupported.
And finally there are important questions about evolution and ethics.
Again we've seen that the reductive position that there are only evolutionary urges turns
out to be much too strong.
So the first conclusion I think that can be drawn from the lectures as a whole is that
our value structure is inescapably pluralistic.
The second conclusion is that although there are important considerations regarding degrees
of responsibility and the influence of culture and how ethical knowledge is possible and
the role of evolution, none of the standard attempts to pose these as ultimate threats
to values end up being successful.
A third conclusion is a reflection on where we stand with respect to values.
This has several parts, three parts, that values are inescapable, a conclusion about
particular values, and a commitment to truth and reality.
First, there's a sense in which value is inescapable for us.
This point appeared early on in trying to imagine the universe without value, a universe
in which nothing had any more significance than anything else precisely because nothing
had any value.
That universe for us seems inconceivable.
Anything approaching life as we know it is inevitably cast in terms of value.
It's impossible without a sense of value.
So a life guided by some form of value seems inevitable.
Values are inescapable for beings like us.
The question isn't whether to adopt values, but which values to adopt.
The second aspect of where we stand with respect to values is that we find ourselves not only
inevitably with values, we find ourselves with very particular values.
The fact is that we do hold strong positions regarding value.
Although we may often disagree, there are also values we hold in common, and I was able
to rely on these again and again in the course of the lecture.
So for example, we place a strong value on commitment, the commitment of promises, or
the commitment of personal bonds deeper and more subtle than explicit promises.
We place a strong value on justice.
The importance of those particular values is that they show our range of values is radically
different and radically different in kind than any calculus of utilities could capture.
So values inescapable for us, and we do find ourselves with some very particular values.
And one of those values finally is a commitment to truth and ultimately to reality.
This showed up in the example of the magic button that would convert everyone to a brain
in a vat living their best possible subjective life.
The fact that that kind of life wouldn't be good enough is an indication that we want
something more.
We want some genuine contact with reality.
We want it in our values too.
As reflective beings, we can't merely accept the values that we have at any particular
time.
Neither skepticism nor relativism nor determinism succeeds in proving ethical reflection impossible,
but each does raise issues that make ethical reflection necessary.
Maybe some things do not genuinely have the value we think they do.
Maybe some of our values are nothing more than societal norms, inappropriate to a new
or a changing reality.
Maybe some of our judgments of responsibility and culpability and blame are ultimately mistaken.
So that's the predicament we're in.
Values for beings like us are inescapable.
But because we want our values to be right, reflection on values, given the particular
values we have and for rationally placed beings like us, reflection on values is also inescapable.
That's what these lectures have all been about.
But the idea isn't that the task should end here with my final lecture.
The idea is precisely that it should continue.
The idea is for you to bring these reflections, these philosophical models, these techniques
to bear in thinking further about value on your own, in your own thinking about abstract
philosophical issues of the nature of value, but also in your own thinking about concrete
value questions that inevitably arise in trying to live a decent life and a life worth living.
This has been an inquiry of ideas.
The philosopher John Dewey somewhere characterizes philosophy as such an inquiry.
And he gives an important warning that an inquiry of ideas like every other real exploration
is intellectually dangerous.
Once you start to think critically about ideas, once you are no longer satisfied with
familiar beliefs just because they're familiar, you can no longer be certain what conclusions
you'll come to.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com or call our customer care representatives at 1-800-TEACH12.
Thank you very much.
