These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by the teaching company.
The Great Courses covered a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day
for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lectures are university professors carefully selected by the teaching company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled A Brief History of the World, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Peter N. Stearns.
Professor Stearns is Provost and Professor of History at George Mason University.
He received his bachelor's degree Summa Cum Laude, his master's degree and his doctorate in history from Harvard University.
Professor Stearns was trained in European social history and has written books and articles on emotions,
child rearing, dieting and obesity, old age, and work as they concern people in both Europe and the United States.
He has also written widely and influential in the field of world history,
including authoring two textbooks that have gone through multiple editions.
He has also written thematic books on world history, including The Industrial Revolution in World History,
Gender in World History, Consumerism in World History, Western Civilization in World History, and Childhood in World History.
He edited the sixth edition of the Encyclopedia of World History and is currently editing the Encyclopedia of Modern World History.
His recent books, Global Outrage, The Evolution and Impact of World Opinion, and American Fear,
illustrate his interest in using history to understand contemporary patterns of behavior.
At George Mason University, Professor Stearns annually teaches a World History course for undergraduates.
He previously taught at the University of Chicago, Rutgers, and Carnegie Mellon.
While at Carnegie Mellon, he won the Smith Award for Teaching and Educational Service in the College of Humanities and Social Sciences,
as well as the Spencer Award for Distinguished Teaching.
Professor Stearns has also worked extensively for the Advanced Placement Program,
and from 1996 to 2006, he chaired the committee that devised and implemented the Advanced Placement World History course.
He has also served as vice president of the American Historical Association,
heading its teaching division from 1995 to 1998.
Dr. Stearns also founded and still edits the Journal of Social History.
Professor Stearns prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a timeline, a glossary, biographical notes, and an annotated bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 What and Why is World History?
The rise of world history has been one of the most important developments in American history education
and to some extent scholarship over the past two decades, so we'll begin with a bit of cheerleading.
Most high school students now take some version of a world history course in the United States.
An Advanced Placement Program has grown immensely rapidly over the past five years.
Colleges widely, though not uniformly, have introduced world history sequences,
and the development of best-selling history books like Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs, and Steel
reminds us that the general public is also interested in world history approaches.
So this is a course about world history, and what I want to do in this first session is define the beast,
talk about why it's developed so rapidly, talk about some problems that are undeniable in the field,
and then turn finally to a few remaining definitional issues.
One of the obvious challenges of world history is the extent to which it can include everything,
and indeed it is fascinating that one can add so many different experiences and places and time periods
to one sense of how the world has developed.
But any world history, whether it's a semester course or a two-year sequence or a big textbook,
any world history is selective, and indeed that's one of the first things that is enjoined upon us as world historians.
It's also not random selection.
The key point in world history is that there are three major approaches,
usually applied in combination to some extent, that help us decide what we're going to focus on.
The first approach, it's probably the easiest, also probably the least rewarding in the long run,
but the first approach involves studying major civilizations, several of them from the word go,
and talking about how they developed and how they helped define the experience of at least many,
usually most of the people in societies around the world.
But this civilizational approach risks being random if it's not combined with an active interest in comparison.
So the first approach in world history involves looking at major civilizations,
but also bringing them together in comparison so we can see what they share,
which is a crucial aspect of the dynamic of world history, how they differ, which is also obviously important,
and through comparison avoid the sense of it's Thursday it must be China.
Okay, that's approach number one.
Approach number two, which is probably what world historians get most enthusiastic about,
involves attention to cases where major societies, including civilizations, come into contact with each other.
And we look at how this contact occurs, how it changes both parties to the contact,
and use this as a framework for talking about broader changes in the experience of peoples around the world.
The third approach relates to contacts, but emphasizes the emergence of broader forces,
forces that will help define contacts, help define the experiences of individual civilizations,
forces like new trade patterns, new migration patterns, new disease patterns, new missionary efforts.
Okay, so you've got a combination of three emphases, civilizational approaches and comparisons,
contacts, and these broader cross-cutting forces.
And these are the components that we use to help us select what materials to emphasize,
and frankly also what in the vast array of knowledge about the world's past, what we can leave out.
The approaches obviously are normally used in some combination.
For example, when you talk about contact, you need some sense of what the individual civilizations involved in the contact consist of,
so civilization and contact to some extent often go together.
When you talk about the impact of new trade patterns, you need to interpret this impact through the experience of individual civilizations,
so broad forces, yes, but leavened by the attention to individual cases.
The three approaches, and particularly the last two, the contact and the broader forces, also help us define key time periods in world history.
A second way, besides selecting major emphases, a second way that world historians make their subject matter manageable,
and I think meaningful, involves the decision to emphasize a rough coherence in certain key periods of time,
and these periods in turn are defined particularly by changes in patterns of contact
and or changes in some of the cross-cutting forces such as the diffusion of new technologies, the emergence of new trade patterns, etc.
Civilizational developments may fit this pattern as well, but they're less crucial in defining the major time periods.
In this world history course, as in frankly most, there's wide agreement here.
In this world history course, we'll be emphasizing a number of key time periods, such as the classical period, which is roughly familiar to many users of history,
running from about 1000 BCE to about 500 CE.
We'll then turn to the post-classical period, and this will require some definition later on. It's a bland term deliberately.
After that, we turn to the early modern period, which runs from roughly 1450 CE to about 1750 or 1800.
We then turn to the long 19th century, which again we will define more clearly later on, and finally the contemporary period,
which in some ways, predictably enough, since we're still in it, is the most challenging of all.
The rise of world history, and I started out emphasizing how rapid and important this has been,
the rise of world history owes its nature to a number of key causes, but it's been an unusual rise in two or three respects.
First of all, world history has emerged initially more as a teaching field than as a research field,
though as we'll see, research is beginning to catch up. That's not the way new fields usually develop in America or anybody else's higher education.
Second, and this is probably related, world history did not emerge initially for the most part at the United States' most prestigious universities,
and indeed, the Ivy League was slow to make the turn to world history, and only really in the past five years has begun adding serious world history components.
Finally, and this will come up a little bit on our discussion later on as well, the field is not evenly developed across the world,
which is somewhat ironic since we're talking about a global approach.
World history, I think it's fair to say, is particularly well developed in the United States.
There's interesting work in China and Japan.
A few European countries have developed significant world history programs, the Netherlands, for example,
and there's growing interest in Germany, Italy, and elsewhere, but it's still pretty much a first step.
And whole societies like the United Kingdom, although they contribute significant scholarship to world history,
have yet to introduce world history significantly in their educational programs at all.
So there's some oddities to the development of the field, and this may help explain why there continues to be significant debate about it.
The reasons world history has developed so strongly, the reasons why I think it's a valid entrant into what people should know about the past,
are really three-fold and they're not particularly complicated.
First, this was more crucial probably 20 years ago than it is now because the development of world history itself has tended to respond to this factor,
but the first factor involves the changes in the composition of the American student body.
As more and more students in American universities can legitimately claim that their heritage
attaches to some part of the world other than the West and Western Europe,
they understandably pressed at institutions like Stanford and Columbia,
they understandably pressed for a history course that would respond to some of their identity issues,
some of their concerns, along with the more conventional appeal to Western origin.
So that's factor number one.
Factor number two, and this is the biggie, very simple, is the extent to which, since the 1950s,
the United States has become engaged with a whole world and not simply with the Western world.
This engagement logically propels us to look for a kind of historical perspective that will give us some basis,
some context for understanding the world at large rather than one important but narrower slice of it.
And finally, cause number three, the rise of world history, I won't claim this at the origins,
but the rise of world history by now is also including significant advances in scholarship
that make it clear that you can use the world history's perspective to gain better understanding of key passages in the past,
and you can embellish that perspective precisely by learning more,
and we'll talk a little later about where these gains in scholarship have been particularly noteworthy,
but it's an ongoing process.
Okay, this said, we've defined the animal, we've argued at least briefly that it's a manageable product,
not simple but manageable, and we've talked about why it's gained ground.
The next thing to note is that there are three kinds of objections to world history,
that truth and advertising we also need to talk about,
because you need to consider these as you go through the process of greater exposure to world history itself.
The most telling conflict, and it is a conflict sometimes referred to as part of the culture wars,
the most telling conflict is the conflict between doing world history and doing Western civilization.
In 1994, a group of historians well-intentioned, careful, produced a set of national history standards for world history.
The goal was to help high schools decide what they should be emphasizing,
what their students should know on the emergence from a secondary school history program.
This set of national standards was condemned 99 to 1 by the United States Senate in 1994.
Now, 1994 was the year in which conservative legislators took power in the United States Congress.
In my opinion, there was a fair amount of political posturing and grandstanding in this vote,
but it's a very dramatic vote.
And the vote was predicated on the extent to which emphasis on world history standards,
as some of the senators stated, detracts from the special valuation Americans should give to Western traditions.
There is, as you all know, a long-standing, respectable, and indeed very important tradition
of teaching Western civilization in American colleges and universities.
The tradition began in the teens and 20s of the 20th century.
It was spearheaded by leading figures like James Harvey Robinson, an historian at Columbia.
And the argument was, in essence, twofold.
One, that it was possible to trace a line of historical development from ancient Mesopotamia and ancient Egypt
onto Greece and then Rome, then onto Western Europe, and then, some would argue, ultimately,
onto the American hemisphere, and particularly the North American hemisphere.
I had a student once who told me that his high school instructor said that there was indeed a law of history
that argued that civilization would steadily spread westward, and I had images of civilization seeping
beyond the coast of California and running aground at the international date line.
Frankly, it's a silly approach from a world historian standpoint, but it reflects the tremendous emphasis
Americans have long given to Western civilization.
The second part of the Western civilization argument, and again, it's perfectly respectable,
deserves serious attention, is that the United States is, broadly speaking, part of a Western tradition
and therefore that students need to pay particular attention to the emergence of Western institutions and values.
These are good arguments, and they continue to create a debate, not always a clash,
but they continue to create a debate, given finite amounts of time,
a debate about whether one should plump for a Western-civ approach or a world approach.
The world historians argue several things, although the arguments vary a little bit depending on the individual.
Some world historians, frankly, and there's no reason not to admit this,
really think that one of the purposes of a world history course is to bash the West.
This is not my approach. I don't think it's fruitful or necessary.
The West has certainly contributed many good things to the global experience.
Also, frankly, some bad things. This can be noted either within a Western-civ context or a world context.
The bashing approach is not part of my own personal lexicon.
But, more validly, world historians make, I think, a couple of other claims.
The key one, of course, and this is just part of the debate.
The key one is that at this point in time, it's more important for American students to learn something about the world as a whole
including the West, including how the West fits into larger world patterns
than it is to learn about the Western tradition more narrowly.
World historians, particularly those of us who are not particularly interested in West bashing,
not uncritical, but not bashing,
world historians would also argue that you don't lose the opportunity in world history
to get some sense of how the West developed, what some of its distinctive features were both good and bad,
so you don't lose all of the value of what many people have treasured in a Western-civ approach.
But this is a debate. It is important to note that the choice of world history in a teaching program,
unless you can have time for both world history and the West,
the choice of world history does involve a really different set of emphases from the Western-civ tradition.
And world historians get particularly, and I think legitimately, concerned about compromise efforts
that will claim that this course is a world history course,
but really turn out to be the Western experience with one or two chapters on other societies.
This is what we in the trade call the West and the West approach.
We think it distorts the way the world developed, and we think it's actually misleading,
but I hope that increasingly, and I believe this is in fact the case, it will go away.
World history argues that Western civilization is one of a number of major civilizations.
It's not always the most important one, though.
Its importance would certainly grow in more modern times,
and it needs to be viewed in a more global context.
It needs to be viewed comparatively.
It needs to be viewed as part of a larger package.
A second concern about world history, and this is probably a little bit more technical within the discipline of history itself,
a second concern is perfectly understandable, deserves real attention,
and that is that even aside from the special claims of the West,
world history simply can't adequately convey the complexities of individual traditions.
This argument comes particularly from historians dealing with East Asian civilizations,
and it's very simple.
It's not totally different from some of the Western civ concerns,
though it doesn't have the identity factors attached.
The concern here is that Chinese history, say, is so nuanced, so complex,
that if you try to put a Chinese slice in world history, you inevitably simplify,
you inevitably elide some of the crucial passages,
and this is a perfectly respectable opinion.
It is obviously true that in world history one will not be giving the degree of detailed attention to China or to the West
that a more specific civilizational approach will offer.
I think the gains outweigh these liabilities, but liabilities undeniably exist.
The third objection is actually interesting, and I will mention it.
I don't quite know what to make of it.
It's come up more recently as some Europeans have attempted to insert themselves into a world history framework,
and this criticism argues that world history is somehow, or at least world history as developed by Americans,
is somehow yet another product of American imperialism.
Now, this comes at a time where, of course, there are a lot of criticisms of American foreign policy,
and to some extent I think these criticisms simply jump on that bandwagon.
As I try to parse out the criticisms, I think that they reflect a European anxiety about the American lead in this field,
understandable but not necessarily creditable,
and a sort of backhanded concern that American world historians have indeed ended up leaving too much of the European experience out,
which sort of goes back to the Western Civ objections, but from a slightly different route.
I mentioned this. I don't think it's a terribly serious objection, because in my judgment,
world historians in the United States have made tremendous effort to avoid an imperialist taint
to deal reasonably and even-handedly with the experiences of various societies,
including those that came under Western control at certain points.
I don't think this one sticks, but it certainly should be noted.
Okay. The definition of world history in terms of some combination of three major approaches,
the sense of why world history has become important,
the recognition that there continue to be objections, which I think can be answered,
but certainly need to be noted and remembered as we actually go through a world history system,
these issues need finally to be refined in terms of a few other essentially definitional features within the broader framework.
First is the question of timing.
There are three kinds of emphases in terms of chronology and world history,
beyond the specific periods that I mentioned earlier,
that we need to pay attention to as we run through the system itself.
First is emphasis on early.
Historians as historians tend to be particularly eager to explore origins,
and in the world history context, this can involve trying to push greater attention
to the early development of human societies, to the early emergence of civilizations,
sometimes at some expense to more recent developments.
It's a valid option.
It's not the one that we will be emphasizing in this course, although I want to pick up some elements of it,
but it certainly needs to be noted.
The second approach simply acknowledges, and this will become clearer when we move into these time periods,
the second approach simply acknowledges that the greatest contributions of world history scholarship
to our understanding of the past, the greatest changes in our perspectives on the past,
have particularly applied to the post-classical period, roughly 500 to roughly 1450,
and to the period right after the early modern period.
Here, as we will explore later on, is where really our understanding of the past has particularly been altered,
including, by the way, our understanding of where western developments fit into a broader framework.
So there is a sort of second world history emphasis that will pay due attention to origins,
but revel particularly in the time period, roughly 500 to roughly 1750.
Finally, however, and this is my own approach,
I think ultimately it's particularly important to see both the early and the middle phases of world history
contributing to an active modern period and a modern period that then can be used,
along with the earlier elements, to help understand the world in the present day.
So in this course, in my opinion obviously with full validity,
in this course we will be emphasizing the connections between earlier phases of world history,
more recent developments, and ultimately the world present, and maybe even to some extent
the most probable developments in the future.
As we work on world history, a couple of other frameworks I think can help us
make sure we keep an eye on the woods and just not the trees.
The first framework is a familiar one.
World historians, like any analytically sensitive historian,
world historians are interested in the balance between, the tension between change and continuity.
World history can sometimes seem to focus particularly on changes.
Each of the major time periods will involve a new framework,
but we also obviously want to pay attention to continuities,
to ways that human societies persist, or at least maintain a certain level of persistence,
and one reason for the civilizational approach, the first of the three approaches I mentioned earlier,
is indeed that it helps us keep tabs on some continuities, some traditions,
juxtaposed with some of the new elements in the global framework.
So balance between change and continuity, which is really the most standard analytical staple
of the history craft, is certainly present in world history.
The second tension applies more specifically to world history itself,
from the earliest points to the most recent.
There has always been a certain degree of tension between developments and identities formed
in particular localities and regions, and the advantages of contact
and the exposure to more cross-cutting forces.
These operate obviously in tension.
We will argue later that probably the first large portion of the human experience,
up until about a thousand years ago, placed more emphasis on the local and the regional
than on the contact and the combination.
And then for the last thousand years, including obviously today,
as the balance has shifted, we place more emphasis on contact and cross-cutting,
less emphasis on local and regional developments and identities.
But the tension is always there. It's vivid in the world today.
We can see it back in the classical period or even before,
and this is a skein to maintain as we run through the course of world history.
I mentioned earlier that world history certainly needs to pay some attention to civilizational traditions,
and we'll be working on that reasonably systematically, particularly in the next set of lectures
after indeed the very next one.
But I think it would be useful to have in advance a certain sense of geographical coverage.
As we will try to define more clearly later, civilizations are not magic or indisputable products.
They involve retrospective definition, and definitional issues will sometimes be crucial.
But most world historians use at least something of the following framework,
although they may break it down in greater detail depending on how much time they have for their subject matter.
We will be, over time, looking primarily at seven civilizational slash geographic areas.
East Asia, certainly.
South and Southeast Asia, and sometimes we can deal with them as a whole.
Sometimes we'll need to emphasize some subdivisions.
Third, the Middle East, and ultimately the Middle East and North Africa,
although that's not a combination that emerged right away.
Fourth, Eastern Europe.
Fifth, Western Europe.
Sixth, Sub-Saharan Africa.
And seventh, what ultimately became the newest of the major civilization areas, Latin America.
This leaves a few parts of the world out, most obviously North America and Pacific Oceania,
and we'll have to talk later about how we put these regions into a civilizational map.
But this at least can help get us started.
A final definitional point is really very specific, and I almost apologize for it, but I think it has to be mentioned.
World historians in the United States use BCE and CE as their main chronological divides.
They add up to the same things as BC and AD, but BCE stands for Before the Common Era, CE for the Common Era.
It's the same dating, but the argument is that since this is a world history dealing with a large number of religious traditions,
to use specifically Christian designations just doesn't quite fit.
Now this terminological nicety, it's clearly an example of political correctness, may be a bit annoying.
I know that some people think it's sort of silly, but I will be using it because it's a convention in world history
and I don't want to get kicked out of the craft.
And also because it does usefully remind us, and here's the one clearly valid element of it,
it does usefully remind us that as we turn to world history, we are really taking a step that differs from the western focused history
that many of us were exposed to in our own educations.
All of us, at least at my age and even a bit younger, all of us who do world history are converts.
We were not trained in world history.
We picked it up because we thought that this was an important new vantage point for the reasons I already indicated,
important particularly because of its role in helping to prepare American students and a wider public for the global framework
within which our society now operates and on which our society has impact.
If you don't know world history, I think it's fair to argue,
you may not be as well prepared to handle world issues at the present as you should be.
Just as in earlier decades in the 20th century, you could make the valid argument that if you didn't know western history,
you would not be as well prepared to deal with the issues the United States faced in relationships to western Europe as you should be.
Our world has shifted and therefore the history we need has shifted as well.
Let me end with a very specific point.
I mentioned earlier that conventionally world historians end one period around 1450 CE and then pick up the early modern period.
1450 will in some ways seem pretty familiar to those of us trained in western history.
It has some relationship to the Renaissance, the Reformation is looming and these things actually are relevant,
but 1450 is a date in world history much more obviously because it begins to introduce some key changes in the Middle East, North Africa,
some key changes in Russia and Eastern Europe, some key changes looming soon in the relationship between the Americas and the rest of the world
and through this many of the products and trade routes that would affect virtually every society in the world.
And only as part of this wider scheme are the developments in western Europe specifically to be fit.
World history periodization will not always seem totally unfamiliar in the dates used,
but it will, I hope, seem quite different from what we're used to in a western framework when we get into the reasons for the choice
and the basic factors to be explored.
Welcome to the World History Train. Our next stop will be the rise of agriculture.
Lecture 2, The Neolithic Revolution.
This session focuses on the rise of agriculture in human history and uses it as a focal point for developments prior to that that we need to know,
but also particularly as a framework for developments that will occur after agriculture is introduced.
Now this is a choice. I mentioned in the previous lecture that world historians often are eager to find earlier origins,
and that can involve pushing back the attention well before agriculture.
David Christian in his fascinating book, Maps of Time, spends about a third of the book before he gets to the emergence of any version of the human species at all.
So he integrates world history with the evolution of the earth itself, and this is fine.
Obviously also you can spend an immense amount of time, and many people do, on the early developments of the species and these nuances obviously fade
if you focus as I do on agriculture as the first cut, but choices have to be made, and I think this gets us off to a satisfactory start.
Agriculture began to be introduced to the human experience around 9000 BCE, and I'll come back to these dates in a moment.
Prior to that time, from the emergence of the human species, say 2.5 million years ago, though the date keeps getting pushed back as new discoveries are made,
from about 2.5 million years ago until about 11000 years ago, the human species was involved in hunting and gathering economies,
in which for the most part, males of the species would participate in hunts, and females would be responsible for gathering seeds and grains,
often generating more caloric value than the more boastful men did in the process.
This long period between the early emergence of the species and the rise of agriculture, raises I think three important points
that even in our shorthand version need some attention.
First of all, obviously, is the fact of evolution itself, not as a debating point, but simply as an understanding that between 2.5 million years ago,
or a little earlier, and about 100,000 years ago, the human species went through a variety of evolutionary phases in a number of different parts of the world.
The species originated in East Africa. Early versions of the species migrated to different parts of the world.
A large number of human species were generated over time. Most of them disappeared well before the emergence of Homo sapiens sapiens,
because of adverse conditions, competition from other species, we obviously don't always know why.
But about 100,000 years ago, Homo sapiens sapiens emerged. That is the species to which we all belong.
And from that point onward, which included, by the way, soon thereafter, the introduction of what some sociobiologists call the speech gene,
which greatly facilitated human speech compared to earlier versions, and therefore facilitated the emergence of more formally organized human societies, etc.
From that point onward, there have been no major evolutionary changes in the human experience.
Sociobiologists would quarrel with this a little bit. There have certainly been some developments.
But we remain the same basic species that emerged in East Africa also about 100,000 years ago.
So world history that begins with the emergence of agriculture obviously doesn't pay a lot of attention to the niceties of the evolutionary experience,
but this looms as an important background. Second datum, and very familiar to those of us who had brief grade school exposure to some version of world history,
it became pretty clear early on that the human species well before the emergence of Homo sapiens sapiens was a tool using animal.
It's not the only species that uses tools, some of the great apes do, but the human species became particularly adept initially at finding tools
that would be suitable for hunting or for gathering or whatever, or as weapons of war.
And ultimately, particularly with the Mesolithic and the Neolithic eras, 12,000 BCE and then around 8,000 BCE,
tool use became increasingly deliberate. In other words, instead of simply finding tools, people became capable of making them,
fashioning rocks, fashioning wood objects to make better weapons, better tools, even primitive boats.
And they also, as part of this tool use, or at least I think it's a logical extension, began to be capable of domesticating certain kinds of animals,
initially the dog and before the advent of agriculture also some other species including in some parts of the world the horse.
So, evolution, but evolution that produced Homo sapiens sapiens and then, at least for a time, tapered off in terms of severe impact,
tool use, these are points obviously that set a framework for the emergence of agriculture itself, help us better understand the species whose history we're studying.
The third pre-agricultural development is, in some ways, particularly crucial to world history, and that is the massive experience of migration.
Homo sapiens sapiens, again, originated in East Africa, but after some thousands of years began to pour out into other regions and ultimately around the world,
as had earlier versions of the species as well. The reasons for migration were very simple.
Hunting and gathering societies require a lot of space, it's been estimated, obviously depends a bit on the region, on an average they need 2.5 square miles per person.
So, even a modest population growth will force a group of hunter-gatherers to move a little farther to seek new space and ultimately this process extends so that the species will push out of the region altogether into other parts of the world.
By 25,000 BCE, in other words, just 27,000 years ago, the species Homo sapiens sapiens had located in virtually every place in the world that is currently inhabited.
Exceptions include, at that point, New Zealand, some of the other Pacific islands, Bermuda, but otherwise the species was in small numbers almost everywhere.
It had crossed to Australia. At the point when it did so, the land mass in Southeast Asia extended much closer to what is now Australia, much farther into the Indian Ocean than is now the case, so the sea passage was relatively modest.
As is more familiar still, people crossed into the Americas around over an ice bridge that connected Siberia with Alaska. This occurred earlier than had been originally estimated.
It seems to have occurred at least 25,000 years ago, maybe earlier than that, but again, by 25,000 years ago there were peoples in the Americas, there were obviously peoples in Africa where the species originated.
People spread throughout much of Asia, in Australia, Europe, etc.
This means that the human history begins at a point when the species is widely dispersed.
I mentioned in my earlier lecture one of the key tensions in world history is the balance between the local and the connected.
Well, we begin with the pretty local. People were spread out in small numbers and inevitably reacting to local environmental conditions, reacting to accident, formed intensely important local cultures, local institutions,
and this would set the basis for the local, the more regional aspect of the human identity, which again remains important today.
Now the local shouldn't be overdone. There were language groupings that united people in larger elements, lots and lots of different specific languages, but a far smaller number of basic language groupings,
and that's a connection that obviously we need to remember that modifies the local, but the species begins extremely dispersed.
About 12,000 years ago, roughly 10,000, 9,000 BCE, there were at most 5 to 10 million people in the world as a whole.
Very small number, very widely dispersed, and that's sort of the framework within which agriculture was introduced.
There are a couple of other ingredients that could be added to the story, one of the things that's been particularly interesting.
As we talk about both migration and evolution, and to some extent even to use, is the debate about how different species interacted, different human species interacted in the process before Homo sapiens-sapiens emerged triumphant.
It turns out that Homo sapiens-sapiens coexisted with other human species like Neanderthals for a longer period than we realized.
Their advantage over Neanderthals may have had less to do with brain capacity, which is what Homo sapiens-sapiens came to pride itself on, than actually with running ability.
Neanderthals were excellent at long-distance slow running, which was terrific when the issue at hand was the hunting of large game.
When the issue shifted more to smaller animals that were swifter, Homo sapiens-sapiens had a clear advantage.
We still don't know the extent to which Homo sapiens-sapiens simply outcompeted other species like Neanderthals, clubbed them to death, this species obviously was violent from the outset, or intermarried with them.
Some of you may have more Neanderthal in you than you recognized.
It's an interesting process and simply serves as an illustration of the complexity of some of the developments that prefigured agriculture.
OK. Agriculture.
I want to talk here about when it was introduced the complexities of its introduction because unfortunately human species did not do this in a tidy fashion, the implications for the future, and the implications about what kind of attitude one takes to major historical developments of this sort.
There's no question, first point, that the introduction of agriculture, what is sometimes called the Neolithic Revolution, was one of the key changes in the human experience.
Some would argue one of literally the two key changes other than the emergence of the species itself, the other one being the replacement of agricultural economies with industrial economies, whether that degree of emphasis is justified or not.
This is a big deal change and one of our tasks today is to talk about why it's such a big deal.
OK. Agriculture was invented at least three different places separately and probably more.
The first invention occurred in the northern Middle East Black Sea region associated with the domestication of wheat and barley.
It probably occurred there because of changes in animal supply.
Agriculture was almost certainly, though of course we don't know this for sure, was almost certainly introduced by women because as gatherers they had been the ones who probably noticed, well if you dropped some seeds in the ground a little later something else happened.
This may have been a mistake on their part as we'll discuss later, but they were almost certainly responsible for the development initially.
The second invention of agriculture was around rice, occurred in South China and the continental part of Southeast Asia, about 7,000 BCE.
The third clear separate invention was the domestication of corn or maize in Central America beginning about 5,000 BCE.
And there were probably other separate inventions. Probably agriculture was separately invented in Sub-Saharan Africa, possibly also in Northern China.
We simply don't know, but at least there were three separate cases at widely dispersed intervals.
So again, this is not a chronologically tidy development.
We can talk about the emergence of agriculture society from about 9,000 BCE onward, but we have to recognize that this was true only in some parts of the world.
Everywhere when agriculture was introduced, it gradually spread and ultimately certainly by 5,000 BCE was becoming the most common economic system for the largest number of people in the world.
But two points. One, it did not spread as rapidly as we might imagine given the presumed advantages that this system had over hunting and gathering, advantages that we will make clearer a little later on.
It spread slowly because contacts among peoples, although they did exist, contacts were themselves gradual and there were simply long periods of time in which agriculture could be flourishing in one region.
Another region as close as 1,000, 1,500 miles away would simply be totally unaware of it.
Despite of agriculture, for example, from the northern Middle East into northwestern Europe, the distances are not inconsiderable, but they're also not immense.
This took literally thousands and thousands of years.
So, slowness of diffusion is a factor.
Second, equally important.
Not all regions were equally suitable for agriculture, either temporarily or permanently.
They might be particularly heavily forested.
They might be arid.
All sorts of factors might induce a people either to delay their adoption of agriculture or simply to avoid it all together, at least until the modern period.
Particularly important are cases in which hunting and gathering economies persisted, but even more important still, cases in which an alternative economic system based on herding domesticated animals, a nomadic economic system,
long prevailed over any introduction of agriculture.
Nomadic societies were particularly important in the Middle East, in Africa, in some parts of the Americas, but above all in Central Asia, where they will play a crucial, recurrent role in world history as we will see later on.
So, two obvious points.
Despite the importance of agriculture, which I'm going to return to momentarily,
agriculture did not conquer the whole world, and agriculture spread more slowly than we might imagine, partly because of lack of knowledge,
partly because of particular climactic and soil conditions, but also partly because there were actually some pretty good reasons that peoples might not want to adopt agriculture.
Agriculture, for example, for the most part, involves settling down.
Hunting and gathering people might treasure their capacity to move around.
There is one version of agriculture slash and burn that allows people to farm for a couple years and then move on, but it's not the dominant form.
Agriculture might seem repellent to societies in which males were accustomed to boasting about their hunting exploits, so there could be gender reasons for delaying, if not avoiding, agriculture altogether.
We do not know the debates that must have occurred in groups and among individuals as the agricultural alternative presented itself as to whether they should adopt it or not.
Ultimately, obviously, agriculture would prevail in most of the world where it's possible at all and certainly in the largest population concentrations, but it was not an automatic or uniform choice, which is a caution about oversimplifying the agricultural story.
When agriculture was introduced, it involved really massive changes in the human experience.
First, it changed the nature of work, and here the change is counterintuitive.
Agriculture involves more work, particularly for men, in most cases, than hunting and gathering does.
It's been estimated that hunting and gathering, on average, it'll be varied depending on the intensity of the hunt.
Hunting and gathering involves about three hours of work per day.
Agriculture in season involved much, much more.
So agriculture redefines and on the whole increases the work expectations of human society.
Agriculture massively redefined gender relations.
In most hunting and gathering societies, as noted, men did the hunting, women did the bulk of the gathering, but because both groups contributed extensively to the food supply,
women were usually given a reasonably prestigious place.
It was separate from men, maybe a little inferior, but in many hunting and gathering societies, they participated in governing decisions.
They were not treated as a systematically inferior part of the human species,
despite the fact that our images of cavemen frequently emphasize club-wielding men lording it over women.
Those images are inaccurate.
In agricultural societies, however, patriarchal systems came to predominate everywhere,
as we'll see they might take different specific forms,
but all agricultural societies introduced male dominance over women, older male dominance over younger males,
and this became a characteristic of agricultural societies that still affects the human experience even several centuries past agricultural predominance.
Why did this happen?
The most obvious reason was that agriculture both permitted and required an expansion of the birth rate.
With more secure food supplies, and that's the crucial advantage of agriculture over hunting and gathering,
agriculture does not guarantee adequacy.
Agricultural societies would experience periodic famines, grain failure, crop failures, etc.,
but agriculture does produce more abundant and more predictable food supplies than hunting and gathering does,
and that permits larger numbers of children to be born.
Quite literally, in agricultural societies, women deliberately limited their lactation period,
during which it's difficult, though not impossible, to conceive a new child.
In hunting and gathering societies, women actually breastfed their children for upwards of three to five years.
This was both to provide food supply for young children in a society in which food could otherwise be scarce,
and was designed to limit the birth rate, because hunting and gathering societies simply could not afford too many children,
they moved around too many young children, would be a burden, etc.
In agriculture, the greater abundance of food, without overdoing that abundance, permitted a new pattern of child rearing
and an increase in the per capita birth rate.
But also, agricultural societies needed these children, because they needed additional hands, additional labor service,
in order to run the agricultural enterprise itself.
In most agricultural societies, the family and the workers within the family, men, women, and children,
were essential to maintain the farming operation.
Okay, with this change in birth rate, obviously, the differentiation between men and women tended to increase.
Women had additional periods in which they were carrying children, dealing with young children, responsible for upbringing,
and it was difficult for them to continue to serve as a major economic supplier for the family, difficult though not always impossible.
And men increasingly, in most agricultural societies, assumed the role of principal cultivator of the crucial food crops.
This economic differentiation, responsible for patriarchy, was fundamental to the agricultural experience
and again, greatly differentiated it from what had gone before.
Childhood, of course, also changed.
In hunting and gathering societies, children had had relatively few functions until they reached their early teen years.
In agricultural societies, childhood and work became closely associated,
and the virtues enjoined upon children, including obedience, tended to follow this shift in role as well.
Okay, so with the advent of agriculture, even though it occurs at different times and different places,
one sees a different kind of human experience emerge, different sets of relationships between different parts of the human community.
The advent of agriculture, including its messiness, its uneven adoption and uneven chronology,
the advent of agriculture raises some really interesting questions about human progress.
The most tempting thing to say, and I think this comes through in a good bit of grade school stuff about basic human history,
the most obvious thing to say is, well with agriculture, human beings were poised for further progress, and in some senses that may be so.
But it's also crucial to recognize that agriculture brought with it a number of very clear liabilities,
and a few historians have argued that with agriculture, a downward spiral was established for the human species that were still engaged in today.
I wouldn't press it that far, but it's worth thinking about. What were the drawbacks?
Drawback number one, obviously, agriculture introduced new kinds of inequality into the human experience, particularly between men and women.
Drawback number two, as human societies began to settle down into clustered communities, disease possibilities increased.
So agricultural societies were exposed to more epidemic disease than hunting and gathering peoples were.
Agricultural societies also, almost by definition, were capable of altering the local environment in ways that hunting and gathering societies could almost never do.
They might have some impact on animal numbers, but fundamental ecological shifts really awaited the advent of agriculture.
And in some early agricultural communities, environmental damage actually emerged quite quickly,
and in some cases actually destroyed the communities involved, at least in that particular region.
So it's important to see downsides to agriculture, lest we adopt an unduly rosy progressive view of human history.
And it's important to realize that some of these downsides actually affected the willingness to adopt agriculture itself,
which, as I said, was not exactly a uniform given in the human response.
But agriculture clearly had a few advantages, and this is why it spread.
One of its advantages, and one historian has pointed this out not entirely frivolously,
was it allowed the emergence of products that could be fermented to create alcohol.
And this historian has suggested, I wouldn't press this too far, but it's sort of fun,
this historian has suggested that one of the reasons that men were willing to adopt agriculture,
but the fact that it took them away from the hunt was because it allowed them to get bombed.
And indeed, we will see early on that some of the first things agricultural societies did,
for example, with the introduction of writing, was to write down recipes for the fermentation of grain.
More systematically and more seriously, agriculture allowed, as we've already suggested,
a significant improvement in food supply that in turn allowed families to have more children,
slash probably engage more frequently in sexual activity, and certainly allowed populations to expand.
Whereas the population of the world at the eve of agriculture was probably at most ten million people,
quite possibly fewer than that.
Within a few thousand years, the human population around the world had risen to a hundred million or even more,
and some of the great agricultural societies would be poised for population figures even in advance of these levels.
Agriculture did not produce world populations that the level were accustomed to today,
but they generated populations that were vastly larger than had been true in the human condition up to that point.
Agricultural societies, agricultural economies always had some limitations,
and as we begin to turn to a long period of human history between about 9,000 BCE until literally 300, 400 years ago, a long period,
it's important to remember that these conditions will be true to some degree almost everywhere,
except in those cases where agriculture didn't prevail at all.
We've already seen some limitations or at least some characteristics in terms of gender relationships,
relationships between parents and children.
As agricultural families moved to birth levels that would usually involve a desire for between 5 and 7 children born for family,
agricultural economies also always were constrained by limitations in the amount of food that a given agricultural worker could generate,
except in a very few hot house regions, even the most advanced agricultural economies, even 500 years ago, as recently as 500 years ago,
required about 8 agricultural workers for every 10 people in the population.
In other words, agricultural economies, although they greatly facilitated food supply,
were always constrained by the extent to which 80% or more of the population had to be engaged primarily in agriculture,
and this is important to remember.
It's a constraint even on societies whose achievements we will soon marvel at,
a constraint because it limited the amount of taxation that could be levied,
it limited the size of cities to 20% of the population at the most and frequently less than that.
Russian agricultural society, for example, only in quite modern times generated an urban level that was more than 10% of the population.
This constraint of resources, this constraint in terms of growing patterns,
is a crucial feature to remember about agricultural societies generally.
Agricultural societies would also, understandably enough, generate some cultural emphases.
I think it's probably forcing it to say agriculture immediately produced an appropriate cultural response
because polytheistic systems that had been developed in hunting and gathering societies
continued into agricultural societies for a considerable period of time,
but obviously over time agriculture would encourage new attention to the spring season as the planting season,
new attention to divine forces responsible for creativity,
so you need to look along with resource constraints and family patterns.
One needs to look to agriculture as a set of cultural parameters as well,
and that will crop up in our later discussions.
Also, the crucial feature of agriculture, along with the drawbacks that have to be remembered,
the crucial feature of agriculture was its capacity to lead to population increase
and its capacity to generate not massive but discernible surpluses,
which could be used for purposes other than agriculture itself.
Agriculture indeed imposed some needs for some people who could be at least partially freed from agriculture proper
in order to do some other things.
Most obviously, for example, agricultural societies depended on the development of manufacturing
of certain kinds of containers that could hold food and seed from one season to the next.
So not surprisingly, although this isn't immediate,
one of the first areas where agricultural societies generated technological events
was in the area of pottery making because you needed these things simply to maintain your agricultural economy.
So without overdoing the progressive emphasis, because again the drawbacks have to be remembered,
agriculture is involved with population growth, the generation of surpluses,
and this could lead, and this is our point in the next session,
this could lead to yet additional developments in the human experience,
including cities, including other kinds of technological events,
and that could be, as we will discuss, the next stage in the story.
Lecture 3 What is a Civilization?
The focus of this session is on the emergence of civilization as a form of human organization
and the early civilization period in world history,
which runs variably in the region roughly from 3500 BCE to about 1000 BCE.
I want to talk about what civilization involves, why it's worth attention,
but I'm also going to be talking about some of the possible pitfalls in overreliance on the civilization concept.
Some world historians are quite nervous about too much emphasis on civilization,
and while I think ultimately we can take their concerns into account without throwing away the concept,
it really is important to pay some attention to some of the drawbacks,
both in civilization itself and in the concept.
First thing to note, pretty obviously, is that in the Middle East where civilization first emerged,
it took about 5000 years between the advent of agriculture to the first arrival of civilization.
Now, before that time, agriculture had already permitted the development of certain isolated cities,
usually with populations of 10,000, maybe a few more people, so there were some precursors.
But it's important to realize that agriculture did not quickly or inevitably lead to what we're talking about today.
Indeed, there were agricultural societies, for example, in West Africa,
that reached the modern period without forming the apparatus that we associate with civilization.
So again, caution against too much inevitability, too much triumphal march of progress.
The advent of civilization in the Middle East was preceded by some technological developments,
in addition to the maturing of agriculture itself.
Most notably, by around 4000 BCE, people in the Tigris Euphrates Valley, Mesopotamia,
were beginning to utilize bronze for weapons and tools,
and they were utilizing the wheel, which probably had been developed by nomads in Central Asia,
but was brought in as part of migration streams.
The use of bronze obviously improved military and production capacities.
It also imposed certain other kinds of requirements on the societies that used the metal,
because now societies to take advantage of this had to seek out both copper and tin,
the amalgam that would make bronze, and tin sources actually could be quite remote,
forcing a good bit of long-distance trade and travel.
Another feature that would mark this early civilization period.
The first specific civilization to emerge, again in Mesopotamia, was Sumeria.
It would be followed over the next several thousand years by a whole succession of states,
Babylonia, the Hittites, the Assyrians, the Chaldeans.
The list is quite long, because this was a region that was open to considerable invasion,
and the attractions of civilization drew peoples, particularly from the north from Central Asia,
who came in as a mixture of migrants and invaders to take advantage of what civilization had to offer.
This first civilization, this prototype of early civilization generally,
offered a number of features that agricultural societies without civilization lacked.
First of all, pretty obviously, it benefited from more abundant surpluses in agricultural production,
and some historians really would like to leave it there.
Civilizations are simply agricultural societies that have particularly large surpluses,
and let's not get into the other characteristics that can seem misleadingly precise and progressive.
But in point of fact, because again I think civilization is a valid concept with caution,
Sumerian civilization not only involved unusually large agricultural surpluses,
but several other features that really were significant as forms of human organization
in contrast to agricultural economies that were not civilized.
Feature number one was the introduction of a formal state, a formal political apparatus,
not only with leadership, which could emerge even in hunting and gathering societies,
but with a certain degree of structure, a certain small but definite bureaucracy,
judges, tax collectors, that sort of thing.
So civilizations are stated societies rather than stateless societies,
which agricultural societies had been previously.
Second, and this is the origin of the word in Latin, civilizations had cities.
As I've mentioned already, they weren't the first to have cities,
but they depended more on cities than agricultural societies without civilizations did.
Cities meant concentrations of people, small by our standards,
but definitely concentrations that could facilitate other kinds of cultural exchange,
technological development, etc.
Cities also quite obviously depended on more elaborate trade
than agricultural societies had required before this denser urban network.
So cities had to make arrangements with the countryside for food supply.
They often traded with other cities.
You see the emergence of a small but definite merchant class,
another characteristic of the apparatus of civilizations,
more pronounced than agricultural economies without civilizations.
And civilizations, beginning with Sumeria and its cuneiform style,
civilizations had writing.
Writing allowed record keeping.
It goes along with bureaucracies.
Writing allowed long distance communication in standardized forms.
It could therefore accompany the expansion of trade.
Writing would ultimately affect the generation and preservation of knowledge.
So civilizations normally are defined as agricultural societies,
although you will later have industrial civilizations as well.
Agricultural economies with unusually large surpluses,
states, cities, and more elaborate trade,
not trade by itself because other societies could do that.
And writing.
Older definitions also mentioned the importance of monuments,
but that's really something of a variable and I think is a little bit superficial.
Okay, early civilizations developed first obviously in Mesopotamia
and then a procession of civilizations,
some of which expanded empires in the Middle East.
Civilization also emerged in Egypt along the Nile from about 3,000 BCE onward,
although recent discoveries suggest maybe a little earlier.
Civilization also emerged in the northwestern section of the Indian subcontinent
in what's now Pakistan along the Indus River in a civilization
that's sometimes called Harappan from Harappa,
one of the major cities involved.
And a little later, Harappan civilization originated around 2,500 BCE.
A little later, civilization emerged in a fourth center in Asia
along the Yellow River or Huang He in northern China.
Some historians also point to the first civilization in Central America,
Olmec, a little later still, as another early civilization type,
although not in fact along a river valley and obviously somewhat more separate in origin and nature.
The fact that these early civilizations clustered along river valleys,
at least in the Afro-Eurasian cases,
the fact that these early civilizations clustered along river valleys was no accident.
River valleys provided the most abundant opportunities for agriculture,
therefore the most promising opportunities for surplus,
but these areas also, to take maximum advantage,
required the use of irrigation systems that in turn depended on a good degree of coordination,
possibly some property definition, in other words,
encouraged a situation in which governments and formal rules and regulations,
as well as increased trading opportunities, would make sense as well.
Okay, I mentioned earlier that historians get a little nervous about the civilization concept,
and I want now to say why, not because I think these objections should cause us to jettison the concept,
but I think they do cause us to surround it with a certain amount of caution and complexity.
Objection number one harks back to comments I made in the first session.
There is a version of the civilization story,
sometimes associated with the western civilization teaching tradition,
that is pretty obviously objectionable to world historians,
easily fixed, but it's worth mentioning.
This is the version that, again, as we're doing today,
emphasizes the importance of civilization, points particularly to Egypt and Mesopotamia,
and then uses this to posit the origin of a glorious tradition
that would pass from these early cases to Greece and Rome, to Europe, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
Now, from a world historian standpoint, the problem with this view is twofold.
First, it ignores the fact that important early civilizations also developed in other places.
So easily fixed, if we don't single out this particular tradition as unique or somehow particularly glamorous,
we can go back to the civilization concept without harm, but it is important to make that adjustment.
The second objection really applies to the issue of heritage.
Even if we focus attention on Egypt and Mesopotamia,
it's obviously vital to recognize, and almost self-evident,
that this tradition would not only feed Greece and Rome,
but would also feed later Middle Eastern civilization,
East European civilization, elements of African civilization,
so the notion of marching as sometimes grade school texts imply
the notion of marching from the pyramids to the Empire State Building
as some sort of distinctive singular tradition just doesn't cut it.
Again, we can fix this, but we need to recognize that you need to shift point of view.
The second objection to the civilization concept,
or at least the second thing that requires attention,
and this is not unrelated to comments we made earlier about agriculture,
it's important to recognize that much of the world,
particularly in this early period, most of the world,
did not adopt the civilization form.
Even later, what do you do with cases like Polynesian society,
an agricultural society that had a definite social structure,
elements of a state, but no writing, no particularly vigorous cities,
it's an interesting society,
it doesn't quite make the most elaborate definition of civilization,
what do you do with it?
Or even take the case of the Incas in the Andes in the 14th and 15th centuries CE.
The Incas are usually regarded as a civilization and that's fine,
but in fact they didn't have writing.
They had a system of record keeping by tying knots in ropes
that would allow them to keep tabs on taxes paid,
but technically they had no writing, so do they fit or not fit?
Okay, so it's important to realize that civilizations,
particularly again in the early period,
were not the only kind of interesting society.
They obviously did not spread to areas where hunting and gathering
or nomadism prevailed,
because those systems cannot generate the organizational forms associated with civilization.
But even in important agricultural cases,
civilization simply did not catch on for whatever set of reasons.
Third objection is really an interesting attachment
to the way civilized peoples fairly early on regarded themselves,
and that's the contrast between civilization and barbarism.
As is well known, the Greeks, this is a little after the early civilization period,
but not that much after.
The Greeks developed an elaborate notion
that people who weren't Greek were barbarians.
The word came from the sounds Greeks thought foreign people made,
bar, bar, bar, and from that barbarian.
Chinese notoriously viewed other peoples,
both in civilizations and out as barbarians.
So it's quite valid to note that civilizations tend to produce people,
particularly city people, who will look down on others
and invent nasty terms for them.
And we can note that it's an interesting human phenomenon,
but it's really, really important as part of a world history approach
not to adopt those kinds of prejudices
in looking at the differences between civilized and uncivilized peoples.
People without civilizations, without the organizational apparatus,
which we're focusing on for civilization.
People without civilizations can have elaborate rules of conduct.
They can be politer than people in civilizations.
They can treat old people better than some civilized peoples do.
They can fight less and engage in much more careful delimitation of war
than civilized peoples do.
So I think it's obvious, but it's actually quite important
because it's sort of hard to get this out of one's head.
The normal connotation of a barbarian, you know,
hairy nose picking, unregulated, just doesn't work
because some of those people will crop up in civilizations too
and people who weren't in civilizations don't necessarily fall into that category.
The final concern about the civilization concept,
and this really is important for civilizations themselves,
is to recognize that what we emphasize in civilizations
can distort aspects of the human experience
and the kinds of groups that form civilizations.
Take an obvious example.
We've mentioned that civilizations with perhaps a couple of exceptions
always involve writing.
And I think that's valid.
Writing is important.
It does change the way states operate, trade operates,
knowledge gathering operates.
But until very recently,
the vast majority of people in civilizations were illiterate.
So writing is there.
It affects the way the society is conducted,
but it does not describe the majority condition.
We've emphasized cities.
But remember from the discussion of agriculture
that all agricultural civilizations had at most
a fairly small minority of the total population living in cities.
Most people were rural,
and many rural people encountered the apparatus of civilization,
mainly in terms of tax collectors and military recruiters.
And frankly, many of them otherwise would have been just as happy
had civilization not existed.
So civilization is a valid concept.
If it is delimited by the recognition A,
it doesn't spread everywhere.
And particularly in this several millennia early civilization period
doesn't spread to most parts of the inhabited world.
Second, it's not necessarily more civilized than the barbarians
if we use civilized in the sense of refined behavior, control, etc.
It may or may not be.
And above all third, it does not necessarily,
it's leading characteristics.
Don't necessarily describe many of the ways
in which most of the people in civilizations lived.
And this in turn reminds us, final point,
that civilizations like any major human development such as agriculture,
civilizations involve a mixture of advantages and disadvantages.
Civilizations almost certainly increased inequality above the levels
that agricultural economies had already introduced.
Civilizations by writing rules and laws like occurred in Mesopotamia,
civilizations formalize at least the inequality between men and women.
Civilizations usually develop a more extensive social structure
for men and women both between the upper classes associated
with politics and religion,
and the lower classes associated with rural manufacture and sometimes slavery.
Civilizations tend disproportionately to benefit those
who manage to find themselves in the upper classes.
The benefits for other groups of people are less certain
and in some ways much less obvious.
Many civilizations finally, and we've already implied this,
extend the capacity for warfare beyond what hunting and gathering
and agricultural peoples had done,
and also by attracting invasions and pressure from the outside
may increase the importance of military activity
and the disadvantages of military activity for ordinary people as well.
Alright, civilization as it actually emerged in the early civilization period
also has a second meaning, and we now turn to this one.
Civilization first is a form of human organization, cities, states, writing, etc.
Civilization in this second meaning involves particular characteristics
in certain regions that will be partially different
from the characteristics of the civilization one region over.
In other words, the second definition of civilization
involves the identification of some cohesive cultural and institutional systems
that mark one case off from the next, at least in part.
A couple of examples from the early civilization period.
Mesopotamian and Egyptian civilizations developed close beside each other geographically.
They had periods of exchange.
There were a few occasions where Egyptian armies pressed into parts of the Middle East.
A few occasions where Middle Eastern invaders pressed down into Egypt.
There was certainly trade.
There seems probably to have been some cultural exchange.
There are stones in which Egyptian and Middle Eastern languages are placed side by side,
which suggests that there was some need and effort to translate.
So these were societies growing up in some proximity and in some contact,
but they were quite different.
Egyptian society, and this is pretty familiar stuff,
Egyptian society emphasized monuments more elaborately than Mesopotamian society did.
These monuments reflected a somewhat different capacity to organize labor.
They also clearly reflected different beliefs about the afterlife
and the appropriate response to death.
Egyptian culture, including its artistic forms and the literary forms that remain,
seems to have been on the whole somewhat cheerier than Mesopotamian culture.
Mesopotamian culture, and we know this from great epics,
the first great literary piece in world history that we know of,
great epics such as the Gilgamesh.
Mesopotamian culture seems to have had a slightly gloomier cast,
less confidence that after death one could ascend to a superior afterlife.
The two societies treated women differently.
They were both patriarchal.
They fit the basic definition.
But Egyptian society seems, at least in the upper classes,
to have allowed greater leeway for women.
There were important women rulers and consorts in Egyptian history.
Women are depicted with greater care in Egyptian art.
Children were treated differently, and I must confess I wish I knew for sure why.
Egypt was a very unusual early civilization
in that it did not seem to have practiced infanticide.
That is, the deliberate killing of young children
as a means of population control both for individual families
and for society as a whole.
Most early civilizations and possibly other societies as well
practiced infanticide often quite widely.
This was certainly the case in Mesopotamia,
but Egypt seems not to have done it
as travelers from the Middle East and southeastern Europe noted.
So you have here obviously an invitation to comparison,
which is one of the things we do with civilizations
once they come into our vocabulary,
but also an interesting attestation
to the extent to which civilizations in this second meaning,
even civilizations that were quite close to each other,
could develop separate lines of activity,
separate cultural definitions,
separate kinds of political institutions.
Egypt was obviously much more consistently politically centralized,
much less subject to invasion than was Mesopotamian civilization.
So the comparative emphasis here highlights civilization
as a regionally cohesive force.
The same applies to the other early River Valley civilizations.
Harappan civilization, the civilization along the Indus River,
is shrouded in some real mystery because, among other things,
we have not managed fully to interpret their writing system yet.
They seem to have developed unusually elaborate cities
with unusually advanced urban technologies
in the sense of sewage systems and sanitation systems.
So we know that their urban emphasis was quite strong,
possibly even stronger than the civilizations
in the Middle East and North Africa,
but Harappan civilization ultimately disappeared
and, frankly, we don't fully know why.
Possibly invasion pressure from outside forces,
possibly internal warfare.
I think the leading candidate now suggests that
Harappan civilization may have overextended itself
in terms of the kind of economic productivity
necessary to maintain its urban structures
and may have overextended also its exhaustion of the local environment
so that it declined as a result of local environmental deterioration
and the impact of this, in turn, on reliable food supplies.
Chinese River Valley civilization is also a little mysterious,
partly because the records, although there is written evidence,
the records are not vast,
partly because the Chinese later on
quickly shrouded this period in considerable mystery.
Chinese civilization may have emphasized
the importance of the ruler and the state,
unusually strongly,
at least compared to Harappan civilization in the Middle East.
It's not entirely clear whether that's true at the time,
with the Shang dynasty, for example,
or whether this is partly an invention of later Chinese culture,
quite possibly a bit of both.
But, again, the point that we made with regard to Egypt and Mesopotamia
can and should be extended to these other cases.
Each civilization developing partially separately,
in the case of the Chinese, quite separately,
each civilization developed its own characteristics
which need, then, to be compared to other cases.
However, and this is the final concern some world historians would have
about this second use of the civilization concept,
you don't want to press this too far.
Each of the River Valley civilizations had some distinctive features,
each had a distinctive history, indeed,
but it is also important to remember,
and this is where you get some coherence
to the River Valley civilization period in Afro-Eurasia,
it's also important to remember that each of these civilizations
had important common features,
and we've already covered them in defining civilization itself.
They all had states, they all developed important cities,
they all developed important trading patterns in a merchant class,
they all had writing, different kinds of writing,
but these features need to be remembered.
Two final points.
One involves legacy,
and one involves drawing the River Valley civilization period,
the early civilization period, to a close.
Each of the River Valley civilizations would ultimately decline,
although this is somewhat complicated in the Chinese case.
And the question is, how much did it leave for later?
And there are three aspects to this.
First, most obviously,
the River Valley civilizations left an apparatus
that would never have to be reinvented.
Societies in these particular regions,
but even more widely, would never have separately
to invent the concept of states.
They might invent a particular new style of writing,
but the idea of writing was now well-established in a minority.
Other apparatus that we take for granted, like money,
was introduced by the early civilizations,
and that too was something that no longer would not have to be reinvented
by later societies, even though the specific forms of money
and the materials might change.
So, legacy number one obviously involves
some of the sort of nitty-gritty of social activity
that we associate with civilizations
that was durably established.
Legacy number two, many of the early civilizations,
and this is probably particularly true in the case
of Mesopotamian Egypt, but possibly also China,
many of the early civilizations,
although they concentrated in river valleys,
obviously spilled over into larger influences,
thus Egypt, to take the most important case.
Egypt had interactions with Sub-Saharan African societies
along the upper Nile.
That would ultimately generate their own civilizations,
but in contact with and in partial imitation of Egypt.
So, Egypt helps beget the first Sub-Saharan African civilizations
and the interchange in terms of trade, mutual invasion, etc.
was very important.
Egyptian and Mesopotamian civilization alike
spread influence into places like Greece and Crete,
where again they would form a sort of dissemination background
for developments elsewhere.
So, second legacy is a certain geographic dispersion
that would be important later on.
Third legacy is the one that really gets interesting.
How much of the spirit of the early civilizations
would spread to later societies?
The Chinese in their semi-mythical histories of the Shang dynasty
obviously wanted to imply that the Shang introduced
the concept of political order and careful government
that would later inform Chinese culture.
The claim is somewhat doubtful, but it's possible.
People have argued also that Mesopotamian ideas
about the separation between humans and nature
would influence later Middle Eastern and European cultures.
Certainly specifics, Egyptian mathematics, Egyptian architecture
would have influence later on in the region.
So, the legacy is not just nitty-gritty,
but we don't quite know how much these early societies
helped define what would come later.
Okay, finally then, the end of the period.
It's not tidy. It would be nice if all the early civilizations
collapsed in April 1000 BCE, and we could say,
now we're ready for the next day. It didn't happen like that.
But there is a bit of a pause.
Obviously, as I mentioned already,
Harappan civilization simply disappeared,
and it was replaced by a period in which Indo-European invaders
and migrants poured into India and would begin to mix
with local populations and ultimately a new civilization phase
and a partial relocation would occur as a result.
In the Middle East and Egypt, Egyptian civilization,
although it didn't disappear nor did its government disappear,
clearly began to falter somewhat around 1000 BCE.
The great empires of the Middle East also went through a period of pause
in which important local societies emerged like Phoenicia,
like Israel, with its vital introduction of the first
durable monotheistic religion and associated ethics.
This was a pause period that was also amplified by a new series
of invasions and migrations from Indo-Europeans in Central Asia.
Chinese civilization has the least clear disruption,
and it really is true that the Shang dynasty flows fairly smoothly
into the next Zhao dynasty, which will become characteristic
of the classical period that we'll talk about next.
But with the admitted exception of China,
there is something of a break in civilization history
around 1200 to 800 BCE that would help create the gap
between the first civilization period emphasizing river valleys
and the next classical civilization period
that we'll begin to define next time.
From about 1000 BCE, 1000 or 800, to 500 or possibly 600 CE,
little fuzziness around the edges, but that's the time period.
In other words, it's about one and a half millennia long.
We will be spending several sessions on the classical period,
which may surprise you since we've raced through
over two and a half million years of human history
in three sessions thus far.
This lecture is meant to introduce some of the basic characteristics
of the classical period, some of the key issues,
and then we'll have an opportunity to expand on some issues of detail
in subsequent sessions.
Not surprisingly, the classical period is a really crucial
world history period, and the basic point is some of the key
formative elements of major civilization,
some of what historians call the great traditions,
were forged in the classical period and they would be
ingredients in world history from this point onward,
and that's one of the things we'll try to amplify today.
The classical civilizations focused in areas
where river valley civilizations had flourished earlier,
but there was usually some relocation involved
and always an expansion.
A key center with China, but now in the classical period
China expanded from north along the Yellow River
to the southern portion as well, forming the middle kingdom
that has remained a fairly coherent core in Chinese history
from that point to the present day.
Indian civilization would now spread through the whole subcontinent
and its focus would be in the Ganges River Basin
rather than in the northwest.
Classical Mediterranean civilization would utilize
some of the heritage of Egypt and Mesopotamia,
but obviously would locate particularly in Greece
and the shoreline of the eastern Mediterranean
and ultimately spread westward both in North Africa
and in southern Europe.
The classical civilization that stayed closest
to its river valley roots was Persia,
which also had its center initially in the Tigris Euphrates Valley
but would spread more widely in the Middle East as a whole.
The classical period is easily described
in terms of the separate stories of these four major civilizations,
China, India, Persia, and the Mediterranean,
and we'll do a little of that today.
But the main purpose of this first lecture
is to highlight some of the issues the classical period
has in common among all four civilizations
so that we don't lose the world history for us for the trees.
A secondary purpose, though I'm not trying to beat people
over the head with this, is to make it clear
that as opposed to the western civilization tradition,
which obviously would linger lovingly on Greece and Rome,
the world history focus embraces Greece and Rome
as one of the truly important classical traditions
but gives at least equal attention to other major cases.
Usual caveat, becoming I'm sure quite familiar,
it's important to remember that the classical world
was not yet the whole world.
The classical civilizations would radiate influenced
other societies, India was actually particularly influential
with trade and cultural contacts with Southeast Asia
and to some extent the Middle East.
China would radiate influence into Korea and Vietnam
to a certain degree.
Greece and Rome would radiate influence into parts of Africa
outside the Empire's proper and obviously into Northern Europe,
but the classical civilizations themselves
were only part of the whole world
and some societies that would be important later on
were essentially untouched by classical developments per se.
At the same time, these classical civilizations,
although they all utilize river valley achievements,
they were all larger than the river valleys.
Indeed, that's one of the main points of this emphasis
on some coherent features, the expansion of major civilizations
and without question, they commanded the largest population concentrations.
At its height, the classical Chinese Empire
embraced about 54 million people.
Classical Rome at its height, about the same amount of territory,
by the way, had about 52 million people.
We're less sure about the population of classical India.
These were big units in terms of population,
dwarfing population levels in other parts of the world.
The individual stories become an important part of the classical period
and I want to evoke them briefly,
and we'll come back to elements of these in subsequent lectures.
During the classical period, China, for example,
went from the fairly decentralized, often landlord-dominated
Zhao dynasty, which was a long dynasty,
but not particularly politically coherent,
to a major period of centralization under the Xi dynasty
and then the maturation of centralized political
and ideological operations under the Great Han dynasty
at the end of the classical period.
In other words, there's a story within Chinese civilization
and when we emphasize the ultimate durable features of classical China,
we're sort of summing up and frankly oversimplifying this story.
What I'm calling the classical Mediterranean,
and this is familiar stuff, of course,
what I'm calling the classical Mediterranean started with classical Greece,
remembering that Greece was not only concentrated on the peninsula,
but also had city-states in other parts of the eastern Mediterranean
and ultimately other places as well,
starts with Greece and emphasizes the Greek tradition
to its decline in the fourth century,
then the classical Mediterranean would go through the period
of Alexander the Great's conquests
and the ensuing Hellenistic period
in which Greek cultural and political influences
interacted with traditions of Egypt and the Middle East, including Persia,
and then in the final phase, emphasis shifts to Rome,
the Republican period and then ultimately the empire
which became the most coherent geographic expression
of the classical Mediterranean as a whole.
Many people accustomed to a more western-focused history
would be happy with more detailed treatment of Greece
and Hellenism and Rome as separate entities
and of course they weren't the same thing,
but remember China also in this same period
was undergoing important shifts from Zhao to Han
and I'm not sure the Mediterranean experience is necessarily more complicated,
we're just accustomed to dealing with it in a somewhat different fashion.
Persia represents a somewhat interesting challenge.
In its heyday, in the sixth and fifth centuries BCE,
Persia was far more important than Greece
and something of a Persian tradition was established
with a strong effective government.
The Persian government at this time introduced the first postal system in world history.
It organized a series of travelers' ins
that facilitated trade and travel throughout the Middle East.
It was a successful conqueror spreading throughout the Middle East,
challenging Egypt, obviously ultimately challenging Greece,
though unsuccessfully,
but the Persian tradition is slightly different
because ultimately the Persian tradition would be partially overshadowed
first by the conquests of Alexander,
but then more importantly by the conquests of Arab Islam.
So there is a classical Persia,
there is a Persian tradition which crops up recurrently in world history
and obviously today there is something of a reassertion of this tradition
in the present day state of Iran
with its growing claims to regional and global political and cultural attention.
But the Persian tradition is handled a little differently in world history
and I think we're only getting used to the notion that we need to pay more attention to it
than we did here before.
Classical India involves the story of the in-migration
of Aryan or Indo-European peoples,
long a herding and hurting people,
their culture which they brought in from Indo-European roots
with elaborate religious stories
which gradually get codified into major works of literature and religious philosophy.
Gradually India in this second civilization period
settled down into more recognizably coherent development
with a major empire in the fourth century BCE, the Aryan Empire,
and at the end of the classical period another major imperial statement,
the Gupta Empire, separate stories.
One of the ways to make sure that the classical period doesn't reduce to a jumble of separate items
is of course to make sure we emphasize appropriate amounts of comparison
and these comparisons are enlightening in on the whole highlighting
some of the crucial differences among the classical traditions as they emerged in this period.
China, for example, compared to India, is a markedly secular culture.
Classical China would generate the Confucian ideology
which is the most important single ideological statement in the East Asian tradition.
It would, to be sure, also generate Taoism, a major religion
which however never spread significantly beyond China.
So the Chinese cultural picture is complex with different groups
and sometimes the same individual holding somewhat conflicting
or at least not fully coherent cultural impulses.
But on the whole, China's culture was resolutely secular
whereas of all the classical traditions, India was the most spiritual
generating both Hinduism as it gradually merged from the Indo-European tradition
and the religion initially called Brahmanism
and classical India would also generate Buddhism,
a religious statement closely akin to Hinduism but opposed to it at key points.
Classical Mediterranean may be seen as slightly in between although on the whole
at least until the advent and spread of Christianity
classical Mediterranean leans more toward the secular side as well.
Scientific traditions differed.
The Chinese developed a particularly elaborate emphasis on empirical science,
science that could be useful to technology,
science that could be sponsored as a research activity by the state
because of its clear utility to society and the economy.
The Greek or Roman particularly the Greek and Hellenistic scientific tradition
was noticeably more theoretical.
India had a major scientific tradition perhaps a little in between
with a strong emphasis on the development of mathematics
including of course the introduction of the numbering system
that we now all use and the introduction of the concept of zero.
The Indians were one of the only peoples, not the only one
to develop independently the concept of zero.
Politically the comparison among the societies
that will amplify this in later discussion is also revealing.
Although the evolution here was gradual
we don't want to see this as an immediate product in classical China.
Ultimately the Chinese emphasis would be on a strong central state,
an unusually large bureaucracy by the height of the Han dynasty.
The Chinese bureaucracy numbered about one percent of the total population,
a small figure by modern standards but truly, truly large
by the standards of the classical period.
Classical China would also emphasize key political concepts
that supported the central state, a specific training system
and at least the beginnings of an examination system for the bureaucrats.
There was no other state in the classical period
that came close to China in this degree of elaborateness
although at its height the Persian Empire had some similar features.
Indian politics, frankly, involves less emphasis.
There are two interesting imperial periods
and some other periods when larger political units were formed by outside invaders
but the emphasis, the focus of the Indian tradition
as formed in the classical period tended to stress
decentralized smaller states, princeton, city-states
and placed much less emphasis on political ideas and political ideology
than did either classical China or the classical Mediterranean.
Classical Mediterranean had like China a very strong political emphasis,
lots of discussions of the nature of the state, the obligations of citizens.
Its overall political tradition was somewhat more decentralized than that of China
though there were some exceptions.
Under Rome, somewhat more interested in the development of legal systems
as a political unifier rather than the generation of massive bureaucracies.
Again, some overlaps and some differentiations.
Socially, and we will again pursue this in greater detail later on,
India probably generated the most startling social system
with its caste system whose rules and regulations
in helping people to determine what they could do by way of occupations,
social contacts, marriage opportunities, etc.
Caste obligations in some senses replaced political obligations
and help explain why the Indian political tradition
was somewhat less fully developed than was the case elsewhere.
Mediterranean society in terms of social forms
was probably particularly noteworthy for its strong reliance on slavery.
Slavery existed also in India and China but in much more limited and peripheral fashion.
Classical China under Confucian thinking developed a fairly strong sense
of social hierarchy based on the notion of rule by wise people,
the upper class with lower classes, emphasizing deference,
emphasizing productive activities, a social structure that permitted
a little bit of mobility but with a corresponding emphasis
on hierarchy and reciprocal obligation.
Economic comparisons are also interesting
and we will trace these in greater detail later on as well.
Classical China depended very heavily on trade
but with Confucianism developed a somewhat interesting cultural bias
against merchants who were viewed with some suspicion
because of their devotion to money making,
the possibility that they would pull away from the most central
political and social values of Chinese society.
India placed the most unambiguous emphasis on merchant activities.
Merchants formed the third highest caste
and of all of the classical civilizations,
India was particularly elaborate in its emphasis on foreign trade
and its encouragement for merchants from various parts of India
but particularly the south, its encouragement of merchants
to use the Indian Ocean as an artery for trade with other societies.
China was particularly successful in its technologies.
There's no question that in this period
and for several periods thereafter,
China would be the most important single source of technological innovation
in the world as a whole and for a long time
a pattern was established by which technologies initially introduced
in China would percolate westward gradually
through trade, contacts, and military activities.
India also, however, had a successful emphasis on technologies
particularly in areas like steel making.
The Mediterranean, interestingly,
probably had the least well-developed emphasis on production technology
possibly because it was tempted to utilize expansions of the slave system
to increase production rather than technological developments per se.
The Mediterranean obviously, in some senses,
led the world in its feats of civil engineering
although China and Persia were not far behind
but its production technology was not one of the society's great strengths.
Okay, obvious point.
Even this shorthand form suggests the possibility and desirability
of using comparison to highlight some of the interesting differences
in flavor of these classical societies
and the ways in which some fairly similar opportunities
could be defined in such different fashions.
It's not always easy, to be honest, to figure out why
such different emphases emerged in the classical cases.
China may have emphasized political order possibly because of geography.
It was susceptible to invasion from Central Asia but not too frequently
which may have been just the right balance
to encourage an emphasis on order because of a fear of further disruption
but not so much disruption that that emphasis became impossible.
India was certainly unusually influenced by invasions
and influences from the outside
through the passes that lead through the Himalayas in Northwestern India.
Climate may play a role.
This is a horny old historical staple
but India's culture, its emphasis on artistic sensuality,
its emphasis on religious fervor
could conceivably have something to do with climate factors
with the heat of many areas of India during the spring and summer
with the irregularity of the arrival of periods of heavy rain.
I mean, one is fishing here.
What is clear, what is clear,
is that whatever the origins of these separate impulses and traditions
whether they're climate or contacts with the outside
or heritage from the River Valley civilizations
or simply the result of creative individuals like Confucius or Socrates
whatever the causes of these differences
they would tend to solidify
and would tend to affect these regions
not only during the classical period but well beyond
and that obviously is one of the key points to establish
in looking at the place of the classical period in world history as a whole.
However, and said this at the outset and I now want to return to it,
it is really important not to spend too much time
on the individual civilization trees at the expense of some larger generalizations.
The most obvious point in addition to the separate flavor of each case
the most obvious point about the classical period
is that it gains coherence from two very very simple developments
simple to say, not as easy to flesh out and explain.
First of all, all of these societies as mentioned before
were territorially much larger than their River Valley predecessors.
China expanded geographically several times over.
The classical Mediterranean had obviously never previously been a unit at all
the Persian Empire was larger than virtually any of its River Valley predecessors
and Indian civilization in spreading through the subcontinent
also embraced a territory vastly larger and more diverse and complicated
than Harappan civilization had been previously.
The reasons for expansion doubtless several.
Crucial, crucial was the fact that these civilizations
in contrast to the River Valley predecessors all had access to iron.
Iron technologies began to be introduced from about 1500 BCE onward
they would serve obviously to underwrite a much more elaborate
and effective production technology
and perhaps more obviously they would underwrite considerable expansion of military capacity.
The most obvious single reason then that these societies
are so much larger than the River State predecessors
is they were operating on a different technological base.
Equally clearly, leaders in these societies
the Greek leaders who wanted to expand the Greek Empire
and the Eastern Mediterranean, the Athenian Empire or its analogs
the Chinese leaders who pressed into the south
leaders in these societies saw clear advantages
in terms of potential population expansion, resource expansion
in enlarging their economic, cultural and political territories
and this becomes part of the operation as well.
Conceivably as a third factor
the fact that these societies were now comfortable
with the apparatus of civilization as a form of human organization
that had been developed in the River Valley period
makes it easier not just to assimilate the basic developments
but to use them in combination with new technologies to expand further.
With the partial exception of the Mediterranean
the achievements of these classical civilizations
represented fairly durable expansions
and the territories open to the institutional and cultural characteristics
of the classical civilizations.
There would be later periods in which China would be curtailed truncated geographically
but most of the time China pops back in world history
associated with the territory that was established in this period
or maybe a bit more.
The same holds for India if we view India as a cultural unit
and not simply a political one
and the same may hold to some degree for the reassertions
the recurrent reassertions of the Persian tradition.
Okay, expansion.
Following expansion
all of these societies faced the need to develop
an apparatus of integration
that would allow the expanded territories to be successfully utilized
and maintained.
Now I don't mean to pretend that individuals in these societies
sat down and said,
gee, we're bigger than our River Valley predecessor
we better figure out some new ways to do things
but implicitly that's what happened
and sometimes the policies obviously were quite explicit.
The Chinese government very deliberately relocated
northern Chinese from the Yellow River region
down into the south
to develop a coherent kind of population loyalty
amid the very diverse ethnic and linguistic picture of South China.
This move was resented in South China
it wasn't a smooth development
but a very clear realization on the part of the Chinese leadership
that expanded territory to be maintained in the orderly fashion
that China's values emphasized
needed this kind of deliberate integration policy
including emphasis on the importance of the Mandarin Chinese language
as the common currency for bureaucrats and other leadership elements
in China as a whole regardless of where located.
Rome in its imperial period would obviously equally
try to emphasize a combination of relocation of groups of Roman citizens
the stationment of a certain number of military garrisons
as a deliberate response to the clear challenge
you've got a great big territory here
how do we hold it together?
Okay, more generally and here's where we go beyond explicit policy
to implicit realization of opportunity
more generally the classical civilizations emphasized
three basic integrating devices
and they all did it even though their specific forms varied considerably
one, perhaps most obvious, economic integration
all of these societies traded to some extent beyond their borders
but their main emphasis was in developing economic communication trade patterns
that would connect the various parts of the expanded territories
and make them useful in terms of specialization and exchange
thus most obviously the Chinese developed regular interaction
between the wheat growing regions of North China
and the rice growing regions of South China
deliberately creating massive canals
because the rivers didn't flow in those directions
deliberately creating massive canals
that would facilitate this kind of exchange
same thing happened in a more familiar fashion
in the classical Mediterranean
Mediterranean rulers and merchants eagerly developed contacts
with regions that could most successfully grow grain
like North Africa and Sicily
and formed exchanges between these regions
and areas like Greece itself that was less suitable to grain growing
more successfully adapted to grape and olive culture
in all instances then exchanges developed that would maximize
the economic utility of these expanding territories
and also integrate them
second integration device, really crucial, culture
all of these societies, again I don't mean that there was a coherent plan
all of these societies introduced key cultural systems
interestingly in all cases in the 6th and 5th centuries BCE
the cultural systems might be Confucianism, Taoism
Hinduism, Buddhism, Zoroastrianism in the Persian case
Greco-Roman philosophy and art
very different statements but in all cases
cultural systems, philosophic and or religious statements
combined with artistic traditions
traditions that could then be expanded
through the empire as a whole at least among elites
to provide something of a cultural glue
again I don't want to suggest that Confucius
or Socrates or Plato were deliberately serving the purpose
of civilization expansion
but the way their teachings were disseminated and adopted
actually had that effect
and the third most obvious integrating device
although in some ways it was the most complicated
was political integration itself
no surprise, no surprise
this was a period of empire
not empire all the time
but empire recurrently because in all cases
there was an effort to take advantage
of the territorial expansion of the civilization
to build imperial structures
that would utilize economic and cultural coherence
but also enhance them in turn
for purposes of ultimate maintenance
China developed the most consistent imperial tradition
Greece tried it, Alexander tried it
Rome obviously was particularly successful
this was however a recurrent effort
more than a consistent one
the Persian imperial tradition although shorter lived
was obviously significant
and as noted already
India had its two major periods of empire as well
in all cases then
economic, cultural and political integration
accompanied the expansion of civilization
and in turn reinforced it
okay, the result pretty clearly
constituted achievements
that later societies in these regions and elsewhere
would look back on with awe and reverence
Iranians today point with pride
to the achievements of Cyrus the Great
and the ruins of the great Persian cities
Indians look back
on Ashoka and the Marian dynasty
as one of the great periods of Indian tradition
and many peoples look back on Greece and Rome
as a sort of reference point for their own identities
so each of the classical traditions
outlived its own existence
by providing an opportunity for emphasis
for identity formation
for a variety of societies that would come later on
but more important
each of the classical societies generated value systems
and institutions
that would also outlive the societies themselves
we call this period classical
because of both the reverence
and the fact that it was formative
and we will see institutions, cultural patterns, artistic patterns
even economic and technological values
crop up later on that hark back directly
to the legacy of these classical societies
in this important period in world history
Thank you
Our discussion today focuses on cultural developments
in the classical period
I want to make two basic arguments
the first one which I'll sort of just assert
is that when you look at the various kinds of changes
that occurred in the classical period
political changes, great battles, that sort of thing
ultimately the factors that reshaped cultures
in this period probably turn out to be the most important of all
I'll illustrate this among other things
by talking about how cultural developments
in each of the classical civilizations
moved some people away
from what previously had been cultural staples
in the human experience up to that point
The second point I want to make
involves the claim that
while the most obvious result of cultural change
in the classical period
was the development of cultural signatures
for each of the major civilizations
Chinese culture versus Indian culture, etc.
You can also look at cultural developments
in this period in terms of commonalities
So we'll play that tension
No question, sharp cultural distinctions emerged
and they remain important to this day
but there were also some shared features
that we need to pay attention to
in assessing the classical period as well
Culture is an obviously vital
but slightly elusive part of the human experience
We're talking about culture
not just in terms of great ideas or artistic forms
but basic beliefs, values and assumptions
The human species is not the only species to have cultures
Various other higher mammals
and some birds seem to have cultures
in the sense of signals that can vary
from one population to the next
and potentially change over time
But human beings pretty obviously depend very heavily on culture
because relatively speaking
we don't have a lot of basic instincts
One of the reasons we need to spend so much time teaching children
and why adulthood comes so late after birth
is we need to work the cultural element
into the human psyche
so that people will be able to understand the world around them
and obviously communicate with other people
in their own societies
Culture has undoubtedly emerged early
and we've referred to this in earlier lectures
Quite early it turns out
people began to develop some cultural awareness of death
and some cultural practices that would surround death
We've seen that by the time of the early river valley civilizations
different cultural forms emerged
obviously distinct artistic expressions
Egypt different from Mesopotamia, etc
apparently different beliefs about death
different moods
greater cheerfulness in the Egyptian case
somewhat greater melancholy in the case of Mesopotamia
So cultural identities and cultural signals
were hardly new in the classical period
But without trying to oversimplify
it's really probably true that
for most people
even at the height of the river valley period
cultural approaches
centered around two or three fundamental features
with local variations
simply embellishing those basic features
In the first place
it is probably fairly natural in the human experience
to have a strong initial belief
in polytheism
in a multitude of gods or divine spirits
that will activate various forces of nature
that will help explain different kinds of occurrences
the rising of the sun, storms, etc
so polytheism was a well established cultural feature
during the river valley civilization period
and doubtless before
Shading off from this was a strong tendency
to believe in magic
to believe that certain kinds of rituals or incantations
could move spirits of nature
could help prevent bad things from happening
or even more commonly
because the most common form of magic was white magic
more commonly to motivate good things
By the time of the river valley civilizations
a third element had frequently been added
and that was an argument that the rulers of the society
the rulers of these new civilized states
were themselves either directly inspired by gods
or were themselves gods
In Egypt and early China
the divinity of rulers seems to have been established
in Mesopotamia it was more a claim
that the gods were directly advising
the kings and other rulers
During the classical period
these staples, polytheism, belief in magic
belief in the divinity of rulers
were not overturned but they were modified
which is what I'm going to come back to
after we take up the more readily available point
about the establishment of cultural identities
As we discussed in the previous lecture
the classical period was marked
by the emergence of key cultural figures
mainly in the 6th and 5th centuries BCE
Confucius and Lao Tzu in China
Zoroaster in Persia
Socrates and his philosophical heirs
in 5th and 4th century Greece
Buddha in India
These figures and their overlap in time
is a really intriguing coincidence
These figures drew together prior traditions
in the regional culture
solidified these traditions
added to them and came up with
coherent and widely appealing statements
that helped shape distinct cultural identities
in each of the classical areas
Zoroaster for example
emphasized the importance of the
tension between supernatural forces of good
and of evil
an interesting approach to the divinity
that would frame the human experience
Chinese culture was particularly shaped
by Confucius and Confucius's interpretation
of earlier Chinese tradition
There the emphasis was on the importance
of political order and hierarchy
Confucius believed that people were
fundamentally good if properly educated
so that they would realize their duties
to society as a whole
duties of wise stewardship
and sympathetic leadership
in the case of the ruling groups of society
the gentlemen
obligations of productive work
and deference to one's social betters
on the part of the masses in society
The focus again was on this world
and the qualities that would go into
political orderliness
But classical Chinese culture was also shaped
by the religion of Taoism
which emphasized the importance of harmony with nature
the importance of contemplation
the importance of spiritual attunement
to the natural world around them
and to the balance that each human being should seek
These two basic idea packages
Confucius and Taoism
were not necessarily directly at odds
but they obviously had significant
and different emphases
Indian culture was shaped by the emergence of Hinduism
an evolving religious belief that originated
with the stories brought in by
Indo-European migrants and invaders
stories that were summarized in oral epics
that were gradually written down
and gradually also made more abstract
so what was initially a set of stories
could be called for moral and spiritual meanings
Indian religion was initially shaped
by the priestly caste which remained important
but it evolved from a priestly statement
to a more sophisticated and varied religion
so that one moves during the classical period
from a period of epic and mythology development
to the emergence of the priestly caste
to the emergence of a more robust
and sophisticated Hindu religion
but classical Indian culture was also shaped
by the emergence of Buddhism
which shared many beliefs with Hinduism
but quarreled with Hinduism
over first the belief in the caste system
Buddhism was much stronger in its emphasis
on fundamental human spiritual equality
rather than a division of people
into different social categories
that also had different levels of spiritual significance
and Buddhism disputed Hinduism's emphasis
on priestly rituals and detailed observances
as the proper path toward spiritual development
Buddhism rather took up a strand of Hinduism
that emphasized the importance of contemplation
of aesthetic withdrawal from the world
as the chief path to spiritual advancement
Classical Mediterranean obviously did not
until the advent of Christianity
produce a major religion
it rather utilized the polytheistic religion
brought in again by Indo-European invaders
but it infused this religion with new artistic qualities
with literary representations
that could allow the gods and goddesses
to be used in terms of ethical models
and ethical injunctions
and it added increasingly an overlay outright
of more abstract philosophy
including an interest in scientific speculation
an interest in exploring the powers of reason
so in the three major classical civilizations
one sees the emergence of powerful religious
and philosophical statements
each with a fairly distinctive twist
and if Zoroastrianism is added in for Persia
you have a fourth statement
so point one obvious but really fundamental
the classical period
as it was shaped by individual thinkers
and by the larger evolution of basic cultural forces
the classical period produced distinct cultural signatures
that would mark Chinese approaches
Indian approaches, Mediterranean approaches
and to a degree Persian approaches
not only at that time
but for some time to come
these approaches obviously
need to be interpreted in terms of their individual meanings
the division between for example
the dominant Indian approaches through Hinduism and Buddhism
and the more secular emphases of Confucianism
and the classical Mediterranean
this division is obvious and fundamental
all of the classical cultural systems
were bent on creating a framework for ethical behavior
but in the case of India
whether the emphasis was Hindu or Buddhist
the basic justification for ethical behavior
lay in divine sanctions
in the sense of spiritual advancement
that would result from doing the right thing
the Hindu ethical concept of Dharma for example
which specifically urges
that if one obeys one's caste obligations in this life
one will have the opportunity for spiritual advancement
in subsequent spheres of existence
this was a direct use of religious and spiritual motivation
to underwrite the appropriate ethical code for behavior in this world
in contrast Confucianism
although it certainly credited the notion that there was a divine order
had no particular interest in exploring that order
and no particular interest either in using that order
to help justify ethical behavior in this life
ethical behavior in this life
should be a function of appropriate recognition
of the individual's obligation to the larger society
it should follow from one's place in society
again gentlemen obligated to wise rule
and sympathetic treatment of one's inferiors
ordinary people obligated to deferential behavior
and a devotion to productive activity for the general good
these are secular justifications for ethical behavior
and on the whole although the Mediterranean culture
certainly used religion and used some stories
of religious intervention in life
to help justify the ethical system
the basic philosophical tendency in classical Greece
Hellenism and later Rome
was to urge that the reasons for ethical behavior
should be found in individual explorations
of ethical imperatives
and the relationship between the individual
and larger social obligations
again in the main a secular justification
the most obvious result of the classical cultural systems
in addition to providing obvious grist
for comparative work including the comparison
between dominantly secular
and dominantly religious approaches
the most obvious result of the classical cultural systems
was to create something of a common language
for elites
elites in China might individually oscillate
between interest and Taoism
and interest and Confucianism
but both packages were initially developed
for elite consideration and elite use
and both packages helped shape a common elite cultural experience
across the expanding territory of classical China
and the same could be argued for elite culture
in the Mediterranean
where school systems among other things
helped inculcate the beliefs of the philosophers
the cultural systems and their elite audience
were also reflected in predominant artistic forms
for example the characteristic restraint
and spare depictions of nature
that predominate in Chinese art
have something to do with Confucian injunctions
for personal restraint for emotional control
and also probably even more
with the Taoist interpretation of the importance of balance
with and harmony with nature
Indian art more sensual
more vibrant one might argue
has something to do with the religious system
that Hinduism encouraged
with the sense of the vigor of individual gods and goddesses
as representation of the larger divine essence
classical Mediterranean art
with its monumentality
its emphasis on balance in literature
as well as art certainly correlates rather closely
with some of the predominant emphases
in Mediterranean culture more generally
ok we're talking again about what became cultural signatures
signatures that could be widely recognized by elites
that would shade over into the most widely disseminated public art
that constituted something of a cultural package
that would provide identity within the civilization
at least at the level of high culture elite culture
and would provide some possible distinctions
between the cultures that would be encountered from the outside
the variations among these identities
should not however obscure some key basic similarities
one to go back to my earlier argument
all of these evolving cultural systems
moved at least to some degree I would argue
away from some of the previous cultural staples
that had defined river valleys and earlier human experience
they moved away to some degree at least from polytheism
Confucianism does not deny the possibility of a variety of gods
but again the system is not particularly interested in exploring
the particular nature of divinity or divinities
nor is Taoism more spiritual
but not particularly focused on any kind of polytheistic expression
Confucianism and even more Taoism
might also detract from any belief in the importance of magic
Taoism would later merge a little bit with magical practices
but at this early point both of these systems tended to caution away from
the notion that there were easy ritual approaches
to manipulation of spirits of nature
all of the systems also tended to move at least partially away
from the river valley emphasis on the divinity
or divine inspiration of the ruling class
Confucianism to be sure was compatible with a belief
that the emperor was a son of heaven
a sort of vague invocation of divine framework and inspiration
but it normally shyed away from any explicit claim
that the emperor was himself a god
the Indian religion specifically detracted from any claim
of direct religious possession on the part of the ruling class
and although a few Roman emperors would dabble in religious claims
for the most part the Mediterranean value system
urged that rulers needed to justify themselves by wise rule
by appropriate identification with ethics and philosophical balance
not directly with claims of divinity
so the emergence of the classical systems
not only provide civilizational identities which they certainly did
they also suggest some movement away from some of the previous cultural staples
of the human experience
the classical systems shared a few other points in common
some of which add up to a few additional complexities
they were all surrounded internally by a certain amount of diversity
in India obviously during much of the classical period
Hinduism and Buddhism rivaled each other outright
and then they share a number of assumptions they're not entirely different
but they certainly had some distinctive emphases
and they certainly had a healthy rivalry during much of this period
classical China was as we've seen marked
not by a single basic statement Confucianism
but by a certain degree of tension
between the Confucian interest in political order in this world
and the Taoist emphasis on the importance of a more contemplative association with nature
classical China also saw the emergence of a third cultural strand
called legalism that almost directly disputed Confucianism
by arguing that human nature is in fact bad
and that the goal of political order which broadly speaking was shared with the Confucianists
could only be achieved by an authoritarian government
by harsh punitive measures that would lead to obedience
rather than spontaneous orderliness of the sort the Confucianists hope
classical India to go back to that case was marked not only by two great religions
but by an important interest in science
classical Mediterranean saw obviously a variety of scientific systems
different artistic schools, different emphases
so while it is valid and important to see the classical period
as developing certain kinds of overall signatures
that would as we've argued among other things be reflected in art
it's also important to note that these were complicated civilizations
with different groups appealing to different specific schools of thought
sometimes even clashing directly
but on the whole and this is the final point about internal diversity
the classical period was marked by a considerable range of tolerance
Confucianists for example could easily tolerate Daoists
sometimes even sharing beliefs in the same person
so long as Daoists did not tamper with their fundamental commitment
toward the importance of basic loyalty to the state
when Daoists made this concession not necessarily urging active political participation
but at least passive loyalty the two schools of thought could coexist quite easily
classical Mediterranean rulers turned against a few specific cultural strands
notably Judaism at several points, Christianity at a few points as well
when these strands seemed incompatible with political loyalty
but beyond this again there was considerable tolerance for diversity
so the classical systems were unsurprisingly not simple
these are rich varied civilizations evolving over a considerable period of time
and they involved perhaps more tolerance than we might expect
from civilizations that were still in early phases of development
these systems of thought, these systems of belief
were for the most part also not actively missionary
the one key exception in this period Buddhism
stands out for its willingness to spread beyond conventional geographic
and cultural boundaries in the interests of converting other peoples to religious truth
but with this exception most of these classical systems worked hard
to develop a considerable consensus among elites within the civilization
but they did not have any particular interest in spreading their systems beyond
again it was as if the proponents of these systems were aware that what they were doing
was providing a cultural definition for a civilization
not a statement for humanity as a whole
this said the classical systems inevitably had some influence
beyond the borders of the major civilizations themselves
Confucianism for example would begin to have some impact on Korea and Vietnam
even though these territories were not part of Chinese civilization proper
Hinduism although not for the most part a missionary religion
fanned out with other aspects of Indian influence particularly merchant activity
to locate Hindu centers in other parts of Southeast Asia and in present day Indonesia
most of these have now disappeared but there are still a few centers
of Hindu religious practice and artistic interest outside of India proper
classical Mediterranean perhaps had slightly less resonance among other things
because it didn't produce quite such a compelling religious or philosophical system
but there too peoples on the fringes of the Hellenistic world on the fringes of the Roman Empire
could at least sense the impact of classical art
if not the richer findings of classical science and philosophy
so these are not missionary packages for the most part
but they do have some influence in creating a cultural borderland
around the classical civilizations per se
the most important question to ask about the classical cultural packages
is the extent to which they gradually reached out toward ordinary people
I've emphasized that as in the case of China
the initial cultural emphasis focused particularly on helping to shape a common cultural vocabulary
a common set of assumptions for members of the governing elite
and there's no question that this remained the predominant purpose
even at the end of the classical period
equally obviously for China and the Mediterranean at least
and in a way classical India as well
the clearest beneficiaries of these cultural systems
were members of the elite who had time to indulge in some of the richer treasures
of artistic achievement
who had time to explore the literature and philosophy
that these cultural systems involved
who had the resources among other things
to educate children in these cultural systems
ordinary people had a less clear stake
and without any question in all three of the major classical cases
ordinary people continued to work more traditional cultural veins
popular religion for example in China
would continue to reflect a belief in a multitude of divine spirits
would continue to reflect the need to use symbolism
for example dragon symbolism
to express different spiritual forces in nature
and to help people protect their homes against adverse spiritual forces
magic in other words as well as polytheism was alive and well
in the popular classes in China
the same thing was definitely true in the classical Mediterranean
ordinary people in the cities and particularly the countryside
continued to participate in folk religions
that were undoubtedly polytheistic
that undoubtedly had a strong magical content
periodically as well these people were swept by mystery religions
coming from places like Egypt
that would provide a greater degree of spiritual passion
than the elite culture or even folk religion
normally provided
so there was an ongoing division
between the cultural signatures
the elite value systems developed in the classical period
and the belief patterns of ordinary people
but there was also spillover
which is probably an equally important point for the long run
gradually if not Confucianism in a full sense
at least certain Confucian values reached well beyond the upper class
to help ordinary people understand their relationship with the upper classes
to help ordinary people understand that they could use Confucianism
to insist on courteous and sympathetic behavior from the upper classes
to help ordinary people understand that they could use Confucianism
to organize their own households
Confucianism at the end of the classical period
was hardly a mass cultural phenomenon
but it wasn't entirely elitist as well
the penetration of cultural systems in the Mediterranean
probably focuses particularly on artistic forms
one of the great claims for classical Athens in the 5th century
was the extent to which ordinary people
particularly from the cities
would come to see the great plays
would hear the great musicians
would participate in the public representations of sculpture and architecture
so there was a popular spillover in this case as well
probably much less at the level of philosophy and science
but certainly at the level of exposure to the artistic values
that emanated from classical Mediterranean culture
almost certainly cultural packages spread farthest in India
probably because they were so integrally wrapped up
with a larger religious expression
ordinary people could see in Hinduism or in Buddhism
opportunities for spiritual expression
for hoped for spiritual advancement in this life
or at least the next phases of existence
and while Hinduism had not reached its popular apogee yet
at the end of the classical period
India was a case in which value systems
initially emphasized by upper class figures
the priestly caste etc
value systems could spread quite widely
these cultural systems in other words
to one degree or another
are important not just because they described identity
not just because they provided
some partially new bases for ethical behavior
on the part of figures in the elite
but because they could move ordinary people as well
usually in combination with
some continued belief in polytheism
in magic and possibly even in a few cases
the divinity of rulers
we should end by re-emphasizing
the balance between diversity and commonality
diversity again is the more obvious point
once the value systems of Confucianism
and other ingredients were developed in China
vis-a-vis those in the Mediterranean for example
Chinese people could have a very different reaction
to basic experiences like anger or old age
from their counterparts in the Mediterranean
Chinese emphasis on restraint for example
would hold anger or revenge activity
in much greater disrepute
than was true in classical Mediterranean culture
Chinese culture would also hold old age
in greater veneration than Mediterranean culture
which placed a greater premium on youthful qualities
of youth and vigor
these cultural systems in other words
are not just abstract
they really describe fundamentally
fundamental reactions to ordinary issues
in human behavior
so diversity is a lead theme
and when civilizations began to contact each other
for example when at the end of the classical period
Buddhism began to spread from India to China
the diversity element even with this contact
required that a considerable revision
of the Indian version of Buddhism be undertaken
before it could be even remotely palatable
to a Chinese audience, diversity
but commonality as well
remember the common elements of these classical systems
were an emphasis on cultural values
that could be widely shared in the civilization
the emphasis was on an effort
to provide cultural arguments
for obedience to the existing social and political order
and as a result of this common aspect
of the classical cultural experience
the classical civilizations all
although each in a distinctive way
all generated value systems
that would have lasting impact
on the regions in which they were created
and sometimes well beyond
Music
Lecture 6
Social Inequalities in Classical Societies
The focus of our discussion today
rests on the social systems of the classical world
I want to make three basic points
first frankly fairly easy
each of the classical civilizations
and I'll be focusing on China, India and the Mediterranean
each of the classical civilizations
had a somewhat distinctive social system
that marked its particular definition of social inequality
and each of the classical civilizations also
had a slightly different version
of a patriarchal gender system
looking both at class structure
and at gender structure
in illustrating the social points
about these civilizations
so point one, following from what we've been talking about
in terms of culture
each of the classical civilizations
emerged with a slightly distinctive social signature
second, again frankly pretty easy
the social systems of the classical world in general
were fairly different from what we expect today
much easier acceptance of inequality
much easier acceptance of legal definitions of inequality
much different cultural framework
for inequality overall
and again that goes for the class system
and the gender system both
but third and here's where I get particularly personally invested
I also want to argue that these social systems
made a difference
that it was not just random
that classical Mediterranean emphasized slavery
whereas classical India emphasized the caste system
and I make this third point
that these social systems mattered
with two basic justifications in mind
first is very personal
they're both actually a little personal
but first is very personal
I was trained as a social historian
which means that I think the histories of ordinary people
are an important aspect of our sense of the past
that ordinary people have a real historical legacy of their own
and they also matter in terms of the stories of the larger societies
in which they existed
so as I moved into world history also
I've had an abiding interest in trying to show
that social experiences, social structures matter
in the framework of world history as a whole
most world historians would agree
but it's obviously true that world historians have so much to think about
so many different societies
so much need to attend to major ideas
major political institutions
that the social can drop off a bit
the second personal element here is actually even more focused
several years ago I was talking to historians at Washington State University
about a world history program that they were about to install
they've since insulted and it's very good
and two older historians in the audience
probably a little critical of world history
challenged me when I was trying to make the case
that we need to pay attention to ordinary people
and the argument went as follows
yeah, in the past there was a great deal of inequality
so you need to say that the classical period was marked by inequality
in which a minority of wealthy powerful people
rode roughshod over a majority of ordinary people
that's true
and men tended to do the same to women
that's true
you don't need to say anymore
one paragraph will do it
you don't need to worry about differences among the civilizations
let's keep this topic short
so that we can get back to wars, emperors and great ideas
this is a really interesting challenge
so what I want to do is lay out the simpler parts of my argument
the different social systems that describe the classical civilizations
and the gender systems that matched
and then turn tentatively
because this is not entirely worked out
to why does this matter
why does this need to be known beyond simply a matter of record
okay
the first place to start actually touches base directly
with the previous lecture
I ended on the statement
each of the cultural systems in the classical world
although each had a variety of purposes
in exploring truth, beauty and spirituality
each of the cultural systems
managed to provide explanations
for why people should remain in their social place
why social inequality was both necessary and justified
the greek philosophers, people like Aristotle
argued specifically
that slavery was an essential system for the conduct of society
because only with slavery
could enough production occur to support the upper class
with appropriate leisure for contemplation and wise rule
so the argument was
you needed a dramatically unequal social hierarchy
in order to generate the resources
for the minority of people
the aristocrats in Aristoy meant
rule of the best
for a minority of people to rule wisely
Confucius wasn't quite so blatant
and he didn't have to justify slavery
which was much less widespread in classical china
but Confucius argued something of the same thing
as we saw last time
Confucius said that
a minority of people in the upper classes
the gentleman would be wise
and know the appropriate rules of conduct
would be able to govern well
they owed this to the lower classes
there was a reciprocal obligation
between upper and lower class
but hierarchy was obviously essential
because the lower classes had to do the productive work
and along with deference
supply the needs of the upper classes
and in combination alone
would this hierarchy manage to produce
a properly organized orderly society
Hinduism, Buddhism is a little bit more challenging here
Hinduism made the social inequality statement quite directly
different people are in different social layers
if they do what they're supposed to
in their current social layer
they will earn the right
right is probably the wrong word
they will earn the possibility of spiritual advancement
so that in the next life
they will either be in a higher social level in this world
or will rise to a higher spiritual sphere altogether
doing what you're supposed to do
in a system of social inequality
was what you had to perform
in order to achieve spiritual advancement
okay, none of the systems
was totally designed
just to justify inequality
but they all did so and this is an important component
they have in common
even though their specific methods are very different
so point one
in contrast to the modern world
where our cultural systems
are a little bit shakier
when it comes to justifying inequality
we certainly have inequality
but we're a little bit less glib
and self-satisfied
in assuming that it inevitably explains itself
the classical world very clearly said
at least in the mouths of upper class people
social inequality is essential
we have nothing to apologize for
there's no alternative to it
it's just there
okay, so the first framework
for the social systems of the classical world
the first framework was cultural
a widespread set of assumptions
widespread at least in the upper classes
but potentially spreading below as well
that inequality was just it
there's no reason to worry about it
it just exists
the second feature
of the classical social systems
needs to be stated very carefully
but it also helps along with culture
explain why these systems worked
the systems were not absolutely lockstep
India for example had a caste system
and on paper this sounds extremely rigid
a person is born into his or her social station
this social station describes
what jobs are appropriate
what jobs need to be done by somebody else
describes whom you can suitably marry
describes whom you can suitably have social contacts with
it was a network of regulations
that really helped describe
daily life and obviously social relationships
but although this was on paper
the most rigid of the classical social systems
it also was not inflexible
in a couple of ways
while wealth levels could vary considerably within a caste
you could be a poor priest, a poor Brahmin
or a wealthy one
and there were subgroups within caste called Jati
and one could move among these
with much greater ease than one could among castes
where technically it was impossible to rise
until a subsequent reincarnation
the classical Mediterranean world
was described among other things by slavery
and the slave systems in Greece
and the Hellenistic world in Rome
were really extensive
tending to grow with time and that's important
on the other hand
classical historians caution us
not to think of Mediterranean slavery
exactly as we have been taught to think
of more modern Atlantic slavery
as it developed in the early modern world
slavery could involve
extremely harsh working conditions
slaves were used in the Athenian silver mines
and elsewhere
and often had very short life expectancies as a result
but more slaves were involved in domestic service
tutoring
even running stores and shops
with some real latitude in what they did
they were property, they were owned
no question about that
but it was not a system where you need to think of
gangs of laborers working under the lash
as part of classical slavery
but not frankly the whole thing
and as an evidence of this
classical slavery could be seen by ordinary people
as an actually desirable state
many poor people actually tried to become slaves
because although you would lose your legal freedom
you might gain in material support
and you wouldn't suffer necessarily very much
in work performance
so caste system, slavery
don't necessarily mean what we think they mean
we look at them through
the eyes of subsequent history
the same holds true for the Confucian system
although again we need to be somewhat cautious
Confucianism urged a distinction
between gentlemen and ordinary people
but every so often
without any question an ordinary person
could actually rise to the status of gentlemen
the system worked like this
a really bright peasant boy
if really bright
and lucky enough to be identified
by the local landowner
might be supported into an education
that would allow him to achieve a position
in the imperial bureaucracy
in other words none of these systems
was as static as they seem on paper
all of them had some loopholes
in the case of Mediterranean slavery
also the loophole of manumission
where owners freed their slaves
this wasn't the normal practice
but it wasn't all that rare
it was more common than in later Atlantic slavery
so along with the cultural justification
of these systems come an understanding
that the way they operated on paper
and the way they operated in fact
were not entirely the same thing
caution though
Americans, perhaps particularly American college students
think so routinely
in terms of social mobility
that they're likely to turn this statement
of flexibility into an unrealistic assumption
that well actually mobility was common
mobility was expected
mobility occurred, flexibility existed
but it was not expected
and you need to weigh the flexibility
I've just described
against the cultural cement
for the insistence on social inequality itself
the third feature
of the social inequality of the classical world
and again it varied a bit
depending on whether the system was Mediterranean slavery
or Confucian inequality
or the Indian caste system
which was particularly distinctive
the third feature is that
with some obvious exceptions
lots of social groups
although technically unequal
didn't have routine daily contact
with each other so that although
they could be seen as inferior
from a bird's eye view
on a day to day basis
they could not necessarily operate in that framework
peasants for example
certainly could be subject to
exactions by landlords
and these could become very troubling
but on a day to day basis
they weren't bossed around by landlords
landlords weren't their employer in a modern sense
and they often had a considerable latitude
to do their work
to operate their village institutions
to operate their folk cultures
without too much interference
without apologizing for the caste system
which really by modern standards seems pretty bad
Indian historians have argued
I think plausibly that the caste system
itself allowed a certain amount of daylight
among groups
because if you followed your caste obligations
if you didn't try to
assume inappropriate relationships
you actually on a day to day basis
might be left
with substantial opportunity
for your own group culture
or group contacts
not a lot of routine interference
this also may help explain
why social systems that to us look
markedly unequal
stark in their inequality
could function
and could actually produce a certain amount of flexibility
turning to gender
the gender systems of the classical civilizations
were patriarchal we've argued earlier
that patriarchy was the common gender currency
of agricultural societies
and certainly of agricultural civilizations
and that is unquestionably true
a dramatic illustration of this
gender inequality was the extent
to which many classical societies
probably particularly classical China
and classical Greece
depended on quite high rates
of female infanticide
that is in order to limit birth rates
individual families
implicitly supported by communities
would kill off usually
by exposing them to the elements
would kill off a certain number
of female newborns
up to 20-25%
probably in the case of classical Greece
because by doing this
they were obviously first
indicating their preference for sons
but second reducing the potential
for subsequent birth rates
that could overwhelm family
and community resources
infanticide was not unknown for boys
it was less common boys were preferred
at the same time
just as with the
system of social inequality
the system of gender inequality
needs to be seen through
two additional lenses
lens one is again
the individual civilization
all the classical civilizations
were patriarchal
but not all of them were patriarchal
in the same way
probably the starkest statements of patriarchy
on the surface
came from classical China
where Confucian culture
was actively used
to describe appropriate family relationships
the argument was
that the family should be the mirror
of society at large
that as the emperor was in society at large
so the older father was in the family
and women as a subordinate group
were supposed to be productive deferential
just as the lower classes were
in the larger social order
and the Confucian culture generated
a host of stories
and actual gender manuals
that illustrated these directives
the most famous manual
produced by a woman
in the Han dynasty, Banxiao
the most famous manual was reprinted
many times from the classical period
right on up to the later 19th century
and it described
at least superficially
a starkly patriarchal world
when a girl was born
placed at the foot of the bed
when a boy was born at the side of the bed
so that in growing up
they would immediately know their different places
in relation to their beloved parents
girls should learn domestic tasks
wives should be deferential to husbands
they owed husbands
decorous behavior
efficient management of the household
and deference
this was a world of two spheres
and the female sphere
unquestionably unequal
Indian patriarchy was in some ways
just as strict
Hindu legalists, for example
argued whether
if a woman lived up
to her obligations in this life
and was able to come back
spiritually advanced
her next step would have to be being a man
some of them argued the man would be the next step
some of them argued that women could
advance spiritually without going through
that gender transformation
but the fact that you could have even the argument
was itself revealing
but the Indian version of patriarchy
was probably a little bit more supple
than the Chinese again at least
on paper
Indians valued female beauty more
evidently
than did the Chinese
they were more interested in
vigorous representations of women
in art
Hindu stories were more likely to describe
successful initiative by women
initiatives undertaken in the name
of fathers or husbands
it's patriarchal
but the fact is women could be clever
they could outwit the gods even on occasion
they were operating
in a situation where
they might earn greater praise
and informally
it's been argued that
the attention heaped on women
for example when they were about to give birth
the attention heaped on women
on the occasion of weddings
was simply provided a different ritual atmosphere
for the operation of patriarchy
in the Indian case
classical Mediterranean frankly a little varied
classical Greece
exercised almost as strict
to control over women as did classical China
Aristotle was
eager to urge men
to treat inferior women
as nicely as they possibly could
the implication being that you know
it's really sort of hard because they are so
laggard
women were upperclass women were confined
Rome particularly in the late republican
early imperial period
Rome was somewhat more lenient
and women had more protections in law
of the major cases
it was probably the case in which
the patriarchal strictures
at least for a few centuries were least
severe
so the classical civilizations
had within the framework of
patriarchy distinctive
gender signatures
just as they had distinctive signatures
with regard to social systems
the second
question to ask of gender is the same
that we will conduct with regard
to social classes
how could women put up with this
there are several answers
first of all patriarchy
itself obviously tended to
isolate small groups of women
in separate households
so although they might see each other
on festival occasions or sometimes
in the marketplace
there was a lot of opportunity for large groups
of women to get together to compare notes
and of course as with the lower classes
in the social system
they were themselves victims
of the dominant culture
they were told they were inferior
and doubtless many of them internalized
this and had no basis
for thinking about potential options
but there are a couple
of other features that are worth noting
in talking about how
this system could
create a little bit more flexibility
than it might seem possible
on paper obviously in the first place
there are personality variants
individual women could be
forceful within the patriarchal system
either to be more successfully
expressive
or to be just plain nasty socrates
wife zantipi for example
was supposed to be just a horrible person
which is one of the reasons he spent so much time
in the marketplace with young men because
his home life was dreadful
the manuel writer in classical china
although she wrote about
how women were supposed to measure up
to the patriarchal system
was herself an educated upper class woman
accomplished
capable of advising emperors
individual situations
could break the patriarchal mold
both at the level of ordinary people
and at the level of elites
class was also important
and this is a tricky one
on the whole
the patriarchal strictures
about how women are inferior
to men operated with greatest
force in the upper classes
lower class situations
where women's work was essential
where women had to help
on the farm or in the household or with the
craft there was
inequality here too but it was much less
marked because both parties
men and women knew that
both parties were essential to the
economic survival of the family
so the groups
where patriarchal inequality was fiercest
had the
compensation of being in the upper class
which maybe made the whole situation
more endurable
but the two crucial points
about surviving the system
are first that
although women were
inferior in the patriarchal system
they were not at least supposed
to be the outright property
of men, patriarchy in this sense
which is a little tricky
and on closer examination
a treatise like
Banjao's manual for women
turns out not just to emphasize
that women were inferior etc
which was true
but also to emphasize
that men in the best
Confucian upper class tradition
owed their inferior wives
and daughters something in return
for production and deference
so men needed to treat women
decently without too much
overt cruelty
they needed to provide appropriate education
at least in household skills
and if they didn't do this they weren't
living up to the
upper side of the mutual obligation
systems that described
Confucianism
finally in all the patriarchal
systems
although again women were inferior
there was a certain possible leeway
over time
the most powerful woman
in a patriarchal family structure
and this was very clear in the Confucian system
the most powerful woman
was an older woman
who had had sons
whose husband had died
and
who was able to retain a stature
as mother
of sons
without being encumbered by an actual
husband boss
whose daughters in law would be brought
home by the sons
to be governed by their mother-in-law
in other words
although this wasn't exactly a
social system of mobility
there was a family system of mobility
that if you were lucky and survived enough
you could actually hope
to enjoy another explanation
of why the system worked
a little bit differently
from the way it initially looks on paper
alright
now the challenge
so what
I hope I've argued
that each of the classical civilizations
had a somewhat distinctive social
signature
around a common commitment to inequality
in social class and gender
so that one can add
caste system to Hinduism
and Buddhism as features
of classical India
I hope I've also
successfully argued
that the systems need to be
looked at a little beneath the surface
to understand how they actually
operated even though
even though they still add up
to a system of inequality
somewhat different
at least certainly somewhat more
unreflectively
rigorous than we're accustomed to
in modern times
what does it all matter
alright let me offer a few illustrations
the first one is
tentative
but it has been argued
and I think it's an interesting point
it has been argued that
different versions of patriarchy
could produce different male behavior
particularly
that the way the system operated
in China
where mothers had
every reason to develop
particular attachments to their sons
particularly if they were
second or third wives
in a polygamous family
that men developed
a sense of devotion
a psychological link
with their mothers
that was simply greater
than developed in the classical Mediterranean
where households were a little more varied
where there were other people
caring for children besides the mother
now this is tentative
but I will add
one of my favorite images
from classical China
which is the mother of one of the
Canadian philosophers
beating him with a cane
an older woman obviously
beating him with a cane
in order to make him obedient
and his reaction was
I hope she's not hurting herself
ok
gender systems could vary enough to matter
the importance of different social systems
is even more obvious
and I want to offer two illustrations
definitely and then a third that will return to
a couple of sessions hence
illustration number one
we all know
I've mentioned it before
it deserves renewed attention
we all know that the technological levels
of say classical China
and the classical Mediterranean
differed considerably
the classical Mediterranean
was terrific in civil engineering
and the construction of great monuments
probably the best
the most successful of the classical civilizations
in this regard
however had it all over the classical Mediterranean
in terms of
practical technological innovations
in the area of production
it was classical China that introduced paper
classical China that invented the wheelbarrow
classical China that introduced
some of the basic innovations
in windmills that produced
greater productive power etc
alright why
well maybe a little bit has to do with
government the Chinese government
was more interventionist than that of the Mediterranean
and actually invested in what we would
currently call research and development
possibly a little bit culture
classical Mediterranean
view of science argued that
scientists were supposed to
develop visions of the rational
universe and that
dealing with petty practicalities
was beneath them and there are explicit
quotes to that effect
among Hellenistic scientists for example
but the most obvious explanation
for technological difference
is that when China wanted to
improve productivity
their most obvious recourse
was to try to think of a
new technological device that would do exactly that
when landowners
in the classical Mediterranean
wanted to advance
productive system their most
obvious recourse was to try to acquire more slaves
slave systems are not
absolutely immune to technological
improvement but they tend to discourage it
and that seems definitely true here
the social system
mattered it helps explain
different production
arrangements different technological
experiences and even as we'll argue
next time to some extent different
foreign policies
second illustration
it would be nice to say that we had
a definite sense of rates
of social protest in the three societies
information is simply
not extensive
enough for us to claim that
but it is certainly
likely that
on the basis of the records we do have
plus speculation
that the classical civilization that faced
the greatest amount of social protest
recurrently not all the time
but recurrently was actually classical China
the civilization
that probably faced the least
was classical India classical Mediterranean
a little bit in between
why classical China
obviously nested
social inequality
the inferiority of the ordinary
working peasant
nested social inequality
in a Confucian culture that
insisted that while
hierarchy was great it had to be
leavened by reciprocal
benefits ok
insofar as peasants bought into
this system insofar as they
adopted some Confucian values
they could easily see
that on occasion
landlords weren't living up
to their side of the bargain
they were exploiting labor too greatly
they were not providing enough material protections
so the inequality system
combined with the cultural system
could produce
recurrent situations of unrest
in which the peasants thought they were actually
doing what their value system
told them was legitimate
classical India with the caste system
reinforced the caste system
with the sense of
religious rewards and sanctions
it was much easier
to assume that if you simply
lived through your caste obligation
in this life there would be a clear pay off later
on something that was not present
in the Chinese value system to the same extent
and classical India also
as we previously argued
used the caste system to keep
social groups partially separate
so they didn't rub against each other
as directly as landlords and peasants
might occasionally in China
as they say classical Mediterranean
probably a little bit in between
we have images of slave protest
in the classical Mediterranean world
Spartacus was a great old movie
but it actually was quite uncommon because
actually slavery was not all that
onerous for many of the people
that participated in it
again specific social system matters
and finally though this is something
we'll take up a couple of sessions
hence social system might
also matter or social cultural
system might also matter
in terms of the kinds of attachments
ordinary people developed
to their society and their social order
some systems probably
work better than others
and when times got bad
that could show in different results
as well
the legacy of the classical social systems
was both specific and general
specifically
India still grapples
with remnants of the caste system
outlawed for over half a century
elements of confusion
social thinking
still mark the Chinese experience
slave thinking
slavery systems are officially
gone but the influence
of classical thinking about slavery
certainly marked history
at least up till about a century
ago and obviously
some of the assumptions
and systems involved in patriarchy
although presumably now eroding
continued to be influential
as well there's a legacy here
just as there is in
the cultural systems we talked about
last time and finally
there's a larger legacy
that we continue to grapple with
and that is the extent to which
inequality was assumed
deeply ingrained
embedded in economic inequality
embedded in inequalities in
access to literacy embedded in
different political rights
although we're a very different society
today arguably we're still
dealing with that heritage as well
applause
applause
applause
music
music
music
music
lecture seven
the Roman Empire and Han China
applause
applause
applause
this session
talks about the comparison between
the Roman Empire
and the Empire of the Han Dynasty in China
the purpose is several
fold first of all
quite simply it's a terrific
comparative opportunity as I'll illustrate
further in just a moment these
two societies for a
several century span were
remarkably similar in some basic
achievements and that gives
an opportunity to look more closely
at how classical societies
operated how classical politics
could operate in a
context in which you're comparing
apples with apples for the most part
second purpose
related to this
obviously is to
use a slightly more leisurely
focused comparison
to get a better sense of what
classical governments could do the
focus this time is not just on
politics but the government
aspect will be central
final focus
is to make it
clear in the case that it's still
necessary that
a world history approach to the classical
period needs to be very
certain that our interest
in Greece and Rome in this case
Rome is properly balanced
by an understanding of the important
things occurring in other parts of the
world this lecture does not depend
on a sense that Rome was somehow
inferior to Han China
it was slightly different
but it does insist that
the world of the classical period
was not one in which Rome just sat
there with a few isolated
societies on the boundaries
I recently heard that reasserted
that Rome controlled the whole world
well it didn't we shouldn't think so
and it's a distortion of world history
even to pretend that that was the case
it won't surprise
you at this point to know that this
comparison will be a little bit
to take the terms of one of the societies
we're looking at a little bit yin and yang
we'll be talking about a lot of
really interesting similarities and overlaps
but I want to focus
particularly in the second part of the
exercise in some revealing
differences or shadings as well
not surprisingly
the end result is two societies
remarkably alike
but not exactly alike and
differences may have counted not just
at the time but subsequently as well
one final
preliminary
the focus is on two empires
we don't want to forget
that these empires did not exist
through the whole classical period
and we don't want to forget
that there were other significant classical
societies as well
the similarities between
the Roman Empire and the Han Empire
remind us that the
Indian experience was on the whole
rather different there were imperial periods
they shouldn't be forgotten
but the core of
Indian history in the classical
period rests on cultural
developments on social systems
to some extent on trade
outreach not
nearly so clearly on political
achievement we could also
work in the Persian Empire
which was a major political achievement
for several centuries and that would be
a perfectly valid comparison
simply not exercised here because
it's in a somewhat different
chronological slot and again
simply for reasons of feasibility
alright
similarities first off
classical Rome began its empire
in 27 BCE
and the empire in the west definitively
collapsed in 476
the Han dynasty lasted from
202 BCE to
220 CE
the Han dynasty lasted for
418 years the Roman Empire
for 503 remarkably
similar I don't know that it means too much
but it's an interesting start
as you know already
these two empires developed
very similar
territorial expansions
Rome's was more geographically
dispersed because the Mediterranean
sat in the middle Han China
was a land mass and therefore more
compact but the actual
territory controlled was
remarkably similar
so that just as people refer
to the Pax Romana
in the Mediterranean world
the Roman peace so one
can refer to the Chinese peace Pax
Seneica in the Asian
world under Han control both
involve considerable masses
of territory ruled
on the whole in orderly
fashion for a considerable period
of time as has been mentioned
before also the population
levels of the two cases
remarkably similar both
had over 50 million people
Han China a little larger but
what's a couple million people among friends
very similar operation
in this regard
both clearly had
emphasized territorial expansion
both prior
to the advent of these particular regimes
Republican Rome had began
the expansionist process for Rome
which the empire simply took over
and furthered
earlier dynasties in China
had also set the stage for the
Han conquests in somewhat
similar fashion
with expansion came
and we've discussed this before
came somewhat similar needs
for integration
both empires
again continuing work by
predecessors both empires
worked hard on economic
integration the Han
continued the policy of building
road systems and canal systems
so that the different major parts
of the empire could be linked
allowing specialization and trade
among the major regions
Rome again continuing policies
that had developed earlier in the Mediterranean
worked very hard on
developing granaries
in appropriate parts
of the empire in Sicily and North
Africa and elsewhere that
then reach through
Mediterranean trade routes
with goods that would come from other
portions of the empire including Rome
itself economic integration
the regulation and encouragement
of merchant activity was
fundamental to the
prosperity including the tax base
of both of these important
political systems
both systems worked on
political integration directly
slightly different mechanisms
but directly
in the case of Han China
several devices combined
to try to produce
a coherent political structure
capable of ruling an empire
that was so large
that it could take over a month
to reach the frontiers from the capital city
even with the
fairly efficient road system
that the emperors built
efforts at political integration included
obviously
biological promotion
the Han dynasty attempted
to further Confucian thought
as the means of
inculcating values
in the elite and possibly beyond
that would emphasize
loyalty, deference
devotion to the state
attachment to political order as represented
by the Han emperors themselves
the emperors
continued a tradition
along with Confucian values
of emphasizing their
divine majesty
or at least semi-divine majesty
the concept of son of heaven
was one that had been inherited
and was still used sort of
as a supplement to Confucian teachings
and there was no inherent
contradiction involved
the emperors surrounded themselves
also with great pomp and ceremony
constructing cultural monuments
military
processions, parades
various activities
that would demonstrate
at least to the urban populations
their splendor
and their remoteness
and finally and most crucial
to the political cement
developed by the Han
the Han
introduced the first
clearly established
system of Chinese bureaucracy
in which the central
government would designate
a significant number of people
as governmental representatives
in the provinces
representing the interests of the central government
receiving communications and sending information
from and sending communications
to the central government
the bureaucratic system
was furthered by an emphasis
on Confucian education
and training in the literary classics
by the beginnings of an examination
system that would in principle
at least select bureaucrats
on the basis of demonstrated merit
this bureaucratic system
provided a network of
political activities
political control
that helped bring this vast
territory together in effective fashion
again
Rome's methods were not exactly the same
the Romans did not
have quite the same
cultural apparatus
as Confucianism provided
although lots of writers
particularly early in the empire
were eager to sing the praises
of the emperors and the imperial system
so there was a sort of
cultural panagyric developed
early on that would help
bring loyalty and attention
to the new regime
a bureaucracy was developed
but it's obviously
important to note that the Roman
bureaucracy was somewhat more rudimentary
than the Chinese
and the Romans placed more emphasis
on the legal system
and on the rule of law
across the empire at least as
applied to Roman citizens
and this emphasis on common legal
principles codified
into really admirable statements
of legal reality
this provided something of the same
cement that the more
abundant Chinese bureaucracy
provided in that case
Rome for the most part
did not emphasize the divinity
of the emperors themselves
although patronage by the gods
was part of the process
and imperial participation in religious ceremonies
part of the process as well
but the Romans certainly at least
equally probably surpassed
the Han in imperial monuments
in
processions through the city of Rome itself
and elsewhere after military triumphs
the emphasis on the majesty
power of the imperial
office was if slightly differently
expressed clearly as great
in Rome as in Han China
both systems
again probably differences
in degree but both systems
also expanded the functions
of government itself
I've mentioned in a previous comment
the role of the Chinese government
in patronizing a certain amount
of scientific and technological research
this probably did not occur
in Rome but both governments
quite understandably
used their considerable powers
of bureaucracy and taxation
to pay a great deal of specific attention
to the provisioning of major cities
in the case of Rome
particularly Rome
so that regulations and encouragement
would help organize
convoys of grain
would help set prices
would help regulate supply
the system didn't always work perfectly well
but on the whole both governments
were actively engaged
in at least a certain level of economic activity
designed in assuring
the economic essentials
of a stable social and political order
the Roman government
was probably in its imperial heyday
a bit more involved
than its Chinese counterpart
in sponsoring cultural activities for ordinary people
but again
the similarities in broad outline
quite marked
so you have two systems
about the same size
strong emphasis on political functions
political systems
bureaucracy and or law
and political symbolism
combined with the active encouragement
of economic integration
in ways that would make
the system work
differences although differences
within a context of still
remarkable similarities
on the whole
and this has been suggested in an earlier comment
on the whole I think
it's fair to say that the Chinese regime
again
building on prior precedent
worked harder at integrating its vast
territory than the Romans did
the Chinese planted
larger colonies of people
in frontier regions
it's absolutely vital to remember
as against our current impressions
that even the Middle Kingdom
in China in the classical period
was the scene of major
ethnic mixing and ethnic division
to use a modern term
particularly in South China
the regime tackled this head on
by planting large colonies
of northern Chinese in the south
as well as of course by encouraging
the common use of
Mandarin at least at the elite
and bureaucratic level some of these policies
by the way are still being conducted
in frontier regions by the Chinese regime
today so the continuity
aspect is interesting as well
as we look at efforts to integrate
the western provinces in Tibet
in contemporary China
Rome planted colonies also
colonies of soldiers
but colonies that could
begin to develop a Roman lifestyle
and Roman monuments
in provinces as remote as
England but on the whole
these were smaller colonies
they didn't do as much
they weren't intended to do as much work
by way of population integration
and they probably didn't accomplish
much as much in this vein
either the Romans
certainly encouraged the use of Latin
by the upper class
although it never
managed to erase
predominance of Greek in
upper class circles in the eastern Mediterranean
the Romans certainly
emphasized the expansion
of Roman citizenship
citizenship initially was confined to
Romans themselves then
during the republic was expanded
as a possibility to certain people
in other parts of Italy and then under the empire
could expand to people
who were not even remotely Italian
Saint Paul the great Christian saint
was extremely proud of the fact
that he was a Roman citizen
so this was an integrating device
perhaps not totally dissimilar
to spreading bureaucrats and language
in Han China but it
didn't affect as many people
and the fact remains that Rome
was content not counterproductive
in the period itself Rome
was content with a looser regime
over most of its provinces
a reliance on
considerable local autonomy
even existing kings where they were willing
to follow Roman rules
and provide loyalty and tribute
whereas the Chinese were more
ruthless integrators
in ways that may have
helped produce a somewhat
different subsequent history
of the two societies
both regimes conscious of integration
for obvious reasons
but both
involved in somewhat different
specific procedures
and specific results
second interesting difference
although again within a somewhat
similar context
involves policies of expansion
obviously both the Roman
empire and Han China
expanded a great deal
this territorial expansion was one of the keys
to their similarity one of the keys
to their needs to provide integrating devices
etc
but Han China was capable
of surviving a
cessation of expansion
and was willing
to operate
in terms of
more diplomatic
interaction with borderline
territories then the
Romans proved interested in doing
so the Han Chinese obviously
pushed the boundaries of empire out
well beyond the middle kingdom no question about this
but when they
felt they had reached a sustainable
term
they did not necessarily feel
that they had therefore
to compensate in some
fashion for the cessation of expansion
rather they adopted
a system of looking at
potential neighbors like Vietnam
and Korea in terms of payments
of tribute rather than as candidates
for further expansion
Rome's appetites
in this regard
seem to have been less clearly
bounded and I think
there are a couple reasons for this
arguably although this certainly
could be debated
the Mediterranean value system not only
Roman but Greek before
was quite simply more militaristic
than the Chinese both
societies depended on
deliberate military commitments
and devotion I don't mean to oversimplify
but the importance
of military valor
probably played a greater role
in the Roman definition of upper class
achievements compared to the greater
Chinese emphasis on
education and gentility
along potentially with military service
more practically
and obviously still
the Romans once the empire
started particularly the Romans
needed additional territory
as a means of rewarding generals
and soldiers they didn't
have as clear a
bureaucratic system
in which successful generals
could be rewarded without
the addition of specific territories
and most obviously still
the Romans needed
expansion in order to provide
a continuing supply of slaves
to a labor system where
in many agricultural
states and in the mines as well
as in domestic service slaves
were simply vital
for production expansion
for successful operation of the economy
there were slaves in Han China
they were mostly domestic servants
they were relatively few in number
the economic system did not
depend on additional
slave supply and in this sense too
expansion could be halted
without immediate consequence
thus
now it's important to recognize both empires
would decline
as we've already indicated both
declined after about the same period of time
so I don't want to overdo the Han advantage
but Rome more
clearly began to suffer
after the point which was reached
in 180 CE
after the point at which expansion became
impossible and even a
retreat
began to be introduced
the system just didn't work as well
in terms of supplying labor
supplying reward
supplying opportunities for the military itself
to feed on victory
rather than feed on domestic discontent
and disruption of
imperial selection and the imperial
process itself
so integration a little bit different
expansion perhaps even more
different interesting contrasts
again within a
remarkably similar context
culture
Han China was I think unquestionably
more culturally creative
than Rome
Rome had its moments
its literature certainly its art
and architecture are splendid
but Roman cultural
achievements tended to be more
derivative from
earlier Greek experience
this was a pattern that was established
earlier in the republic and on the whole
continued in the empire
and it's less easy with again
artistic and literary exceptions
it's less easy to point
to basic Roman creativity
in philosophic
or scientific endeavor
huge exception here once Christianity
came in the later stages of empire
when Roman intellectuals
broadly construed operated at
extremely high level so again we don't want
to oversimplify but
the culture of
Rome itself the culture that the empire
would itself emphasize
at least until
the imperial conversion to Christianity
the culture was less robust
less creative more
derivative it is perhaps
worth reminding here that some historians
have compared
Rome's cultural position here to that of the
United States a very powerful
society
strong in many respects including military
but possessed of a cultural
apparatus that was to some extent
derivative from an earlier point of
origin Greek in the case of classical
Rome western European
in the case of the United States
whether the analogy is useful or not
it's at least sort of fun to kick around
all right classical
China was also
and we've discussed this before more creative
in the area of technologies
particularly production technologies
classical China created
and this
was prior to the Han dynasty
itself but was something the dynasty was
able actively to utilize
classical China created
basic philosophical and
religious systems in a way that
with the obvious exception of Christianity
which was sort of a late
adoption on the part of the Roman Empire
the Roman Empire did not
how much does this matter
how much does this matter how much did
the ongoing creativity
of Confucian and other intellectuals
in Han China contribute
to a majorably different result
than in classical Rome
one point however
returns us to similarity
neither Han China
nor classical Rome
developed or sustained
cultural systems on their own
that satisfied
what one might argue were the
spiritual needs of important
segments of the population
the Han dynasty's emphasis on
Confucianism, Taoism persisted
but the emphasis was on Confucianism
classical Rome's emphasis
on civic religion
the religion of the gods
and goddesses
these emphasis were interesting
they could help call attention to rituals
and themes that would bring loyalty
to the imperial system itself
but neither system
was itself intensely
spiritual
and both regimes in their later stages
and here's an interesting similarity
both regimes
ended up seeing the importation
of spiritual values
from
outside or at least partially
outside the main imperial
centers
in the case of Han China
Buddhism began to draw
interest in the later stages of the dynasty
and then would surge forward
still further after the dynasty
collapsed
in the case of classical Rome
the story is more familiar
increasing numbers of Romans
converted to Christianity by the
4th century probably about
10% of the imperial population
was Christian
and then in a hope
to seize on a new method
of winning popular
loyalty and support
the imperial system itself
embraced Christianity under Emperor Constantine
and the association
of the final faces of the empire
and Christianity
became increasingly intertwined
interesting development in both cases
despite the differences
in cultural creativity
both systems seemed to have something lacking
that
invited additional cultural innovation
additional cultural importation
at least things when things began
to turn a bit bad
both systems
encouraged active military activity
the Roman system was particularly
famous and again this was not a development
that began with the empire
but was furthered by it
the Roman system depended on
tight military discipline
and the careful organization
of infantry in the Roman legion
these legions were extremely effective
they were given substantial privilege
they developed tight
bonds of comradeship
and they operated obviously very effectively
through much of the
early history of the empire
Chinese military was probably
best known at least
in retrospect not for its tactics
although these have to
have been quite successful in many instances
but for
its larger approach to military philosophy
so it's from the Han dynasty
that we get the Art of War
by Sun Tzu
one of the great works on military
thinking generated by any
society anywhere still utilized
in military training in the present
day and one wonders here
and this is real speculation one wonders
here if there's an interesting
contrast that would again go back
to some of the other distinctions
between the two systems
Rome was known for military force
military organization
excellent weaponry
and obviously for many centuries
great success
China was known for these things to a degree
but also for a level of thinking
about the place of military
activity in the larger
political and social picture
so Sun Tzu was
just as interested perhaps even more
interested in writing about
the limitations of the use of war
about writing about
how war was a last resort
and various other devices should
be utilized in preference
and one wonders if possibly
in association with the different needs
for imperial expansion there's
a distinction here that's worth
remembering
the two empires
obviously had different origins
the Han dynasty sprung
more directly from
prior dynastic activity
in classical China
it operated
in a context in which a period of
disorder under the Tzu dynasty
had been replaced by
cultural confusion as well as
political emphasis on the importance
of political order the origins
of the Roman Empire
were a little bit more
oblique
obviously the process of territorial
expansion predated the advent of empire
but Rome's origins had more
to do with
in politics had more to do with
the control of aristocratic landlords
the importance of
a certain democratic element
in Roman politics
and these were on the whole
overridden by the
institutions of the empire
to some extent
possibly there's some difference in
the smoothness of the advent
of these two systems that would be
worth attention as well
most obviously however
and this is the
clear concluding point and we will return
to it two sessions hence
most obviously
the fates of the two empires
continued the theme
of
a surprising amount of
coincidence with
an important level of difference
both empires
began to fade
as the quality of individual
emperors began to yield
as invasions
from
Central Asia or indirectly
prodded by Central Asian migrations
began to press into
the territories of the empires themselves
both empires suffered
from increasing economic
stagnation which complicated
not only material life but also
the taxation base of the empire
both empires seem to have suffered
from considerable inroads of disease
that reduced population levels overall
so both empires
although at slightly different time periods
would fall victim
to a somewhat similar process
of decay
and ultimate disappearance at least
in portions of its holdings
but in the case of
the Roman Empire at least
in its western stronghold
in the case of the Roman Empire
the empire once it fell
was gone never to be revived
as a whole it would be
remembered it would be remembered
with reverence it would be
selectively borrowed from by later regimes
but it was never
reconstituted the fate
of the Han dynasty was different
it too was destroyed
the Han never returned
but the key institutions
and achievements of the Han dynasty
were revived by later regimes
so there's an interesting
final difference between the two stories
a story of
remembrance and selective
utilization
versus a story of revival
because among other things
it's been argued the Chinese really
when they got their act back together
following a period of disarray
they really couldn't think of a system
that would do better than the Han had done
they could work to perfect it
and they did
introduce some further changes
but they did not need to see its replacement
because it really just needed
to be restored
and Rome never quite achieved that final luster
LUTURE 8
The Silk Road
Classical Period Contacts
This is a discussion about
contacts among civilizations
and regions during the classical period
of all the discussions
we're having about the classical world
this one is perhaps the
discussion that would most please
the pure world historian
because as we discussed in the first session
world historians love to talk about
contact
I probably need to worry about my credentials
because while I will talk about contact
and while I think that the contacts
will discuss clearly have historical
significance
I'm also going to reign on the parade a little bit
to mention that the contacts
not only occurred but occurred
amid severe limitations
so we're talking about two kinds
of contacts
involving several different patterns in each category
contact first
by means of trade
contact first by means of
direct juxtaposition
between two civilizations
and we're talking about
how these contacts
need to be assessed
in terms of the classical
period itself
and in terms of later legacies
pretty obviously the classical
period rests primarily
on integrations
that occurred within large regions
which we've come to call civilizations
in other words the classical
period is not defined by
really local history
but by regional history
and by patterns of connections
that expanded those regions
fairly systematically and in some
cases very durably
but the
contact that
overlaid these regional integrations
needs to be noted as well
while not overshadowing
the regional picture itself
regional focus remains primary
contact is a significant
overlay
two major types of trade contacts
developed during the classical
period the most famous one
and it's deservedly notorious
involved the contacts
that went along what we've come to call
the silk road
a nexus of trade routes
that ran from western China
usually
through central Asia
across the
northernmost reaches of the Himalayan mountains
into the Middle East
through Persia
and sometimes beyond the Middle East
on into the Mediterranean
alternative routes would take some of this
trade directly through India
the silk road is a nice
label but it is obviously
important to recognize there was no
single route
no nice highway markers it's a pattern
of western Chinese
to Middle Eastern
to Mediterranean movement
that we're focusing on here
the trade was
romantic in many ways
at least as it has been recalled
by historians and art historians
it took
traders into
a variety of ethnic settings
in central Asia particularly
it involved
frequently some direct interaction
between merchants
from established agricultural
economies and
nomadic traders it's one of the ways
in which the nomadic peoples of
central Asia played a
direct role in world history
through their contact but also through
their capacity to extend
what people in the settled civilizations
were interested in doing
it involved romantic
designations in the
along the way such as the city of
Samarkand which I have never visited
but would like to
it's a really interesting set of
patterns as the name implies
the good that was most important
on this trade route was silk
manufactured in China
increasingly esteemed by people
in the Middle East and even
in the Mediterranean by the time
of the later republic and particularly
empire in Rome it was fashionable
for upper class Romans both
men and women to wear silk
or silk adornments on their togas
this was obviously
a prime luxury
commodity flowing
along the silk road also in the other direction
were exotic animals
which the Romans were able to import
from Africa
gold
slaves a variety
of goods that westerners
tried to use to match
the important flow of manufactured
products from China
and to a lesser extent
spices and food products from
other points along the more
easterly end of this chain
it's a terrific
route to note
it's a favorite thing to ask about
on world history tests
but we also need to ask
what the significance was
clearly you can make a case
that the silk road had
at least a little bit of significance
in terms of the
economies and even more
obviously the consumer patterns
of some of the recipients of the trade
this is an example
as we look at the increasing
taste for silk this is an example
of the ways in which
new patterns of world trade
can feed new levels of consumer
interest
the trade was undoubtedly economically important
for some manufacturing centers
in western China and clearly
important for the merchants involved
but I think it's fair to say
that with these important
significance is noted
this is not a trade
pattern that had deep significance
for the economies of any
of the major societies involved
it was an interesting
addendum it undoubtedly sustained
some individual groups and peoples
but it wasn't an economic main
stay equally
important the trade
proceeded in stages
along the vast expanse
of the Asian continent
nobody as far
as we know went the whole way
Romans were vaguely aware
that China existed
they knew a lot about India as we'll come
to in a moment they were vaguely aware
that China existed they tended to
to confuse it with silk itself
and sometimes use the same word for both
we have no evidence it's not impossible
we have no evidence that anybody
ever made it from the Mediterranean
to China or vice versa
there's a possibility of a Chinese traveler
but no clear confirmation
the trade was in stages
which helps explain along with
the relatively light volume
why the silk road
did not generate any particularly intense
cultural exchanges
or even technological exchanges
this is an interesting
pattern of trade not to be minimized
but also not to be exaggerated
a second nexus
of trade
surprisingly robust
developed with India as its direct center
this involved
trade from the Middle East
and the Mediterranean
going directly to India
and also involved Chinese interest
in direct trade with India
by the time
of the Roman Empire
regular expeditions were mounted
annually from the Red Sea
to the
subcontinent of India directly
colonies of Roman merchants
operated in some southern
Indian cities
the key interest here was spices such as pepper
but obviously there was a sufficient
trade to motivate
some government encouragement
these were imperially organized expeditions
some increased knowledge of the
navigation patterns necessary
to handle the wind routes
on the Indian Ocean
and some direct involvement
between the Mediterranean societies
and Indian societies themselves
Chinese trade also
reached India not only overland
along the silk roads but through
ocean born travel
from the Pacific coast of China
around to the Indian Ocean
and to eastern India
at one point for example
Han Emperor in China directly sent
a ship to India seeking a
rhinoceros for his personal zoo
so India is a
second center of trade and it reminds
us again as does the silk road
that classical civilizations
did not operate in complete
isolation from each other they did
increasingly learn the advantages
of at least limited commercial
outreach and this outreach
obviously tended to expand
there were some other
trade routes that pressed beyond
boundaries of the classical civilizations
themselves as is pretty obvious
from our earlier discussion of the
patterns of Chinese tribute
China developed a fairly robust trade
with places like Korea and Vietnam
India had probably
the most extensive trade outreach
of any of the societies
our problem is the records here are not
terribly elaborate but
Indian merchants particularly from southern
India regularly traded
with other parts of Southeast Asia including
present day Indonesia this is one
of the reasons that pockets of Hinduism
spread in these same directions
and this is another set of connections
that's worthy of note
Mediterranean societies
and Middle Eastern traders also developed
contacts with certain parts
of Sub-Saharan Africa we don't
always know the specific means by
which Romans for example acquired
more exotic African animals
including lions
some of which were actually North African
some of which were Sub-Saharan
but clearly the Romans
had means of contact
with Sub-Saharan peoples
active trade
connected Ethiopia
in northeastern Africa
with the Middle East and even
points beyond in the eastern Mediterranean
it was through these trade
contacts that Ethiopians
acquired knowledge of Judaism
and some Ethiopian conversions
to Judaism occurred
before or during the classical period
and later obviously
Ethiopian Christianity reflected
the same kinds of well established
commercial and cultural connections
with the Mediterranean world
obviously then
the classical civilizations
along with their
strong emphasis on
patterns of internal trade
and internal commercial integration
and specialization reached out
for certain kinds of products
and different kinds of opportunities
to a wider network
that embraced territories beyond the classical
civilizations themselves
and that could to a limited degree
also connect these civilizations
not surprisingly in this context
the classical period
offers our first stories
of great
inter-regional travelers
undoubtedly such travelers that existed before
remember the human species
was a migratory species
we have records and we don't know how far
any given individual
wandered but in this period
among other things the first
great Greek traveler Herodotus
the 5th century Greek
managed to write down his travel stories
and they reveal an active
imagination and active curiosity
about distant places
a considerable tolerance
for habits that he discovered that were
different from those of Greece
all of the apparatus that one would
hope from a person
whose travels reflected
the extent to which the classical world
was not entirely bound
within severe limits
Herodotus also however
illustrates some of the
continuing limitations
of inter-regional contacts
his travels took him to
Egypt his travels took him to parts
of the Middle East his travels took him
at least toward
the western reaches of Central Asia
but this is not a huge
network no reason to downplay him
it's very venturesome by the standards of the time
but by the
standards that would be established by
a next series of travelers
in the next world history period
this is interesting promising
but a little bit modest
equally revealing was the extent
to which Herodotus and some other
early travelers or people who were
echoing the comments of travelers
the extent to which Herodotus was
willing to mix absolute
fancifulness
and nonsense with
solid fact
he visited a number of societies
he often proved to be a good observer
but he was extremely credulous about
what people told him about that society
over the next hill
particularly he loved to exaggerate
sexual peculiarities
anatomical peculiarities
and his mixture of
sober account
and his invention reveals
what might be argued to be a sort of
logical first stage
of interregional travel that matches
the tentativeness of
commercial outreach that we've already
described
other travelers developed later in the
classical period particularly important
right at the end of the classical period
was a significant series of Chinese travelers
moving into Central Asia
and particularly into India where they
among other things often sought
Buddhist sanctuary, Buddhist inspiration
these travelers would help expand
Chinese knowledge of a world
beyond Chinese boundaries and again
illustrate the extent to which the classical
world was not entirely
confined to the major
civilizations themselves
a second kind of contact
beyond travel and trade
emerged through
through two direct encounters
between major civilizations
themselves and one might add a third
encounter number one
really reasonably well known
at least from the Greek standpoint
in terms of Greek history
involved the encounter in the
sixth and early fifth centuries
BCE between
Greece and Persia
many Greeks learned quite a bit about
Persian society some Greeks
like Herodotus argued that Persians
learned quite a bit about Greek society
in what was
a really unusual situation
in which two major societies
operating on
somewhat different cultural and institutional
bases had direct
territorial and military interaction with each
other with some mutual
learning resulting and certainly
a good bit of mutual antagonism
beyond this
and in some ways extending it
Alexander the Great's conquest
brought Greek civilization
not only into more elaborate
contact with societies
and cultures in the Middle East including
Persia but on into Northwestern
India
here emissaries
from Hellenistic society
Greeks themselves and other Middle Easterners
who were interacting
with Hellenistic values
Hellenistic representatives
interacted directly with representatives
of Indian culture
with several interesting but
arguably also surprisingly limited
results
most obvious was an artistic
interaction that followed
this period of Hellenistic
Indian contact and lasted
for
probably about 150 years
in this contact
Greek artistic styles and
costumes were utilized
by Indian and Central Asian
artists to represent
among other things the figure of the Buddha
and other figures associated
with Buddhism so there are
interesting depictions of the Buddha
with Greek hairstyles
Greek clothing styles, Greek artistic apparatus
and it's an intriguing example
of the potency
of contact in which two
societies both maintain
a certain degree of separation
i.e. these are Greek styles but
Indian religion but also manage
to combine them in an imaginative
combination
or synthesis
equally important however
this stylistic fusion
didn't last too long
doesn't have clear echo because
by the end of the Hellenistic
period this kingdom had
dissolved and the
Greek-Indian interaction
dissolved with it
another facet of this interaction which
almost certainly occurred but we don't know
full dimensions involves the extent
to which Greek and Indian mathematicians
exchanged ideas
both societies had developed
various mathematics each had
a somewhat distinctive set of experiences
and as far as we can determine
there was some active interest
on both parts in using
this point of contact for
what we might view as an early version
of scientific exchange
on the other hand not only is our knowledge
of exactly what was passed
around limited but
one of the most obvious
in retrospect possibilities
for transmission did not occur
Greeks did not pick up
through this conversation the Indian
number system which was vastly superior
to the
Greek system and which would be
adopted in the west only after it had
much later been transmitted
to the Arabs and thence
to the western world so again
patterns here seem to be
interesting intriguing but
surprisingly limited suggesting
that even when two civilizations
encountered each other directly
there was some hesitation about borrowing too much
other possible results
of this Greek and Indian interaction
include the possibility
that
it was Alexander's inspiration
his intrusion politically and militarily
into India
that helped inspire later Indian leaders
to begin greater
political and imperial activity on their own
leading initially to the
Marian dynasty the first
great Indian imperial episode
that's an interesting possible
ramification but not exactly
a connection in the sense
of active ongoing
contact or imitation
it's also possible that fueled by
this contact some
Buddhist missionaries were sent into the Middle
East where possibly
although they did not seem to generate
many if any direct
conversions to Buddhism possibly
there was some interaction
with Middle Eastern thinking
Middle Eastern ethical thought
in ways that would later
fuel western movements
like stoicism and through them
even possibly some aspects of
Christianity but this is speculative
we simply don't have the records
we don't know how far to press
this contact
a final contact
and a much better
established one we know more about it among other things
a final contact began to take
shape in the early
century CE
directly between China and India
Chinese merchants
obviously had developed
interest in Indian connections
Chinese travelers began to report
not just on Indian religion
but on the prosperity of Indian society
and a fairly
steady trickle of Chinese
visitors began to pour down
into the subcontinent
from the second and third centuries
CE onward
from their activities
and sometimes as a direct
intention behind their activities
China began to import
Buddhism directly from India
along with Buddhist artistic styles
Buddhist literature
in a pattern of
exchange a really unusual pattern
of exchange for the classical
period that ushered in
a significant alteration
in Chinese history for several
centuries this actually
until the past century plus
is the only significant case
of fairly deliberate
and extensive Chinese involvement
with
a foreign cultural import
in ways that would interact with
the Chinese mainstream
large numbers of upper class
and ordinary Chinese converted to Buddhism
interest in
replicating
Buddhist prayers in translating
Buddhist religious literature
ran high in China
and it's an intriguing episode
also intriguing and this frankly
is not a qualification on the importance
of this contact also intriguing
is the extent to which the contact
had to be mediated
by a corresponding effort
to make sure that the Buddhism that was
imported was imported in ways
that were consistent with Chinese value
systems
two points of signification
of making Buddhism Chinese
significant first
Chinese insistence
helped
persuade many Buddhist leaders in China
of the importance of
combining their genuine
Buddhism with a very
explicit acknowledgement
of the importance of the Chinese state
and the legitimacy of the Chinese
emperor in other words
Buddhism by Chinese
values particularly Confucian values
could seem slightly risky
if it was allowed to
retain its emphasis on
purely religious goals
on other worldly contemplation
and it could be brought into
greater harmony if
some explicit statements of
political loyalty could be added in
the other adjustment is actually
in many ways more intriguing not less expected
but more intriguing that was
the extent to which under Chinese influence
the Buddhism that flowed into China
was modified
to place greater emphasis on
what today we might call family values
Buddhism
in its pure form
valued celibacy
Buddhism tended to emphasize
individual spiritual
quests in which the family might be
deliberately downplayed or even abandoned
and this did not sit well
with the Confucian view
of social propriety
so many Buddhist statements
about women, about family obligations
were significantly redone
in the effort to make this pattern
more recognizable, more
harmonious with Chinese values
this is an indication
obviously
that exchanges between civilizations
were going to be complicated
which is totally unsurprising
it's an indication that serious exchanges
and this was one
serious exchanges would involve
what we sometimes call symbiosis
that is a combination
of the imported value system
with important
beliefs and practices
from the receiving society
in a syncretic fashion
this is an illustration
then of a kind of combination
that during the classical period itself
was frankly fairly rare
what does this add up to
the stories are intriguing
Herodotus is a really interesting traveler
his account is well worth reading
both the accurate parts
and the fanciful parts
the stories of the silk road trade
are endlessly enthralling
because again they're shrouded in mystery
they cover long distances
they cover societies
in which civilization and nomadism
intermingled to a certain extent
all of this is great stuff
but as I've tried to indicate
it's important to realize
that for the classical period itself
these patterns of
contact and exchange
were
not peripheral but
minor chord
in the history of the period itself
the basic stuff of classical history
continues to be the focus
on the individual civilizations
the areas immediately around them
that they could affect through trade
patterns and cultural exchanges
but not
any sort of systematic interaction
among the civilizations themselves
it's important to recognize
that for most of the classical civilizations
during most of the period
direct borders
with other large organized civilizations
were the exception rather than the rule
Greece abutted Persia
the expanded Roman Empire
would also contact
later Persian kingdoms
and war with them
that was an active inter-civilizational border
Persia and
Indian kingdoms
might have some direct contact
with other kind of geographical
passage
but large stretches of the Roman Empire
bordered on
hunting and gathering
or early agricultural societies
not on highly organized civilizations
most of China's borders
with the exception of Korea and Vietnam
similarly
involve contacts with nomadic peoples
not those of other civilizations
and the same applies to much of India
classical history
remains a history in which contacts
are an important but secondary
story despite our tendency
to wish that they somehow
countered for more
that said
I'll back up just briefly
to insist as well
that though the contacts were
somewhat
marginal
in terms of the leading economic themes
of the period within the major regions
although with the exception
really of the Chinese Indian exchange
they didn't generate
deep or durable
cultural influences
that touched
more than one society
although they didn't clearly develop
patterns of technological diffusion
that were particularly extraordinary
the exchanges were
significant enough
that they would be remembered
even after some of the apparatus
of the classical period itself
fell into disuse
the silk roads
particularly
had depended obviously
on effective Chinese control
of a territory
that reached into Central Asia
they depended on
some capacity to protect
at least some of the traders and travelers
along the Central Asian route
they depended very heavily
on the significant
organization of Persia
that was first obtained in the Persian Empire
and then revived by successor states
because utilizing
the Persian road system
utilizing the system
of inns
and places of refuge
that the Persian government had built was a vital
land route connection
between Central Asia
and the Middle East
and on into the Mediterranean
so these routes were important
to establish
and as they began to be challenged
they would be remembered
and ultimately replacements
would be sought
for the final stage of the story
in the classical period itself
is to recognize that as the classical
societies began to decline
to suffer new levels of disorder
and that's the subject of our next session
familiar but
in world history somewhat transformed
account of the rise and fall
of as these
organized classical civilizations
began at least for a time
to disintegrate
the importance of
trade opportunities
and possibly even the promise
of cultural exchange
remain vivid enough that people
would actively seek replacements
and if the land route
that had for example anchored the silk roads
if the land route became impassable
if government authority
became too weak and enfeebled
to guarantee the security
of travelers around this route
there was frankly a pretty obvious alternative
already sketched
in the classical period itself
and that would be further
wider utilization of the Indian Ocean
a replacement at least for a time
a replacement of land based
operations with sea trade
and that would help indeed usher
in some key characteristics
of the next period so
the contact points in the classical
period well worth noting
they're an important
if subsidiary part of the classical story
they don't overwhelm
the greater dominance of factors
operating within the civilizations
but they add a bit
but they did help set up a phase
in which in succeeding centuries
after the classical period
new types of contact would be pursued
new levels of contact
would develop and the story
would really take on a different coloration
entirely
applause
lecture 9
the decline of the classical
civilizations
applause
we're dealing today
with one of the great divides
in human history
the fall of the great classical
empires
the fall of the roman empire
has been the subject obviously
of immense
analysis and speculation
even beginning as
the empire itself was falling
needless to say
for those of you who are beginning to get tuned
into world history
the one empire however significant
might not mark the
end of a full world history
period but the fact is
the fall of the roman empire was joined
in approximately the same chronological
span by the fall of the
Han dynasty in china
and slightly later
the fall of the gupta empire in india
so we'll be looking
at a process that actually has
if not global at least
afro-eurasian dimensions
involving significant changes
significant deterioration
in some of the great structures
that had been tossed up
by the long classical period
the fall of
the great empires
obviously should not mask the fact
that there had before
during the classical period
been some significant ups and downs
in the Mediterranean
the greek city states
Athens, Sparta had reached
apogee at the end of the fifth century
and then went into a period
of decline this was followed
of course by the Hellenistic period
which itself would then decline
about 200 years later
the roman republic rose and then
declined followed by the empire
so there were oscillations
the same thing applies to indian history
with for example the fall
of the morian empire
followed by a period of regional
emphasis then followed by
the rise of the guptas
chinese classical history had been
marked by the decline of the zhao dynasty
over a prolonged period
again oscillations
but these earlier oscillations
all occurred within a framework
that seemed to persist
or at least revive
so that one can talk about change
but not some sort of systematic
major termination
to a period
the fall of the great classical empires
the subject today
is really different
because we're talking about
a significant alteration
in political and in many cases
economic and cultural structures
after which
the world that would follow
still very interesting
still very vibrant in many respects
would really be majorably different
from the dynamics of the classical
period itself
there are of course three separate stories
the haan dynasty
was the first to go
it entered a period
of greater weakness
toward the end of the 2nd century
CE
and there were even interruptions
in haan rule itself
economic conditions seemed to deteriorate
there was definitely rising social
unrest which in chinese history
usually signals a period
in which landlords are acquiring
greater power over the peasantry
increasing their exactions
and the central state increasingly
enfeebled is unable to control
their inroads
that obviously happened with the haan
a series of invasions
from central asia
from a group
that is broadly named the haan
a series of invasions
toppled the empire
that was the coup de glace
and the haan were no more
after 220 CE
the story in Rome
was a little bit more drawn out
the roman empire reached
its high point around 180 CE
that was the point at which
the empire had its greatest
territorial dimensions
after 180 it became
impossible for Rome to expand further
and as we discussed previously
when Rome stopped being able
to expand it was almost
automatically in some trouble
because it lost the means to supply
resources of labor
and to reward generals
decline was however gradual
we don't want to overdo it
but over time
in the third and fourth centuries
and then finally in the fifth
on average the quality of leadership
in the empire deteriorated
individual emperors were more likely
to be inept than had been the case before
the army began to intervene
more crudely
in political affairs
emperors according to who would favor
one or another factions in the army
cultural life deteriorated
original work
tended to yield to
copying efforts textbooks
I personally hate to use textbooks
as an example of
intellectual decline but the fact is
if you're only generating
summaries of established information
you're probably not in a
deeply creative period
so cultural decline with the key exception
of the new work being
done around Christianity
cultural decline in the
literary and philosophical
central points of
Roman intellectual life
was part of the picture
economic decline was marked
the internal trading
network that Rome had carefully established
began to deteriorate
in favor of more local
economic
emphases and efforts itself sufficiency
many agricultural
states tried to produce
whatever they would need
locally rather than relying
on trade networks
economic deterioration in this sense
obviously also led to
a worsening in taxation conditions
the central state
found itself unable to collect
as much tax revenue as it had been
accustomed to and this was
something that would then feed
political decline you have clearly
to cycle that described
a major reduction in
the empire's ability to function
this was then followed
by a period of
increased invasion
particularly pressure from
Germanic tribes on the northern border of the empire
pressing in by
migration as well as invasion
but in one case there was also
a direct attack of the
Huns another group of Huns
from Central Asia who came into
Italy sacked Rome and was bought off
only by elaborate negotiations
by the Roman papacy
invasion again as in the
case of the Han dynasty
set the seal to imperial decline in Rome
but the process had been going on
for a long time before
this final blow
the Roman Empire officially
ended at least in the west
around 476 CE
but again
this was the culmination
of decades even centuries in which
the empire simply had stopped functioning
as well as it had done
at its high point
the case of India is frankly simpler
the Gupta empire began
to face a deterioration
in operations
in the 5th century
emperors found themselves
less able to control local
rulers another theme that we see
in all three cases so
decentralization even though there was still
an emperor in name
decentralization began to occur
local officials began to usurp
the functions of the central government
in terms of regulating
local peasants
exacting taxes etc
and then in the 6th century
CE another set of invasions
from Central Asia again another group
of Huns dislodged
the empire all together
and the Gupta empire was no more
so we have three cases
they are not exactly
tidy chronologically
the cases spread from the
3rd century
to the 6th century CE
almost 400 years
but given the fact that
the classical period had operated
in terms of
focus mainly on individual
cases rather than some sort of
coordinated whole
to have such similar developments occur
this close together is taken
by most world historians
as an indication that you really
can talk about some common processes
and as we will see some common
results and use these
cases to say well
by 500 or yield
a little bit in terms of the Gupta empire
at least 600 the classical
world is really gone
the coincidence
in process the fact
that three magnificent
empires found themselves
less able to function
the qualities of central leadership
deteriorated local
political and economic elements
began to see center stage
economic performance stagnated
in some cases
at least increased social unrest
would respond to worsening conditions
which could make the situation
still worse in turn
and all of this capped
by a series of invasions
this process has enough in common
not only to mark
the end of one of the major world
history periods and as we will see
also the beginning of the next one
but also to stimulate
tremendous discussion
of what kinds of causes were
involved why these
magnificent edifices could crumble
as they did
historians have debated these issues
particularly frankly focused on the fall
of the Roman Empire historians
have debated these issues for a very
long time and there are lots of candidates
at one point there was
speculation that somehow
changes in climate
changes in basic environment
were involved and people
wondered if there had been some sunspots
or some other disaster
in the in the wider
environment that reduced the quality
of harvest and disrupted
economic activity in the
case of Rome there was a long debate
at the time actually
and then it was again revived in the 18th
century there was a long debate
as to whether the rise of Christianity
was responsible for some
sort of weakening of
classic Roman virtues
not necessarily anti-christian
this argument could hold that
Christianity with its otherworldly
turned the other cheek emphasis
while a vital and
an important addition to world
history was so different
from the kinds of Marshall virtues
that had organized the Roman Empire
that this in itself
was a cause of deterioration
these factors now are
mainly
put to the side
in favor of three
coincident
emphases with regard to causation
first quite obviously
in all three cases
invasion was a key
factor we don't quite know
what turmoil
in Central Asia possibly
population expansion
possibly internal rivalries
began to propel groups
of Huns into
patterns of migration
and attack on the established
empires first in China
then in Europe
and the northern Middle East
then finally in India
we don't quite know what
propelled these attacks but we certainly know
what occurred in the case of
China and India
the attacks of the Huns were directly
responsible for the
fact of the end of empire
in the case of the Roman Empire
the pattern
is a little more complicated
because the direct invaders of
Rome were for the most part
Germanic tribes who had been hovering
on the borders of the empire
for some time some of them
partly Romanized some of them not
the Germanic tribes themselves
were pushed into the empire
partly because of invasions
from Central Asia the Huns
again and as I noted
in one instance the Huns attacked
Italy quite directly
so the first factor
involved in all cases
was the new pressure
of invasion
but we also know frankly that
these invaders although fearsome
would not have ended these
great empires if the empires had been
at the height of their vitality
the Germanic tribes the largest group
to press into classical territory
the Germanic tribes
numbered at most a tenth
of the population of the Roman Empire
itself
there was no particular weapons advantage
no particular military edge
for the invaders the Huns were
skillful horsemen
and they had developed
stirrups which allowed them to mount
and shoot more effectively
than cavalry had done previously
so there were some factors involved
but again without any question
at the height of the Roman Empire
or the height of the Hun dynasty
the military apparatus of the empires
would have been amply sufficient
to push these invaders back
possibly with some difficulty
but they would have won
so something else is involved
factor number two
less familiar but really crucial
in the case of Rome for sure
and China almost for sure
factor two
is a new incidence of disease
hitting in
the Roman case
in the fourth and fifth centuries
possibly with some incidents
a bit earlier
we don't know quite what these new epidemics
were
possibly this was the first incursion
of smallpox outside of southern Asia
may have also involved
measles which can be a deadly disease
for a population that had
not previously been exposed
and developed some inherent resistance
in any event
up to a quarter
possibly even a third
of the population of the Roman Empire
was swept away by these disease factors
we know there was also
an epidemiological crisis in China
we don't have the figures
quite as firmly
but in two of the major cases
the new patterns of disease
causing
massive levels of death
clearly caused economic
and social dislocation
that helps explain
why economies began to function less well
why there was more emphasis
on economic localization
as people worked hard
to find available labor
and pulled back from some of the more elaborate production
and trade arrangements
that had marked the empires at their height
again this kind of crisis
would obviously have political implications
because the governments would find it
less easy to collect
taxes there would be more pressure
from local landlords
to compensate for their revenue decline
by increasing their pressure
on the local population
disease factors clearly enter
into the picture and may be
although we're less accustomed
to these explanations may be
a really big part of the story
diseases probably spread
from India
which as a more tropical area
had had higher rates of disease
previously and frankly was more accustomed
to them the kinds of trading connections
with India that we discussed
in the earlier lecture
clearly helps explain
why disease could now
move more readily from
one region to another
with devastating effects when these diseases
were unfamiliar as they clearly
were in these instances
so we have two factors
that are to some extent beyond
at least normal human control
the pressure of invasion
which could have been handled but then when compounded
by devastating disease
disease that had
economic effects but probably also
psychological effects
reducing the vitality reducing
the confidence of the peoples affected
we have a package that already
is quite powerful
but it's obviously important to talk
about a third set of causes
and this is the one where
greatest attention has often focused
particularly in the Roman case
a package that has something to do
with the human qualities
the institutional qualities
of the empires involved
pretty clearly
though it's not always to tell
which is the cart and which is the horse
pretty clearly leadership deterioration
was a factor
in the decline of the great empires
emperors possibly
because of inbreeding possibly because
of army interference in the case of Rome
emperors became on the
average less talented
once in a while there would be an exception
like Diocletian or Constantine in Rome
but on the average leadership quality
deteriorated perhaps
more interestingly because it's a larger
category within which
leadership changes can be subsumed
possibly more interesting was
an increased selfishness
an increased short sightedness
on the part of elites more generally
upper class people
began to indulge
in an appetite for pleasure
in an interest
in short term material
advantage short term sensual indulgence
they began to be less
willing to serve the state
they began to be less willing
to serve in military leadership capacities
it was more important to have fun
than to do the tough stuff
of maintaining an empire
we see this clearly in the case of Rome
it's highly probable also
in the case of Han China
and Gupta India
and finally although again this has been
applied particularly to Rome
there may even have been a deterioration
in morale of ordinary people
in the case of Rome one refers
to the bread and circuses
that the empire had provided ordinary people
in Rome urging them to attend
festivals urging them to
take largesse from the state
instead of devoting themselves
to economic productive activity
devoting themselves to military
service etc one symptom
certainly of population
decline probably also
of changes in morale
and social
confidence one symptom
was that it became increasingly
necessary to recruit foreigners
in the case of Rome
and Germanic tribesmen
to serve in military forces
because it was simply impossible
to find enough ordinary citizens
previous inhabitants
of the empire to perform these
duties this is
obviously a powerful causation package
and it has been
written more broadly
still in some renderings
of world history the fall
of the great classical empires and
particularly the fall of Rome
this is almost inevitably the question
is there some inherent
law in human history
such that a successful
civilization will have a
period of infancy when it's developing
its values and beginning its surge
of expansion a long
period if it is indeed successful
of adulthood in which the mature
institutions and ideas are forged
the empire reaches
its height of expansion but then
followed again law of history
inevitably by old age
in which the empire
civilization begins to totter
its sources of vitality
yield to greater weakness
and finally it fades away altogether
this notion of
a human like
pattern of existence for
major societies was posited
among other things by the great British
world historian Arnold Toynbee
and it is a very very tempting picture
i.e.
civilizations will reach a height
that they simply can't sustain
because their bureaucracies
will become more venal more
defensive and less interested
in the kind of innovation that created
the vitality of the civilization
in the first place
upper classes will turn selfish
leadership will turn narrower
the whole system the very
success of the system carries
the seeds of its own destruction
and equally obviously
this notion of laws of history
and particularly laws of history
applied to the great classical examples
have tempted some observers
in the 20th and 21st centuries
to wonder whether these laws
and the analogy of the fall of the great
classical empires also may
apply to societies today
is the west for example
on the same road that carried
Rome to destruction
are signs of unwillingness
to serve in the military
efforts of tax evasion
clear corruption in the upper classes
are these patterns
that will see the
west or possibly particularly the united states
follow the path
that had been carved by the great
classical empires because not
just of the fact of this analogy
but because of the force of the laws
of world history
happily or at least
possibly happily
the laws of history notion in this case
need to be modified
for the classical period itself
by a recognition that the
actual fate of the different
civilizations
varied immensely
from one case to another
so far I have frankly cheated
by arguing that we've got one
type of decline in fall
occurring in slightly different
specific respects at slightly different
chronological points
I've cheated there are in fact
four cases and it's important
to recognize these four
and then to talk about why
four rather than one
the easiest case where I
cheated particularly is in the case
of the guptas the fall
of the gupta empire in India
was a major development
it was followed by a
long period literally centuries
in which no large
empires were created
in India except
as a result of invasion
Muslim invasion later British
invasion the next time
a really overarching
Indian state was created
by Indian Indians themselves
after the fall of the gupta
was frankly in 1947
with the creation of Indian democracy
after the departure
of the British that's a long
period and that means that something did change
in the Indian
pattern after the fall of the guptas
but India's cultural life
continued Hinduism would change
but it continued to spread and its
changes actually suggested
new sources of strength
the Indian social system the caste system
continued to define life
not changelessly
but the system itself was basically
intact and it too
continued to spread territorially
reaching the southern more parts of the
subcontinent after the classical
period India's trade
activity worsened perhaps
a little bit in ensuing centuries
but India remained a very productive
economy vitally engaged
in both internal and world trade
this was a significant change in other
words but frankly not exactly
the decline and fall of a civilization
the Chinese case
another specific
the Chinese case involves
a more significant change
here you're dealing with
with very real social as well as
political dislocation
and the fall of the Han dynasty
was followed by literally 350 years
a very long time in Chinese history
in which central government
institutions did not operate
China was divided
politically into regional entities
landlord power increased
considerably
invasions from the outside
periodically marked the Chinese structure
so that you're talking not just about
political dislocation
but social and economic dislocation as well
but
a short live dynasty the Sui dynasty
was reestablished
and with it came a period
in which China
basically recovered
most of the institutions and cultural
values that had described it
under the Han the Han were gone
that's that's ended and the period
of intervening chaos
must be remembered this was not
a simple transition from Han dynasty
to the next step
but the fact is that talking about
the decline and fall of Chinese civilization
clearly also
would be misplaced you're talking about
a major major interruption
bought an interruption that did not
destroy the capacity to remember
what had gone before
and as conditions permitted
to revive this recollection
in terms of an active reinstatement
of institutions like bureaucracy
Confucianism etc
more serious disruption
by far than India
but not exactly the fall of
Chinese civilization
the Roman case is at least
two-fold as well
the fall of civilization
image obviously works most
accurately in the case of western
Rome the European part
of Rome here the
authority of the state really did dwindle
localized conditions
began to prevail
economic conditions deteriorated
trade fell
cultural levels declined even with
the assistance of
support from Christianity
this is a real point at which
the level of civilized activity
tapers off for a considerable period
and then when it revives
because it ultimately will
it does not revive literally
according to Roman dimensions
but in the eastern part of the empire
and the emperor Constantine had
for purposes of political
efficiency created
an Asian capital for the empire
to parallel the Roman capital
in the west
in the southeast European
and middle eastern part of the empire
particularly the northern middle east
the Roman empire didn't clearly fall at all
it was replaced
by what became known as the Byzantine empire
which maintained
many of the institutions of the empire
itself many of the cultural attributes
indeed one of the greatest
codifications of Roman law
occurred under the Byzantine empire
so you're dealing with at least two cases
in this instance
so we have a
major series of developments
I don't want to detract from that
but it's not exactly a tidy
civilization is born
it rises and then it dies
it may inevitably get disrupted
from time to time that may be a law of history
but you don't know from history
we don't know from classical history
whether the result is going to be
a massive change
in the capacity of
social institutions
or a period of dislocation
followed by revival
either path is possible
either path is illustrated
by what happened in the classical period
this leads then to
a brief revisiting of the analytical question
that preoccupied us before
now instead of why decline and fall
why differential
decline and fall
factors include obviously
invasions might be more or less
severe the pressure
of the Germanic tribes on the western
part of the empire in the case
of Rome was markedly
greater than the pressure in the east
so one of the reasons the eastern empire
fared much better than the west
it had less outside
attack
to contend with
it was probably less affected
than China or Rome because
as we discussed earlier it was
accustomed to the disease
patterns and not nearly as adversely
affected by some new wave
of epidemic it's also
possible particularly
in the Roman west that
despite the glory of Rome
compared to India and China
the institutions
and values of empire may have been
slightly less deep-seated
the emphasis on integration
the emphasis on
pulling the empire together in terms
of bonds of loyalty
may have been somewhat less successful
as we've discussed previously
the Roman empire was a little bit
more decentralized a little
bit more tolerant of local variation
no great cultural
system to match Confucianism
or Hinduism
was tossed up by the empire
therefore there may have been
less vigorous bonds of attachment
between ordinary people
and the empire itself
certainly when the going got bad
as it clearly did in western Rome
ordinary people frequently
abandoned the empire with
surprising willingness
often talking about greatly
preferring the Germanic invaders
to the Romans who had been seen
as warlords and taxation agents
whether this was
because of the severity of the moment
or whether it suggested a longer
term disaffection hard
to say but it is certainly
tempting to speculate that
the Roman Empire at least western Rome
fared particularly badly
not just because the factors
that pressed on it were unusually huge
but because it was somewhat
less solid in the first place
at least it's worth
some comparative analysis
so what does this all add up to?
obviously it does not add up
to a fully even picture
but
despite the variety and despite
the importance of recognizing
that our image of fall
attaches only to one part
of one of our classical cases
there were three durable changes
that really
marked the reason that we use
the fall of the great empires
to note the end of a period
and the beginning of a new one
first and this is true for China
as well as Rome it's least true actually
for what became the Byzantine Empire
in much of the civilized world
the formation
of empire the emphasis
on empire now at least
for some time diminished
societies were either less
capable of maintaining
these large integrated political
structures or were less
interested in it or both
so while empire does not
disappear in the next phase
of world history it's certainly
less emphasized
it becomes much less a focal point
which leads to the second
general result
the deterioration
of this worldly
conditions economic
political decline in the
cases particularly of China
and Rome inevitably
helped push people
to think about cultural
alternatives to the kinds of
political values that had described
the classical period and not
surprisingly the end of the
classical period and the beginning
of the next period in world history
would be marked by a much greater
religious emphasis than had been
true of the classical period itself
particularly outside India
and finally although this is
a geographically
confined result the changes
in the Roman Empire
did mark what seems to be
the dominant division of the Mediterranean
world
ultimately into three
different entities
western Europe
the northern middle east south eastern Europe
and the rest of the Mediterranean
coast including North Africa
this division of the Mediterranean
which had always been at least
a tentative entity
in the classical period
under the Greeks the Hellenistic
kingdoms and certainly the Romans
this division of the Mediterranean
would mark the next phase of world history
and would continue to mark world
history right up to the present day
again a result of this major
period of collapse
and transformation
The Post Classical Period
We're talking today about the post
classical period in world history
it's general contours
it's a period that runs from about
500 CE to about
1450 CE
you could argue maybe a little later
you could argue 1450
give or take but
we're talking about roughly not
quite a thousand year span
of the human experience
The purpose of our discussion today
is to talk about the general nature
of this period what its basic themes were
and I'm going to begin
at risk of a little personalization
by talking about the way this
period looked when I first became
engaged in world history on a high school
project some years back
when we were thinking about how to
block out the project and none of us
was all that experienced in world history
at that point we had a lot of fun
with the river valleys and we could talk
about the classical civilizations
and then when we got to the more modern era
we were in good shape but for this block
we really didn't know what to say
so I think we stumbled around
something like age of separations
or age of incoherence
or some nonsense that suggested
that all we could do for this period
was to tell a whole batch of separate stories
and hope that people didn't get bored
and hope that people didn't realize
we had no basic themes at all
well in point of fact
the post classical period
is one of the periods that has been
most reshaped by world history work
not mine that of others
and it is indeed one of the most exciting
periods to try to teach
but before we talk about
what the positive themes are
a couple of words on why it used
to seem and maybe to some people
still seems like this is a
particularly confused
stage of the human experience
there are two reasons
most obviously and this simply has to be
grappled with the
geographical territory
now organized in civilization
civilization is a form of
human organization as we've discussed it earlier
the territory now
expands greatly so you're talking
about much larger stretches
of geography
than was true for the classical period
at the same time
no matter how you cut the cake
the number of separate civilizations
also has to be expanded
in the classical period obviously
we got by with
three or four basic
foci can't do that
for the post classical you've got to have more
cases and we'll talk about that
during the course of our discussion in this
session so the
superficial reason that the
post classical period seems complicated
is not really all that
superficial there are
more cases there are
greater complexities the second reason
however that this period
can seem off-putting
is because
in the European history tradition
this period is exactly the
period known as the middle ages the medieval
period we don't use
that word for the whole world
in world history because the connotations
are just wrong
but the European middle ages were always
themselves a bit of a catch all
the implication was
that after the glories of Greece
and Rome and before the glories
of the Renaissance there was this
somewhat awkward stretch of the European
experience where you could
ultimately talk about some growing
strengths and revivals but
much of which was defined as a bit
of a civilizational wasteland
well for world history
this is a non-starter the
post classical period
was a period of great dynamism
all sorts of major innovations
all sorts of extremely vigorous societies
and medieval Europe
would be only a small
part at the end of growing part
but a small part of this larger
experience to the extent
though that we're still trapped in notions
of middle ages of
lack of vigor of
civilizational deterioration
this may color our view of this
period but this one's easy just throw
it away start over the post
classical period is different
periodization
and we're talking and trying to define
the classical post classical period
we're talking about periodization
periodization is the historian's
key analytical tool
and when we introduce a new period
in world history
in United States history wherever
if we're analytically honest
we're trying to say this
there is a change
in framework
so that the framework that had
described the human experience
or the relevant chunk of experience previously
no longer is front and center
a different framework
replaces it and
developments and changes within this
new period would work within this
new framework until the period itself
ends and yields to another
so without belaboring
the technicalities here
when we introduce a new period
we owe our audience
three things one
we need to say clearly
and hopefully prove that the themes
of the previous period no longer
have dominant
operation they may still be a factor
but they're no longer dominant
two we need to say
when the new period
comes into play
and also at the other end
when it stops being particularly salient
and then three
and this is the most important part
we need to say
what the new themes are
in the world history case
what the themes are
to which other major societies
most major societies will have
to react
point one hopefully easy
we did some of this last time
the end of the classical period
the fall of the great classical empires
means that we no longer
look primarily
to the processes of expansion
of China, India and the Mediterranean
and the integration devices
these societies would develop
to try to hold these expanded territories
together
the remnants of this effort
are still quite visible
but the effort itself is no longer predominant
China and India
are essentially established
they'll change
but you no longer have to talk about
expansion that will create the geographical
framework for China
or the basic integrating devices
the institutions of empire, Confucianism
that will be used to hold it together
they're already there
with Hinduism and the caste system
and you're certainly not going to talk in this new period
about the continued expansion
and integration of the classical
Mediterranean because it's burst apart
so first point
hopefully easily established
the old themes, their mark is still there
but the old themes are no longer dominant
second point
the chronological boundaries
pretty obviously
the beginning of the post classical period
is marked first
by the fall of
Han China, Gupta India
and the Roman Empire
and second on a more positive note
by the emergence of the Arabs
and Islam
as a new force in world history
there are important centers
of activity besides the Arabs
in Islam during the post classical period
notably the Byzantine Empire
would have a significant voice
in affairs
in the Eastern Mediterranean
and in Eastern Europe
and China would revive to play a major role
in East Asia
but in the post classical period
beginning indeed around 600
the Arabs with their new religion
of Islam
emerge as a major force
in world history
and Arab Islamic civilization
really becomes the first world class
civilization that we have dealt with
in world history thus far
in the classical period
you could haggle a bit about which
of the three major centers
was primarily influential
probably India would win
because it had the greatest commercial
and cultural outreach
but it's not a very sensible discussion
but in the bulk of the post classical
period the vigor
activities, outreach
of Islam and the Arab world
really carry much
of the story of world history
and the other developments
in places like the Byzantine Empire
and China need to be seen
alongside this central dynamic
correspondingly
much of the end of the
post classical period
is described in terms
of the reduction
of Arab vigor not the decline
of the Arab so much as a reduction
in vigor noteworthy
particularly a political
deterioration but also
some changes in cultural
and economic roles that we will
detail and do course
this reduction of the Arab
rule becoming
particularly marked by the 13th century
would be followed by a couple
of centuries of sort of end
of the post classical period experimentation
notably a
new vigorous if short
sub period the Mongol period
and a few other experiments that
we will talk about as we near
the end of the experience so
the post classical period in terms
of power dynamics
is particularly shaped by the
rise of the Arabs in Islam
and then a later point
marked by the beginnings of
a reduction in the role of the Arabs
not so much a reduction in Islam's role
a reduction in the role of the Arabs
and a couple of
intermediate systems
introduced at the end of the period
that will take us up to 1450
that's for the chronological dimensions
now as I noted already
is obvious from any cursory
knowledge of the period
there's no question that this period sees
the emergence
of a larger number of civilization
centers
and a larger geographical range
for civilization than had been true
in the classical period
two developments shaped this fact
first as we already noted
the Mediterranean world splits apart
it wasn't always unified
in the classical period but the Greeks
it's sketched a considerable
effort at unification
at least of the eastern Mediterranean
and the Roman world unified it completely
for several centuries
now it bursts apart
and three related
but distinct civilizations
begin to emerge
from the wreckage of the
Roman experiment
there was first of all
Arabs and Islam
Middle East and North Africa
become the Islamic heartland
as well as the heartland of the Arab world
and that's chunk number one
chunk number two
involves the territories
carved by the Byzantine Empire
in the northeast corner of the Mediterranean
and the extensions of
Byzantine influence on up
to other parts of Eastern Europe
that's chunk number two
deriving from the Mediterranean world
and chunk number three of course
in this array
involves the society that
would emerge in Italy
north of Italy in France etc
what we will come to call
West European civilization
or society so the Mediterranean divides
and that already adds
to the complexity of our civilizational map
but we also have to take
account in the post classical period
of the fact that new territories
come into the civilization game
for the first time
civilization as defined by
the capacity to organize
states use writing
develop significant cities
the basic apparatus we've talked about before
this is the period in which Japan
enters the history of civilizations
it's the period in which Russia
enters it's the period in which
northwestern Europe
northern Germany
the British Isles although they'd certainly
been touched by Rome
Scandinavia certainly
additional parts of Sub-Saharan Africa
enter the civilizational
story with the great expansion
of political activity in West Africa
and the stretch
of trading territory along
the Indian Ocean coast
in East Africa civilization
was not new in Sub-Saharan Africa
but the territorial expanse
becomes significantly greater
and civilization also expands
in this period geographically
in the Americas so that from
more confined beginnings
in a few parts of the Andes
and in Central America one can begin
to talk about major empires
major cultural zones in both
of these parts of the Americas
so splitting of the Mediterranean
geographical expansion of civilization
means that the complexity
of our story inevitably deepens
in one crucial respect
and with it although we'll touch on this
more fully later on
we'll tackle some new challenges
to defining how many civilizations
there are and for example
in dealing with Japan or Russia
or even in a certain respect
the West itself
new kinds of definitional issues
will have to mark our discussion
that were not so clearly present
when we talked about the classical world
having said this however
it is important to insist
that
two basic themes
unite the post classical period
saying two risks
over simplification there was a lot going on
and we will capture
some developments outside these themes
but as opposed
to the incoherence and
sheer variety
that may seem to
dominate this period
two basic themes serve as primary
focal points
Theme number one which we'll talk about
in greater detail in our next session
Theme number one
involves the spread of the
world religions
that is the spread of religions
that showed the capacity
to
pour across political and
previous cultural boundaries
without necessarily erasing these boundaries
these world religions
and there were three of them
that were primary
Christianity, Buddhism and Islam
these world religions
were one of them quite old
one of them predating this period
one of them born with the period itself
these three religions
would push
so far
into the civilized regions
of Afro-Eurasia
as to touch literally every major society
they would push so far
that literally
hundreds of thousands of people
at some point during the post classical period
more of them in the first half
than the second but the process was ongoing
hundreds of thousands of people
would change their belief systems
not necessarily completely
but would alter their focus
because of a conversion
to one of these three basic faiths
a process that frankly
is fairly rare in human history
at this scale
so point number one obviously
the post classical period
as we look at it
throughout the Afro-Eurasian world
the post classical period
is partly defined
partly given coherence by
the immense surge
of missionary religions
mainly
originating either in the Middle East
or in India
but spreading from these places
to the other parts of Asia
to much of Africa
and to ultimately pretty much the whole of Europe
a huge process
this focus on cultural
cultural developments that is changes
in beliefs and values
and the attendant shifts
in art and other cultural activities
these changes in cultural
focus also help
explain although again
you could have a chicken and egg
discussion here they also help
explain why the post classical
period is not defined
by overarching political themes
there are important
political developments
in Japan, in Western Europe
in the Arab world certainly
but unlike the classical period
when we could talk about the common
tendency at least periodically
to form empires
there's no clear pattern at all in this period
there are some important empires
headed by China
the Arab caliphate is an empire of sorts
but there are places
in which decentralized rule predominates
there are places in which
efforts to form empire
occur but equally clearly fail
we will have to pay attention
to politics
but there's no political theme
and this is partly because
people's attention
their
capacity to innovate
their focus on institutional creation
and no small amount
of their money
went to religion
and the churches
and the networks of
Islamic legal centers
and centers of scholarship
the Buddhist temples
these become the focus of activity
in this period in a way that
often eclipses
the role of formal states themselves
so cultural theme
with the subsidiary statement
that politics while it doesn't
disappear stops organizing
world history more generally
for this span
the second theme
probably striking probably in the long run
more important
the second theme involves the emergence
of what I like to call
a world network
and I use the term only to try to convey
that it's in this period
that
systematic commercial
and through commerce
other kinds of exchanges
begin to predominate
in much of the Afro-Eurasian world
as opposed to
the less systematic
less
significant patterns of exchange
that we had described
in the classical world
along with concepts such as the
silk road and that sort of thing
during the post-classical period
a basic
commercial artery
emerges in the Indian Ocean
running from the Middle East
with Arab and Persian and other traders
operating the system
from that end
emerges from the Middle East
across the Indian Ocean
obviously to India and Sri Lanka
but also reaching Southeast Asia
both the landmass
and the Indonesian islands
reaching around into the Pacific
touching the Philippines
and reaching the Pacific coast of China
so an east-west
or a west-east artery
was the fundamental unit
of trade and communication
established
by what one might call
a whole series of feeder routes
that ran north-south
connecting with the artery
these feeder routes included
at the East Asian end
the new commercial connection
between Japan and Korea and China
where regular series of exchanges
and expeditions
helped connect Japan through China
to some of the rest of the
post-classical world
important feeder routes included
the new pattern of trade
running north-south
along the Indian Ocean coast of East Africa
where the Swahili coast
connected
cities along this territory
to trading centers in the Middle East
and through them the wider world
it included north-south connections
from west Africa
below the Sahara
across the Sahara
to the urban centers
north Africa
it included a trade route
that began to be developed
pre-early running from Scandinavia
through western Russia
and what's now Ukraine
running down to Byzantium
and through Byzantium to the Arab world
and it included slightly later
the pattern of trade
that would run from northwestern Europe
down to the Mediterranean
and through the Mediterranean again
linking up to the Arab world
to the east-west trade nexus
this was a very elaborate
set of trading routes
we can trace it among other things
by noting the considerable
hordes of Arab coinage that can be found
in places like Russia and Scandinavia
or parts of western Europe
or many parts of Africa
that date from this period
and show the connections
that were now developing
among different parts of the
Afro-Eurasian world
this set of trading connections
the second major theme
along with the spread of world religions
this set of
trading connections
was not initially caused
by major new technologies
this is not a period defined
by a significant
set of technological advances
in the world as a whole
but the development
was certainly sustained
by new technologies
like the ships developed by the Arabs
that were appropriate
particularly for commerce in the Indian Ocean
new navigational devices
developed by both the Chinese and the Arabs
such as the compass
and as trade expanded
improved map making
the Arabs became the most accurate map makers
that the world had known to that point
all of these technologies
and related support systems
helped sustain and expand
the new trade network
the new world network
that connected these various societies
throughout Africa
Europe and Asia
again not a cause
but if you will an ancillary
that began to gain importance
in its own right
two major developments then
the spread of world religions
and the spread of a new level
of
world
not global obviously because
aren't included at all
a new level of world commerce
that put connections among different regions
to a new level of importance
one other device
that we can introduce today
will be useful
in sorting this period out
and also in interpreting
the ways that religion
and new levels of inter regional trade
began to reshape
the world experience
more generally
I've noted already
and it's inescapable
that the sheer number of civilizations begins
to expand the definitional issues
attach and we will be talking
during the course of discussing the post-classical
period about the importance
of giving new attention to Southeast Asia
obviously to Japan
obviously to Russia
obviously to different parts of sub-Saharan Africa
no escaping it
but there is a wider
coherence that can be found
categorizing
these new and old
centers of civilization
into one of three categories
depending on their relationship
primarily to the new patterns
of inter regional trade
I suggest and will flesh this suggestion
out in subsequent discussions
I suggest that
it's useful and not over simplistic
to think of the world
as centered on
three different kinds
of economic and contact zones
during the post-classical period
as a whole
zone one
focused on
the Arab world, the Byzantine empire
India and China
zone one is what if we were using
the language of today we would call
the developed world
these were the areas that built most clearly
on the achievements of the classical civilizations
whether those classical civilizations
had split apart or not
these were the areas that had the most
sophisticated manufacturing systems
these were the areas certainly
that had the largest cities
as travelers to the regions
would routinely note
these were the areas on the whole
that had the most sophisticated
opulent upper classes
and artistic styles of life
this was the developed world
and this was the region
also that tended to have
the most elaborate political structures
as measured by size of bureaucracy
and that sort of thing
these centers
of zone one civilizations
traded actively with each other
exchanging different kinds of manufactured
products they copied each other
for example the Byzantine empire
systematically worked to introduce
the silk industry that they
copied from possibly stole from China
there's some interesting stories about how
they got their first silkworm
smuggling them out of Chinese territory
these were the areas that had the most
elaborate kinds of industry
and commercial activity
they were the most prosperous
sectors in the world
but around these zone one centers
literally geographically around them
came a host of societies
where civilization was newer
as a form of human organization
sometimes brand new indeed
where trading connections
could be forged with the zone one
societies but where also
patterns of imitation could develop deliberately
such that this
zone two
ring
would be able to develop
different kinds of apparatus
particularly cultural apparatus
and economic apparatus
more quickly
than if simply left to their own devices
so a circle of societies
that to one extent or another
deliberately imitate
zone one achievements
in selective ways
would include Japan
parts of Southeast Asia
that borrow actively from India, China
and later the Middle East
Sub-Saharan Africa
Russia
and Northwestern Europe
a zone where developments
in this period were particularly crucial
in many ways particularly formative
but formative
in the sense of combining
initiatives from the regions themselves
with this pattern of imitation
based on new levels of contact
new levels of commercial exchange
and finally
we will have to note though
a few sessions hence
that a third significant part
of the human map
of the civilized experience
developed in this period
in exciting ways but in no contact
no effective contact whatsoever
with either zone one
or zone two
an area of isolation
that simply has to be treated in different terms
from those parts of the world
actively connected
to the world network
the two major themes
of this period
raise one or two final points
first of all
assessing significance
converting peoples
to one of the major world religions
and by the end of the post-classical
period most people
in the world
counting by head
were either
Buddhist, Christian
or Muslim
or possibly Hindu
so significant changes in the world's religious map
the spread of the world religions
obviously
involved new kinds of contact
but also new kinds
of rivalry and suspicion
that become
durable parts
of the world history
environment
but world historians many of them
would claim that the
importance of the new trade connections
and the kinds
of wider contacts and imitation
possibilities that followed
deserve even greater emphasis
and one world historian has quite
simply said and I think it's well worth
attention even though
I will modify the statement slightly
one world historian has claimed
that around the year 1000
CE in the middle of our post-classical period
the human experience reaches
a crucial divide
before that time he argues
the bulk of human experience
was shaped by local and regional factors
people followed
language groups, religions
political institutions
that were organized either quite locally
or at the most
in the larger regional environments
that attached to the great civilizations
the focus was
on the separate
more than on the shared
but after 1000 he goes on to argue
the balance shifts
and focus shifts to convergence
rather than divergence
and from this point onward
to the present day
one sees a pattern of interaction
a thirst
for contact
a willingness to imitate
that transcends
the kinds of divisions
and local identities
that had been emphasized there before
it's a powerful image and I would frankly
modify it only by saying
yeah this is an important divide
but don't forget about the importance
of the advent of agriculture earlier
or the advent of industrialization later
I'd have three points of major
sorting out rather than just one
but a powerful point
well worth attention and obviously
a point that focuses our inquiry
onto the post classical period itself
but with this
one additional tension
just
abstracting
the importance of new levels of contact
but the concomitant development
of new religious loyalties
sets up an obvious dilemma
trade put people together
Christians traded
frequently with Muslims
Muslims traveled in Christian boats
and they would note that they were doing it
but they could do it because the commercial
purpose overrode the religious division
and the result
was as we've already said
a network of contacts that spread
more regularly and widely than ever before
in the human experience
but the religions also mattered
and though they sometimes coexisted
sometimes even tolerated
each other magnificently
the religions did
set up some new cultural boundaries
that could modify
or challenge the new commercial connections
so one emerges
from the post classical world
with a sense of new contact
new interaction
but also with the potential for new rivalries
perhaps particularly
between Muslim and Christian
but also between Muslim and Hindu
Hindu and Buddhist
Buddhist and Confucian divisions
that would also shape
the world of the post classical centuries
and the world after that as well
Thank you
Our focus today is on the spread of
world religions during the post classical
period
I said in the last session that
the spread of religion
was one of the two great themes of this period
a theme to which virtually
every society in Afro-Eurasia
had to respond
this is the lecture where we talk about
what this meant in two senses
first most obviously
this was the period in which much of the
still contemporary religious
map of Africa, Europe
and Asia was forged
by 1450
Christianity had not yet reached
the Philippines or Korea
Islam was just beginning
to solidify its hold in Southeast Asia
Sub-Saharan Africa
saw significant
Islamic and some Christian influence
but there would be changes still to come
so it's not a done deal
but the basic outlines
of where Christianity
and Islam and Buddhism
had their hold in Asia
Africa and Europe
this basic outline was established
during this period
point one then talking about the forging
of this religious map
and what it meant in terms of
how and why people changed
at least to some extent
what they believed in and the way they thought
about the world
the second theme and this really is
in some ways more important
or at least as important
involves the common impact
this spread of religion could have
in areas as diverse
as gender relations
law and art
pretty obviously talking about
world religions
in a period like our own time
in which religion is a
hotly contested subject
talking about world religions is
not an entirely
easy task
and it is my honest desire to talk about
religions in a way that is
value neutral
to talk about common aspects
of religion in ways that won't
necessarily offend people who still
believe well that particular religion
is much better than the others
but I have to admit at the outset
there are some pitfalls here and we will do
our best to skate around them
the first pitfall
involves justifying the selection
of three religions
as world religions in the first place
again the fundamental definition is very simple
I call those three
religions world religions
that in the post classical period
and since have shown the capacity
to persuade people
beyond conventional
political boundaries and even
in different cultural zones
that this religion is the one
to adopt
the second way of putting the same
point is these were the religions
that most clearly developed
a missionary capacity
a missionary claim
a claim indeed that
they possessed the kind of truth
the kind of universal truth
that should be taken as possible
to all the peoples of the world
Buddhism
developed a missionary impulse pretty early
because remember
Buddhism was formed in the
6th and 5th centuries BCE
as an alternative to Hinduism
so Buddhist adepts pretty obviously
realized they had to work hard
to persuade people at least in India
that their version was preferable
to Hinduism and from this effort
in turn a more active
missionary impulse developed
that could take Buddhism to other places
besides India over time
Christianity
in Islam actually hesitated
a little bit before taking on a missionary
stance Christians for
a few decades wondered if their
religious message was intended
for Jews alone and
it was only with Saint Paul that Christian
missionaries developed a firm
conviction that theirs was a religion
for the world and not a religion
for a single people
Muslims hesitated actually a bit longer
wondering if Islam was a message
for Arabs only or
again whether it had wider appeal
and as Islam first began
to spread it spread often because
peoples for example in North Africa
who were not themselves Arab
would as a matter of latching on
to the dominant force in their
world decide that they would
make themselves Arab and Muslim
simultaneously only more gradually
did Muslim leaders
come to believe that they had a mission
for the world and not just
for the Arab people but one way or another
these three religions rather
unusually decide
they have a truth that should be spread
identifying these three
religions as world religions
most obviously does not
mean they were the best religions
there are all sorts of other religions
that were and are important
in world history the
religion that most clearly
has a borderline
position between
regional religion and world religion
is Hinduism
which as we've noted already did
show some capacity
to spread beyond the borders of India
to
significant pockets in Southeast Asia
including Indonesia
this was not a massive spread
for some reason perhaps attached to the
caste system
Hinduism did not travel too well
outside India but there was some capacity
Judaism deserves
specific and particular importance
Judaism obviously was
a huge innovation
from about 1100 BCE
onward it was the first great
religion of the book in the Middle East
and would have consequences beyond
the boundaries of Judaism itself
on that basis it was the first
durable statement of monotheism
it was the first clear statement
that linked beliefs in
God to systems of ethics
and personal behavior so there's
no effort here to belittle
the historical importance
or ongoing role of Judaism
but the fact is that although
Jews did convert some others
at key points Judaism
was mostly the religion of one people
it did not have ambitions
toward larger missionary
or world religion
status Taoism a significant
religion in China a very
intricate and attractive one
also didn't travel widely
the point is pretty clear
stating that there are three major
world religions and that the post classical
period is where they get their
geographical shape
and exert much of their influence
is not a denigration
of other major religious faiths
or even the role these faiths played
in key regional histories
it's simply a statement
these religions in one very simple
but basic respect were somewhat
different what caused
the spread of world religions
here again there's a potential trap
because I'm not trying to
downplay the role
of spiritual attractiveness
the role of divine guidance but
from an historical standpoint
in addition to whatever factors one attributes there
three types of cause
stand out particularly
first remember the context
although Buddhism, Christianity
and Islam began
at very different
chronological points
their take off period clearly has something
to do with the later stages
of the classical empires
and then with the collapse of these empires
several of the religions
Buddhism and Christianity most notably
benefit from the existence of classical empires
in the Mediterranean
and in China for example
that facilitated travel
that facilitated missionary activity
but they benefited probably
even more from the troubles
that set in as the classical empires
declined as
economic levels deteriorated
as political instability
grew and don't forget as
new levels of disease and therefore
death spread
looking for other worldly solace
looking for
institutions that might
supplant or compensate
for the decline of the institutions
of the state this was a very
compelling framework within
which missionary religions
could take hold
the second set of factors
in the
spread of the world religions
involves missionary qualities themselves
missionary activity developed
in all three cases pretty
early and obviously quite
effectively it was often
correlated this was
quite vivid in the case of Buddhism
and later Islam perhaps a little
less with Christianity in the early phases
it was often correlated by
expanding merchant activity as well
so merchant outreach and
missionary outreach frequently went
literally hand in hand and merchants
through their commercial success
as well as their geographical outreach
would help bring the religion
to new areas and missionaries
in turn as they sought
to convert new souls would
frequently set a framework within
which new commercial activity
could develop from the host society
as well so
missionary zeal
clearly established in all three cases
once the decision was made to take
the message to the world is
a second undeniable factor
backed sometimes by commercial activity
sometimes by other
kinds of institutional support as well
and the third factor
which we've already touched on with regard to
links to commercial activity
the third factor
involved the extent to which
one or more of the world religions
could seem associated with
other aspects of success
obvious case in point
individual rulers
and this happened in all three of the
major world religions individual rulers
might decide this looks
like a winning religion
or this missionary successfully healed
my son and I'm going
to adopt it not just for myself
but for my whole people and in the
process I will use the religion
to help cement new kinds of loyalty
between my people and my
rule or as noted
religion might be associated with
commercial success join
the bandwagon and it looks like
you may have opportunities to trade
with new
sources of wealth
political military
commercial success
often could seem to be associated
with one of the new religions
and persuade people to climb on board
and there's no insult to the religions
attached to this final factor
so
the conditions of the late classical
early post classical period
the
energy and zeal of missionaries themselves
and the
extent to which religion could be
attached to political
economic and other factors
these were clear sources of this
major period in which belief
systems spread
to new areas
the chief change if you look
at the big picture the chief change
involved here was a
replacement of what we've already
seen was a pervasive
attachment to polytheism
a replacement of this attachment
by one of the major new
religions people stopped
believing in the old sets
of gods and goddesses
whether we're talking about china
or the Mediterranean
and they started believing
in one of the new more
unifying more abstract
religious sources again
choosing among the three
this process of conversion
this major
shift in attachments to polytheism
was of course
attached also to compromise
all of the world religions
formally or informally
made some bargains with polytheism
they might for example
build new religious institutions
where the old temples had been
thus associating the power
of the old religion with the claims
of the new
they might incorporate
not literally the old gods
goddesses but some hints of them
in rituals of veneration
for other holy figures
they might make other adjustments
all of which go under the name
of syncretism
the extent to which in accepting
new beliefs people continue
to be able to find some remnants
of the old this doesn't mean
that the change wasn't significant
it just means as a matter of fact
processes of conversion
are complicated and
the new rarely
outweighs the old
entirely
Buddhism
as it fanned out from India
took two major directions
with a third noteworthy at least briefly
interestingly
as is obvious already
Buddhism began
to lose ground
to Hinduism in India proper
the Gupta empire definitely favored Hindus
many Indian rulers
saw in Hinduism a clearer support
for military activity
even for commercial activity
and distrusted
the abstractness
and the spirituality of Buddhism
but as Buddhism faded in India
it began to gain
holds elsewhere
Buddhism spread in one major direction
to southeast Asia
winning converts in Sri Lanka
in many parts
of continental southeast Asia
where Buddhism remains important
to this day
this was one major path
Buddhism also spread of course
at the end of the classical
early post-classical period
Buddhism also spread to China
and through China
to Korea and Japan
the Chinese
eager for Buddhism
as the classical period drew to a close
the Chinese embraced Buddhism
though as we have seen
stipulation that Buddhism
adapt a bit
to Chinese modes of thought
particularly with regard to family life
and with regard to the importance
of the political and imperial order
but for many centuries
Buddhism exercised a profound influence
on China with many Chinese visitors
coming to study in Buddhist institutions
in India and in southeast Asia
large numbers of converts
Buddhism would also exercise
an impact on other
Chinese belief systems such as Taoism
pushing toward
greater spirituality
greater use of devices like ritual
and magic in order to compete
with Buddhism
but it's important to note that ultimately
the Chinese dynasty that
commanded the first part of the
post-classical period the Tang dynasty
ultimately turned against Buddhism
on grounds that Buddhists were
unreliable allies of the state
were too foreign to Chinese
values and a significant effort began
to reduce official support
for Buddhism and even to
persecute Buddhism although the religion
retained some hold among
the Chinese but the spread of Buddhism
to other parts of East Asia
was less qualified and actually
would exert a longer term influence
than the spread within China
itself. There was also
a Buddhist surge into Central Asia
and
belatedly a Buddhist surge into
Tibet. Buddhism showed
an impressive capacity
to adapt to local conditions
to tolerate and merge
with other aspects of the
local religious scene
and it clearly has to be rated a great success
if not an exactly
tightly unified religious
package as it spread into
various parts of
Southeast and Eastern Asia
The story of the
spread of Christianity may be a somewhat more
familiar one. Christianity
fanned out widely in the Roman
Empire during the centuries
after the death of Christ
missionary activity was obviously
central here and remember this spread
involved not only conversions
in the European parts
of the empire but also extensive
penetration into Armenia
into North Africa and into
parts of the Middle East.
Christianity would actually
show the capacity even to pour
slightly beyond the boundaries of the Roman
Empire as Christianity
ultimately developed some
following in Persia
and even in other parts of Asia
in a track that was somewhat separate
from the main institutional foci
of Christianity. The decision
of the Emperor Constantine early
in the fourth century to
tolerate Christianity represented
a significant new opportunity
for Christian advance within the
Roman Empire. At that point
Christians probably numbered about 10%
of the empire's population as a whole
they now began to
gain much more rapidly
and Christianity was named a state
religion at the end of that same
century a further opportunity
for gain although also a
source of new problems as the boundary
line between church and state
became somewhat murkier.
Christian expansion after
the fall of Rome took
mainly one of two paths
in the first place the Byzantine Empire
in
Eastern Europe and the
Northern Middle East the Byzantine Empire
began to sponsor
Orthodox missionaries who
went northward into East Central
and Eastern Europe they developed
among other things a modified
Greek alphabet for the Slavic language
they penetrated widely
in the Balkans and in Russia
and something of a
missionary no man's land
developed in parts of East
Central Europe as
Byzantine missionaries competed
with missionaries sent out from Rome
in the west.
Western missionary activity also
fanned out to the north
reflecting the fact that
the south was increasingly closed
by the success of Islam
the papacy sponsored missionary activity
in Britain
Germany and Scandinavia
as well as again pushing eastward into
places like Poland so during
the post classical period particularly
the first centuries missionary
activity that had previously been
largely though not entirely
confined to
the Roman Empire now pushed
much more widely particularly
toward the north in two
major streams
the spread of Islam
during the post classical period itself
was the greatest success story of all
as Islam reached larger
territories and more peoples
than either of the other two missionary
religions although the exact numbers
are obviously impossible to determine
Islam spread rather quickly
among Arabs
and some others in the Middle East
and North Africa
it spread widely in India
becoming India's largest
minority religion by the middle
of the post classical period
it spread into Central Asia
interestingly displacing Buddhism
in the process it's one of the only
cases where one of the world religions
had an initial hold that
was later successfully dislodged
by another
Islam also toward the
end of the post classical period began
to make major inroads in southeast Asia
particularly beginning conversion
processes in Indonesia
which is now the largest Muslim nation
in the world and Islam
finally had success also
in a few parts of southern Europe
and in much of sub-Saharan Africa
three different stories
three somewhat different though
not entirely distinct parts of the world
a common pattern
of significant missionary activity
and a common pattern as well
of successful efforts
both to convert people to new
patterns of belief but also
to utilize some
existing remnants of older belief
as an additional
inducement
the most obvious point about
these three world religions
involves their differences
Buddhism was
noticeably different from
Christianity and Islam it was not
as clearly a religion of the book
it had a less clearly defined
relationship to authorities in the state
it was
more
hostile to things of this world
although there's a strain
in Christianity Islam that could rival
this
but Christianity and Islam
were hardly cut from the same
cloth either
they differed noticeably
on the nature of the divinity
they differed on specific
matters as to how
salvation could be attained
they differed on the organization of the religion
they differed with regard to degrees
of tolerance so
the spread of world religions calls upon
an understanding that
a new
differentiating factor
was introduced into world history
in Afro-Eurasia
a differentiating factor whose ramifications
obviously continue to
apply to the present day
but
second theme in addition to
forging a new religious map
in addition to carving out
new types of differences
the religions had some
common effects
that helped describe
larger processes of change during the
post-classical period and also
beyond for example familiar point
but I think a really important one
the spread of world religions
increasingly
set the framework for
artistic and philosophical activity
all of the religions
as they spread
helped define most of the
leading artistic work
helped define the goals of most
the most significant architects
as religious buildings began
to outstrip secular buildings
in expense and purpose
artistic activity
during the post-classical period
although there were some secular
representations artistic activity
in much of Asia
Africa and Europe
was defined by one or more
of these basic religions
and this was true even in China
despite the attacks on Buddhist influence
where Buddhism significantly
colored Chinese art
and architectural activity
the same obviously applies to
a good bit of literature
and certainly philosophy
as we will see in discussing Islam next time
religion hardly
totally conquered the philosophical
sphere there was still independent
scientific activity
but increasingly
much philosophical work
even if it didn't entirely
over into outright theology
much philosophical work had to be
devoted to questions about
how older philosophical
systems scientific discoveries
fit with the new sense of religious
truth with the new commitment
to faith
world religions in other words
define much of the larger cultural life
of the post-classical period
in virtually all
the civilized parts
of Asia Africa and Europe
the same though particularly for Islam
and Christianity the same applied
to a good bit of law
increasingly legal systems
were reshaped
or were divided between
secular and religious
areas of activity and the notion
that law was simply a
matter for the state to decide
that law was independent
of a larger religious system
this attitude was
increasingly jettisoned as the religions
developed significant
bodies of
legal thought
and commanded significant jurisprudence
all three of the world
religions raised
new questions directly for the state
itself
if these religions
carried primary
truth
what was in fact the role of the state
should the state be
reshaped mainly to defend
religion was this the new main political
purpose
was there some way to separate
political and religious areas of
activity
was the relationship between
religious authority and political authority
one of superiority inferiority
even though the state had the troops
these political questions
obviously very
different in specific context
these political questions would be quite
significant in all three
of the world religious areas during
the post classical period and
beyond
the world religions had
an interesting relationship with trade
and remember we've already
argued that trade was the second
along with religion the second
shaping factor of the post classical
period as a whole on the surface
the rise
of world religions might seem to
discountance trade after all
the main purpose of existence according
to any of these world religions
was otherworldly too much
attachment to material objects
and motivations would be bad
and all of the world religions
could generate extensive
criticism of merchant values
and merchant activities
Christ for example was reported
to have said it's easier
for a camel to go through the eye of a needle
than for a rich man to gain heaven
and there would be Islamic figures
who would have rather similar thoughts
about how it was very difficult
for merchants to maintain a
pure religious life because their motives
were so inherently corrupt
so the world religions
introduced a new tension or at least
exacerbated attention
between value system
and trade but the
world religions also in their own way
as we have seen encouraged
trade in several ways
missionaries might set up outposts
to which traders could come
all the world religions
although they didn't do this entirely
deliberately established
religious institutions
that could serve as
waystations for travelers
for example had networks of ends
where religious pilgrims could go
as they traveled to holy sites
but where merchants could repair as well
the same thing would occur in Islam
and the same thing would occur
in Europe with Christian monasteries
both Orthodox and Roman Catholic
so
inadvertently perhaps but quite really
world religions could stimulate
trade even though they introduced
this new tension
and most obviously of all
as each of these new religions
posited a
larger religious unity
a single god
or a single divine essence
they might encourage merchants
to venture more widely than they had before
confident that their
religious system would now go with them
because it was a system for the whole world
the relationship with trade
was important if complicated
each of the world religions
also carried a
an important
social message although again
a complicated one
on the one hand and this is really crucial
there are a few other religions
that do this but the world religions did this
quite systematically though
each in its own way in the first place
the world religions all posited
the fundamental spiritual
equality of all believers
whether you're rich or poor
slave or free
if you believe
you have the same kind of
access to spiritual rewards
and to the possession of a soul
this is true in Buddhism
in Islam and Christianity
at the same time
and this may have been the price of
becoming a world religion
the world religions also argued
that social inequality
in this world would always be with us
poverty would always be with us
the main point of religious life
was not to fight the social system
because that would distract
from the true otherworldly goals
so you have this odd dilemma
on the one hand
the world religions
significantly modified
the casual calm acceptance
of inequality that as we have seen
described the classical period it was no longer
glibly possible
to say well slavery will always be with us
and indeed
the world religions might work either
to reduce or to modify slavery
and that was not a trivial result
but none of the world religions
crusaded against social
inequality
none of them directly subscribed
to the most explicit forms of social
protest
so the world religions could be bent
in occasional social protest
to be used
to argue for greater attacks
on inequality for
new kinds of social justice
but equally important this was not
the main point
the same bifurcation and equally intriguing
applies to gender
each of the three
world religions in contrast
for example to Hinduism
clearly specified that women
had souls alongside men
and each of the world religions
provided new opportunities
for women in religious vocations
and in the case of Christian and in Buddhism
particularly in religious
institutions
so as with society
more generally
the world religions could seem to be aligned
against the most literal traditional
forms of patriarchy which argued
for sharper differentiations
between men and women
but although the world religions
said this about women's
spiritual capacity
they also for the most part
sustained and even in some case
increased the institutions
of patriarchy
by insisting that men were the
major bearers of the religious faith
that women
might be singled out because
they had a greater propensity to sin
this was an aspect
that could be found both in Islam
and in Christianity
impact therefore
on actual gender relations
could be quite complicated
and even
contrary to what the assertion
of spiritual equality might stipulate
many women were
encouraged actually
to religious devotions this was true
for example among Chinese Buddhists
they might be encouraged
to religious devotion because this would
actually distract them from
concerns about other aspects
of their lives in which inequality
might loom large
women's devotion to other worldly purposes
might in a larger sense distract them
from this worldly
concerns about the inequalities
imposed by patriarchy
and in point of fact
during this same period that the world
religion spread
new institutions developed that extended
and further illustrated
women's inequality these institutions
were not mainly the result of
world religions but they coexisted
with it for example
the spread of foot binding in China
the limited but interesting
practice of sati in India
which was a Hindu practice
where women were encouraged to
emulate themselves on their husband's
funeral pyre if they were widowed
on grounds that once your husband was dead
there was no purpose anymore in existence
this was a period in which
in fact in many
parts of the world women's inequalities
increased even though the burden
of the world religion might be
superficially
bent in the other direction the social
impact of the world religions was
complicated and it was not entirely
played out in the
post classical period itself
the world religions
had then some common
effects on
not just patterns of belief but larger
cultural expressions
introducing new political and social
expressions playing an interesting but
on the whole probably encouraging role
with regard to the expansion
of trade the world religions
as they spread in the post classical
period raised one final point
the point in which
religions individual religious
people had to decide
between hostility
and tolerance there are
certainly examples as the world religions
spread of new levels
of intolerance attached to the
new faiths there were
points as we've noted already
at which Chinese authorities attack Buddhism
in new ways
there were certainly points at which
other Asian religions
tried to belittle
the Buddhist message
Christians and Muslims
clashed obviously
in the crusades obviously
in the Christian Reconquest so called
Christian Reconquest of Spain
but there are also cases in
the post classical period as the
religion spread of surprising
islands of mutual
toleration many parts of the Middle East
saw significant Christian
and Jewish communities remain
even as Islam spread
Muslim Spain
tolerated even
encouraged interactions
among the three basic religious
faiths the decision as
to emphasis on tolerance
or intolerance was
not fully
completed in the post classical
period though obviously
new questions were raised
lecture 12 the impact
of Islam
the rise of the Arabs
in Islam was clearly
one of the most important developments
during the post classical period
three major facets
of this need to be emphasized
first
the surge of the Arabs
from their original homeland
in southern Arabia
north into the
rest of the Middle East or much of it
and also across North Africa through a
process of Arab dispersion
and local assimilation
this created a
new civilization zone
that combined the Middle East and North
Africa in a package that
really remains to this day
obviously it remains a varied region
there are lots of minority
peoples minority languages
minority religions and while
the Persians ultimately converted to
Islam they did not assimilate
to the Arabs as some smaller
peoples did but this was
an important package it remains obviously
influential in the world today
change one change two
an Islamic religious
zone was established gradually
that ran from
Morocco and Spain in the west
all the way across the Middle East
through India
and on to Indonesia
and even the southern Philippines
in the east a tremendous
Islamic world that also spread
south into Africa that
also remains
vibrant in the present day
and was a product largely
of the post classical period itself
finally significant
statement number three
even for those regions that did not
directly convert to Islam
the power of the Arabs
and the power of Islam
inevitably compelled attention
China for example
while not confronted
with a direct Islamic surge
through the society as a whole
different for example from Buddhism
in this regard nevertheless
encountered the Arabs and certainly
encountered Islam in the western
provinces and a new Islamic
minority developed in China that
again remains important to the
present day Russia
although not in this period Islamic
was quite aware of the
importance of Islam and the Russian
ruler of Vladimir when he
converted to Christianity around
2000 CE presumably
decided directly against
Islam because as he put it
the Russ enjoy their
drink Islam in other words
didn't quite make it for this early Russian
ruler because of its aversion
to alcohol but the consciousness
was there and obviously later
on Russia would develop a much more
complicated relationship
with Islam and with Muslims
Western Europe encountered Islam
quite directly as the Islamic
invasions poured into Spain
and at some points also held
portions of Sicily
and the West was also extremely
conscious of Islam through the
post-classical period and beyond
both as a source of inspiration
a model for imitation in some
respects but also
clearly as a source of dread
the fact that western Christianity
developed in a period in which Islam
was clearly more powerful
and more intimidated helped shape
this set of western attitudes that again
echo to this day at least to some
degree Islam
as no other of the world religions
did in this period touched
literally every society
directly or indirectly during the
post-classical period itself
this is a major story
equally obviously
there are some complexities in dealing
with Islam
of three sorts first
Islam encounters all sorts
of issues in the contemporary world
because of Islamic participation
in terrorism
other issues that
help create
difficulties and biases in interpreting
Islam and we just need to acknowledge
this at the outset
second as I already briefly mentioned
not just contemporary
westerners but westerners
over a long period of time
have harbored prejudices against
Islam hostilities to Islam
which have led to
certain kinds of perceptions that are quite
old and if not outright
distortions at least significant
exaggerations
and oversimplifications
and we need to try to sidestep these as well
but it's not always easy
and finally the particularly important
point
Islam has long been
varied this is a major religion
covering vast territories
with all sorts of variations
not only the famous
Shiite Sunni split
but all sorts of variations
in encounters with social issues
with political issues with concepts
such as jihad and it's very important
to recognize that just as with Christianity
where we would seriously
hesitate to say
this is the Christian way
with Islam the complexity
is important but frankly
sometimes easier to forget
so we'll take a stab today
at talking about the rise of Islam
in the post-classical period
and also some of the interpretation issues
that affect
our judgment of what Islam did then
and to some extent what its legacy was
for later periods as well
the first issue interestingly
involves
recognizing the combined
but complicated relationship
of the Arab military
and commercial surge
after 600
genius Arab conversion to Islam
in the
vacuum of power
left in the Mediterranean world
particularly the Middle East and North
Africa in the wake of
the fall of the Roman Empire
Arab leaders obviously
saw an opportunity
to expand their military efforts
to seize plunder
to seize new territories
to gain wealth and political power
and they did this
they also became Muslim
in the main and their advance
would help spread Islam
again particularly in the Middle East
and in North Africa
and on into Spain for several centuries
most scholars now argue
that the Arab
surge needs to be taken
as one of those periodic
explosions of a people
interested in new opportunities
rather than a sign
Islam spur to conquest
and conversion
Islam would
as I mentioned in a previous comment
Islam would long be
somewhat
hesitant
to try to convert non-Arab peoples
the Arabs were not
initially primarily interested
in spreading Islam
to those other peoples
we need to sort things out a little bit
but the
most basic fact remains
uncontested nevertheless
the Arab world expanded
Islam grew with it
and this provided a crucial
homeland
for both the Arabs and Islam
in the post-classical period
and this happened quite quickly
on the
footsteps of the Arab armies
Islam would also spread
during the post-classical period
in a number of other regions
though each
articulation deserves
a little bit of special attention
Islam spread to India
involved primarily
efforts by
missionaries and merchants
bought Arab or Muslim armies
periodically poured into India
during the post-classical
period in Africa
sometimes seeking brief opportunities
for plunder
somewhat larger political units
like the Delhi Sultanate
that was established in the post-classical period itself
Islam never
displaced Hinduism as India's
majority religion
but a combination of missionary activity
example and direct
political pressure did help
create substantial Muslim
minorities in key parts
of India beginning in the post-classical
period though the process would expand
later on
Islam also penetrated Central Asia
often displacing
Buddhism in the process
here conversions to Islam
frequently brought nomadic peoples
to
a major world religion
in advance of later movements
into the Middle East for example
the Turkish people converted
to Islam in Central Asia
often to very fervent
and pious versions of Islam
and then when they would move into
the Middle East later on
in the post-classical period and beyond
they would bring this faith with them
as part of their
political and cultural impact
the whole of Islam
in Central Asia was not absolutely
uniform but there's no question
that a substantial
inroad was made
Islam's penetration
in Sub-Saharan Africa
was yet a third case
here
Islam certainly described
a mixed Arab-African
community that developed along
the Indian Ocean coast
the Swahili community that developed
among other things a language
that utilized a mixture of Arab
and African forms
and this was a coastal
zone that was pretty solidly Muslim
but in the West African
kingdoms
the kingdoms of Ghana and Mali and others
Islam became a significant
minority faith
but mainly among the upper classes
African rulers used it
as a source of bureaucracy
as a source of writing
and there were some undeniably
fervent conversions to the Islamic faith
but most of the rulers
made little effort to press ordinary
people to convert
and for many centuries
Islam remained a major religious force
but not a majority religious force
in this part of the world
and finally of course as mentioned before
Islam gradually spread to
Southeast Asia
to the continent particularly
places like Malaysia
and to the islands of present day Indonesia
where it would ultimately gain a very substantial
hold indeed
the expansion of Islam
and the particular phases
in each given region
can also be usefully divided
between areas in which Islam
expanded on the heels of military activity
and political rule
and where Islam expanded much more
purely on the basis of
missionary and commercial outreach
Africa is mainly
missionary and commercial
but there were a few periodic
military raids from North Africa
into West Africa
that muddy the process a little bit
a military and missionary
activity combined as noted in India
the spread to Southeast Asia however
had nothing to do with military pressure
whatsoever this is then not
a totally simple division
but a useful one and certainly a useful reminder
that Islam spread
widely
with no implications of military pressure
or political over lordship
at all
why was the religion so successful
as we've noted in talking about the world
religion generally there's no simple
answer to this
certainly many people would point
to the clarity of Islam
to the extent to which Islam developed
codes of conduct
that while demanding
because remember man was sinful
and needed to be held to exacting standards
while demanding
at least pointed rather clearly
to the major obligations that a person
could fulfill in order to gain
religious reward in the afterlife
this legal clarity on the part
of Islam could be attractive
and Islam had and certainly
added particularly with the rise
of the Sufi movement
from the 8th century onward
Islam had powerful claims
on personal piety
on spiritual enthusiasm
on religious emotion it was a very
impressive religious package
in its own right
Islam also gained ground
as we noted for the
world religions generally but it was
particularly true for Islam in this period
Islam also gained ground
simply because of the example of Arab
Islam, commercial and political and military
success
again without detracting from the religion
many people were
undoubtedly drawn to it
even if they added
true pious commitments
because it was attached to such clear
success in the post classical world
in
the Middle East North Africa
in Sub-Saharan Africa and other places
as well
Islam also gained
because of an interesting combination
of tolerance and inducement
there were episodes in the
post classical period in which Muslims
turned quite intolerant
against other religions
Jews and Christians were in principle
people of the book
their religious traditions
a precursor of
religious truth and therefore
to be respected and for the most part
they were
but Jews and Christians were also subject
to distinctive taxation policies
even as their political communities
were allowed to continue
to exist and there certainly
were some fiscal reasons
some reasons of political
acceptance to think about conversion
in this framework as well
relatively few people
were actually forced
to convert to Islam
the concept of jihad which
is usually interpreted
as an effort to defend Islam
militarily or more abstractly
as a personal struggle
to live a pious life
against impulses towards sin
jihad was
rarely employed
as a direct effort
to push people into conversion
bought a framework
of political activity in which
there were some inequalities for non-Muslims
certainly could prove influential
certain social groups
might see some particular motivation
in converting to Islam
of all the major religions
Islam is undoubtedly the most
tolerant of merchant activity
it does not condone
anything a merchant might do
it stipulates for example
that the taking of interest, usury
is literally wrong
but Muhammad himself had been a merchant
he praised the merchant life
and so long as a merchant combined
his commercial activity
with appropriate fulfillment
of religious obligations
merchant activity was
by itself fine
so merchants might be attracted
to Islam in societies
beyond the Arab world
ordinary people, poor people
might find in Islam
obviously a source of religious solace
a hope for
benefits in the afterlife in heaven
but they could also see in Islam
a powerful statement of spiritual equality
and a clear
opportunity
for access to charity
all the major world religions
enjoined charity but Islam does so
particularly clearly
as one of the five major obligations
and a charitable atmosphere
could help frame the popularity
of Islam as well
even slaves as we'll discuss a little later
might find some specific advantages
in Islam
the motivations in other words were varied
and help explain the undoubted fact
this was a very popular religion
indeed
complexities in the spread of Islam
clearly involve
the famous split that occurred
relatively soon after Muhammad's death
between Shiites
who were attached to a
son-in-law of Muhammad
as Caliph
and the majority Sunnis
who held to a different
selection for Caliph
and the two groups would differ
patterns of religious interpretation
they would differ in their claims
to purity etc
this rift began early
and obviously continues to define the Muslim
world not always
surfacing in acute
tension but
reminding us that this was
a faith that could have a number of
branches did have a number of branches
the emergence of Sufism
while
certainly supporting Muslim
revolutionary efforts the religious enthusiasm
the Sufis generated was considerable
could create another kind
of tension between
a more emotional version of Islam
and a more one might say
cerebral or rational
approach
divisions of various sorts entered
early and would continue to mark
understandably the progress
of a major but complicated religion
Muslims
in the post classical world
particularly Muslim cultural figures
face some interesting tensions
between the injunctions
of the faith
and the rich artistic
heritage of the
Middle East
including its Hellenistic heritage
so during the post classical
period itself during the heyday
of
Arab and Islamic development in the
Middle East some really interesting
discussions and compromises occurred
between people eager to embrace
their Islamic faith but eager
also to share
in the artistic
scientific and philosophical
traditions of the region
Islam Muhammad and joined against
for example the artistic
representation of animal or human
figures because these
would be potential sources of idolatry
and in the Arab
world this injunction was largely
upheld during the post
classical period and beyond
but as Islam spread to Persia
the Persian artistic
tradition which had
a richer experience
with human and animal representation
could shade off
and maintain that earlier emphasis
alongside
a more literal adhesion
to the faith
Islamic attitudes
toward music were complicated the Middle East
in fact developed or furthered
a rich musical tradition
although the religion itself
advised against the use of music again
because of its potential
distraction from pure
spirituality
a great deal of philosophical effort
in the post classical world
went into discussions of the relationship
between Islamic faith
and rational science and philosophy
the Arab world
generated building on
Greek and Hellenistic traditions
and the Arab world generated
important scientific and medical discoveries
this is one of the science centers
of the post classical world
but people also talked about
how much truth could one gain
by use of reason alone
where did faith have to come in
because reason couldn't penetrate
this was a philosophical tradition
that would later inform
Christianity as well
and the Arab advance here
was quite sophisticated
the question then of
the role of religion
in a rich cultural
combination
was a crucial one during the height
of the post classical period
in Islamic centers not just in the Middle East
proper but in other centers of scholarship
for example in parts of sub-Saharan
Africa
the role of the state of Islam
in Islam
was a crucial one two points are pretty clear
first
the religion itself
had a clear model
of an ideal ruler
this ruler would uphold
the laws and obligations of religion
as first duty he would himself
be pious and faithful
but beyond that
he would use the state not just to defend the religion
but to advance it
to
associate its laws and rules
with the laws of the state itself
to punish on behalf of the religion
etc
so there was an image
of the ideal ruler or imam
or caliph that
was a very important product
of Muhammad's own writings
and those of the traditions
that build on the Quran
in subsequent years and centuries
but second point
the actual Arab caliphate
the rule that was established
after Muhammad
first in
Damascus and then in Baghdad
the actual Arab caliphate
although it used religious nomenclature
and claimed the Islamic mantle
was
rarely primarily religiously inspired
there were individually
pious caliphs
people who could be used as examples
of spirituality or charity
but most caliphs were pretty worldly
the court around the caliphs
was increasingly
luxurious this was not
an act, an example of the
religious ideals
that Islam seemed to embrace
so
two initial facts
there's a model
and there's the actual historical practice
that differs widely from the model
so what do we put in between
several points
first of all
like Christianity
but perhaps a bit more forcefully
the Quran urged
that even when the state
was inappropriately organized
even when it was unjust
the loyal muslim
should remain loyal to it because
becoming embroiled in political disputes
would distract one
from a religious obligation
in other words
muslims were enjoined
to accept political injustice
to accept rule that did not correspond
to the ideals
because political chaos
would be inimical
to religious purpose
so the loyalty injunction
was quite clear
but there was also always
the possibility
that muslims might
periodically measure the
state against the greater
expectations of religious
purpose and religious justice
and come to a different kind of
conclusion a tension that
was built into Islam just as
in many ways it's built into Christianity
where Christians are
enjoined normally to accept
the rule of the state because that's not
the primary sphere of religion
but can try to see
occasionally Christian values
as ones that can be used
to reshape
or protest the state itself
much ink has been spilled
in the contemporary world
over the
political traditions of Islam
and their relationship to
modern democracy
the debate is possibly
a bit sterile
because original Islam had
little connection with any possibility
of democracy any more
than early Christianity
except perhaps for very early Christianity
did either
this is just not a relevant part
of assessing these religions
in a post-classical context
where democracy was simply
different one crucial difference
between Islam and Christianity
can be noted though what to
make of it is not entirely easy
Christianity was born
outside the state
the Roman state did not always
persecute Christians persecution was
sporadic but it certainly was
not a friendly force for
over three centuries
in Islam
because of Muhammad's position
as political and religious leader
and then the subsequent traditions
that went into the caliphate
the religion was born in association
with the state
and could be seen more clearly then
as an instrument
of politics as something
where the state should be actively engaged
at the same time
lest we press this distinction
between Islam and Christianity too far
Islam was also forced
to develop
a structure that would allow it to
endure
even amid state indifference
if not sometimes
outright hostility
so while Islam did not establish
quite such a clear institutional
church as did
Catholics in western Europe
Islam established networks
of scholarly centers
where Islamic scholarship
and law could be interpreted
that helps sustain
and provide some coherence
in Islam
even amid political indifference
even amid the vast
expansion of Islam
across such a large territory
so centers of Islamic legal scholarship
in places like Cairo Egypt
became
unifying points
not quite in such an institutional way
as in the Christian church
but through the power of persuasion
through the power of intellectual authority
and this helps explain
how Islam exists in a variety of political
circumstances
both in the post classical period
and subsequently
Islam clearly had important
social implications
that provide a specific
illustration of some of the larger
points about the world religions
and society that we made in the previous
discussion
two areas I think
command particular attention
the first is the relationship
between Islam and slavery
and the second inevitable
and I think actually quite interesting
the position of Islam
on issues of gender
with regard to slavery
Islam was concerned
about slavery
but equally obviously tolerated it
Middle Eastern society
had a significant number of slaves
some of whom were imported from Europe
and Africa large numbers of slaves
were part of the African trade
and yet Islam
was not entirely comfortable with slavery
particularly when the slave
was himself or herself
Muslim or converted to Islam
so while Islam
tolerated slavery
more readily than Christianity
did although there was complexity
in European Christianity as well
even before the great African slave trade
while Islam tolerated slavery
it tended to provide
also some protections particularly
for Muslim slaves
families were rarely separated
Muslim slaves gained
superior work conditions
they might frequently be manumitted
even when they had been imported from Africa
this was an area of ambivalence
where issues of belief
including belief in the equality of souls
for believers clashed with
social reality in ways that were not
entirely tidy
Muhammad unquestionably believed
and I see no reason
to contest this
that he was bringing
improvements to conditions of women
as he spread this
religion among the Arabs
several injunctions are particularly noteworthy
in the first place
the Quran specifically invades
against female infanticide
and indeed the spread of the world
religions generally helped
reduce infanticide
throughout much of the
Afro-Eurasian land mass
female infanticide was wrong
because females had souls
babies should not be
deliberately killed
women were given clear legal rights
in Islam
most important in contrast
to situations in much of
Christianity
Muslim women had property rights
they could own property
they had claims to their dowries
they had claims to parts of family inheritance
these rights were not necessarily
unequal to those of men
but they were well established
and they gave Muslim women
important opportunities not just
in property possession
but in business activities
Muslim women also had rights
with regard to divorce
unequal to those of men
but definite
they had access to worship
although separate from men
they had important access to travel
and historians have actually
particularly the great pilgrimage to Mecca
compared to opportunities for travel
by Christian women in the same period
and the conclusion is Muslim women
had considerably more latitude
in this area
at the same time two points
first
Islam protected women
in many respects
it advanced women's spiritual interests
but it did not provide equality
contemporary Muslims
can argue
that the system could be perfected
to correspond more fully
with contemporary standards
but there's no question that if you
look at Islam literally in the post-classical period
women have some
stipulated inferiority
vis-a-vis men in marriage
and religion alike
second
in the Middle East
Islam became overlaid
with acceptance
of other regional traditions
notably the practice of veiling
which is not directly
enjoined in the religious literature itself
Muhammad urged veils
for some of his own family
possibly so they would not be
harassed in public
but a general religious obligation
of veiling was not clearly present
it was added in
regional perceptions
as the religion integrated
more fully with
Middle Eastern urban society
where veiling had been established
earlier
the issue is obviously
then complicated
and one just needs to
leave it at that
this is not a clear cut victory
for gender equality
but it's arguably a significant advance
it arguably can be utilized
even in contemporary society
the debate clearly continues
Arab society
in some measurable ways
by the 13th century
the caliphate became less effective
various territories
in North Africa and Spain
peeled off even aside from the Christian
attack on Islam
in Spain
cultural activities narrowed
the kind of rich philosophical
and artistic discussions
that had occurred earlier
tended now to narrow in favor
of greater insistence
partly under the spur of
the advance of Sufism
Arab role in politics
declined as more minority peoples
including Turks were incorporated
in political life
and Arab role even in international trade
was increasingly disputed
partly by Muslims from other places
like India and Southeast Asia
this is however
a complicated decline
because it doesn't mean
the erasure of Arab
Islamic culture or institutions
the caliphate finally
fell in the 13th century
but Arab society
more generally maintained a great deal
of vitality
the nature of and reasons for this
transition are complicated
but they do because of the vitality
of Arab Islam itself
earlier they do mark an important
transition toward the end
of the post classical period as a whole
thank you
these lectures are part of the
great courses series
they are produced by the teaching company
these lectures are titled
a brief history of the world
part 2
lecture 13
post classical trade
and contacts
our discussion today
focuses on the development
of new kinds of contacts
particularly trade contacts
in the post classical period
I've already argued
in introducing the post classical period
that the new range
and intensity of contacts
was along with the spread
of world religions
one of the really crucial developments
in this period
affecting most parts of Asia
many parts of Africa
many parts of Europe
there was no single
heroic event
in this proliferation of contacts
we're talking really about the efforts
of literally hundreds and thousands
of traders
some inventors, some craftsmen
certainly a lot of manufacturers
but the process
can seem a little abstract
so what I'd like to do
this crucial development
is first talk about
one of the interesting byproducts
of the new patterns
of contact
in the emergence of a new set of world travelers
that'll allow some
personal faces on the phenomenon
then we'll turn back
to the major roots themselves
and then
and this is the most important part
talk about so what
what were the consequences of this contact
why make such a big fuss about it
in the 14th century
one of the greatest
perhaps the greatest single world traveler
emerged
by name of Ibn Battuta
Battuta was born in Morocco
in northwestern Africa
he
grew up in a
what we might call middle class
merchant family, reasonably prosperous
received a legal education
and launched his travels
as did so many Muslims
first by participating in the great
highly recommended
obligatory if possible
pilgrimage to Mecca
Battuta obviously
crossed north Africa going to Mecca
and he already showed
his travel thirst
by not just visiting Mecca
but by visiting other parts
of the eastern Mediterranean
Palestine
Jordan etc
in his lifetime
Battuta would travel over
75,000 miles
almost certainly the longest
trip any single individual
the longest set of trips
any single individual had ever undertaken
in world history
that's a lot of miles
he went by foot
he went on donkey and the importance
of donkeys in carrying
world contacts at this point
he underestimated
he went occasionally on ship
he used virtually every
known means of conveyance
but he undoubtedly spent
a great deal of time
in motion
his travels would take him
not just frequently back to the pilgrimage
to other parts
of North Africa and the Middle East
they took him
to Persia
they took him well into Central Asia
where he frequently traveled
over mountain passes in winter
enduring a number of
harrowing adventures in the process
he spent a good bit of time
in India particularly in the Delhi Sultanate
where he actually at one point
had an official position
he traveled to island groups
in the Indian Ocean
he traveled to Southeast Asia
he traveled to China
which as we will discuss further in a moment
he didn't actually like too well
he then went back
after a long series of journeys
he then went back to North Africa
but was still insatiable
and in what we could regard
as Central or even slightly later
Middle Age undertook a final
set of trips into
Sub-Saharan Africa particularly
into the great kingdom of Mali
he wrote up his travels
which is obviously why we know
so much about them
and his account both reflects
the new range of
geographical
contact possible
and also encouraged this kind of contact
because people read Battuta
they could seek to imitate him
they could develop a thirst for learning
about new places from his accounts
his motivations for travel
seemed to have been several
he was certainly religiously inspired
he was a faithful Muslim
and much of his travel
indeed most of it
centered on territories
that were fully or partly converted
to Islam
where he could feel comfortable
where he could maintain contact
with his religious rituals
his travel was sometimes
probably sexually motivated
he writes rather
so satisfactorily
about some sexual exploits during his travels
he frequently picked up consorts
and short-lived
spousal relationships
he probably left
because these relationships deteriorated
but above all
he was clearly driven by
a massive curiosity
about strange places
even though often Muslim
still nevertheless strange
his reactions
in addition to illustrating
the new potential
for geographical expression
of human curiosity
his accounts reflect
of other features that are worth noting
he judged
according to the standards of Islam
in places that were Muslim
but not exactly like
the Middle East and North Africa
he would praise their religious piety
this particularly applies to his reactions
to some of the African
societies he visited
he would praise their piety
but deplore departures from the norm
for example he worried greatly
that many African women
to wear fewer clothes than they should
by Middle Eastern standards
and seemed to have a
social presence
a confidence
in public assertions
in social settings
that he found disturbing
in his one clear venture
well outside Islam
his visit to China
he professed himself
almost
clearly uncomfortable
in a great society
he praised Chinese cities
architecture etc
but he said he stuck to his room a lot
because without the presence
of an Islamic overlay
this was just a little bit disorienting
another great traveler
of the post-classical period
actually a little earlier than Ibn Battuta
was of course Marco Polo
the great Venetian traveler
who presumably went to China
under Mongol rule
and reported elaborately
on what he found there
a brief caveat
we are not absolutely sure
that Marco Polo went
his uncles clearly visited China
but he may have used
their accounts
plus Persian travel literature
to fabricate
a version of his own travels
among other things glorifying
his personal exploits
we're simply not absolutely sure
the odd thing is
he fails to mention certain features
of China that you think he would have
found really quite noteworthy
for example the foot binding
of many Chinese women in the cities
so we're not absolutely sure
but if Marco Polo didn't do it
other Europeans clearly did
their travels were somewhat less
wide ranging
than Ibn Battuta's
though the travelers to China sometimes came back
via the Indian Ocean
they encountered South and Southeast Asia
as well as East Asia
but the European travelers
if Marco Polo was taken as illustrative
differed from Ibn Battuta in one respect
they were
less uncomfortable
in settings outside their religious orbit
they almost had to be less uncomfortable
because Christianity
had spread less widely
they could not have expected
a cultural umbrella
that would frame them as a Muslim could expect
but if you put the two cases together
Ibn Battuta
Marco Polo or the Polos
you have an active
sense of the
new extent to which people
could visit distant places
did visit distant places
developed a thirst for travel adventure
and in their ensuing accounts
Marco Polo's book for example
was on Christopher Columbus's
bookshelf somewhat later on
by their accounts spur other people
to seek trade activities
contact activities
that would push them also
into the unknown
or at least the less known
travel of course was interesting
and it's very clear
that travel in this period differed greatly
from the kinds of travel
that had been possible in the earlier classical era
the travelers travel farther
they encounter far more
different kinds of situations
and their accounts are much more
consistently accurate
than accounts of earlier travelers
like Herodotus
who simply made things up
or accepted fabulous stories
when he went beyond his
actual travel range
this is a different kind of travel
it reflects a different kind of world
the actual contact patterns
need to be further embellished
as well
as I noted earlier
the core root
was the kind of contact that emerged
in the post-classical period
the core root was an Indian Ocean root
connecting western Asia
or the Middle East
the Arab territories
the Persian territories under Islam now
connecting these territories
with South Asia, Southeast Asia
and the Pacific coast of China
this was a
series of roots
initially forged by Arab merchants
primarily
then joined by Muslims and others
from India
from Southeast Asia and elsewhere
and also a number of Persians
this was a series of roots
that carried a variety of goods
particularly important
were manufactured goods from China
silk of course
but now also porcelain
and some other products
and spices
that were available from Southeast Asia
or India
this was an Asian centered
trade pattern
and it had the interesting effect
and here we begin to see
the new importance of these kinds of contacts
it had the interesting effect
of spurring major manufacturing
expansions particularly in China
in China
during the Song dynasty
which opened up in the later 10th century
some historians have actually referred
to a Chinese industrial revolution
I think the term is a little misleading
I don't want to confuse it
with industrialization later on
but there's no question
that China was becoming in this period
something of a world manufacturing
powerhouse
a status which the nation seems to be
recovering in our own day
other roots of course
fed into the east-west
contact
three patterns were particularly important
two roots as we've noted previously
two roots connected Sub-Saharan Africa
to this east-west trade
and carried African goods
not just into the Middle East
and North Africa
but into other parts of Asia as well
the easiest root
the one that most clearly linked
with the east-west
corridor
was the coastal route that stretched up
the Swahili coastline
the Swahili trading cities
that developed along the coast
along the islands of East Africa
but
West African trading activities
merchants from places
like Ghana and Mali
also participated actively
in inter-regional trade
using camels and horses to cross the Sahara
and seeing North African
traders come down to
participate directly as well
as traders and once in a while
as raiders
so link number one
the connections that linked
various parts of Sub-Saharan Africa
to the
North African Middle Eastern end
of the east-west route
from Africa came a variety of goods
gold
slaves
exotic animals
certain other kinds of animal and vegetable
products that fed a considerable trade
particularly with the Middle East
but also sometimes beyond
and handfuls of African slaves
developed up in post-classical China
where one can speculate
about what the Chinese made of these people
and above all what these people
themselves made of their
experience in such a different kind
of environment
another feeder route developed
beginning in the
8th and 9th centuries
from Scandinavia
through what is presently
Western Russia and Ukraine
passing through the great city of Kiev
on its way to the Byzantine Empire
and from there connecting
with Arab trade as well
Scandinavian traders
coming down through Russia
may actually have given Russia
its name from the Scandinavian
word for red the red hair
that many of these traders had we don't know
that for sure but it's at least possible
but there's no question that
this east-central European
north-south route
was a vital one for the region itself
and as it contributed
products and merchant activity
to the larger east-west flow
slightly later
and more gradually
Western Europe also connected
with this trade route
as merchants from England, the low countries
in France began to
come down either overland
or along the Atlantic coast
to the Mediterranean
where they could directly reach into
Middle Eastern areas
in the Eastern Mediterranean, Egypt
etc. An example of this kind
of merchant activity
was the famous French merchant of the 15th century
Jacques Coeur
who was an advisor to French kings
a money lender but also
who frequently traveled to the Middle East
in search of products
that would sell widely back home
he was just one of many European traders
French
obviously Italian and many others
who made considerable fortunes
and sometimes lost them as well
in their connections
with this new kind, new level
of international commercial
activity Jacques Coeur ironically
disgraced in his later life
died on a crusade
directed presumably
against Islam and in favor
of Christian
reconquest of the Holy Land
a major set of routes then
stretched from the
Eastern center to various parts of Asia
it was connected
to much of Africa
and a good bit of Europe
both East Central and West
and the combination
provided a series of
activities that really had
no previous precedent
in world history
what were the results
why make such a fuss about this
a number of results
developed from these trading patterns
that were important at the time
and that also set precedence
for later activity
I've mentioned one already
the extent to which this level
of inter-regional trade
could now have a major impact
on internal economies
particularly the economy of China
was already an effect
of no small magnitude
some areas of the world
again particularly in China
began to orient a good bit
of their economic activity
toward production for
what we would today call world markets
new kinds of consumer dependence
developed as well
we don't usually think of post-classical societies
as consumer societies
and in a modern sense they weren't
but very clearly in this period
and there had been hints of it earlier
along the Silk Roads
very clearly in this period
certain elements of the upper classes
developed tastes for goods
that could be only supplied
from distant regions
a clear example occurred in western Europe
during and after the Crusades
the Crusades began in the
later 11th century
as west Europeans
particularly noblemen
participated in the Crusades
they learned of higher living standards
that were common in Middle Eastern cities
and they developed a taste
for some of the resultant products
a particularly interesting example
that would motivate a tremendous amount
of European activity
from this point onward into the 19th century
a casing point is sugar
post-classical Europeans
traditionally had sweetened their products
with honey
which actually strikes me
as quite sensible and quite pleasant
but for whatever reason and I cannot pretend
to know why they like sugar better
well they couldn't make it at home
so they begin
an obvious and consistent effort
to acquire access
to more regular supplies of sugar
initially still for the upper classes
this is not yet a mass taste
although it will become one
and this kind of consumer attachment
obviously helped feed
the activities of many merchants
both European and Asian
it helped spur new kinds
of shipping activities in the Mediterranean
that would link Europe
to Middle Eastern ports
products could be trans shipped
from other parts of Asia
this kind of consumer attachment
was itself a major
variable in world history
from this point onward
not all societies developed
equal levels of susceptibility
to consumer needs
China for example
which had an elaborate urban consumer culture
in the post-classical period
needed far fewer
products from the outside world
than did Western Europe
China did need to trade
with Southeast Asia
particularly for certain kinds of tea
but their needs otherwise were limited
so China would see
a much greater effort
to seek from world trade
other kinds of products than
personal consumer items
products such as exotic animals for zoos
handfuls not masses
but handfuls of slaves
and particularly precious metals
these goods moved along
the new trade routes
in response to the
supply of Chinese
manufactured products
new kinds of economic impact
new kinds of consumer
attachments even dependence
on international trade
a third item obviously
were new levels of culture
contact some of this
involves simply a
matter of word exchange from one language
to the next
a large number of words began to pass
into European languages from Arabic
denoting the kinds of products
that were now being trans-shipped
from other parts of the world to Europe
terms like orange for example
or sugar itself
Arabic words translated
into the major European languages
because these were the words that described
initially what the products themselves were
but other kinds
of cultural exchange were obviously
more important
particularly noteworthy was the extent to which
what Europeans called
the Arabic numbering system
came into wide use in this period
this system had itself
been developed in classical India
it was not Arabic
but the Arabs had taken it over from the Indians
and Europeans and others would in this
period take it over from the Arabs
providing what is still
the most efficient numbering system
ever developed in the world
the numbering system that now began to gain
what we would today call
some real international currency
mathematical systems could spread more widely
Algebra
another Arabic word
and Arabic mathematical innovation
Algebra began to spread
from the Arab world to other societies
including Europe
not surprisingly then
new levels of commercial contact
spurred other kinds of cultural
interaction
even across what otherwise
seemed major religious barriers
i.e. for example the barrier
between Islam and Christianity
technologies were impacted
by new levels of
world trade
in two ways
first a number of new technologies
were introduced during the post-classical
period deliberately to
facilitate
new kinds of trading activities
new kinds of
seagoing commercial activities
ship design improved
the Arabs introduced significant developments
in sailing ships particularly
making them more appropriate
for use in the Indian Ocean
toward the end of the post-classical period
the Chinese introduced gigantic
ocean going vessels
the Chinese junks with huge
hulls and huge carrying capacity
that they began to use
from the Song dynasty onward
to link eastern China
with the Indian Ocean trade routes
in addition to new ship design
obviously new navigational
devices emerged
the compass was almost
certainly invented in China
possibly initially not for use
by travelers
but to help the Chinese
arrange their domestic furnishings
appropriately according to the principles
of Feng Shui
but whether this story is entirely
or not the navigational use
of the compass was quickly realized
and the Chinese used the compass
increasingly in their own commercial
activities and from the Chinese
the compass would spread
to Southeast Asia
to the Middle East and to Europe
where in a number
of its transmissions the device
was also improved
particularly for shipboard use
other navigational devices in the period
included the astrolabe
which helped ships locate themselves
according to the night sky
a number of devices
facilitated navigation
and obviously this is both a consequence
of heightened levels
of inter-regional trade
and again an encouragement to further levels of trade
the second technological impact
of this new level of contact
involves transmission
not surprisingly although
still slowly by contemporary standards
not surprisingly new levels
of contact help societies
learn about inventions
that had initially been introduced
elsewhere more quickly
than it previously been the case
technological diffusion was not new
agriculture
iron use etc had previously
spread from one area to another
but now the process is accelerated
and in some cases
made much more deliberate
than had been the case earlier
an interesting example
which also I admit shows
the continuing limitations on the process
an interesting example was paper
paper was a product
that had been invented in classical China
and not used widely
outside of China at that point
the utility of paper
in China as a society
that was particularly bureaucratic
can't escape notice
but the fact is this was a major technological
invention that could greatly facilitate
communication
Arabs learned about paper
in their military interactions
in western China in the 8th
and 9th centuries
they captured a number of Chinese
and took them back to the Middle East
they discovered that a couple of them knew how to make paper
and they put them to work setting up the
first paper manufacturing operation
in the Middle East proper
as I say in the 8th and 9th centuries
Western Europeans would learn
about paper from their contact
with the Arabs
and the first European paper factory
was established in Sicily
reasonably close to the Middle East
in the very early 1200s
now again this is not
lightning transmission
you're talking about several centuries
between Arab utilization of paper
and West European imitation
from the Arabs but nevertheless
this is a lot faster
than we've seen
major technologies transmitted
from year to four and we will have
other examples in subsequent sessions
of technological transmissions
during the post-classical period
that were more rapid still
economic impact
consumer tastes
cultural exchanges
technological diffusion
all of these added up
to a significant set
of
consequences of
environmental factors surrounding
the new level of inter-regional contacts
and the final point
in talking about consequence
really sums up the growing utility
that various societies
in Asia, Africa and Europe
found in maintaining
or increasing their commitment
to these international activities
the fact was that
the utility
of international activities
or inter-regional connections
was so obvious at this point
that some kind of
inter-regional system
would survive disruptions
and changes in the original
system itself
most obviously as we noted
in a previous discussion
the Arab capacity to sustain
major initiatives
in the inter-regional arena
began to decline
in the 12th and 13th centuries
Arabs remain involved
other Muslims from the Middle East
and South Asia continued to participate
strongly
but the international apparatus
could have tumbled
at least for a while
as Arab capacity
diminished
as Arab political and cultural vitality
dwindled to some extent
but the system
was simply too precious to abandon
and as the
Arab sustaining of the system
yielded to
other entrants
the clear result
was a continued commitment
a continued capacity
to sustain inter-regional contacts
either along the established trade routes
or on alternative routes
that would develop precisely because
of this new level of commitment
this new understanding
of resulting benefits
the post-classical period
particularly as
inter-regional connections
developed and solidified
by a thousand CE onward
this has been seen
as we discussed previously
as one of the real watersheds
in world history
the point at which many societies
in Afro-Eurasia turned from an emphasis
on largely separate developments
with connections with other regions
a peripheral
activity at best
turned from this focus
on the local and regional
to an increasing focus
on the benefits of connections
the possibilities of imitation
the possibilities of diffusion
and this was a pattern
that would then once the tipping point occurred
continue to accelerate
from this juncture onward
there's another way to make the same point
and I do this tentatively
but it's worth consideration
there is a fairly straight line
from the
inter-regional connections
that developed in the post-classical period
to what we now view as globalization
now, lots of apologies
contemporary globalization is a lot quicker
it involves a lot
greater volume in terms of
trade connections
it involves far more extensive
cultural interactions so
the post-classical period does not
introduce globalization
in a contemporary sense
but the straight line aspect
is nevertheless noteworthy
people who traded
and traveled and wrote about their activities
in the post-classical period
helped inspire people
who would extend inter-regional
trading activities still further
later on people like Christopher Columbus
and they in turn
would feed great trading companies
new technologies that would spur
travel and trade still further
and on to contemporary globalization
there are historians
and we'll encounter them later in the course
there are historians who will argue
this evolutionary
approach a pattern
of inter-regional
connections from the post-classical period
blossoming steadily and gradually
into globalization that this is a wrong view
globalization in their eyes
is a much newer phenomenon
and we will have to deal with that
but remember this possibility
post-classical
explosion of trade and travel
really looms so large in world history
it's a different world
by the 11th and 12th centuries
in terms of the impact
and involvement of many people
merchants
consumers
upper class leaders
the involvement of many people
in a dependence on and enjoyment of
contacts with distant places
Thank you
We're talking in this session
briefly I admit
about four different parts of the world
in the post-classical period
we'll talk about Japan
we'll talk about Russia
we'll talk about Southeast Asia
and we'll talk briefly about Western Europe
The main focus
is on patterns of imitation
that these four areas
conducted
usually fairly deliberately
with adjacent regions
that were in some measurable senses
better developed
they had older cultures
they had greater prosperity
they had a more elaborate apparatus
with regard to technology
we're touching base here
with a number of key themes
obviously we continue the notion
of interregional contacts
but now we're talking about
slightly smaller distances
than the ones we were referring to
in the great system we discussed
in the previous lecture
we're talking certainly about
the spread of civilization
the parts of the world we're talking about today
either had been outside
the civilization orbit in the classical period
or at least only
incompletely involved
and we're very definitely talking about
an effort to make
this expansion of civilization
manageable and meaningful
in a world history sense
we're talking without question
about four places that were very different
Western Europe was different from Russia
Russia obviously different
East Asia differences that would show up
in cultural systems and religions
in at least the details
of political systems
in specific trade patterns
all those things so we're not talking about
a nice coherent package
but we are talking about
something of a common process
and it's really an intriguing one
in which societies
deliberately undertook
activities that would bring them closer
with adjacent
or prosperous societies
without fully merging with them
but in a process that gives
specific meaning
to the notion of increasing convergence
that we've introduced in previous discussions
the first case
and in some senses it's the easiest one
because the process was so very explicit
the first case is that of Japan
quite early
in the post classical period
Japanese leaders
princes began to send
student trips to China
in order to learn more about Chinese
ways and to bring their
knowledge back to Japan
proper and this began
a centuries long flirtation
between Japan and China
in which Japan would regularly
organize expeditions
several times a year
to reach China in search
of trade but also in search of
knowledge and in the process
the Japanese developed a
really impressive range
of sectors in which
they imitated China substantially
or at least in part
obviously there was technological
limitation the Japanese were able
to learn new agricultural techniques
from the Chinese new manufacturing
techniques that began
to spur the increasing
development of the Japanese economy
we don't necessarily
want to argue that Japan became
as sophisticated technologically
as China was but there was
certainly interchanged and this was
a pretty obvious aspect
of the regular kinds of connections
that developed between the two societies
the secondary and in some
ways the more elaborate still
in which imitation had massive effects
were in the area
of culture and cultural apparatus
in the first place quite simply
the Japanese introduced the Chinese writing system
this was a system
designed for a very different language
the Japanese and Chinese remained
very different as spoken languages
and over time the Chinese
ideographic system proved not
fully appropriate for Japanese
and some other systems were developed
but they all built from this system
and the Chinese system was retained as well
so simply put
though ultimately with some modifications
the Japanese got writing
one of the basic components
of civilization from the Chinese
they also incorporated
cultural forms adapting them of course
to Japanese language
and other conditions
they introduced many of the basic
Chinese verse styles
they adapted Chinese martial arts
they adapted Chinese
systems of very carefully
regulated gardens
they adopted Buddhism
extensively from China ironically
adopting it more wholeheartedly
than the Chinese would
during the post classical period as a whole
but with Buddhism from China
also came architectural forms
like the pagoda the temple form
and a variety of other artistic themes
that would connect
Japanese art with Chinese
cultural connections then
were extremely substantial
and helped shape a real blossoming
of Japanese culture
in a number of artistic areas
Chinese social ideas were adopted
to a somewhat more limited extent
among other things for example
as Japan learned from China
the prestige of merchants began
to decline slightly
although the Chinese
downgrading of merchants in the Confucian system
was never fully brought in
to Japan
another interesting area involved gender relations
the Japanese did not
import the full gamut
of Chinese gender relations
most notably they did not import foot binding
but from the Chinese
they learned that women were
less equal to men than the Japanese
had previously thought
so gender divisions tended to increase
in Japan though without reaching
Chinese levels there was an interesting
footnote to this at some points
in the post classical period
because Chinese culture was
such an object of esteem
it was assumed that Japanese men
should emphasize Chinese culture
which left Japanese writing
actually to women
it was an interesting period of time
and among other things the first
novel ever written in the world
the tales of Genji was written by a Japanese woman
in this period where it was all right
for women to do this because the real
prestige stuff was stuff being done
in the Chinese manner by men
social imitation then
was significant but
obviously less complete
than the kinds of connections that developed
in culture and in technology
a final area
an intriguing one where the Japanese
seemed to have learned from the Chinese
involved attitudes toward the wider world
China as is well known
tended to think of itself
as the epitome of civilization
with all other societies
viewed as inferior and barbarian
and the Japanese picked up
something of this attitude by osmosis
obviously arguing
that Japan
in connection with China
was a very special place
and little attention needed
to be paid to the rest of the world
one world historian has actually
wondered why Japan
in this period of clearly increased
dynamism didn't attempt
a larger expansion effort
for example possibly
sailing into the Pacific
and we don't obviously know the answer
it's hard to answer historical negatives
but one reason maybe
that the Japanese were so focused on China
and through this to a sense
that there was nothing to learn
from other places that
the horizons were interestingly shaped
and possibly interestingly
limited
the second imitation example
involves Russia and the Byzantine Empire
we've seen already how
trade ran through western Russia
and Ukraine
what's technically known as Kievan Rus
during this period
and connected it to the Byzantine Empire
well with trade obviously came
with many kinds of missions
and Russians frequently went to Constantinople
for trading purposes, political missions
cultural exchange
that sort of thing
and Byzantine emissaries
were active in Russia as well
missionary activity at the forefront
from these connections
Russia imported a variety of things
from the Byzantine Empire
cultural apparatus again
was primary
the Russians got their writing system
from the Byzantine Empire
from the Cyrillic adaptation
of the Greek alphabet
that was exported widely
to East Central Europe including Russia
along with writing the Russians
of course got religion
the decision to emphasize
Orthodox Christianity
presumably involved this effort
by Vladimir the ruler of Russia
to distinguish among three options
Islam was rejected
because it didn't allow alcohol
Western Catholicism was rejected
because the Russians were worried
about too much papal interference
that left the Orthodox faith
but frankly there probably wasn't
all that much choice
given the Russian connections with Byzantium
this must have seemed quite obvious
along with religion and writing
came a wider cultural apparatus
conditioned only
by the extent to which Russia was a less prosperous
less sophisticated
urban society than Byzantium
but Byzantine architectural styles
were widely imitated
particularly interesting was
the Russian adoption
of the Byzantine tradition of iconography
of carefully worked paintings of saints
at which the Russians
would ultimately become past masters
but which they did not in fact originate
artistic
religious
cultures widely imported
along with the basic apparatus
of cultural transmission itself
and the writing system
from the Byzantines also
Russian leaders incorporated at least
some sense of political horizons
to the Russians
the Byzantine Empire
was successor to Rome
and there could seem to be
some sort of chain
that connected Rome
to Byzantium to Russia
and we will see this notion blossom
in the next period of world history
still more fully
the Byzantine Empire
was primarily some technologies
no doubt as well
but a political orientation
was transmitted as well
Japan and Russia
two very different places
imitating two very different societies
simply using China or
the Byzantine Empire's models
assure differentiation
nevertheless exhibit some striking similarities
in terms of basic process
in each instance
in the imitating society
feel that there's positive
advantage not only in visiting
but in copying aspects of
the adjacent
more prosperous society
cultural imitation seems to play
a strikingly significant role
although other kinds
of apparatus and ideas
could be imported as well
and the process raises
one other question
that actually
crucial for the post classical period
and to some extent new in this period
but a question that we will
have to deal with at various points
from this juncture onward
the question is how now that
civilization is expanding
and now that societies are
deliberately imitating each other
how do you define civilization
the Japanese case is
probably particularly clear
Japan imitated China
it did not however
become Chinese it didn't
or couldn't imitate fully
so now that civilization
has reached Japan as a form of human organization
do we need to talk about
Japanese civilization as well as
Chinese or can we talk
about a larger East Asian civilization
zone in which
Chinese influences are primary
but in which other societies
not only Japan but also Korea
and Vietnam sort of hover
participating in a number of common
influences including
various aspects of cultural styles
including some
exposure to Buddhism certainly
some exposure to Confucianism
but without becoming a clearly
unified whole it's a choice
you can answer either way
the advantage of
seeing Japan as a separate civilization
is you have to make fewer
apologies you have to
back up less frequently
and say but don't forget Japan
is covered on this point
on the other hand there's an obvious inefficiency
if we start labeling
Japan a separate civilization
what do you do then with Korea and Vietnam
and how many civilizations do you end up with
and can you manage them
the efficiency of an East Asian civilization
zone probably
outweighs its drawbacks but it clearly
has drawbacks it oversimplifies
a choice
the case of Russia is actually also
intriguing and we will have
to encounter it later as well
world historians frankly
have a good bit of trouble dealing with Russia
because they don't quite know
whether to say well it's part of
European civilization because after all
it becomes Christian or is it part
of a special Byzantine tradition
but it's not fully Byzantine
what do you do with it
my personal
preference is to view Russia
as a partial heir to a
Byzantine East European tradition
that will continue to distinguish it
from Western Europe
thus two major civilization zones
emerging in Europe the West
and the East Central East
but this is disputable
and among other things it raises the question
of where you draw the boundary line
in East Central Europe among other things
it seems to fluctuate fairly often
so there's no fully happy resolution
to this dilemma the main point
is to recognize it's a dilemma
because imitation is becoming
more important the
clear cut boundary
lines that separate one cultural
zone from another are blurring
and we simply have to recognize
that fact and recognize
that some new kinds of choices
some new kinds of dilemmas
emerge in consequence
the case of Southeast Asia
is somewhat different
this was a period the post classical
in which a number of regional kingdoms
emerged in Southeast Asia
Thailand in Burma in parts of present
day Malaysia and in parts of Indonesia
but at the same time
this was a region that received
significant cultural and commercial
influence from several other
sources most important initially
was of course India
and we've noted earlier that Indian
traders reached into this region
and sometimes brought with them Hinduism
the spread of Buddhism
from India was even more striking
and from India also came inspiration
to a number of regional
writing systems which were adapted
but nevertheless which
utilize the Indian model
so an Indian derivation remains
extremely significant
but Chinese influence would come in as well
particularly in the form
of increasing trade activity
from the Song dynasty onward
this among other things
began to establish communities of Chinese
merchants in certain parts of Southeast Asia
this would expand later on as well
so the Indian influence
is modified by Chinese
contacts and then by the end of the
post classical period a third stream
of influence coming in
in the form of Islam
and Islamic merchants
actually gaining the greatest religious
success in this in many parts of this
region of any of the three influences
this then Southeast Asia
is a region that clearly
is an active recipient of outside
influences an active
zone of commercial exchange
and travel exchange
but in which the fact that several different
influences combined
with local traditions sets up
a pattern that's rather different
from the Japanese and Russian cases
where there's a single model
which the society's attempted to follow
Western Europe
constitutes the fourth major case
in the pattern we're discussing today
West Europe obviously
needed some things
less than Japan
and Russia did from its
potential inspirers
it already had an alphabet
inherited from classical Rome
it already had through
missionary activities early in the post
classical period it already had
a religion although in one sense
this religion is borrowed it's not
native to Western Europe
as is well known
but West Europe did
see the advantage West European leaders
of various sorts political cultural
and economic did see clear
advantages in
imitating contacts
both with the Byzantine Empire
and with the Arab world
in part as is quite well known
in medieval European history
it utilized these contacts to
regain knowledge of
classical learning scientific
and philosophical particularly
literary to some extent because
the Byzantines and the Arabs
preserved Hellenistic and Roman
knowledge better than have been
the case in West Europe itself
but imitating
the classics via these
models is really not the main point
from the Muslims and from
the Byzantines West Europeans
also imitated
a variety of technologies
and the eagerness
of West European technological
imitation becomes a striking aspect
of the post classical period
it imitated scientific concepts
again partly these
were derived from Greek and Hellenistic
work but Europeans also
benefited very directly from
Arab advances in medicine
in mathematics and in other
fields the West Europeans
borrowed philosophically
the Arab debate over
the boundaries between faith and reason
was a debate that was
transmitted back into Europe where
it made a great deal of sense in terms
of Christian interests in rationalism
as well
there was significant borrowing
in the area of art
the Gothic arch that
quintessential artistic symbol
of post classical
Western Europe was in part
adapted from the characteristic
Islamic arch the engineering
principles were essentially the same
and the stylistic features
very similar legal
limitations also occurred
West Europe borrowed extensively
from Islamic
innovations in commercial law
among other things learning that one
could identify certain principles of commercial
law that could transcend
political boundaries and help protect
merchants regardless of specific
location the
West European debt in other words
whether acknowledged or not
to Islamic and Byzantine example
was considerable this is
not a case exactly like that
in Japan and Russia the imitation
is a little more diffuse
two societies are being utilized
not just one but
the notion of this as
an extensive period of western imitation
is an important
addition or at least
a heightened emphasis
for our view of post classical
Western Europe in this larger
world history period
and we need to talk as we will next time
we need to talk about what
this partial revision does
to our sense of the
emergence of western civilization more
generally the imitation
process going back to
the general phenomenon
raises one final question that's actually
intriguing for the period itself
and possibly carry
some interesting implications even for
more contemporary situations
we've stressed particularly
with Japan and Russia but really
for all four cases we've stressed the extent
to which along with technologies
cultural forms
and styles seem to have been
particularly eagerly sought
and one wonders why
were these simply
what were most impressive about the societies
when student groups
or merchants visited
the great buildings the great artistic
works the
polished literature
or was there a need
as these new civilization
regions were beginning
to get going in the civilization
process was there a need first
to establish some cultural
bases before other things could be
done because the striking
omission
from the pattern of imitation
though not for want of trying
was significant capacity
to imitate the model in the
area of politics and here
we need to go back to three
separate stories those stories
with ultimately the same point
Japan, Russia
and Western Europe were keenly aware
that political models
existed
that were considerably superior
to their own decentralized
political situation
as Japan began to imitate China
there was a deliberate and frankly
quite understandable desire
to import the Chinese imperial system
after all Japanese princes
were sponsoring the
Japan voyages they
surely wish to enhance their own
political power what better
than to introduce a powerful
notion of emperor a powerful
bureaucracy supplemented by
Confucianism so for the better
part of the century the Chinese
example was
widely incorporated into
Japanese political activity
but the effort failed
Japan simply could not at that
point sustain that degree
of centralization
mountain and island barriers
possibly impeded lack of political
experience and legitimacy
possibly impeded but as
Japan successfully
imitated aspects of Chinese culture
economic activity social forms
it notably departed from
Chinese example in politics
and the Japanese
solution during the bulk of the
post classical period would be
a form of feudalism a form of
alliance between regional
lords and vassals
that led to a great deal of internal
warfare could be utilized
to construct some larger political
patterns could be utilized
to inspire larger systems
of loyalty that many people have
argued are extremely influential
in Japanese history since that
point but which is definitely
did not generate anything
like the Chinese political model
Russia as we've already noted
Russian leaders were keenly
aware of Byzantine political
example and Russian rulers
were capable of pronouncements
that could make them sound like
junior league Byzantine autocrats
so they could say my subjects
will do this my subjects will
convert to Christianity as though
they wielded the power of
a great imperial bureaucracy
they did not Russia
had central rulers
during much of the post classical
period some initially perhaps
imported from Scandinavia
but they did not establish
a tightly organized political system
there was a great deal of looseness
a great deal of negotiation
and horse trading between the ruler
and local aristocrats
this was a decentralized political system
despite the existence
of a clear centralized political model
and the West European
case broadly speaking is
just interestingly similar
the West Europeans had one clear
shot at a more
centralized coordinated
political structure and this shot
occurred under Shalemain
in the early 9th century
Shalemain
was clearly aware of the Roman
Empire's example but he was also
aware of the Byzantine Empire
and of the Arab caliphate and there was
a clear interest in developing
a large central
kingdom or empire and
Shalemain's realm extended to northern Italy
very northern Spain
through France the low countries and parts
of western Germany it was an impressive
geographic amalgam
and briefly it looked like
western Europe might beat the odds
and at an early phase of its development
managed to create
a substantial and possibly
sophisticated political structure
but like the Japanese effort with China
this attempt failed
Shalemain lacked the resources
and possibly the experience
to set up a really
independent bureaucracy
he ended up reinforcing
West European feudalism which was
a system interestingly similar
to that which was the Japanese fallback
Shalemain's heirs
his grandson split his
realm into three
hinting at the later development
of France on the one hand
Germany on the other and then
an intermediate territory that would always
be something of a no man's land
embracing the low countries
Switzerland northern Italy
etc and the
effort simply found
West Europe during the post classical period
emerged as yet another society
in which
loose political structures
loose political rule predominated
so obvious question
is this somehow
a
logical pattern
in which societies that prove quite
capable of imitating
aspects of other societies
cultures and who use this
imitation rapidly
to speed up artistic, literary
and cultural development
are these simply
inherently
less able to utilize political
example does culture have to come
first is there a period of
political gestation necessary
before a society can imitate
another society's political
achievements
and if this is so is this
a case in point that still applies in the world today
we have a number
of instances in the world today
in which societies
seek or are told to
seek a political inspiration
from societies who have
more political experience
is this a particularly hard thing
to imitate or is the
experience of the post classical period
where politics clearly lag
behind culture
is this simply confined to that period
and no longer applicable to the world today
I don't have an answer to this
question but I think the post classical
patterns do pose an intriguing
question
the post classical period saw
obviously a great deal
of deliberate and a
substantial amount of successful
imitation new connections
were forged between societies
in which civilization was
a new phenomenon and societies
in which the patterns were better
established these connections
were never complete
these connections never
erased issues about
civilization definition
as between Russian Byzantium
Japan China etc
but the fact that the questions
could be raised at all suggests
the importance of the imitation process
and one final point is equally
obvious
all at least
three of the major cases explored
today involve societies
Japan Russia and western Europe
that during the post classical period itself
were clearly
somewhat on the peripheries
of the most sophisticated patterns
available in the world at that time
they did not have as
advanced economies they did not
generate the goods for trade
that the more established centers did
and as we've just been discussing
they clearly fell short
of the political standards of China
the caliphate or the Byzantine empire
but these three societies
and possibly southeast Asia
should be tossed into the mix as well
would use this period of
imitation as gestation
for a later emergence
in world history in a much stronger fashion
and thus we see this period
not only as one of imitation
but one of unwitting
preparation of societies
that would later play
a much greater and more independent role
on the world scene
The great Indian leader Gandhi
according to the story at least
was once asked
what he thought about western civilization
and he replied
I think it would be a very good idea
he presumably was questioning
at a time he was in struggle with the British
whether the west was civilized
he presumably was not questioning
whether the west was western
I want to use the discussion today
to muse a little bit about
western civilization
in the world history context
we'll be focusing on
two topics primarily
both of which have a bearing
on the west
as part of the post classical world
the first topic is
when an identifiable western tradition
can be uncovered
and what it consisted of
and the second more focused
involves situating the west
in the post classical world
we've already begun that process last time
by talking about western Europe
as one of several imitating societies
with some distinctive twists
but part of a larger pattern
and we'll certainly come back to that notion
but I want to add some issues
about particular patterns
of western trade
and particular patterns of western
dynamism
toward the end of the post classical period
the relationship between
the history of western civilization
we've already touched on
it is frankly complicated
you can't do both exactly at once
at least you can't do
a full western civ program
in the framework of world history
because the result would be
to crowd out other societies
or to view other societies
either as irrelevant
or as worth noting only when they're in contact
with the west and we've already seen
the world historians really think that's a
bad approach
to stick to the west itself
and not pretend you're dealing with the world
as a whole at all
I want to be discussing today
not just the issue
of how much west
can one deal with in a world history program
I want to be talking about
what I think is a more subtle
but also very real issue
involving the western civ tradition
when looked at through world history
and that's the extent to which
the west is sometimes viewed
almost unanalytically
as if it's a given that requires
no particular thought
we can begin the discussion
by situating the west
among certain other kinds
of definitional issues
we've already evoked
I would argue for example
and all of this is open to discussion
I would argue for example
that it's harder
to pinpoint the western tradition
its origins and its
precise characteristics
than it is with regard to China
or India
China obviously
has a tradition that goes back
presumably to the Shang dynasty
certainly to the classical period
and it always involves
certain elements of the state
Confucianism
certain aspects of
a technology tradition etc
Indian history does not necessarily
effectively go back
to this civilization on the subcontinent
Harappan civilization
we don't know about links there
but certainly once Indian society
gets going in the classical period
with the caste system, with Hinduism
with certain characteristic political
features you can start talking
about an Indian tradition
that's identifiable
in its linkage between the classical
period and today vastly changed
I mean neither of these traditions
neither the Chinese nor the Indian
but there's a clear pattern
western civilization
it seems to me is more complicated
partly because of the
fall of the Roman Empire in the west
it is of course common
and justifiable
to go back to the classical
period in looking for the origins
of the western tradition
and elements are certainly going to be there
either because they persisted
despite the fall of Rome
or because they were later revived
but
there are also two problems
in looking at the classical
period as the origins of the west
and these need to be noted as well
problem number one
we've emphasized before
but it really bears repeating
is the extent to which the classical
Mediterranean tradition fed
not only the west but also
a number of other societies
Eastern Europe quite obviously
the Arab world as well
this fact makes it a little bit
difficult to pull out
exactly what's western in this tradition
for example
classical Greek and Hellenistic
science unquestionably
had a lingering influence
an impact that survived
the classical period itself
but we've seen that this tradition
was actively taken up
in the Arab world
and in a sense in the post classical
period western science
partly because it copied the Arabs
was really part of a scientific
community that was indeed
partially derived from Greece and Hellenism
but was widely shared
and not distinctively western at all
later arguably
the west will produce a more
decisively different scientific tradition
but at this point frankly
it's a bit hard to pull out
the same thing holds to the great debate
between rationalism and faith
this was a debate that turns out
to have been shared in the post classical period
in Islam and in western Christianity
alike interestingly it was not a debate
that particularly affected eastern
Christianity in other words
there's heritage to the classical tradition
unquestionably it's not
always distinctively western
the second problem
in overemphasizing the classical
origins of a western
strand
the second problem involves
how much of the classical tradition
did not survive or at least did not
survive in any direct sense
take a simple but not
in significant example
classical Greek and Roman
attitudes toward homosexuality
did not form part of the west's
later tradition with regard to homosexuality
was a very different pattern
whether the pattern emerged
at the outset of Christianity
or only later in the post classical
period has been debated
but there's simply no classical
connection to characteristic
western attitudes toward homosexuality
in so far as this forms a part
if a subterranean part
of a western tradition
or take that staple
and here I'm going to be very candid
I'm editorializing a little bit
take that staple of American education
the notion that the west's
democratic tradition
goes back to Greece and Rome
okay
Athens had a democracy
it's not exactly the modern form
of democracy but that's quibbling
it was a democracy
Rome had a subordinate democratic
element in its republican constitution
although its main emphasis was
on aristocratic rule
so unquestionably there is a democratic
strand in the classical
Mediterranean past
it was not the predominant strand
but it was there
unquestionably also
by the time one gets to the late 17th
centuries and western thinkers
are beginning to think about democracy
again they will hark back
to Greco-Roman example
I don't think this caused their
thinking but it certainly provided
some rhetorical cover
and in that sense there is a tiny bit
of connection but we're talking
about a gap of
almost 2,000 years
between the classical instance of
democracy and anything like
the contemporary western one
where's the filler, where's the connection
frankly there isn't much
democratic ideas appear in the west
almost not at all
in the post-classical period
there is a brief possibility
in one
popular rising in Rome
in which classical traditions
may have been still evoked
and remembered but
the notion of a western strand
of democracy stretching from the classical
period to the present
I think is very least
highly debatable and in my view
it's a non-starter, it's a historical
distortion, it's understandable
because it lets us think that
this political system we value today
has these really
venerable roots
but it just doesn't work
so
if the classical period
raises two crucial kinds
of questions about western origin
what are the options
nobody's denying by the way
that some segments of the classical
past would survive
or be revived
and would form part of the western
self-perception
I don't think
to take another tack
I don't think that defining the western tradition
defining the west as a civilization
is
as problematic as say defining
Japanese or Russian civilizations
issues we talked about in our previous
discussion. Japan
raises huge questions about
whether it should be seen as a separate
entity as a civilization
or as part of a larger
Chinese influenced East Asian whole
that issue does not clearly arise
for the western case
it's true of course that
one needs to think about some common
aspects to Christianity
which raise questions about the boundary
lines between the west
and the larger Christian
whole but on the whole
it seems to me most historians
have been reasonably comfortable
in arguing that the
marked divisions between
western and east European
versions of Christianity which
were sort of ratified and solidified
in the 11th century
with the great schism between
east and west. These divisions
in doctrine, in church
organization, in church state relationships
in religious artistic traditions
in philosophical traditions
these divisions make it
fairly clear that the western tradition
is not Christianity
as a whole but a subset
of it, initially obviously
organized primarily by the Roman Catholic Church.
So
we're skeeting here
between
two levels of definitional difficulty
my argument is that the west
is harder to define
as a civilization tradition
than India or China
or maybe even the Middle East
but easier than certain cases
where imitation was even more rampant
as in the Japanese instance
or possibly the Russian.
I would argue
and this brings us back to the period
we're examining more generally
I would argue that it's in the
post-classical period specifically
that one really finds
some distinctive features that
become
fairly western and fairly durably so
although of course they too
will change over time just as
is true with any civilization tradition
and if this is so
what are these features
let me suggest three or four
first
in the post-classical period
obviously the west
was defined by Roman Catholic Christianity
so there was
in that particular version of Christianity
the origins of
some distinctive western features
and there was also an organizational
basis that one can look to
as well
obviously the western
tradition of Christianity
posited a certain degree of separation
between a distinct church
institution, a distinct religious tradition
and political structures
now these distinctions
could be blurred in point of fact
states often muscled in on the church
and the church often muddied
its own waters by calling on state aid
when it might have been better suited
to try to solve its own problems by itself
but
the notion of a distinctive version of Christianity
and
a partial separation
between a religious sphere
and a political sphere
strike me as one element
in what one might call
an emerging western tradition
different obviously from the
East European Christian tradition
and other parts of Asia
as well
second component
the
post classical period
through the particular western form
of feudalism, its dominant political system
not
immediately but ultimately
developed a clear
if at this point
pre-modern
parliamentary tradition
feudalism was ultimately taken to
read that rulers had
something of an obligation
to consult with their vassals
and possibly other elements of their
constituency
in making certain crucial decisions
particularly where taxation
and budgets were involved
this parliamentary tradition
which flowed out of western feudalism
it didn't result from
Japanese feudalism which had a
rather different if equally important
later heritage
and parliamentary tradition
shows up in Spain
in England and elsewhere
by the 13th centuries
and becomes a durable part
of western political structures
most of the time thereafter
there are other traditions
in other parts of the world
that also involve consultation
with councils
one doesn't want to overdo this distinctiveness
but along with church-state relations
in western Christianity
we can posit this as at least
a possible defining piece
a third component
and this one needs to be stated
particularly carefully
involves the
political power
and independence
of western merchants
as their traditions emerged
in the post-classical period as well
now the care here needs to be directed
toward emphasizing
that the west was not the world's
leader in the post-classical period
it wasn't even necessarily
a leader in capitalism
Islam had a great deal more capitalism
than the west did at this point
but what I'm arguing here is that
as western merchants began to gain
greater dynamism
participating in trade
throughout various sectors of Europe
and then even in inter-regional trade
their vigor
their commercial activity
was less constrained by political
regulation
then would be true in the Middle East or China
other centers of actually more sophisticated
merchant activity
but where state regulation
and state supervision were more
present as well
here then are three possibilities
others might add a couple
of additional in addition to
church and church-state
parliament
and a particular
sphere of independence from merchants
some
authorities on western Europe in this
period have argued that Christianity
helped the west generate
a particular sense of the superiority
of man over nature
that would make the west particularly
interested in new technologies
not at this point a world technological
leader but particularly interested
in new technologies
either of their own invention
or as they could be borrowed from other societies
this is at least worth thinking about
and finally although this one actually
develops more clearly
a bit later on there's an interesting
argument about a distinctive kind
of western family structure
that would emerge beginning
at the end of the post-classical period
and then intensifying
in the centuries thereafter a family
structure in which ordinary
people married fairly late
thus having an emphasis
on nuclear families
husband wife families
in which wives and husbands had
to collaborate or
conflict particularly directly
that contrasted with the extended family
traditions that described
actually most of the rest of the world
one way or another here's another
interesting western ingredient
a less expected one that might
be worked into a definition
of western origins
alright the first issue then
involves the possibility
that we are
well served in looking
at the post-classical period
as really a formative one for western civilization
in which
certain classical traditions
could be incorporated
or reutilized in which
certain activities developed
simply as a result of imitation
of other societies
but in which in a few crucial areas
of political relationships
social and economic relationships
something of a set of western
themes is beginning to emerge
that we can trace
from that point onward
just as we can trace
indian or chinese traditions
even earlier on
the second aspect
of positioning the west in the post-classical
period is in one sense
an easier one and we started the process
again by talking about the west
as an imitator
the west obviously
if you look at the west in relationship
to the other societies operating
in the post-classical period
the west was long
a rather backward society
Muslims
who were not necessarily
totally intolerant of christianity
tended to look on west europeans
as clumsy
unsophisticated
possibly good warriors
a somewhat football player image
of western society
that we perhaps have retained traces of
even today
this was not
a western civilization that commanded great respect
in islam and doubtless the muslims
were being unfair just as we've
returned the favor in more recent periods
but the sense of a
serious civilization gap
was perceptible
and to some extent defendable
in terms of the west's position
in world affairs
the west obviously
many western leaders
in various spheres of activity
felt this gap
directly as well
this is why among other things
they proved such eager imitators
this is why they frequently traveled
to other places
in muslim spain
in the bizantine empire in egypt
and were filled with awe
at the
standards of living at the urban cultures
they encountered there
this is why the crusades
called obviously
in a burst of a sense of
religious superiority and obligation
called to urge
western leaders to retake
the holy land from islam
this is why the crusades actually
ended up having
their primary impact on the west
as a revelation
of the gap between western living standards
and those of the middle east as a spur
to new levels of western trade
and western consumption
western society in the
post classical period
poised I think somewhat uneasily
between a firm
conviction
sometimes pressed to the point of absolute
cruel intolerance
a firm conviction that this was a society
that possessed essential religious
truth as no other society
did
on the one hand
and on the other a nagging sense
that despite this religious superiority
virtually every other
aspect this society
was somewhat backward
somewhat lagging
the west also faced
a particular issue
that
we need to discuss a little bit today
and then come back to as we go back
to a larger world schema
we've seen and it's quite obvious
that the west participated actively
in
post classical trade
increased as
western society
gained vigor particularly from about
900 or 100 CE
onward
western merchant activity pressed into the
Mediterranean
Italian ships particularly from
Venice and Genoa
began to carry trade actively
in the Mediterranean
ferrying passengers and goods
from Islamic societies as well as from the west
itself the west entered
increasingly into
interregional trade patterns
but it did so with two obvious
disadvantages the first
is fairly well known but deserves
emphasis and that was the extent
to which it inevitably
for some of the goods that were most sought
after in the west from interregional
trade it inevitably
depended on Islamic middlemen
it had to go western traders had
to go to Egypt
or to the eastern Mediterranean
order to seek the goods that would come
from India from China
or the Middle East itself
and this meant a quite simply
in terms of economics
a an additional price
to pay to an additional
series of middlemen
but even more it meant
the necessity of dealing
with emissaries
of a religion that was viewed as
heretical and inferior
to Christianity an awkward
cultural position as well as a
slightly awkward economic one
the bigger problem however
was what in
modern parlance we would call
a balance of payments issue
the west wanted
goods from various parts of Asia
it wanted spices it wanted
silks etc
what was it to use
to pay for these goods
western manufacturing
offered almost nothing to
trade
it was a manufacturing system that improved
during the post classical period itself
textile products became
better new kinds of
woolens were introduced so within
the western sphere itself
there were clear manufacturing gains
but this was simply not world class
manufacturing
the west had no distinctive
minerals or agricultural products
to offer there was a little bit of gold
available and the west had some silver
sources but it was not nearly as well
endowed in this regard as say
Africa was
so the west faced
an obvious dilemma
it wanted goods
that it had difficulty paying for
in terms of the
strengths of the western economy itself
a revealing moment
occurred now this is strictly slightly
after the post classical period itself
but it carries the themes onward
that I'm discussing here a revealing
moment occurred when the
Portuguese explorer Vasco de Gama
rounded the southern tip of Africa
and reached India
in 1498-99
he brought with him on this first trip
some western
textile goods
woolens that the Indians didn't want
they had much better textiles
he brought some crude metal pots
and products Indians
didn't want those they had much better metal
products he happily did
bring some gold
this they did like and this allowed him
to purchase enough to take Indian
products back to Portugal
and persuade the king that a regular
series of voyages
would be desirable in the future
without the gold he would have been
lost and as we will
discuss later when he went back the second
time he had a remedy
but it was not a remedy that reflected any
particular European economic gains
Europe then
existed in the post classical world
as a
an increasingly eager
participant
in larger
Afro-Eurasian patterns
but a participant at some disadvantage
either because
of the
greater recency of
cultural and political and economic
achievements or because of basic
resource position or both
one response
and this is clearly emerging
in the post classical period itself
one response
was to become particularly
eager imitators
of developments and particularly
technological developments elsewhere
and here to a real
extent the west would luck out
toward the end of the post
classical period two things
happened that began to
create new opportunities for the west
in the first place
regional competitors
particularly the Byzantine Empire
to a lesser degree the Arabs
regional competitors
encountered some new difficulties
Arab political unity shattered
the Byzantine Empire
declined increasingly to the extent that
that western
trips actually rated Constantinople
during the fourth crusade
this may have relaxed some of the
tension on western Europe but the more
important point was that
new opportunities arose
to borrow major
new technologies from other
societies that could help the
west over time answer
the question how do we get out
of this fix how do we
more clearly match our sense
of religious superiority to
our relationships with our neighbors
how to resolve the balance
of payment problems in ways
that will allow us to participate
more successfully more freely
in larger world trade
the imitation opportunities
occurred vis-a-vis
the Middle East and from the Middle East
we've seen the west eagerly
borrowed a number of technological
and cultural devices but opportunities
also opened up in
new western connections with China
and from China at the end of
the post classical period the west
would take a number of
technological items the compass
we've mentioned before but the great
ones were explosive powder
invented by the Chinese
and used by them for military purposes
but on a somewhat limited
scale the west would
learn about explosive powder
would adopt it as their own and would
by the early 14th century begin
to add formally made
guns to the utilization of
this powder guns and cannon
in ways that differed from Chinese
patterns and the second great
borrowing utilized a little
later was of course the printing press
initially invented in Korea
and China carried to western Europe
during the same late post
classical period and put to
use by a variety of inventors
but particularly Gutenberg
in 1450 right at the end of
the period in question
it's always possible
to look at the west at the end
of the post classical period at a point
where the west is on the verge
of beginning to
assert a new and more active
world role it's always possible
to look at internal
developments in the west itself
quite clearly
western political
capacities were beginning to improve
in the last centuries in the post classical
era with the emergence of feudal monarchies
very clearly
military rivalries in the west
the frequency of war the frequency
of feudal conflict or conflict
among monarchies helped spur
the west's interest particularly
in technological developments
either imported or home grown
that had military implications
Christian inspiration
in the crusades
or later in Spain and Portugal
as they chased the Muslims out
during the
later stages of the post classical period
Christian missionary
inspiration might inspire
the west to new levels of activity
and early facets of the Renaissance
presumably a new spirit
in western cultural affairs
might inspire
new western activity onward
there's no question
that textbooks in western civilization
routinely assume
that changes within the west
in the later post classical
centuries leading to the Renaissance
were the crucial determinants
of later western activity
in the world as a whole
but a world historian
I think can legitimately
and I don't think this is an anti-western stance
take a slightly more cautious view
possibly
new opportunities for imitation
and the results
in terms of new world role
actually came first
and then helped inspire
changes internally in the west
that would amplify the western tradition
that would build on it
in ways that become familiar parts
of the western story
we're talking in this session
an extraordinary period in world history
that covers much of the 13th
and 14th centuries
100 to 150 years
this is a period that
can be known now as the
Mongol era or interlude
in world history
and it had some decisive results
for
most of the societies
in Europe and Asia
although the results differed
from one case to the next
I can't think of
a people
that have been so
reconstituted
in the historical view
as have been the Mongols
in the last decade or so
when I took history
if the Mongols were mentioned at all
it was with a grimace and an apology
because they were bloodthirsty barbarians
who killed a lot of people
to no purpose whatsoever
more recently
they would be seen
as an unusually
tolerant people
who managed to establish a political system
that facilitated
interregional contact
to a greater extent
than had ever before been possible
or would be possible for some time thereafter
in world history
a decisive interlude
in which the general theme
of interregional contact
was directly intensified
in ways that in broad outline
would survive
the Mongol period itself
though we need to come back to this
at the end of the discussion today
in 1999 the Economist magazine
a respectable
rather conservative British
periodical
named Chinggis Khan
the man of the millennium
an extraordinary accolade
think of all the other candidates
now this was probably partly due
to military achievements
here was a nomadic leader
who managed to defeat
much of one of the great civilizations
in history at the time
the Chinese
but it was really more a tribute
to Chinggis as the first
of a succession of Mongol rulers
who would manage to administer
conquest
reasonably wisely
and who would use conquest
deliberately to accelerate
the contact among different kinds
of people
whether he deserves the honor or not
frankly is immaterial I think
the notion of choosing the man
or the person of a thousand years span
is a little silly
I would want at least three choices personally
but the revision is striking
the Mongols have now a
if anything a revered place
in world history
in contrast to the dustbin
to which they'd been traditionally
relegated probably
as in any revision this one may have
pressed a bit too far
the Mongols could be cruel
Chinggis Khan could kill
urban civilians
in order to set examples to other cities
so they would yield more quickly
to his forces after all
the Mongols did not have a terribly
numerous army and they needed to use
devices of intimidation
to bolster their chances of success
and undoubtedly Mongol
rulers subsequently
were not only seen as
disruptive and terrifying but
could be disruptive and terrifying
certainly that was the widespread
impression among Russians
as Mongol invasions
penetrated that society
so we don't need to
whitewash the slate entirely
there are downsides to the
Mongol experience but
and here we may perhaps
not pay sufficient attention
to the casualties and cruelties of the past
but the dominant revisionist picture
does seem valid
this was an important episode
in world history that
furthered connections in ways
that had durable results
and to some extent began a process
of reshuffling among major societies
in ways that would have
durable consequences as well
we don't know
precisely why
the Mongols decided to invade China
this was in one sense
the last and it was the
last of a series of
eruptions from Central Asia
from the nomadic territories
of Central Asia that had
earlier seen groups like the
Indo-Europeans, the Huns
pour out probably some
combination of population pressure
in a nomadic economy that was
fairly fragile and political
rivalries which were undoubtedly
involved in the immediate
development of Chinggis Khan
probably some combination
encouraged the Mongols to look
to the rich society to their east
and divisions in
China itself
the Mongols had long been one of several
border people who were harassing
the Chinese and pressing into
what was traditionally Chinese territory
during the Song dynasty
probably opportunities in terms
of Chinese imperial decline
encouraged the process as well
in any event early in the 13th
century Chinggis Khan did invade
China and conquered a good bit
of it and the conquest was completed
in ensuing decades so that his
grandson the great Kublai Khan
the Khan that Marco Polo encountered
if indeed he went to China
the great Kublai Khan
was ruler of China
entire and this Mongol
rule in China known in Chinese
as the Yuan dynasty this
Mongol rule would last for
better part of the ensuing century
in China
the Mongols occupied a
really interesting and
distinctive position
they used the Chinese government
system they used
Confucian values and they used
the Chinese bureaucracy even though
many bureaucrats resented them greatly
the Mongols were
once in power at least tolerant
they saw the advantage of
not overturning established systems
they didn't insist on
identifying their own ways
and ramming them down people's throats
the Mongols did however
actually disapprove of many aspects
of Chinese values
they found Chinese court life stultifying
and continued to live in tents
outside capital cities
they didn't like the Chinese gender system
Mongols were
among the nomadic peoples
and nomads varied greatly in this regard
Mongols were among the nomadic peoples
who gave women a considerable voice
in political decision making
the wife of Kublai Khan
was instrumental
in calming him down on occasion
and urging that he adopt restraint
toward Chinese traditions
but no question the Mongols thought that
foot binding and the subjugation
of women in the post classical Chinese fashion
was a bad thing
and the Chinese reciprocated
by coming to
detest the Mongols
with that kind of resentment that combines
disdain for
barbarian unwashed peoples
I don't personally know Mongol bathing habits
the stereotype was probably pressed too far
but the combination of disdain
for a people viewed as inferior
who nevertheless had decisive power
and the Chinese
would work assiduously
to throw this new dynasty out
which they accomplished
toward the end of the 14th century
but actually
in China itself
brought clear economic benefits
Chinese manufacturing developed further
Chinese opportunities
to trade with other parts of the world
expanded
indeed the Mongols intensified
the kind of Chinese relationship
to the world network
that we have seen developed earlier
in the Song dynasty
prior to the Mongol incursion
in China also
the Mongols utilized
along with Chinese bureaucrats
a variety of foreign peoples
this was a regime
that was deliberately hoping
to open up the societies
it ruled
to a wider set of influences
so Christians from western Europe
were welcomed
Marco Polo and his uncles were presumably used
in Mongol administration
they had learned the Mongol language earlier
though they never learned Chinese
people from Persia were widely used
Nestorian Christians
a Christian branch
that had long since migrated
out of the Middle East
were used and their places of worship
newly tolerated
this was an interesting mix
of successful adaptation of Chinese customs
and
a sort of welcome mat
to people from other societies
and the net result clearly
was trade benefits for China itself
even though this did not overcome Chinese hostility
and a new openness to China
for peoples in a whole
host of other places
including of course western Europe itself
Mongol conquests
soon surpassed
the conquest of China
we've discussed earlier the importance
of the Mongol invasion of
the eastern part of the Middle East
where they conquered Baghdad
and overthrew the last Arab caliphate
a Mongol conate
was established in the eastern
Middle East including Persia
that held sway for several decades
Mongol conates
fanned out in Central Asia
so for the first time Central Asia became
somewhat
coherently politically organized
and the other great
conquest of the Mongols
involved Russia
toward the end of the 13th century
just as with the Middle East
and the Mongol success in overturning the caliphate
where earlier Arab
political divisions
increasingly unsuccessful
efforts at caliphate
rule helped prepare
a successful invasion
well before the Mongol invasion of Russia
Russian rulers were having increasing difficulties
with restive nobles
they were having problems
maintaining the coherence of the
of the Russian territory
so as is so often the case in history
successful invasion in this instance
combined with prior internal
weakness but the result
was a tremendous Mongol sweep
across European Russia
exempting only a very few territories
but interestingly
stopping short of pressing
beyond the boundaries of Eastern Europe
thus sparing Western Europe
and creating a new kind of division
between the Russian experience
and that of most of the rest of Europe
a division between direct Mongol rule
and a good bit of anxiety
but frankly ultimate freedom
from this kind of invading pressure
Mongol efforts also pressed
into Southeast Asia
at key points
there are no really durable
conquests involved but this was brought into
the Mongol horizon
to some degree
so by the
late 13th century
in what is one of the most
amazing sweep of successful invasions
in world history
is the most amazing
Mongol rule had established
Khanates
interlocking Khanates
tied by blood relations
and cultural affiliations
from China in the east
all the way to western Russia
in the west
from northern China
and Russia in the north
to the Middle East
and incursions into Southeast Asia
in the south
that simply had no precedent
in world history
the results are
familiar and important
it became increasingly
easy to travel
back and forth over land
from west to east
and east to west
European travelers were obviously
particularly important
Popes began to send Christian emissaries
to the Mongols
quite early with two purposes in mind
initially
the biggest goal was
defensive
papal emissaries wanted to persuade the Mongols
to stay out of western Europe
to stay out of Catholic territory
but gradually there emerged some hope
that religious missions
might convert some peoples
in the Mongol realms
including in China
and make contacts
with small Christian groups
in these regions as well
but a number
of papal emissaries went
and some increased knowledge
of China resulted
from these trips as well
the more famous trips
including of course the travels of the Polos
involved western merchants
particularly from Italy
though there were French and others as well
western merchants who went
to the Mongol realms
taking advantage of the safe passage
that the Khans could grant
better one con territory
and get a passage that would assure you
favorable protection as you went onward
and although we know of only a few
of these trips and again the Polos
are particularly important but there were trips
by a few European Jews
and others as well
the result actually uncovers
a surprising number of Europeans
who made it to China for one reason or another
there were European artists
established in China
European entertainers
who see a new place
possibly earn money in a new place
have a different kind of experience
was clearly widely stimulating
the consequences amplified
of course the kinds of
knowledge that
exchanges had already been
bringing to the world network
it was during this period
that Europeans had a particularly
clear opportunity to learn
about Chinese technologies
and to import some of them directly
they learned about some
that they didn't take full advantage of
for example Marco Polo
describes the use of charcoal
in smelting iron
the use of coal as well as charcoal
in smelting iron in ways that wouldn't
be widely taken over in Europe for some time
but key Chinese developments
particularly printing
an explosive powder
were crucial imports that passed
west from the east
at this point in time
and gradually
would begin to create a process
in which the huge
traditional technology gap
between east Asia and western Europe
would begin to be
somewhat closed
that perhaps was one of the crucial
long term results of this process
contacts also as they accelerated
in this period had a downside
it was in the Mongol period that the
black death began in China
and spread quickly
to the Middle East and Europe
the bubonic plague
presumably although there's some debate about this
bubonic plague presumably
began in the Gobi desert in western China
passed quickly
into eastern China
and then because of the trade
connections between China and other parts
of the world spread rapidly
elsewhere
bubonic plague began to be registered
in eastern port cities
by the middle of the 14th century
and in western European cities
a couple of decades thereafter
in both these cases
death rates were appallingly high
upwards of a quarter
to a third of the population
of western Europe in the Middle East
succumbed to the bubonic plague
in a
major population blow
that would obviously have
crucial effects on these societies
thereafter
interestingly, interestingly
on balance at least in the west European
case while the population blow
was huge and had major
dislocating effects
in wage relationships
labor relationships
and major implications as well
for religious
retreat against this wrath of God
interestingly
west European dynamism was not
as significantly dented by this population
blow as might have been
imagined and it's possible to suggest
that the
pluses of access to new technology
may actually have
outweighed the drawbacks of this level
of mortality though both factors
would weigh on the European experience
not just at this point
but for many decades and even
centuries thereafter
Mongol rule began
to decline
in the later part
of the 14th century
the Mongols were
unsuccessful in two efforts
at invading Japan by sea
and while this was not
necessarily a catastrophic
setback it did suggest
some clear limits to the
Mongol capacity to expand further
most clearly
the Chinese began
to organize more
effectively
against Mongol rule
and chased the Mongols out
in the later part of the 14th century
quickly establishing
a new
dynastic cycle within China
with the advent of the Ming dynasty
one of the dynasties that
tended to crop up after a crisis period
and could then enjoy
as the Ming did many decades
of subsequent success
Mongol rule in Russia
ended later
the Mongols had operated
in Russia as well as in China
fairly tolerantly
they didn't insist on for example
conversions away from Christianity
they levied
taxes on the Russians
but they didn't interfere intensively
in Russian administration
but the Russians unquestionably
viewed the Mongol period
as an outside tyranny
and indeed
perhaps because of previous
Russian decline the Mongol rule
in the spring
the economic benefits to Russia
that it did to China this was not
a vibrant society
under Mongol sway
but early in the 15th century
local Russian rulers
particularly around the
the Duchy of Moscow
local Russian rulers began to assert
increasing independence from the Mongols
and by 1450
sort of ending the post classical
period in the Russian case
began to establish an
autonomous Russian area
in the Moscow region
which became then the center of Russia
from that time onward somewhat eastward
from the Russian centers
during the post classical period itself
the expulsion
of the Mongols
from China and then from Russia
led to
interesting subsequent reactions
both of which indicated
the distaste that these peoples
had felt for Mongol control
but which pointed in rather
different directions
the Chinese would obviously be
preoccupied not just with chasing
the Mongols out but with creating
systems that might prevent their return
and the most coherent expression
of this was the beginning
of the dramatic reconstruction
of the Great Wall of China
to the form that it takes today
the Chinese wall previously
had been an earthenworks wall
this wall was brick
it allowed massive patrols
to operate on its surface
a huge huge investment
to seclude China
from this direction
of barbarian invasion
Russian reaction partly because
Russia was less protected by
natural frontiers
Russian reaction was more in terms of
a steady series of
conquests initially
designed to push the Mongols farther
back but a series that would
turn in to a durable Russian
commitment to expansionism
a reaction
in some ways rather similar to the Chinese
in both cases you want to do something
that will prevent this
dreadful occupation
from recurring but which
pointed specifically in quite opposite
directions defensive in the one instance
expansionist and aggressive
in the other and this obviously
would enter historical channels
in subsequent periods in world history
as well
the end of the Mongol period
for world history more generally
meant a return
to increasing political barriers
including just sheer brigandage
it's important to realize that
when we talk glibly about
interregional travel and trade
without political controls
one of the huge barriers
to regular contact
and one of the huge costs
of the Mongol system was the
frequency with which bandits could
beset groups of travelers
particularly in overland cases
but also on the seas
overland travel became less
possible
the opportunities to use
overland travel to reach between
Europe and China actually
receded considerably
for quite a good period of time
and thus the
specific
opportunities that the Mongol period had offered
come to an end
but there are further
repercussions
the Mongol period needs to be seen
as
something of a rebalancing
among
major societies in Europe
and in Asia
the impact on China
was considerable but in many ways
somewhat fleeting the Chinese
perhaps deepened their hostility
toward outsiders
they certainly as I've already indicated
created defensive reactions
designed to prevent this from happening in the future
but the Mongols had also
confirmed China's importance
in world manufacturing
and the Chinese would continue
to enjoy this position for
many centuries thereafter
an important
modification
of Chinese stance
therefore but not a fundamental disruption
the long-term Mongol impact
on Russia was
as I really have already suggested
more considerable in turning the Russians
from a
somewhat regional people
to an increasingly aggressive and expansionist
people this would be a major
theme of the next period in world history
and continues to be some
preoccupation even today
the Mongols had an interesting
impact on Japan
the Japanese
faced two Mongol invasions
and been spared
in one case because of a typhoon
that destroyed the Mongol fleet
the Japanese referred to this as a divine wind
the Japanese began to think
that
perhaps they were not only
along with China
the pinnacle of world civilization
but perhaps they were the pinnacle of world civilization
even aside from China
because after all the Mongols had taken China
they didn't take Japan
so a Japanese sense
of isolation
from superiority to
much of the rest of the world
and newly applying this
even to relationships to China
would be an interesting factor in world history
in the succeeding period
Mongol impact on Western Europe
was obviously
decisive
the Europeans simply lucked out
I don't think there's any other way to play it
this was just one of those fortunate accidents
in world history
that one needs to acknowledge
sometimes occur
the Europeans lucked out
the Mongols didn't invade them at all
there were some borderline clashes
in Hungary and elsewhere
but they did not have the cost
or anxiety of direct invasion
and the fear abated fairly quickly
as well
what they did get was the benefit
of this century
free contact with Asia
unusual opportunities to
import Asian technologies
and they used this to the hilt
as indicated
the Europeans whatever their other faults
or virtues turned out to be
an excessively
zealous imitating people
at this point
they knew a good thing when they saw one
they knew the advantages that
new kinds of weaponry could bring
in a society that was highly militaristic
in which each local ruler
each local feudal monarch
was interested in whatever
advantage could be obtained
so the Europeans took to Chinese
explosive powder
exceedingly quickly
and adapted it to new metallurgical
techniques that allowed the manufacture
of guns and cannons so that the explosive
force could be more clearly directed
and targeted
they would make use of printing as well
in ways that would have deep
implications for European culture
and bureaucracy
the Europeans in other words
clearly were the leading beneficiaries
from this Mongol
era
perhaps benefiting in part because
of their own alertness
to the possibilities of imitation
you don't want to withdraw
a European attribute here
but beneficiaries also
of a simple concatenation of forces
that has to be termed just
good luck
it would be stretching it
to apply the Mongol experience to other
societies but I do want to mention one
other case because we'll return to it
in a session quite soon
Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
had no particular
impact from the Mongol experience one way
or the other
African goods did reach the Mongols
this was part of the long distance trading
patterns
African animal products were used
as decoration by Mongol rulers
but the African
experience itself was not significantly affected
Africa continued to deal
with the rest of the world mainly
through the medium of Islamic traders
and these traders
were largely buffered from Mongol impact
this meant that Africa
was not disrupted
as some parts of the world were by the
Mongol experience but it also meant
that the Africans had no particular stimulus
to learn
from new technological opportunities
this was a
a null case in other words
that would contrast quite interestingly
with the experience of western Europe
the decline of the Mongol system
could have
overwhelmed
the pattern of intensifying
inter-regional contacts that we have so vigorously
emphasized for the post-classical
period it certainly
diverted contact opportunities
overland
contacts had to recede
the great travelers that we mentioned
a session ago the people like
Ibn Battuta who
utilized Mongol systems
as well as Islamic systems
to travel such long distances
in relative security these travelers
were increasingly a thing
of the past you couldn't do that
safely overland anymore
but the system was so successful
in its larger sense
the importance of exchanging goods
and information was so considerable
that it readily survived
the Mongols and the question
as ultimately posed
by the end of the 14th century
was not whether
world contacts would recede
that could have been a question it turned out
not to be because the importance
of contacts was so well established
the question rather was
what system under whose sponsorship
would replace the Mongols
and what roots would they use
the answer was almost surely
increasing use once again of waterways
but what roots would they use
and what societies would particularly benefit
this was again
an extraordinary world history period
sort of the last
fling
of the post-classical era
the system that briefly replaced
the system that the Arabs had created
earlier on
that extended
and extended its benefits
but it was not the last gasp
of global interconnections
that chapter was about to reopen
in new ways in the
15th century
one of the remaining puzzle pieces
to fit together for the post-classical period
involves dealing with
civilizations in the Americas
and in sub-Saharan Africa
and pretty obviously
that's the focus of our discussion right now
both cases illustrate
the broad theme of the expansion
of the geographical range
and variety of the
and of course
of the international
and of course
the expansion of the geographical range
and variety of civilizations
in the post-classical period
but we need to do more
than simply mention that obvious fact
we need to talk about
how we can use these final two cases
directly
or in one case indirectly
to illustrate some of the other key themes
of the post-classical period
civilizations in the Americas
began before the post-classical period
indeed for fairly obvious reasons
since the Americas were not
directly connected to Asia
Europe and Africa
the periodization of the
post-classical period is
somewhat artificially imposed on the Americas
early civilizations
emerged in Central America
and suggestions
of early civilization also a bit later
in the Andes
the post-classical period itself
captures the final
flowering of Mayan civilization
in Central America
the later decline of the Mayans
and the emergence of a mixed
Mayan Toltec society
in many parts of Central America
and then finally
still in Central America
the emergence in the mid-14th century
of a new Aztec empire
the Aztecs were in migrants
from the north coming in
to Central Mexico
and other parts of Central America
this Aztec empire was constructed
and would flourish
during much of the 15th
the post-classical period
also captures the development
of further civilization
activities in the Andes
and particularly though quite late
in the post-classical period
the emergence of the Inca empire
from about 1400 onward
stretching over an amazingly
long swath of territory
along the Pacific coast
of what is now Latin America
Key developments
in American civilizations
in this
post-classical period
obviously emphasize the continued
improvements in agriculture
American societies
were based on the cultivation
of several key crops
particularly corn
but also in the Andes the potato
a number of other additional
crops were added to this mix
the
emphasis on agriculture
the careful organization of cultivation
produced some amazing
population concentrations
and opportunities for the emergence
of impressive cities
by the
14th and 15th centuries
probably as many as 25 million people
concentrated in the
Central Mexican Plateau
around the capital city of the Aztecs
and this was a concentration
that rivaled any other
in the world
it would greatly impress early European visitors
who marveled at the
monumental style
of buildings in the cities
again the careful organization
of agriculture around irrigation systems
carefully terraced hillsides
etc
so agriculture
and a carefully organized agricultural economy
was one key feature
of these American civilizations
trading activities were also extensive
trading networks ran through Central America
and the Inca empire
was based on trading patterns
that actually not just connected
different parts of the Inca territory
but ran up and down the Andes mountains
with different specializations
at each level
and trade along this
altitude parameter as well
a second focus
along with the economy, agricultural and trade
a second focus for the American civilizations
involves the
emergence of
impressive and interesting cultural forms
these were
polytheistic societies
often particularly in Central America
focusing on some rather
fierce gods and goddesses
some of whom took animal form
which would inspire some interesting and dramatic art
American
cultures particularly again in Central America
also
emphasized impressive scientific
developments the Mayans were one of only
a few societies independently
to develop the concept of zero
they introduced an elaborate
set of calendar calculations
among other things they were aware
that the earth is round
the scientific achievements
of this society were most impressive
indeed
so the post classical period
sees an expansion
territorially of American civilizations
a further flowering of cultural
and economic developments
two impressive
empires developed toward
the end of the post classical period
both of them both the Aztec and the Inca
based on tributes
paid by subject people
in the case of Central America particularly
there was extensive use of slavery
but this is a
a key set of societies
that needs to be added to the list
of crucial developments
in the post classical period
this said there is a question
again fairly vigorously debated
about how you place
the American patterns
into a larger world framework
in this pre-Columbian
post classical age
Charles Mann recently published
a very impressive book
big book called 1491
in which he takes world historians
including myself
in one of my textbooks
to task by name
for failing to do
justice to the richness and detail
of pre-1492
American history
and the point is well taken
but there are a couple of issues
that I would
continue to stress even in
acknowledging the impressive
historical work that increasingly
builds our picture of what American
societies were like
and how rich and varied they were
before the arrival of the Europeans
the key point from
the world history standpoint
in addition to registering
on these important cases
and indicating some of their main outlines
the key point is to recognize
that these societies
were indeed isolated
they had no effective
contact with other parts
of the world and while this
in no sense hampered their development
during the post classical period
or indeed before again
impressive economic achievements
impressive cultural apparatus
it did create certain
vulnerabilities once
contact was established which obviously
began in 1492
the vulnerabilities were these
first of all
American societies for all
their impressive economic achievements
and in many ways this fact
makes the achievements even more significant
American societies
lacked certain key technologies
they had no metal use
they used gold and silver for ornamentation
but their weaponry
their tools did not
embrace metals
obviously had they had contact
with other societies
where metal use was established
this would have been fairly automatic
nor did they utilize the wheel
they had wheels
on toys interestingly
but they did not incorporate wheels
into other aspects of their activities
again this can make their capacity
to build large dense
population networks all the more
impressive but it certainly made
them vulnerable comparatively
once contact was established
so technology gap
is a key point
animal gap is a second point
the Americas
possessed relatively few
domesticated animals
there were guinea pigs
there were dogs there were turkeys
obviously potential sources of food
and in the Andes
there were light burden-carrying
animals in the llamas and alpacas
but the rich
mix of potentially
domesticable animals that existed
in Afro-Eurasia
was simply absent in the Americas
and this also would be a liability
not before 1492
but once contact was established
most important of course
was a disease gap
because they had
no routine contact
with other parts of the world
peoples in the Americas were
extraordinarily vulnerable
to diseases that had been
acclimatized
in Afro-Eurasia
notably diseases such as smallpox and the measles
again didn't matter
during the post-classical period
there was no new exposure
but once contact was established
again American societies
would suffer and frankly suffer quite dreadfully
this means obviously
that the
1492 divide
between the Americas
before contact and the Americas
after contact is
particularly crucial
because given technology
animal and disease vulnerabilities
American developments
would be
more fully
superseded
by European and African patterns
American
political
social and cultural leadership
would in essence be decapitated
and that means in turn
there's less obvious continuity
between the Americas
in the post-classical period
and what would happen next
so very important to recognize
that the developments
in the Americas were significant
important also to discuss
possibilities of casual contact
with the Americans all the time
who come up with the knowledge of this or that
National Geographic Special
and say but didn't the Polynesians
have an expedition that drifted to the Americas
wasn't their contact with Asia
and the answer is frankly
maybe yes but it didn't matter
because no contact was established
that was significant enough
to remove the Americas
from this category of isolation
from the larger world network
significant contact obviously
would have brought technological
diffusion would have brought animal diffusion
would have brought disease diffusion
and that would have altered
the face of American history
well before 1492
there are reasons to study the Americas
they can usefully be compared
with other early civilizations
some scholars have noted
a vague similarity for example
between the Inca Empire
with its emphasis on a divine ruler
and
ancient Egypt and they've contrasted this
with a slightly more Mesopotamian
like Central America
and this kind of comparison
is a useful addition
to our analysis of early civilizations
though it may not do
full justice to the Americas
there were certainly American legacies
to the wider world particularly in the category
of food and we don't want to
forget these aspects
either and finally perhaps most
important although
the American society was
overwhelmed after 1492
it was not absolutely obliterated
and important
traces of earlier artistic impulses
important traces
of polytheistic religion that could
be fused with Catholic
saints for example
important aspects of local village
organization and agricultural practice
these would survive particularly
in areas like Central America
and the Andes where concentrations
of Native American populations
were particularly great
but it's also important
to recognize the
legacy here was limited
the
problem of figuring out
how to integrate the
American patterns of the post classical
period with the larger patterns
remains considerable
I should add very briefly
that something of a similar dilemma
applies to activities in Pacific
Oceania during the post classical
period here too
societies had developed early
and they then became isolated
from larger patterns
important activities occurred
in for example Polynesia during the
post classical period with
the establishment of human settlements
in what is now known as New Zealand
but again these patterns
which were somewhat less
elaborate
than the civilizations of the Americas
although they included interesting artistic
efforts and interesting social and
political structures these efforts
also have to be taken as
a separate case an isolated case
that merely has to be noted
it can't easily be fit
into the larger patterns of world history
during this period
the case of Sub-Saharan Africa
is absolutely different
and indeed there's a risk in
pairing Africa and the Americas in this
period the clearest connection
is a fallacious one
but it needs to be mentioned
until fairly recently
African history was viewed
almost as much in no man's land
as American history has been
viewed until recently
example I had the privilege
a decade or so ago
of working on an encyclopedia
of world history a new edition
and the earlier edition
which was extremely impressive involved
all sorts of significant scholarship
noted literally literally one page
to developments in Sub-Saharan Africa
from the origins
of social activity
until the end of the post-classical
period i.e. until the arrival of the Europeans
and while this coverage had
a few interesting bits
of data it was shrouded with
statements like early African
history is
covered by obscurity etc etc etc
this is absolutely wrong
we now know a lot
about post-classical African
history and even African history
before that point we know that
it was quite varied and we know that in
fact in contrast to the Americas
it fit quite directly
into the larger patterns of the post-classical
period including
active connections with what we've
described earlier as the world network
agriculture
and ironworking were introduced early
into Africa and in the case of agriculture
may have actually been independently
invented there can't be sure
again we know
there were several cases of
discrete invention and the African case
is a possibility
the spread of agriculture and ironwork
south of the Sahara
proceeded relatively
steadily
before the post-classical
period itself and then during the early
centuries of the post-classical period
an important effort of diffusion
was undertaken in a process
known as the great Bantu migrations
with peoples originally located
in west-central Africa
steadily migrating southward
and then eastward bringing
agriculture and ironworking with them
and in their wake increasingly
also possibilities
for new kinds of political organization
the spread of the Bantus
was a major development also
in terms of connections among African
language groups it's an important
process which again precedes
the post-classical period but continues
during its early phases as well
early civilized
activities in sub-Saharan Africa
focused as we've already noted
in the upper Nile
area in some connection to
developments in Egypt
significant states and cultures
developed in Kush and Ascom
in the upper Nile region
and then
there followed the development
of Ethiopia and
the establishment of an Ethiopian state
these activities were
in considerable connection
with patterns in the Middle East and the
Eastern Mediterranean which is one
reason that Ethiopia very early
received influences from Judaism
and then later from Christianity
becoming one of the major Christian
strongholds on the
sub-Saharan African subcontinent
in the post-classical
period itself as we have already
suggested in earlier discussions
two centers of activity
developed particularly in sub-Saharan
Africa one stretching
along the Indian Ocean coast
in mixed Arab African
communities the Swahili belt
a very active set of trading societies
developing
a written language developing
city-state type political organizations
obviously in
close commercial
and cultural contact
with the Middle East particularly
larger kingdoms
emerged in
sub-Saharan West Africa
sometimes they're called
Sudanic kingdoms after the Arab word
for black they began
with the Kingdom of Ghana
which actually originated slightly
before the post-classical period
these kingdoms and there were
numerous examples
these kingdoms featured frequently
fairly large territorial holdings
powerful rulers
kings who would claim great
authority and who would surround
themselves with impressive rituals
and considerable majesty
the territories
also experienced
increasing trade activity
including trade activity that would connect
West Africa across the Sahara
to North Africa and the Middle East
the capacity to tax
merchant activities was one of the sources
of revenue of these newly
imposing states
cultural apparatus proceeded considerably
as well
West African art featured
a variety of designs
but a fairly
close emphasis on work
in sculpture both metal working
and woodworking creating designs
that continue to have a characteristic
resonance when you look
at our African artistic patterns
in a larger global context
in other words this was a period
of important commercial
political and cultural development
in West Africa
there are a couple
of interesting questions
that need to be addressed
in
characterizing
the Sub-Saharan African patterns
again in a framework that can be
fit into the larger network
of world history the first question
is
the most fundamental this is a
great big place
the African subcontinent
is the second largest landmass
in the world second only to Asia
it
has all sorts of climatic conditions
all sorts of
geographical features
and it is forcing things
a bit to talk about
African civilization
when so much variety exists
still
while recognizing this issue
it is possible to suggest
there were a few characteristic
African themes that would crop
up particularly in the
Sedanic kingdoms of West Africa
but in some cases beyond as well
theme number one
was a vigorous emphasis
on polytheism
and a use of polytheism
to emphasize the close connections
between human activities
and the forces and features
of nature this is
not necessarily a strikingly
different version of polytheism
but it certainly provided
a cultural
explanation for a variety of phenomena
for Africans it served as the
framework for a good bit
of natural medicine
combination of herbal treatments
and invocations
of divine spirits
it was an important cultural
framework second feature
again particularly vivid in
West Africa was a
tendency to emphasize
the divinity of major rulers
divine kingship not a
uniquely African product
was an important feature
of many African political
efforts
emphasis on extended families
and the connections between
individuals in this life and ancestors
was a third feature
African families frequently
for example banded together
to protect widows
not uncommon in many regions of Africa
for families to feel an obligation
for a brother
of a deceased husband
to marry a widow and there can be emphasis
here on the importance of social
solidarity
the importance of familial protection
these features fairly general I admit
can be used to
give at least some baseline
for discussions of African characteristics
that would cut across
particular states and even
regions
a second question about Africa
which goes back to
the long uncertainty about
African history before
the arrival of Europeans
a second feature of African history
is the
complicated relationship
between African developments
in the post classical period and before
and what we might call the great traditions
the great religious
and philosophical systems that
frankly for the most part developed
elsewhere not in Sub-Saharan
Africa proper
Sub-Saharan Africa was a recipient
of great traditions just as
frankly Europe was
and we need to recognize
that African development
would feature the manipulation of great traditions
the combination of these traditions
with more local elements
Africans did not
collectively seize in the long run
on only one tradition
they utilized several particularly
traditions derived both from Islam
and from Christianity
so there's simply a
feature here that needs to be recognized
it doesn't
detract from the variety
and importance of developments in
Sub-Saharan Africa during the post classical
period the notion again
that this is a
simply a vast
mysterious and frankly backward society
is an absolute myth that
reflected racial assumptions
and prejudices
on the part of western
scholars until quite recently
throw that away but there still are
some distinctive features and they can be recognized
a particular twist on this
that we've touched on already
obviously was the
fairly complicated relationship
between post classical
Sub-Saharan Africa and
the forces of Islam
African developments
both in the Sudanese kingdoms
and in the Swahili belt
African developments were
directly connected with Islam
and powerfully influenced by Islam
but particularly
in the Sudanese kingdoms, particularly in west Africa
Islam was taken
in a somewhat distinctive way
African rulers
welcomed
Islamic merchants
and obviously Islam helped bridge connections
between commercial
activities below the Sahara
and the larger
trading patterns of North Africa and the Middle East
African rulers also
welcomed Muslims
as scholars
and officials
Islam provided literate bureaucrats
Islam provided people
who had experience in other bureaucratic systems
so there was
a strong
Islamic caste
to the African kingdoms
particularly from the midpoint
of the development of Ghana
onward. It featured
commercial connections
it featured some occasional
military contact and raids
it definitely featured a strong
cultural interest
from the great kingdom of Mali would emerge
the scholarly city of Timbuktu
one of the real centers
of Islamic learning
during the later post classical period
a center that easily
compares with some of the
intellectual centers developed in western Europe
during the same period
but Islam
outside the Swahili belt
Islam did not at this early point
become yet a mass
religion in sub-Saharan Africa
most Africans remain
polytheistic
and this was simply a
distinctive African combination
just has to be taken as the way this
connection with Islam developed
Muslim travelers
and we've noted this already with Ibn Battuta
would also note that even some African Muslims
while they were pious
while they followed the injunctions
of the Quran faithfully
including going on pilgrimages to Mecca
the pilgrimage
of one great African king
Mansa Musa
was a tremendous splash because he brought so much
gold with him
he briefly dislocated
the banking systems in places like Egypt
but many African Muslims
did not practice Islam
exactly the same way
as it was practiced in North Africa and the Middle East
particularly
gender aspects
the freedoms and public opportunities
allowed to women were not
exactly subsumed
into the Middle Eastern
North African version of Islam
again a distinctive amalgamation
while recognizing
the importance of the overall connections
to the Islamic world
basically
the most important point
is to see that
Sub-Saharan African history in the
post-classical period needs
to be treated in much the same framework
that we used for Japan, Russia
Southeast Asia and Western Europe
Sub-Saharan Africa
was another case
of a civilization in active
contact with the most
prosperous centers of the world
benefiting from trade with these centers
imitating at least
to some degree as in the
utilization of Islam
for purposes of scholarship
and political activities
but also maintaining a certain
separate sphere of existence
and in this vein
one African historian
has proposed a particularly close
comparison between
developments in Sub-Saharan Africa
during the post-classical period
in Western Europe
he seizes on
a rough date of 1250
and argues that
if you look at Sub-Saharan Africa
and Western Europe in 1250 CE
in broad outline
the similarities are actually quite striking
in both cases
there were significant kingdoms
they tended to be larger in Africa
than in Europe
but loosely organized
African kings might claim divine kingship
were arrested on careful negotiation
and conciliation
of the warrior class
and this was while Africa did not develop
literal feudalism
this had some overtones of the
jockeying necessary
in the European feudal monarchies
both African Europe were developing
new commercial centers
merchant classes were on the rise
both saw increased activity
linking commercial
patterns to those of the
Mediterranean and the Middle East
and again
in both instances merchant activities
were important not only in their own right
but in stimulating other
economic developments for example
mining in the case of Africa
and in stimulating
political activity as well as we have seen
these then were cases
in which you had two
emerging civilization areas
still fairly loosely
structured politically though with definite
states and political apparatus
exploring commercial opportunities
exploring new cultural expressions etc
the same comparison however
and this is the point on which we'll end
the same comparison also
notes however that if you take
the two societies 200 years later
in 1450
the comparative situation
changes markedly
by 1450
and we'll explore this a little more fully next time
by 1450
European societies particularly
Spain and Portugal were actively
engaged in
exploratory trips down the African
coast they were
reaching out toward new world
roles they were
developing more rapid changes
in political and cultural systems
African
societies in no sense were
lagging
compared to their own past
kingdoms ebbed and flowed
the kingdom of Ghana had yielded to
the rise of Mali
by the end of the post-classical period Mali
is fading somewhat and will be
replaced by another network of kingdoms
including Songhai
but these were ebbs and flows that really didn't
distort the basic framework of African history
but there is not the same kind
of outreach and commitment
to major change
and the final question is
why and the answer
involves several factors
that shed light back
on post-classical African history as well
factor number one, sheer geography
Western Europe
possesses an abundant river system
that creates navigable possibilities
connecting inland
areas to the oceans
Africa for the most part
Sub-Saharan Africa for the most part
does not African rivers are
not easily navigable from ocean
inland and they were
before less obvious
as a stimulus to seagoing
activities except for the Swahili
coast Africans did not
develop a significant
commitment to naval
activities during the
post-classical period or obviously
before so geography
second relationship
to Islam for Western
Europe trading with Islam
was always tense it was always
to some degree trading with the enemy
there was always a certain level
of resentment and anxiety
for Africans trading with
Islam was non-problematic it was fine
Africans were either Muslims
or familiar with Muslims
they didn't have a problem here
to be solved third balance
of payments Western Europe
as we've noted previously had
significant difficulty in coming up
with goods that they could use
in exchange for products they wanted
from World Trade Africa had
much less of an issue here
they traded slaves they traded gold
they traded other agricultural
products I don't
mean there was never an economic
issue but there again was not
the same kind of problem to be
solved as existed in Western Europe
and finally as we've also noted
before Africa unlike Europe
had no particular interaction
with the Mongol interlude
and therefore no
particular opportunity
to connect to new sources of
technological change again
a contrast with Europe so
1450 finds the fates
of these two societies beginning to
diverge in a way reflecting
how successful
post-classical African developments
had been Africa did not
face the same need for
difficult transitions
for ambitious
outreach that Western Europe did
perhaps this was unfortunate
but it was at the very least
an ironic cap
to a very important
and very impressive period
in the history of
sub-Saharan African societies
almost all world historians agree
that 1450
or 1500
constitutes
a significant break
in world history
today we're going to talk about
developments in 1450
we'll make a brief bow at the end
to 1500 I don't think
the tensions here are
terribly significant
we're going to be talking about
1450 in terms of
significant changes
taking shape in a number
of different regions of the world
not just one
the context
just by way of reminder
the context is two fold
first of all by 1450
the great era
of Arab politics
and
merchant activity
has passed
Arabs are still a vigorous people
there are a number of Arab states
Arab religious and cultural activity
remain considerable
but the
central role that the caliphate
and the Arab version
of Islam had played
is obviously over
also over is the Mongol era
definitively
by 1450 there are still
pockets of Mongol rule
their pockets of Mongol population
for example in the Crimea
Tatar minority
exist to this day
expelled by Stalin and newly returned
since the fall of communism
but the Mongol era is over
so an overarching question
in the world in 1450
was
given the demise of these
two great systems
which had so dominated
the post classical period
and its transitional ending
and given the continued
importance of
inter regional economic
and cultural contacts
what kind of system would come to be
in
the place of these previous
frameworks
specific developments focused
initially on China
the big news during the first
half of the 15th century
was actually primarily Chinese news
the Mongols had been expelled
from China at the end of the 14th
century a new dynasty the Ming
was in power in China
and like many new dynasties
was full of women vigor
benefiting from an expanding economy
interested in new political statements
interested in territorial expansion
to a degree although remember
the Chinese have never historically been
devoted to expansion as a
primary
guiding principle
under the Ming
beginning in 1405
a series of Chinese expeditions
were mounted
which took Chinese troops
and goods and
political and cultural representatives
from the Pacific
coast of China
through Southeast Asia
to South Asia
to West Asia
and to the Indian Ocean coast of Africa
these great expeditions
organized in huge ships
so large that they actually could carry
not only domesticated animals
but actually gardens
to feed the expeditions as they moved along
these huge expeditions
were probably mounted
primarily
to extend the
old Chinese custom of seeking
tribute from
neighboring contacts
and certainly the expeditions
were actively utilized in this
vein with political representatives
from several of the
visited territories coming back to China
bringing tribute with them
sometimes held until they provided
appropriate tribute in turn
a specific
goal of establishing
more politics
free commercial networks
was probably not involved
but be that as it may
for virtually 30 years
the Chinese expeditions
mounted every several years
provided the most striking
inter-regional contacts
that were operating
during the 15th century
as a whole
these expeditions commanded interestingly
by a Muslim Chinese
a Unuk named Zheng He
these expeditions were
extremely successful
in bringing Chinese connections
to Indonesia and other parts
of Southeast Asia
in obviously establishing
a new kind of Chinese presence
in India
in establishing new Chinese links
directly with the Middle East
particularly the
Persian Gulf region
and with the states of East Africa
Chinese coins
and other artifacts have been found
from these expeditions
in considerable abundance
speculation
has one wondering did at some
point as the Chinese expeditions
moved along the East African coast
at some point did the expeditions
reach the southern tip of Africa
and peak into the Atlantic
and did the leaders wonder
should we go there they didn't
we don't know that for sure
one historian recently
has written a book arguing that
one of the Chinese expeditions
actually crossed the Pacific
it's an amazing piece
of historical imagination
based on essentially no evidence whatsoever
and there's no reason to think it's accurate
this was an important series of expeditions
a delightful episode
in world history
an important assertion of Chinese
economic strength remember these expeditions
built on the established position
of Chinese manufacturing
that had begun to
be embellished in the Song dynasty
extended under the
Mongol Yuan dynasty
and now obviously
confirmed by this explosion
of a statement of Chinese
dynamism and
commercial and military strength
but
the expeditions ended
in 1433
by a
an imperial decision
the modis for this decision
seemed to have been several
there may have been a certain
traditionalist bureaucratic suspicion
of these costly expeditions
on grounds that they gave too much
attention to naval
activities too much attention
to commercial groups
we don't know that and it's important not to
overdo the conservatism
that this decision implies
there certainly were specific factors
a new Ming emperor
had come to the throne and like
many political newcomers
he wanted to establish that his policies
were going to be different from those of his predecessor
so probably a certain amount
of sheer whim entered in
it's also possible that while
the tribute received from
the expeditions had been considerable
the crude economic calculation
at least in terms of short run
cost benefits argued for termination
without question
and I think these two are the more
important causal factors without
question the new dynasty
the new representative of the dynasty
felt that there were two more important
purposes for investment monies
one was to establish a new
Ming capital in Beijing
which began as the expeditions
ended and turned out to be both
magnificent and costly
this was the point at which the famous
Forbidden City began to be constructed
a series of new tombs
for the Ming emperors these were
costly investments which arguably
paid off in terms of the
prestige of this new capital
but certainly made it difficult to
consider doing the two major
enterprises at the same time
the other major investment was of course
the redoing of the Great Wall
the concern about
making sure the Mongols now out
stayed out seemed
to warrant this huge defensive
investment obviously the Great Wall
is one of the famous architectural
symbols of China deservedly
so it was also extremely expensive
again hard to do too many
things at once the ending
of the Chinese expeditions did not
did not end China's
economic role in world trade
it did not
isolate China from the rest of the world
these points we will need to return
to but obviously the end
of the expeditions did
signal a
terminus to the brief
flurry of Chinese
initiative going this far
toward the rest of the world
Chinese activities including merchant colonies
in Southeast Asia remained
they had been strengthened by the expeditions
there's a lingering impact here
the extent of Chinese
outreach that these expeditions
had represented would frankly
not be matched by China until
the late 20th century
the change also
the decision to end the expeditions
also
re-raised the question that I
started with if the Chinese
weren't going to organize the next
inter-regional trade system
who would and the answer was
obviously going to be clear
but hopefully soon we'll come back to it
a second center of developments
around 1450
involved the Middle East
and Southeast Europe
the decline
of Arab rule
had left openings for
the in-migration of new
peoples from Central Asia
particularly Turkish people
several waves had come in already
Turkish populations
in parts of the Middle East during the Crusades
Turks had been used
in the administration of the
later Abbasid caliphates
so Turks were not new to the region
but around 1450
a new group of Turks
the Osmanli or Ottoman Turks
began to come in from Central Asia
remember they were already Muslims
actually quite fervent Muslims
heavily influenced by Sufism
they began to migrate
into the area and they began
to organize militarily
taking territories
not only from
Arab states
Arab rulers but also
increasingly focusing on an
attack on the Byzantine Empire
the Byzantine Empire
a major factor during the post-classical
period in politics, trade
and obviously cultural outreach
the Byzantine Empire had been
declining considerably
for some decades before 1450
its territory shrunk
increasingly finding it
difficult to maintain the great city
of Constantinople
the Byzantines were already in trouble
and obviously this
declining economic and political
strength made them a ripe target
for this new
series of interlopers
the Turks would lay
siege to Constantinople
and in 1453 the city fell
to be renamed
by the Turks Istanbul although the rest
of the world acknowledged this name
only more recently
the fall of
Constantinople is one
in 1453 is one of the great
single events
in world history both for
its real impact and its symbolic
meaning
for the Middle East itself
it obviously represented
a clear step not a final step
but a clear step in the
establishment of a new Turkish
or more properly Ottoman Empire
that would provide a
new source of political and
military power to a region
that had been fragmented now for
almost two centuries
the
fall of Constantinople also represented
a new opportunity
for the Turks and for Islam
to move into the Balkans
to move into southeastern Europe
and already even before the fall of
Constantinople the Turks had seized territories
in parts of present day
Greece
the change then to
southeastern Europe was
in many ways just as great
as the impending change
for parts of the Middle East itself
Russia was obviously hugely
impacted
Constantinople had been the Byzantine Empire
had been the model for
Russian development
the collapse of Constantinople on the one hand
represented a rather terrifying
challenge
to Russian sense of identity
but it was also equally
a liberating possibility
because Russia could now see itself
as inheriting a mission
from the old Byzantine Empire
and that would play some role
in the new surge of
Russia that we'll come back to
in just a moment
the fall of Constantinople finally
was a symbolic and real
challenge to other parts
of Europe including Western Europe
Europeans, West Europeans
particularly Italians had treated
Constantinople very scornfully
in the last days of the Byzantine Empire
as we've noted previously
one crusade actually
invaded Constantinople directly
in hopes of plunder and in hopes
of reducing commercial competition
and West Europeans did not
pay any attention
to appeals from late Byzantine emperors
for assistance against the
assailing Turks
they ignored it but when the city fell
the sense of threat
the sense that a bastion
of Christianity had been
removed in favor
of a new and fairly potent
Islamic presence was something
that Europeans had to grapple with
quite directly and it would
take some time to assimilate
the Middle East then
and Southeastern Europe were a second
center of change along with the
oscillations in Chinese
economic activity and
inter-regional policy
associated
with the fall of
Byzantium and the rise of the Turks
was the extent to which
the early
15th century
represented the point at which
Russian political rulers began
fully to cast off
Mongol rule process began
to heat up around 1420
and by 1450 as we've already
noted a real
Russian state was forming
around Moscow and it was
steadily expansionist
the fall of Byzantium was actually
an additional spur
to this Russian expansion
the Russian ruler carefully
married one of the daughters of
the last Byzantine emperor
to maintain a clear link between
a new Russian mission
and now failed Byzantine mission
and we will have to come back
to this important assertion
of Russian power
as it began to take shape
around 1450 as well
not every place was changing
in 1450 or not every place was changing
massively we've noted already
that there was considerable
basic continuity in Africa
African historians insist of course
quite properly that Africa must not
be viewed as changeless
current political shifts
alterations of trading patterns
the rise of the new kingdom of
Songhai was an important development
in the Sudanic region
but African stability
compared to developments elsewhere
I think can be legitimately
emphasized as well
Japan of course
was digesting a
certain degree of change
again we've noted earlier
that the failure of the
Japan in contrast to their success
in China gave Japan
a bit of food for thought
and a new opportunity
to rethink Japanese
relationships even with the Chinese
1450 is not a striking
point in Japanese development
but again we need to remember
that there was a bit of an adjustment
going on in this case
developments in India are not
marked by any dramatic
shifts around 1450
the more dramatic changes will come
50 or 70 years later
with a new series of
Islamic invasions into India
so that's hovering in the wings but not yet there
there were however
by sheer coincidence because remember
there's no connection yet
between American patterns and those elsewhere
there were significant developments
in the Americas
both the Aztecs and the Incas
by 1450 were beginning
to encounter new challenges
to their rule
subject peoples were becoming more restive
the Inca Empire was probably
overextended remember its vast
territory along a mountain
stretch was very impressive
but also hard to sustain
so quite spontaneously
quite independently of anything else
the great political
structures of the late post-classical
period in the Americas were beginning
to unravel to some extent
and this would obviously facilitate
European entry
after 1492 no connection yet
but they need to be noted
as simultaneous developments
the final series
of major developments
occurred in new forms
of European outreach
beginning as early as the 13th century
individual European
merchants and rulers had
shown some interest in
breaking the confines
of European
European geography and its
focus on the Mediterranean
as an artery of trade
an artery of trade which inevitably
led to interaction with
independence on Islamic merchants
and Islamic centers of power
in the 13th century a genuine
expedition set out into the Atlantic
obviously the Atlantic was
potentially the great escape hatch
we have no idea what happened to it
they never came back but the fact that they went
is actually an interesting revelation
North of course Scandinavians
had crossed the Atlantic and Scandinavians
had successfully reached North America
found nothing that they particularly
valued there and retreated
to more interesting and durable
settlements in Greenland and particularly
Iceland so there's a bridge
in the North but it's not one that connects
particularly to developments
in the 14th and 15th
centuries
by the early 15th
century
patterns of exploration
in the Atlantic down the African coast
were beginning to extend
quite routinely
sponsored particularly
by the king of Portugal
newly freed from
Muslim control
but with some interest also
by rulers in Spain
where also Islamic control
was being pushed back
the last Islamic enclave
in Granada would fall in Spain
in 1992 an interesting coincidence
of dates
the explorations steadily
pushed down the African coast
the purpose was
let's see what we can find
maybe there are great sources of gold
an understanding that Africa
had considerable gold supplies
and myths about even
greater riches were rampant
in Europe at this point
so there was a clear
mercenary tinge
the larger framework
was a European recognition
that it did face
some severe difficulties
in the inter-regional relationships
that had developed
during the post-classical period
European taste for Asian goods
upper class taste primarily
was well established
there's a consumer stake here
there's money to be made
but at the same time
the European capacity
was not terribly well established
by seeking
new sources of gold
by seeking other opportunities
the Europeans were
obviously trying to remedy
what was just
front and center a clear problem
in their
inter-regional outreach
they also began
to wonder if by
pressing down Africa
they could find a direct connection
with Asia itself
and thus save money
by avoiding the Islamic middlemen
and save cultural challenge
by bypassing Islam
in favor of connections with Asia
directly this interest in
again a combination of a cultural
and economic solution
to the problems of
dependence on Islamic merchants
this
effort to find a solution
was galvanized further
by the fall of Constantinople
by the sense of a new level
a new potential for Muslim organization
in the eastern Mediterranean
the spur here was considerable
the conventional textbooks
on West European history
obviously emphasize
the background to these new expeditions
in a somewhat different fashion
and there's no reason
that we have to choose fully
between them
but this is certainly true
that by 1450
European political capacity
was beginning to improve
there was still a great deal
of internal warfare
indeed the great hundred years war
between England and France was still raging
but
European feudal monarchies
in England, France
and now increasingly Spain and Portugal
European monarchies
or feudal monarchies had managed
a bit more central control
over their territories
they did have somewhat greater capacity
to guide trade policy
to do things like mount
significant exploratory expeditions
European Christianity
not a new force
may have been given a new
lease on life
in terms of missionary spirit
by the success of driving the Muslims
out of the Iberian Peninsula
sometimes this kind of success
would help promote
a further sense of great zeal
and
Spanish and to a lesser degree
Portuguese Catholic leaders were prominent
in playing roles
in the explorations
that began to take shape in the 15th century
a motive
of religious conversion
associated with a desire to push
Muslims farther back from Europe
may have been a spur here
and certainly we need to acknowledge
that 1450 was a point
at which new attitudes
in the Renaissance
were developing first in Italy
and by 1450 to beginning to spread more widely
and the Renaissance
did suggest a
new level of attention to
activities on this earth
rather than simply religious motivations
they did suggest some
new confidence in the possibilities
of individual achievement
no accident that some of the great explorers
would turn out to be Italian
the center of the Renaissance
but I think the world history picture
has to continue
to be more complicated
the European expeditions
down Africa
may have had some religious motivation
although the commercial
economic motivation was much stronger
at the outset
there may have been some Renaissance spirit involved
but the sense of key problems to be
solved the sense of a need
to deal with the
the problem of
the Islamic intermediary
the sense of the need to compensate
for the new Islamic control
in the eastern Mediterranean
these spurs were very real
as well
as the expeditions unfolded
still around 1450
a bit before
extending to a bit after
as the expeditions unfolded
they also revealed a couple of other points
that I think bring us back
to the complexity
of the motivations
involved
first of all the expeditions for all their
hopes failed to find
massive troves of new wealth
they did however
find some new territories
Europeans began to
take over island groups in the southern
Atlantic such as the
Azores and the Canaries
and when they arrived in these island groups
several things happened
first of all they didn't find gold
so disappointment
they did find a native population however
that had been long removed from contact with Europe
the Romans had been vaguely aware
of these island groups
but there had been no active exchange for a long time
so these population groups
were extremely vulnerable
to some of the common diseases the Europeans
brought such as measles and smallpox
so a rapid depopulation occurred
in these islands
was at once a
useful development for the Europeans
local resistance was minimal
but also a challenge
because there was the obvious need to think
about finding additional sources of labor
so the solution
adopted again in the 15th century
was to begin to raid
the African mainland
the northwest African mainland
for sources of slaves
slavery was a well-established system in Africa
there were African merchants
willing to play ball
and the Europeans began importing African slaves
into these island groups
with the purpose of
establishing sugar cultivation
remember one of the great European
interests in interregional trade
was the acquisition of sugar
the indulgence of a western sweet tooth
and if the
new territories did not yield
the kind of easy wealth
that the Europeans hoped for
they could at least yield opportunities
to reduce dependence on sugar
imports directly from Asia
so sugar plantations were established
in these island groups
using slave labor
cleared obviously by the fact that
new diseases had carried off
the local population
and obviously something of a dress rehearsal
not not planned
but something of a dress rehearsal was being developed
that would prefigure
what would later happen in the Americas
when the Europeans reached there
an obvious further point
this kind of policy
I think perfectly understandable
in terms of European interests
they had an economic problem
they wanted to resolve it
growing sugar directly was one
at least partial remedy
but this European policy
of economic exploitation
seizure of slaves
did raise some interesting questions
about what would be the nature
of European
role in the world
as Europeans beginning
with these expeditions
gained new levels of power
the comparison with
earlier groups of
global overlords such as Arabs
and Mongols is interesting
and not always to the west's
clear advantage
the other thing of course and I've mentioned this before
the other thing that the Europeans learned
not in 1450 but a little bit later
was that once they did
actually succeed in rounding
the southern tip of Africa
and reaching Asia directly
they still had a problem
remember Vasco D'Gama's first expedition
around the Cape of Good Hope
and
to India
revealed that the Europeans
still although they now had some direct
contact the Europeans still
had a balance of payments problem
D'Gama did not carry with him much
except some gold that was
available in exchange with Asia
so when D'Gama went back
and now we're after 1500
when D'Gama went back
he brought with him a solution
and the solution was military
he brought guns
and he
deliberately slaughtered
a number of Indian officials as examples
to the rest of the population
that they should become willing to trade
even though the Europeans did not
yet have very much to offer
in the exchange
again an interesting prefiguring
of developments that would occur later
the key point
in concluding about 1450
the key point is to emphasize
the variety of developments
that were occurring
and the number of different places that were involved
there's no tidy pattern
to be sure
the Chinese expeditions
and their end
helped set a stage where
in June
European initiatives would prove to be
the new
basis for a framework
for inter-regional trade
but Chinese policy decisions
European adventures
are only part of the story
developments in the Middle East
the arrival of the Turks
the fall of one of the great Christian empires
the beginning of new
assertions by Russians
as they pushed the Mongols back
and these developments need to be
factored in as well
not surprisingly
the end of the post-classical period
was complicated
it did ultimately
involve
the gradual emergence of a new system
of inter-regional trade
that would be immensely important
but it also involved
power shifts, cultural shifts
in other regions
and a complicated period
and set the stage for a rich
but not
straightforward pattern of development
in world history's next period
today we'll be talking about
the early modern period
in world history
a period that runs roughly
1450 to roughly 1750
the next period
after the great post-classical millennium
the period warrants
two comments
by way of general introduction
first, it's obviously fairly short
we've been dealing with
1500 years for the classical period
1000 years for the post-classical period
1000 years for the post-classical
and now we're talking about 300
and the reasons for this
are probably three-fold
and I won't even pretend to say which is most important
first of all
change may have speeded up
that's a modern impression
and maybe it's true, I'm honestly not sure
worth thinking about
second, as we get closer to the present
we know more, there are more abundant records
that's pretty obvious but it also
helps historians feed larger sections
of their treatments
and third, I think quite legitimately
you need to spend more time
on periods that are closer
to the present day because inevitably
they will have even more influence
on current patterns of activity
these connections will be working on
through the discussions
from this point onward
but they're perfectly legitimate
this is a perfectly
honest indeed useful
employment of historical analysis
the period begins
1450 or so
we talked last time
about some of the components that were changing
in the world in 1450
including the new European expeditions
the significant changes
in the Middle East and Eastern Europe
the Chinese decision which
helped set the stage
for new activity as well
some historians would urge maybe 1500s
a bit better date
by 1500
it was becoming clear that the Europeans
had arrived in the Americas
and were actually going to utilize
their arrival to introduce
significant changes
that obviously was not even on the horizon
clearly in 1450
and also by 1500
the Ottoman Empire had expanded
from its hold in
southwestern Europe
northeastern Middle East
to include victories over Egyptian forces
that extended the Ottoman Empire
the Arab world not all of it
but much of it including
portions of North Africa
Egypt obviously front and center
so 1450-1500
gets things started
1750 at the other end
is frankly a date of convenience
it really is used
mainly to say
well it's around this time that things are going to be
changing because of the impact
of European industrialization
not an entirely satisfactory
decision we'll have to talk about it
when we talk about the next period in world history
this is an unusual
case in which
the boundaries
of a period at the end are frankly
pretty vague but
let's be honest that's the way it's usually done
early modern obviously
is meant to be revealing
it's not quite modern hence early
but it's a lot more recognizable
in terms of our world today
than the post classical was
it's a term that was long used
in European history I don't think it's a distortion
to use it in world history
but we need to
recognize what some of the implications are
the second general comment
about the early modern period
is really a warning
this is where many
well-intentioned world history educational
programs go off the rails
for example the California
state system
California established
different parameters
for world history up to 1450
interesting treatments of Islam
of Asia of Africa etc
but then in 1450
the world becomes Europe
and two things happen
one the expansion of European
power which is undeniable
becomes the central theme
so that everything is organized
around how societies
were reached by Europe
how they reacted to Europe as though they had
no abolition, no independent background
and that just oversimplifies
and distorts the second thing that happens
is European history
is suddenly given a richness
we're indulging ourselves
in looking at the glories of changes in the west
as if
nothing else were going on elsewhere
as if these developments
need to receive a degree of attention
that simply distracts
from the continued complexity
of the world as a whole
in the early modern period
we must recognize
that the power of western Europe
in the world did increase
that's a legitimate major change
we must recognize
that the nature of the west itself
was significantly transformed
in ways that were obviously important in the west
and would have implications for other
regions
but we must keep balance
I think it's easy to do
but we need to keep the warning in mind
Europe did not
run the world in 1750
many societies
continued to act in great independence
of Europe
important developments continued to occur
that had very little to do with Europe
one way or the other
the world continued to be complicated
the world continued to operate
along several parallel lines
in establishing a new period
as we discussed when we talked about
the post classical period
we need not only to have a set of dates
here 1450 or so
1750 or so
we also have to have a fairly clear sense
that the themes that had previously predominated
have lost some force
and this is fairly
actually easy to state
the post classical period
lots of things going on
the post classical period was defined above all
by a clear expansion
in the geographical range
a number of civilizations
by the impact of the world religions
and by the establishment
of a world network
connecting different parts of Africa
Asia and Europe
the theme of expansion of civilization
obviously can continue
to be played in the early modern period
but because the main
contours of the civilization
zones are pretty well established
particularly outside of the Americas
it's no longer a dominant
modernizing principle
world religions did continue to expand
Islam is still
moving into southeast Asia
and obviously the Ottoman
conquests introduced the possibility
of a significant Muslim minority
in southeastern Europe as well
Christianity would expand
hugely in the Americas
during the early modern period
although not quite as rapidly
as some priests and monks had hoped
but for the world as a whole
the religious map was pretty well set
and
the big impact
of world religions really
had come and gone
in terms of a major innovative force
their sustaining power is still there
the world network
simply gets transformed
it's still an operative concept
but it gets transformed
because of the inclusion of the Americas
so the world network
was an intense interrelationship
of different societies in what we might
conveniently call the old world
the new world economy
which we'll explore more fully next time
the new world economy is literally global
and that's a huge change
indeed
and now we turn to the most important part
what are the new themes
indeed the most important single development
in the early modern period
is the intensification
of interregional
trade connections
and the inclusion of the Americas
and at the very end of the period
the inclusion also of Pacific Oceania
in these global trade patterns
huge development
pretty obvious
but the implications are immense
other changes
other new themes
include and these are what we're going to explore
during the balance of our discussion today
other new changes include
the new power relationship
of the west and the world
it didn't happen overnight
it has to be seen as gradual
but it did occur
the biological
exchanges that resulted
from European and African contact
with the Americas
and finally
the explosion, no pun intended
of gunpowder empires
a point that relates to the expansion
of Europe but needs separate attention
first the expansion of Europe
this can be very simply
summed up and there's a nice book
by Carla Chipola
precisely along these lines
as gun sales and empires
by the 15th century
Europeans had adapted
Chinese explosive powder
into guns and particularly cannon
they benefited
interestingly from the fact that well before
the advent
of Chinese explosive powder in Europe
Europeans were already familiar
with heavy metal casting
interestingly for the purpose of making church bells
now nobody sat around
when church bells were being developed
saying say I think several centuries from now
this will make a great weapon
but the fact is another bit of dumb luck
Europeans were able
to transfer this technology
to the casting of bronze
and iron cannon
sales came from adaptations
of Arab
shipping
Europeans learned how to make more effective
ongoing vessels they stopped
depending on galley slaves
to row through the Mediterranean
and these new vessels proved to be particularly
successful in navigating
the waters of the Atlantic
and then the Pacific
along with guns and sales came of course
the increasing utilization of navigational devices
most of which the Europeans
had borrowed from elsewhere
the compass etc.
and the Europeans were often running
for the most part
the early modern period took Europeans
mainly to islands
and coastal regions
where they could establish
ocean going contact
and use their sea based cannon
to intimidate and threaten
thus Europeans
over the early modern period
seized some port cities in West Africa
occasionally a bit in East Africa
though the European presence
was much less significant there
they seized some ports in India
East Port of Goa which was only given back to India
a few years ago
they seized island groups
in what's now Indonesia
they periodically seized
territory in Taiwan
they certainly seized the Philippines
these were places where ships
ships cannon
and short distance expeditions
from ships would pay off particularly well
it's obviously vital to recognize
no mystery
but it's obviously vital to recognize
that with rare exceptions
the interior of Africa
and Asia would remain
immune to European
conquest at this point
the technology was simply not relevant
Europeans made inroads
in African territories
directly only in Angola
a Portuguese holding
and then a bit later on in South Africa
where the Dutch established a foothold
but otherwise their dealings with Africa
in terms of the use of ships and force
are coastal as is the case with
most of Asia
the huge exception of course was the Americas
where Europeans had the advantage
not just of ships and guns
though this was certainly relevant
but also metal tools and technologies
horses
and a sense of military organization
that in some instances
at least was also superior
to that which had been developed
among Native American peoples
the European conquest of the Americas
which was gradual
let's not assume that Europeans
suddenly because they made
huge land claims over
South America for example
seized these territories fully
but European success here
was absolutely vital
but in terms of the world as a whole
atypical and remember
it was accompanied by another advantage
the Europeans had, if advantage is the right word
that they did not have
with regard to Asia and Africa
the disadvantage of disease
the decimation of American populations
because of imported diseases
running up to
80 to 85% of the
total Native American population
dying off within two centuries
whole populations in some cases
literally entirely extinguished
minorities remaining in other instances
this cleared the way
for European conquest
as no other development could
so the expansion of Europe
the establishment
of European military presence
was mainly a naval activity
underwritten by
new technologies that had developed
as Europe encountered
Asian societies and utilized
the contacts to their own
benefit it was
developed in different
ways in the Americas
because of the very special circumstances
that resulted frankly
primarily from previous American
isolation
a question obviously arises
with regard to this European weapons
advantage as to why no other society
in the early modern period
decided to rival the Europeans
at their own game and it's a valid question
several societies doubtless
could have done so
because they had the
metalworking traditions
they had the shipbuilding capacity
they had experience in inter-regional activity
but they did not do so
the Chinese for example
although abundantly
exposed to European example
and interested in some European artifacts
for example clocks
the Chinese decided not to
imitate European patterns at this point
probably partly because
of a
Confucian reluctance
to indulge too many activities
that would give greater prestige
to merchant values and merchant life
probably because of a
bureaucratic suspicion of too much
change occurring all at once
but above all
because China simply
had no use for these patterns
in terms of the purposes
seen for Chinese society itself
as we will see more fully
in a later discussion
China benefited hugely
from Europe's world economy
because of the Chinese
productive capacity
they didn't need to emulate
European weapons patterns and naval patterns
in order to seize these benefits
China was interested
in maintaining the integrity
of the Middle Kingdom
against outside invasion
European devices here
particularly naval devices were of little use
the Chinese proved perfectly capable
of organizing their
contacts with Europeans
through some regulated ports
particularly the Port of Macau
they simply did not have problems
that European
weapons patterns would seem to
solve something of the same
case applies to Japan
although we know a little bit more about
debates in this regard
as Europeans first encountered
Japan in the 16th century
Japanese were initially rather
interested in what the Europeans had to offer
there were even some significant conversions
to Christianity
Japan was after all a war-like feudal society
and seeing a people
with new types of weapons could be
a real turn on
and there was considerable interest
in European guns
and a quick capacity to manufacture
similar types of guns in Japan
itself but at the end of the
16th century
under a ruler named Hideyoshi
the Japanese made a decision
to cut off these contacts
and to end this
degree of interest
in European weapons patterns
the decision was motivated
first
by a realization of what the Europeans
were doing to the Philippines
a sense that European control
of the Philippines in the name of the Pope
or so the Japanese viewed it
would be so threatening to Japanese culture
the Japanese value system
that the threat simply could not be endured
Japan needed to cut off contact
lest what happened to the
Philippines happened there
second it was clearly realized
that while eagerness for European weapons
might be a delightful edge
for feudal belligerence
in the short term, in the long term
European weapons would threaten
the system of feudalism itself
older fighting patterns
were essential to maintain feudal values
and feudal social relationships
and this maintenance was more important
than
the opportunities the Europeans
seemed to offer so Japan
cut off this kind of
interest, regulated the manufacture
of guns
in some years in the 17th century
Japan produced only 9 guns
per year this was simply not
going to be a
dominant pattern for the Japanese
political and military system
so
the sense that European patterns
although obviously extremely
dynamic
were not relevant to the goals of
key societies
the sense of social preservation
or cultural preservation or both
motivated a stance
toward European technology
that was obviously
very distinct
Europeans in turn quickly developed
a sense that whatever
their drawbacks with regard to
the new societies they were in contact with
in the opulence of cities
the richness of tradition
at least they had a technology edge
and Europeans began to judge other societies
mainly by the state of technology
and obviously in the process
found their own society
vastly superior
an interesting pattern of evaluation
that I think still operates
in much of the contemporary world
along with
the rise of Europe and its military base
a second key development
involved what historians
routinely call
the Colombian exchange
here's where the biological
entry of the Americas
into the global system
had its clear expression
the Colombian exchange
means that biological products
moved from the Americas
to the rest of the world
and from the rest of the world to the Americas
the exchange
for the Americas themselves
was almost entirely
disastrous
obviously biological exchange
meant that old world domesticated animals
were brought to the Americas
and Americans proved very adept
at using horses for example
in this new system
old world food products
like wheat and other grains
were also brought to the Americas
where they would embellish the food supply
but the big
import
biologically to the Americas was disease
and as we've already seen
it had horrendous impact
was accidental
Europeans and Africans did not intend
to bring these diseases to the Americas
though over time by the 18th
and 19th centuries Europeans
actually learned deliberately
to introduce diseases into
Native American populations
in order to clear them out
it was initially accidental
it became sometimes intentional
the Colombian exchange for other parts of the world
was arguably beneficial
maybe a slightly
loaded word but beneficial may do
that is
American food products
began to spread widely to other
areas and enhanced food supplies
in ways that would help sustain
and even augment
populations
China for example
by the early 17th century
was utilizing American crops
like sweet potatoes and corn
along with some new strains
of rice in China itself
and this served as a basis
for considerable population
expansion later in the 17th
and in the 18th centuries
China gained these crops mainly
through their ongoing contact with the Philippines
where Spaniards had introduced
American crops to see if they would also
help improve the food supply there
the pattern obviously shows
the complexity
continued complexity of China's relationship
with the wider world and the capacity
for real innovation
China also adopted some new world crops
and again
there were probably population consequences
there as well
Europe ironically was slower
to introduce new world crops
Europeans were very food conservative
arguing that these new crops
were not mentioned in the Bible
and therefore might be the source of evil
and disease but by the late 17th century
Europeans as well
were beginning to use the potato
they used corn less which remained
a food for animals and on this basis
would experience a dramatic
population increase as well
the Columbian exchange for the world as a whole
served to
augment the food basis
for population growth
but in particular societies
particularly the Americas themselves
served as a population deterrent
for a considerable period of time
the African involvement
in the Columbian exchange was obviously
complicated new world foods
particularly corn spread widely
to Africa
and helped sustain population development
but here there was another
biological exchange in people themselves
that worked in the other direction
beginning in the 16th century
8 to 12 million Africans
would be seized in the Atlantic slave trade
taken to the Americas
often in hideous conditions
a level of
displacement
that had obvious population consequences
for Africa particularly West Africa
as a disproportionate number
of the slaves were males
and young prime age
for reproduction
so overall in the early modern period
when these two forces are put together
African populations
roughly stabilized
suffering in some regions
benefiting slightly in others
the
most vigorous impact
of the Columbian exchange
was created by the early 18th century
disease patterns
began to stabilize in the Americas
as more people became
disease resistant and as the bulk
of the population now mixed
European and Native American heritage
in the mestizo group
that would quickly become majority
so the Columbian exchange
is not an eternal pattern
in world history
but it did organize some very
significant developments
of the early modern period
some of which including China's population growth
would continue to ramify
thereafter
third basic feature
of the early modern period
the extent to which
gunpowder
was utilized to establish
a new series of empires
in a way that actually
had never before been matched
in world history this was a great age
of empire at two levels
first familiar
the Europeans
launched by the Spanish and Portuguese
established their famous overseas empires
in the Americas in parts of Asia
and Africa as we've already
discussed so Spanish, Portuguese,
Dutch, British and French empires
become the great
overseas empires of the early modern period
with huge consequences
in world history
but equally important indeed
for much of the early modern period more important
was the establishment
of land based gunpowder empires
in Asia
the Ottoman Turks for example
had used gunpowder, had used
cannon in their siege of Constantinople
the establishment of the Ottoman empire
was partly based
on the use of land based
cannon and guns
the new Mughal empire in India
was similarly
organized by invaders
who utilized new weaponry
the Safavid empire in Persia
was another gunpowder empire
the expanded Russian empire
quickly became
a fourth gunpowder empire
so in eastern Europe
and much of Asia
a new series of empires arose
on the basis of new military technology
quite different in orientation
from the more commercially
minded European overseas empires
but equally important
because they maintained
sway over such a significant land mass
and over such
dynamic economies
and even in China
the last dynasty
which launched in the 17th century
the Qing dynasty
was itself partly a gunpowder empire
operated by Manchurians
not Chinese proper
who used new weaponry
as one of their means
of obtaining new political control
on the Chinese mainland
this establishment of empire
which goes way beyond
the familiar story of the rise of the west
is a crucial development
in the early modern period
that deserves attention in its own right
a couple of things
did not happen
in world history in this period
the early modern period is not
a distinct period with regard to
gender relations for example
the post classical period
with the complicated impact
of the world religions on gender relations
but also
the pattern of increasing subservience
of women in a number of key societies
such as China
post classical period
suggests a break in gender relations
but in terms of the world as a whole
the early modern period did not
there were important developments
the arrival of Europeans in the Americas
had huge implications
for American gender relations
because European values and expectations
were largely from Native American traditions
the slave trade
in withdrawing men from Africa
increased the importance
of polygamy in Africa because of the
need to provide family arrangements
for the remaining women
again a significant gender change
so there are points of change
in specific cases
but there's no blanket pattern
that allows us to use the early modern period
for purposes of
gender discrimination
the same thing interestingly applies to culture
there are all sorts of cultural developments
in the early modern period
and we will have to pay attention to them
the importation of European
religion, artistic styles
and some science to the Americas
was a huge change
in American cultural history
European culture
itself would change and we'll be taking this up
quite specifically
with for example the rise of science
the division of European Christendom
etc
European cultural patterns would have some
impact on a few other societies
particularly Russia
but in the world as a whole
in the world as a whole
in the early modern period there is no
overall cultural dynamic
it's as though
and I think in some cases this is really exactly
the situation
it's as though individual societies
like Japan
as new opportunities for contact
develop decided
ok we may indulge these to a degree
perhaps China would be a better example
here we may indulge these
new contacts to a degree
but not at the expense of
massive cultural influence
the Chinese for example would
tolerate a little bit of European missionary
activity as long as the Europeans
were respectful of Chinese
ways and dressed like Confucian scholars
but they were not interested
in more significant cultural
interpenetration and indeed
they would later move to block
missionary activity to a greater extent
as well this is not a period
of vibrant cultural
exchange on a global basis
this is not a period of systematic
cultural innovation
the main points
in the early modern period
are to recognize
the obvious
that a number of different things are going on
in Europe is a real fact
it doesn't have the same implications
for some parts of the world
as it does for others but it's a real fact
but along with the rise
of the west comes the establishment
of really significant
political units in other parts of the world
that would long overshadow
western politics per se
along with
these political developments
came the
force of the biological exchange
which results from the inclusion of the Americas
a number of things going on
that would
prompt reactions
from different societies
many societies did have to make some decisions
about how to handle
new contacts with the west and these decisions
varied but they also had to make
decisions about the utilization
of new foods, reactions
to new diseases
they also had to make decisions about the impact
of new imperial structures
land based as well as sea based
a lot was going on
and different regions would react
differently
one final point
I mentioned and it really needs to be repeated
that along with the specifics
the gunpowder empires
the columbian exchange etc
we need to keep in mind the central theme
and that central
theme was the intensification
of economic relationships
which now also included
the Americas
and at the end of the period
parts of the Pacific
in ways that would have
deep impact
and as one final caution
against placing too much emphasis
on western achievements
in this whole pattern
one interpretation argues
that what the west really managed
in the early modern period
was to place itself as a transmitter
of American goods
and production
that actually served
as the engine of the world economy
with much more diverse
benefits and implications
than we usually think of
when we think of the rise of the west alone
