The left loves fascists.
One, because they're cartoonishly evil,
so it's a very easy thing to be like, that's the bad guy.
And two, because we beat them.
They keep trying to do this America is actually centrist thing.
I think they've given up on that.
It's harder to make stuff, so they go online,
and they're lonely, and they're bored,
and they have nothing to do but doom scroll
through all these esoteric subcultures that aren't even fun.
Welcome to Doom Scroll.
I'm your host, Joshua Citarella.
My guest is Amber-Alee Frost,
an organizer, a host of the Chapo Trap House podcast,
and the author of Dirtbag.
I think there is a lot of the kind of right-wing push with young men.
It's just like, people are sick of woke stuff.
They don't want to apologize anymore.
This is boring. This is not fun.
And not that, you know, the revolution is a tea party or whatever,
but they don't want to engage with politics as some sort of, like,
atonement or scold fest or, you know, blaming people.
I've read two different things, one in the New York Times,
one, disappointingly, in Jacobin in the past week,
that were like, we have to build a new masculinity.
You know, we can't get the bro vote.
And it's like, you know, you spend eight years calling someone a racist reactionary,
and like, what, like, 21-year-old men when they're most full of beans?
Like, it's like, don't, don't do that.
I mean, they're shooting everybody.
There's clearly a problem.
Like, we've got to do something about this.
And what you're doing has not been working.
Just, we've got to do something.
You know, they're going to kill everybody.
There is something wrong with masculinity,
but it seems like they're going to do,
they'll do anything they can to avoid,
oh, maybe housing should be affordable.
Maybe there should be a jobs program.
Maybe there should be less email jobs.
And I'm, by the way, all about, like, the old school masculinity.
Like, have a jobs program that has, like, and women should be in it, too.
But, like, have them drive a fucking forklift.
It's fun.
I drive a forklift.
It's like playing weird Tetris.
Right.
You know, give them, let them play with the rocks and dirt.
Women do that, too.
It's rewarding.
It's fun.
And you have nothing to look forward to.
And everyone is scolding you.
And they're boring and they're not funny.
And you know who is funny?
Meme makers that are right wing.
And, you know, the left can't mean.
Yeah.
And the right wing Trump young podcasters.
And, you know, these, both articles were like, you know,
it's not going to work to put in economic programs alone.
It's like, well, why don't you try it?
And then we'll just, like, if you just, before we write it off, like, why don't you just try, like, once?
You know this thing that we've never tried, ever?
It's not going to work, so we shouldn't even try it.
They don't also.
Give me a fucking break.
Even court them.
Oh, they're notoriously hard to get.
Like, again, they've tried?
You've already written these people off.
You've vilified them.
And now you're shocked that they don't like you?
Fuck off.
What do you think about these young people who post this radical material online?
You know, they're looking at political iconography.
They are quoting books that may be influential to you and me.
They've got this, like, kind of radical aesthetic style that's attached to it.
And it can, at some points, be difficult to tell whether they mean it for real or if this is a bit of an ironic LARP or what's going on.
How do you interpret these people?
How do you understand them?
I am aware, sort of, like, via you of these kids.
And I do remember teaching, you know, a millennia ago.
I remember very distinctly being, like, to the woman who got me the job despite, because it was at NYU and I don't have an advanced degree.
I don't even have an impressive undergrad.
But, you know, it's a real estate venture with a college attached.
And they're like, they can sell, like, real bohemian New York writers.
Well, I'm like, have you noticed it's more fun to teach boys?
And she's like, oh, yeah, no, obviously.
Hmm.
And I'm like, because they're not scared of being wrong.
Oh, okay, I see.
They just, you ask a question, you're like, how do you, you know, what do you think about that?
You know, do you agree with this?
What are your impressions of this person?
Who do you think they are?
And they're like, I read something online last week, and I know exactly what is going on, and I know everything.
And the girls are like, what if I say something wrong, and it'll follow me into the job market, and everyone's going to think I'm a bad person.
And then a week later, the same guys would be like, I read something else, and I changed my mind.
So I know that this stuff is very fleeting for them.
What I think concerns me is that for us, before this sort of extreme growing up online thing, which is exacerbated so much by COVID, we had other options for subcultures.
Right.
And we, you know, we're in the art fag world, but like, you know, generally like writing, like, you know.
You were into music.
I grew up in music, art, literature.
There was stuff to be a part of.
It's like things that used to be around, like, church groups.
Yeah.
Or sports.
Sure, sure.
You know, these used to be things that people had and, you know, sort of put it, at that age, you're supposed to be trying on hats.
You know, and be like, this is the greatest hat.
I found the correct hat.
And then next week, I read something different.
You know, you're supposed to be finding who you are.
And now it's like Hoja, Book Chin, et cetera, et cetera.
It's terrible.
It's like, it's also so much pressure on them.
I had a friend who, this stand-up comedian, very successful one, he's like, these kids are screwed.
They're very scared.
Because they're like, if I say something wrong, it will be on the internet forever.
It is carved into a stone tablet forever.
And we just got to be dumb and do things in real life and, you know, have your friend drive you to Cincinnati to see a punk band that wouldn't play in Indiana.
Like, it was...
There was something special about it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It was just as stupid, but it was better.
We were just as dumb, but it was healthy.
Yeah, yeah.
Also, it's a way lonelier world in general.
Not seeing people in person is a big part of it, but I don't want to say it's entirely the technology and it's entirely COVID.
It's that these institutions have really degraded.
It's degraded.
There's no...
I mean, real estate's a huge part of it.
You can't...
There's been a mass shutdown of comedy clubs and all-ages clubs and venues, and you have to be like a bajillionaire to open up one to rent studio space as a...
You know, but even to, like, galleries shut down.
Um, that's the big, um, that's the unspoken secret to all of this is just the moving average of galleries and comedy venues and any kind of social spaces that young people could go to.
You can't live in a place where people have those things.
Yeah, yeah.
And so the cities got too expensive, and then youth culture, it couldn't go to events or participate in activities.
Yeah.
And so it just sublimated, it went online.
Yeah.
And it's like, then it abides by the incentives of online shit.
And it turned less into making shit or playing games or having conversations and more into being something.
Right.
What's your...
The way you try on hats is way less healthy.
You're not doing it with people.
You're not able to make real mistakes and change your mind because this stuff is carved into a stone tablet.
You've got to go back and delete all your tweets.
It's harder to make stuff, so they go online, and they're lonely, and they're bored, and they have nothing to do but doom scroll through all these esoteric subcultures that aren't even fun.
They're just something to do.
I just, I feel really bad for them.
Why does politics have this magnetic attraction then?
I totally follow you.
People are going online.
They're doom scrolling because they don't have activities in the real world, right?
Everything is too expensive to participate in, essentially.
And so, yeah, you could doom scroll, and you could get really into, like, baking, for example.
You know, why is it that politics pulls in so many people, orders of magnitude more people than baking?
Two-part thing to that.
One, I think there is a normie parallel internet that is making, but it is for people more to our age.
Okay.
And a lot of it is handicraft stuff, sort of trad-y stuff.
I follow a lot of, you know, carpentry things and stuff like that.
But I think politics in particular, particularly in text form, because the other thing is that people don't have a lot of time.
So, in order to be, like, an online maker, you have to, like, set up the camera, and you have to get the dough for the bread, and you've got to do this thing, and you've got to have the big white island, kitchen island.
So, you know, the standard thing.
But if you're 15, you don't have any of that shit.
But you do have text.
Text is all online.
That's something you could do.
Plus, part of the reason subculture is attractive in general is because you feel really powerless.
And the same way punk, you know, made me feel, like, powerful or something.
Like, if you have a political identity, you're like, maybe I could change things.
These are my politics.
I could change things.
So, not only does the average American, I think, feel pretty powerless, adolescence and puberty are, by definition, feelings of powerlessness and feeling like outcasts, and you just feel like a monster.
You can't make a lot of decisions for yourself.
Yeah, yeah.
Your parents are in charge of you.
So, you're like, well, I'm going to find something to believe.
Yeah, yeah.
And so, yeah.
There's that famous tweet about, under communism, we will abolish bedtime.
There was a thing during Occupy Wall Street where they were like, no dads.
And I'm like, my dad's in jail.
I would love it.
Okay, yeah, yeah.
I would love it if...
Saying a lot more about themselves in that case.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
That really speaks, and it wouldn't be that embarrassing if it weren't a 26-year-old.
Yeah.
Like, you're supposed to, you should grow out of that by now.
So, we're both of the generation that we saw, like, life before social media and life
after, right?
The, like, mass adoption curve of Facebook happens in 2012.
Yeah.
I remember the world before where I played video games through, like, literally the dial-up
connection in my family's house.
I remember dial-up.
And then I remember the world with social media, and I experienced that too.
So, we have this kind of unique threshold of historical memory.
Yeah.
The people growing up now, they don't necessarily know what things were like before, and they
don't necessarily remember the promises that were made to our generation specifically about
what this type of connectivity was going to do, what the utopian imaginaries were, and
what it was supposed to create, how it was supposed to pan out.
Because right now it feels remarkably different.
Yeah, they're too young for techno-utopianism, and they're too young to know what a huge
fucking deal 2008 was.
Right.
Because they've just had, well, this is the economy now, I guess.
This is normal.
We were promised, you know, by the, you know, the blue sky theorists about the democratizing
potential, the liberation of, we had the techno-utopianism.
Now, that's obviously stupid.
It was always stupid, but, like, now everyone has to admit it.
Right.
Um, yeah, no one ever promised that to those kids.
That was over.
They're like, the internet is where you live now.
It sucks, but there's nothing else.
And, uh, yeah, this is the economy now.
Good fucking luck.
At best, you will get a miserable, soul-grinding email job where you work way too much, and you
still can't afford anything, and you're mind-numbing, debased, whatever, or you just won't have a job.
Like, those are the options.
Right.
Those are the alternatives.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The email job, which is totally unfulfilling, and you know what you're doing is non-productive
and pointless, or no job at all.
Yeah, yeah.
Which is, uh, yeah, that sucks, uh, even worse.
Yeah.
And that's the dream, and that forgets all about the people who are just working in retail.
Hmm.
Um, or in horrible debt, we have a huge nursing shortage, because no one wants to go into that
kind of debt for nursing school.
They don't even make enough, and they're union-busting them.
So the meaningful, rewarding jobs are, the barrier to entry is so high.
In your book, you write about three types of political perverts that emerge on the left.
What are these three types of perverts?
Um, well, they're the masochists.
The masochists, I think, are more, like, an outrage thing, but earlier.
Some of them are still really holding on to it, but then there's the professional set.
You know, Robin DiAngelo, the author of White Fragility, just got tricked into giving $15,000
of reparations to a random black guy.
Like one individual dude?
Yeah, yeah.
He was, like, a producer, I think, on some, I forget the right-wing, you know, media personality,
and they, like, they pranked her, and to just give it, and she's like, I apologize for what
white people have done, and, you know, it doesn't make up for it.
It's just this constant prostrating yourself.
And it's like, but just go be, like, Catholic or something.
What are you doing?
And it's this idea that you'll have absolution for being constantly apologetic for the sins
of the father.
Not even the father.
We're talking about quite a few generations back.
It's very illiberal, isn't it, to blame people for the sins of their, like, intergenerational
karma?
Yeah.
Very illiberal.
Yeah, it's liberal.
It's borderline race science.
Right.
It's really walking that line.
But that's obviously really unappealing to normal people.
People don't, like, what, so I'm scraping and bowing for the rest of my life for something
I didn't even do.
And I think when people have their come-to-Jesus moments, people do apologize, you know, if they
don't feel back into the corner.
They definitely don't if they think there's no way out.
If they're going to execute you anyway, you might as well do the crime.
Some of these email job types seem to very much enjoy this kind of masochistic relationship
to politics.
Absolutely.
You see this with, you know, the union drive and the professional sort of liberal set.
We are in a union.
And it's like, well, what does that mean?
Are you negotiating for wages or, you know, better hours or, you know, to prevent layoffs?
No, we're demanding that they give us more anti-racist training.
It's like, you're demanding you go to school?
Watch out.
You might get it.
Oh, it's so awful.
And it's just, what if you just like weren't racist?
Like, just don't be, you know what it is.
Just don't be racist.
It is not that hard.
But, yeah, they don't, they don't know what to do.
They don't think in terms of their own power.
They think of, you know, leftism or progressivism or whatever you want to call it as atonement,
which automatically means assuming a posture of weakness.
And I think the whole idea is to make people strong and not so division and solidarity and the whole thing.
So, yeah, the masochists, you can pretty much spot them.
It was really weird there for a while and around 2014.
And Bernie came up and it calmed down.
And then it collapsed again with, like, Trump.
And then I think it's kind of relaxed a little bit with Biden.
But, oh, boy, I bet it's coming back.
No matter who wins, it's coming back.
The masochists are coming back.
Yeah, yeah.
I think, and not even specifically because it's like a sort of social tenancy,
but because they have succeeded to some degree in a little bit changing the kind of professional world to incorporating these things.
And certainly the capitalists are very happy to institute this.
They're like, sure, we will pay a $300,000 speaking fee for Robin DiAngelo.
That's wages we don't have to pay.
Right, right.
Yeah.
Anything that is workplace discipline that precariatizes most of your employees is still cost savings at the end of the day,
even if you're paying these absorbent consultant fees.
Yeah.
Yeah.
There's another type of pervert you write about in the book that likes to say things like,
the youth will save us.
Yeah, yeah, the pedophiles.
The political pedophiles.
It's very weird.
Again, because people don't want to, like, talk to kids and let them talk.
If they did, they might be really worried and disappointed.
But I think this really started with the kind of new left counterculture, 60s hippie.
You know, there's Abby Hoffman said, you know, don't trust anyone over 30.
I think he was 34 when he said that.
There's a cultural currency of youth that happened because this was, these were baby boomers.
Um, suddenly they were a demographic.
It's kind of the creation of, like, the teenager happened in the 50s with the car and they had enough money to buy things.
So they became a marketing demographic.
Um, and then, of course, that resulted in an identity.
Um, we are young.
Uh, and.
Once they're able to buy things, people start to produce products and culture to market to these people.
Absolutely.
Now that they're consumers.
Yeah, if you were living in the 20s, you didn't buy, like, a young hat.
You bought the same hat as your dad.
Now there was subculture, but it had more to do with artistic movements that are associated with fringe.
I mean, you might wear a zoot suit, uh, you know, if you're in the Harlem Renaissance.
But that's also because you've been completely separated and cut off from society at large.
I see.
Uh, it's a subculture formed out of, um, you know, necessity and rebellion.
You know, it's kind of punk.
But there wasn't, like, a, um, a mainstream counterculture in the way we might think of, like, the 60s hippies or something like that.
Yeah, that, that, that's a whole other, I want to say level, but it's, it's a whole other beast, really.
Um, and in thinking of themselves as young, they also thought of themselves as righteous.
And that's the, the famous, you know, Hunter S. Thompson quote where he's like, we thought we would win because, not because we were going to, like, overthrow them or kill our parents or anything like that.
But because they're, like, old and wrong and we're, like, young and right and with the powers of righteousness.
He's like, you know, yeah, I don't know why we thought that.
I don't know.
It seemed to make sense at the time.
But people have still inherited that.
They're still, like, passing that down.
The future is in the youth.
And this is definitely something that is very boomer.
A little bit Gen X, but I think it's, they have to wait for their kids to grow up a little bit more.
Um, but it's very boomer, uh, because they're like, well, we didn't change the world.
Maybe the next one's well.
Right.
I think it's a lot of guilt.
It's a lot of displacement.
And they want something to be optimistic about.
Do you feel like there's a, um, that people are tempted to kind of defer responsibility when they say, well, you know, things are really bad right now.
But the kids today, they're really on top of it.
They're more radical than ever.
And they're going to get something done.
Yeah, yeah.
They're great.
It's fine that we're leaving them holding the bag.
You know, it's great.
Also, they definitely know what they're doing.
There's an inherent intelligence to children.
What's the dumbest thing you thought when you were 17 years old?
You don't have to say it out loud.
I can't even, yeah.
You do not have to say it out loud because who wants to?
You have dumb ideas.
But more than that, you don't have any experience.
Like you talk about they, you know, these kids have no memory of life sort of before social media.
I don't have any memory of life before union strength.
I had to talk to older people for that.
I had to learn from older people.
I can't, you know, this isn't like a free-range daycare situation.
Like politics has to be intergenerational because you're sharing things.
Young people can invigorate, you know, a wizened old borderline cynic.
But like also older people know things you don't.
They've just like lived longer.
And they could obviously be wrong too.
But being presented with someone's experiences, even if they're an unreliable narrator, is a really important part of growing up.
It seems intuitive.
Like let's take the most important task in the world, right?
Changing the world.
The most important job you can give someone.
And let's pick the person who has the least experience whatsoever.
Like that sounds fucking insane.
But this is political common sense all the time.
Conveniently enough, I don't have to do anything.
Oh, yeah, I don't have to do anything.
Yeah.
Yeah.
The pedophile is the most debased and deranged of them.
But this next one is maybe the most dangerous.
Because it can be hard to identify sometimes.
These are people who like to sort of criticize the past of the labor movement.
But at the same time, canonize certain people.
But only because they failed.
What they like about them is that they failed.
There's no celebration of, really, of union victories.
You know, the noble and the doomed.
The dead.
You know, both metaphorically and literally.
But, you know, I used a specific example.
But there are a lot of them.
You know, the people talking about the weather underground or the Black Panthers.
And it's like, well, they lost because they had bad ideas about how to change the world.
Like, they weren't good at it.
Right.
They just weren't good at their thing.
But also, it's very easy to defeat groups like that.
But then other people.
Why is that such a romantic aspiration for so many people?
So many young people on the left who, like, look up to the weather underground, for example.
Honestly, they're all kind of cool and hot.
Have you seen the Angela Davis at trial?
Yeah.
Oh, my God.
And the miniskirt?
She's gorgeous.
Smoke show.
And then, like, you know, the weather underground has all these, like, perfect giant sunglass, long hair, whatever.
And they're wearing fatigues and, like, building bombs.
And it's like, dude, being cool and dangerous and hot is cool and dangerous and hot.
I think part of it is aesthetic.
Part of it is like, yeah, man, they really did something.
Yeah, it didn't work.
But then there's other stuff like, you know, just labor failures.
I mean, you know, Harlan County, USA is an amazing documentary.
No one ever talks about her second one, American Dream, which is about a massive, massive failure and defeat of the Hormel factory.
And part of me is like, goddamn Midwesterners.
His hog cutters were immunized and they were losing because they were cutting them down.
They were cutting jobs and stuff.
And no one really pays attention to that one, I think, because in it, it partially failed because they hired a consultant.
Because this is the beginning of that.
But, and it would vilify them.
Um, but they kind of, you know, they love the idea of the Harlan County wins, but then they're like, ah, damn, but it couldn't last.
Or like the, the almosts.
They love the almosts.
It's a good story.
And also, people who are dead can't disappoint you.
Right.
Maybe they weren't flawless, but they're not talking anymore and you can ignore the parts you don't like.
You don't have to actually engage with them.
You can just stare at this corpse like a, you know, like a, like a relic and be like, this is holy.
Um, they just, yeah, they, they want to fuck corpses, metaphorically.
Speaking of being cool, dangerous, and hot, there's a sense that participation on today's left does not necessarily feel dangerous.
It feels kind of safe and boring, if I can describe it that way.
Yeah.
And, uh, you've written before about vulgarity.
You've written about the language of the court, about elite affect.
Is there something that's happened in the last few years that, that kind of edgy, countercultural, like, that cool, rebellious quality of the left has kind of disappeared?
Yeah.
Um, I, I think it's also sort of shifted and, like, done a little horseshoe thing where it's, like, actually the most radical thing you can do is yell at everyone about transphobia or whatever.
Um, so that kind of sets you apart as dangerous and probably are dangerous because you're trying to get people fired.
Yeah, yeah.
It's consequences.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, that's the messaging that comes from the left now.
There is, however, something emerging from the new right, as it's been called, the pro-union GOP.
Yeah, yeah.
Make of that what you will.
Yeah.
How do you understand these people?
What do you make of this new right movement?
Do you take their endorsement of unions seriously?
How should we understand this thing?
Yes and no.
Uh, so, part of this, I think, is that there's just, as, as powerful as the Republican Party seems, it is a shit show right now.
They cannot decide who they are, who they're reaching out to.
So, suddenly, they have the lack of organization and solidarity.
You almost always associated with the left prior to this.
Um, I think they're realizing that there's a captive audience and people who are fucking miserable and they're no longer buying into, like, the Reagan thing, which is really interesting.
Um, which, you know, good riddance.
But, you know, what I saw the left do, the left, whatever that means.
Whatever that means.
When Sean O'Brien, you know, president of the Teamsters, spoke the RNC, everyone got crazy pissed.
All the online left, they were so, they're like, well, the UAW doesn't do that.
Like, and they have Trump voters.
The thing is, a lot of Trump voters in the Teamsters.
And I was like, well, one, the UAW has fewer Trump voters than, particularly because they got carpetbaggers.
Um, I mean, I was a UAW member.
I wasn't working the fucking line and I loved it.
I loved my, I loved my, uh, benefits and I, you know, I loved voting in the thing and I loved being a part of the union that was actually a union.
But there's, something has gone wrong when an adjunct at NYU can be in the UAW.
You're really having to pad your numbers there.
And the Teamsters are the Teamsters or the Teamsters.
They're logistics, they're drivers.
It's, it's not a professional job.
Um, it's an important job.
Um, but he had to talk to his own membership to some degree.
Two, he has gotten concessions from people like J.D. Vance.
Um, his job is not to work for the Democratic Party.
It's to work for his members.
Also, you gotta hold their feet to the fire.
Like, hey, just so you know, we're talking to who's gonna be in charge, no matter who that is.
Mm.
Uh, hope it's you.
They donated more to the Democratic Party than they did to the Republicans.
Um, they also wanted to speak at the DNC.
And, uh, someone didn't pick up the phone.
So, hey.
Tells you a lot, doesn't it?
Yeah.
This is real.
You know, this movement, these people are real.
Yeah.
And they are in the union movement.
You do have to be like, I see you, I hear you, I'm holding space for, you know, and then, but like a teamster.
Um, and it is part of engaging with membership.
It's about, you know, implicitly threatening the Democrats.
Right.
You don't deserve some, you don't deserve our support if you don't put it in.
Um, it's about, you know, recognizing who your membership is.
And I think people also miss a very cogent point here.
Sean O'Brien isn't going to get anyone to vote one way or the other.
Unfortunately, although for better or worse, the lack of union militancy means that nobody's voting is a block.
It's not like what the president of your union says, this is going to be good for the union.
They're going to be like, yeah.
Also, the teamsters are extremely atomized, which a lot of unions are because we're not really a country.
We're 50 small countries.
There are different labor laws everywhere.
So they can't really organize in a certain way.
And a lot of people don't have engagement with the national leadership.
But they might watch the RNC.
Like, it's the idea that he would be getting teamsters to vote for Trump is absurd.
He couldn't get teamsters to vote for, you know, Kamala if he wanted to.
Unfortunately, unions don't have that power.
Also, it's very funny.
I'm sorry.
Like, it's just, it's extremely funny.
He gave one of the most left-wing speeches.
He got these Republicans to clap for it.
He has gotten some, you know, concessions from Republicans.
And, you know, telling the Democrats they better play ball.
It was a baller move.
He did nothing wrong.
It was very savvy, I think.
And the only fallout that he gets is from, like, the loony left.
Everyone else is like, ha, that's funny.
Oh, that's a good speech.
It doesn't, it doesn't, the idea that either this means it's paving the way for unions to become right-wing is utterly stupid.
And it means you know nothing about the labor movement.
But also, the idea that he really supports the Republican Party.
He supports the unions, supports the members.
It's what you want in a, you know, he answers to the members.
It's what you want in a labor leader.
Zooming out here, not just in the scope of, like, one election cycle, but in the 40-year arc of neoliberalism, big, you know, transformations to the global economy, theoretical, also practical.
There's a general retreat from free markets and global trade.
Right.
There's a degree of reinvestment into the national economy.
This has reshaped the right, I think, in really profound ways for the last 10 years.
The faction I would describe as techno-libertarian, maybe 10 years ago, this kind of Silicon Valley entrepreneur, very focused on deregulation, has drifted towards this national conservative right.
And this now characterizes a large portion of the Republican Party.
Yeah.
And they are very happy to work with the State Department and the military and, you know, all of the forces that they were seeking to evade or deregulate before.
They've really incorporated themselves into the national project.
Yeah.
And I think that this Republican endorsement of labor, this kind of tentative attachment, is actually attached to that in some way.
It's fake, everyone knows it's fake, but still, it's an interesting phenomenon and it represents some kind of sea change in how its conservatives are thinking about their role.
Right, right.
And I think probably both you and I would say that this represents a larger class de-alignment in American politics in general.
All fallen parts.
Right.
But just because we can name it as a de-alignment doesn't mean that the shift isn't continuing to happen.
Does this represent some larger arc in the development of neoliberalism, of this kind of retreat from globalization?
Does that strike you as a significant development in some way?
Yeah, I hope so.
I mean, you say that, it could be worse.
But offshoring has been horrifically unpopular since it happened.
And the fact that, you know, there was a bipartisan infrastructure bill, that they are unshoring, that they are giving tax breaks or whatever to stay in the country, represents something truly changing.
The Silicon Valley thing is very interesting, too, because it's very, like, fight the power, put me on the throne.
It's like a very classic story or whatever, but it also sort of represents, like, conservatism in general just exploding.
And I think that that coincides with neoliberalism also on the decline.
Right.
Because the way conservatism has been shaped since at least the 80s has been by the neoliberal project.
Right.
And also the Democratic Party.
Without that model, none of these parties function in the same way.
I mean, you could argue they kind of don't really function well at all anymore because they're like, what's the project we grab onto?
Because there was a certain agreed-upon Overton window or whatever that Republicans and Democrats shared for a long time.
And now everyone's splitting.
They're splitting like leftists.
They're reproducing, like, the way amoebas do.
They're, like, bacteria.
They're splitting everywhere.
It's really crazy.
I don't know what's going to happen, obviously.
But honestly, the boost in manufacturing is a very good sign.
The fact that Republicans are at least scared enough of labor to give lip service and the fact that, you know, labor leaders like Sean O'Brien, I believe, are like, this is lip service.
Or, like, they know the fact that unions are now able to play the game when they haven't really been involved for a very long time.
Something is happening.
I'm very much of the opinion that power generates power as long as you do it right and no disasters happen.
So I think the idea that there are a lot of critics of the New Deal, they're like, that was to stop a revolution.
It's like, well, maybe, but who cares?
It was good.
And here's the thing.
If it stopped a revolution, it's because they won a lot of shit.
They probably wouldn't have won the revolution.
What do you say to these people who make an argument like, we shouldn't do another New Deal because we want to have the revolution?
Shut the fuck up, loser.
Good.
Like, shut up.
Yeah.
Or here's what I say.
Go to a steelworkers union meeting.
Say that out loud.
Make some friends.
The only reason you are able to hold this opinion is because you are not around the people it would affect.
When did you get on board for social media?
Maybe my mid-20s.
Yeah, my mid-20s.
And that was just Facebook.
And then I got on Twitter.
I'm such a bad predictor of trends in that way.
And so I got on Twitter, and this was well before it was, you know, LinkedIn for blue checks.
Then you saw a lot of things sort of blow up on it in a pseudo-intellectual.
That's mean.
An ostensibly political or intellectual.
All these people who went to college and graduated after 2008 had nothing to do.
Right.
Like, they were either underemployed, unemployed, or overemployed working 60 hours a week at, like, an email job and just had nothing to do.
Right.
Yeah, yeah.
So they were posting about, you know, misogynoir and, you know, decolonialization.
They had to use their degrees for something.
And I'm like, this isn't as fun.
And then it became really professionalized.
I'm like, this sucks.
But, yeah, I did politics well before that.
Yeah.
How did you get politicized?
What age were you?
When did you first encounter this material?
In junior high, I learned to hate Reagan.
Because my mom got pregnant in high school and my dad, you know, R-U-N-O-F-T.
And it was right when a lot of programs for single moms were being canceled when I was born.
And we really, we were poor.
We weren't working class.
We were poor.
You get really sick of being poor.
You know, at some point you're like, this is bullshit.
I feel like people will say, we didn't know we were poor.
I'm like, what were you, fucking morons?
Like, how did you, even if you're surrounded by other poor people, you have, like, TV.
And you know that there are people who, like, own a house and, like, get to have clothes that aren't from Kmart and shit.
And I sort of started looking around at sort of, you know, the economics of the time.
And then in high school, I moved from, also my junior high was very upper middle class.
And we lived in, like, the one very shitty apartment complex.
Obviously, we couldn't buy a house there.
But when in high school, my mom got a subprime mortgage.
And we moved way out in Bumblefuck.
And it's like, there was a steel plant that shut down.
And there were farmers who were losing their land.
And I'm like, oh, all these people are poor.
This is great.
Or at the very least, country middle class, which is, like, the richest girl in my school and family on a dairy farm.
I sort of, I was like, oh, de-industrialization and big agriculture.
And I really started to pay attention to that.
This is also when, you know, the Indianapolis Star, the local newspaper, was like, covered this stuff.
You could read about state news.
Sure, sure.
And then in college, I really wasn't radicalized by Iraq.
I, I, I, it was a huge flashpoint for me.
But there was definitely a delayed reaction.
We didn't even have a cable.
We were like, oh, we should get those guys.
And then slowly we realized, I think they're lying to us.
We should get us.
I don't think.
Yeah, yeah.
They know what they're doing.
I don't think.
Those aren't the guys.
I think they're making shit up.
Yes.
Because they want to go there.
You know, they were doing a little bit of fake news.
That's what we call it now.
Yeah.
No, that's new.
And, but that, that was big.
And then I sort of, like, international politics.
I was like, oh, the only reason we can do, like, I believe politics starts at home.
I think a lot of the anti-imperialist people are technically correct.
But if your first thing is imperialism, it's like, baby, most of America has bigger things
to worry about.
And something tells me you don't actually care about, you know, Yemenis so much as you
don't like rednecks and middle American people.
Yeah, yeah.
It's like the, you know, animal rights people.
Sometimes you're like, do you really like animals or do you just hate people?
Yeah.
Do you see what we do to humans?
Yeah.
It ain't good.
So you're, um, people like to say that there's getting radicalized by reading and then there's
getting radicalized by real life.
And in the circumstances, the immediate circumstances, you were politicized through that experience
and you didn't necessarily have contact with theory.
You like, you're not reading in high school.
You're not reading political material.
No, I was very late to that stuff.
When did you find your way to that stuff?
Like, like, my fifth year of college.
Okay, wow.
I went to a, not because I got an advanced degree, but because I went to a, what they
call a commuter school, is a community college, for, uh, you know, it was like troops, ex-cons,
and single moms, go Jags, is what we joke.
And I was sort of aware of the news and read the local paper, but it was mostly that I was
like, oh, there's a history of, uh, of social democracy in this country.
It's always been weak, but like, oh, I had family members that were in unions.
Right.
And how come those aren't around anymore?
Like, there's my great-grandpa and great-grandma's house were just surrounded with Chesapeake railroad
stuff.
And he's a proud union man.
And, uh, I'm like, things have gotten worse, which means, theoretically, they could be better.
So, I sort of got into reading about it, you know, socialist stuff, and, you know, I didn't
go through the complete works of Lenin.
I, you know, I was cool, um, but around, when I was around 23, but before that, it was like,
oh, you know, just, it's sort of, certainly liberal protections.
Things like gay marriage were big right then.
Um, but I was also, like, all my gay friends were, like, punk, and they were, like, we don't
have any fucking health insurance to share anyway.
Who cares about getting married?
Lesbians with children, like, the most domestic-seeming demographic for gays were, like, neither of
us have insurance.
And we can't afford a wedding, so who cares?
But it was mostly economics.
It was cuts.
It was the history of unions.
Um, it was, hugely, it was right to work.
In the book, you write about first seeking out the DSA, and you're looking at different
political organizations, and you have enough wherewithal at that age to differentiate what
is, like, three kooks in a Maoist cult versus an actual organization.
How are you finding these, these different groups?
Are you browsing their literature?
Are you looking online?
How are you discovering them?
I married a townie when I was 23, and Bloomington, which is funny, because I was, all the people
who lived there couldn't afford the university, obviously.
And he worked, he was shop steward for his local grocer's union, and, you know, uh, but
really, it's like, there were people like the Spartacist League on campus, and, like, just
giant weirdos.
A lot more anarchists, which is, you know, very du jour at the time, I think, largely because
the last memory they had of what they thought was leftist politics is very, like, libertarian,
and a lot of times those things slide into each other.
Most of the time they do.
I mean, if you're, you know, the Spanish Civil War, or, you know, agrarian, uh, India, you
know, go for it, but that's not what anarchism means in America.
Yeah, that's not, yeah.
And, uh, I was like, kook, kook, kook, but I was like, I'm gonna look into this and start
Googling, and I think the thing about DSA was that, one, I didn't really have a position
on communism until later, and I'm like, it's kind of a loser to be a Trotskyite, to be
a critic of the, like, who cares what they do in the Soviet Union?
Why would you, it's a different country, but I didn't really think about communism.
I was just like, well, I at least know that I support these social programs, and the biggest
thing is that they were old.
It had old people in it.
Right, right.
And I didn't believe in any organization.
It didn't have enough young people.
I didn't believe in any organization that was entirely youth-oriented, where no one had
kids, and, you know, people were, like, bike punks or whatever, and I'm like, I want grown-ups.
One, because I don't know anything, you know, is it the intellectual history, which wasn't,
still wasn't that into, just because I'd rather read other things and, you know, listen to punk
music, but, too, I just, I want to know from people's experiences, which I think you're
doing in the other direction.
You're watching people develop, and I like listening to old, bitter people.
I have a dream before they all die of doing, like, a similar ethnography, but with people
who are, you know, in their 70s, about their, yeah, sort of an update romance of American
communism thing.
What was political organization like before social media?
God.
Well, it changed, you know, almost every decade, right?
So, if you read about the Communist Party, you know, it's very dramatic.
There are all these, you know, different factions of leftists, the Trotskyists.
There was this secret speech when people were like, did you know life in the Soviet Union
actually isn't that cool?
And there were, like, three camps where people were like, it's not true.
And then there were people who were like, yeah, so.
And then there were people who were like, I'm not a communist anymore.
Like, it's just like people couldn't deal with it.
But also, they hadn't been confronted with that information before.
If you're on the internet now, you know 10 different versions of what's happening somewhere,
and you pick what you choose to believe.
It's super different in that respect.
But then when you look into the cultural aspects of it.
So, like, you know, I talk about those old sleepy Jews in the Bronx that were DSA people.
They lived in these co-ops that are beautiful that are now sold as condos.
And they had common space at the bottom where you would have, like,
give, like, painting lessons through the party to kids and, like, dances and things like that.
It was a real social component.
Not, like, community in the way that, like, we're all going to have a vegan potluck.
It's like we work together, and this is the result of us working together.
The work is the first part.
That is how the social stuff blooms.
Then you had all kinds of, I mean, you had really violent labor confrontations, too.
So, I'm focusing on labor here because it's, so goes that, so goes politics.
But then, you know, you saw the advent of the consultant class making its way into, I mean,
SEIU at this point is basically just, like, an NGO.
You saw, you know, kind of anti-war protests turning into, you know, a major, like, mass movement that, you know, had negligible power.
It's more like we were like, man, Vietnam's side.
We should leave.
We're not doing well here.
There's so many.
It's gone through so many iterations, which is another reason why both the sort of deterministic, you know,
doomers and, you know, the end of history people were right.
It's very narcissistic.
It's like, well, this is finished.
This is how things are forever.
I know because I'm alive.
Nothing will happen in the world after I die.
It's like everything has been different every 10 years, sometimes less.
Like, everything is constantly churning and changing in the world, but also just in America specifically.
You don't know what's going to happen.
How do you feel about this idea, the end of history?
How do you feel about that now?
Yeah, I mean, like, obviously that's been, like, really, to me, just totally disproven.
You know, the Bernie movement, you could say, like, fizzled.
It wasn't, you could say it never had a chance.
You don't know that.
I do believe it was always going to be sabotage, but it was worth a shot.
I think this stuff is very stupid.
I think people are like, what was the point of even trying?
It's like, dude, if you, if your team, if your NBA team loses a game to another NBA team,
are you like, well, should I ever have even had hope?
If you grow up, you're going to lose.
You're going to lose.
Actually, it's more like baseball.
You lose more than you win, even if you win a championship.
But the funny thing about the Fukuyama thing, which I had never read all the way through,
the essay, certainly not the book, it's about the end of his job.
Yes.
As a Cold War consultant, there's no more Soviet Union.
And it's very, it's very, very, well, after me, nothing will happen.
You know, we're done.
Like, shit, what am I going to do with my days?
What do you think about this, like, Fukuyama saying that socialism should come back
and calling himself something of a social democrat nowadays?
I think he's, well, that's probably a little bit true,
because when he argued that neoliberalism was the end point, it hadn't quite gotten as far.
I mean, there still was, there still were some social democratic programs as weak and diminished as they were.
He probably does, on some level, have a, well, I didn't mean that, like, you know, attitude towards it.
At the same time, I think he's like a hustler.
And he's like, I'm relevant again.
Yeah, he's got to make a pivot.
He's got consultancy brain.
Right.
You know, you always be selling.
I think it's really funny.
I mean, I think a lot of stuff is really funny.
I mean, when I think about these, like, large arcs of, like, what neoliberalism was in, like, 1989 versus what it is, you know, decades and decades later,
like, there's a process that's playing out.
And this is not, like, a manageable system that can continue in perpetuity.
No.
Like, this is extremely volatile.
It's very unstable.
It's getting worse rapidly.
Yeah.
And there's not, like, a cyclical process where there's, you know, booms and busts and, like, just generally things work out.
No.
Like, this is actually just a grinding process of racing towards the bottom.
The whole history repeats itself thing is, like, no, it doesn't.
There's new things all of the time.
Like, not just regards to technology, but in statecraft and, you know, just it's all changing all the time.
And, yeah, everything, we're moving at a thousand miles an hour, but the wheels are flying off.
I don't know what's going to happen.
I hope it's good.
When we look at the activity of young people who make radical posts online through this frame of the end of history,
does this help to contextualize some of this, like, frantic, excited energy of, like, why they're posting in 40 different directions at the same time?
That things are actually more open than they were during the period that you and I were growing up?
I think you're right.
I didn't think about that, but it's like, you know, I think you're right.
Like, not to, you know, compliment you on your own paw, that's always embarrassing, but, like, the idea that there's more of an open field now, it's like, well, the thing that we were told, like, they weren't told it's the end of history.
They watched weird things happen immediately, so they have this, like, damn, I have all of these options.
Any of them could be correct, and they're very young, so they bounce around and, you know, they're trying on different hats, like I said.
But, yeah, it makes them feel potentially powerful, but also it means that maybe they can have power that isn't rooted in these traditional institutions, like the party system, which are falling apart.
Right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That's fun.
How open is this field, though?
Like, when we're talking about socialism in the 21st century, are we talking about, like, capital S socialism, like, kind of romantic notions of the 20th century?
And on the flip side, like, when people talk about ascendant fascism in the U.S., like, capital F fascism, I don't think that this is, like, the 20th century fascism that we saw.
How open is this field?
What are the parameters of the Overton window that are actually available right now?
Well, I think one of the important things to remember is that we live in the United States of America, and it's a different country from other countries.
So to expect it to look like the Soviet Union or fascist Italy is stupid.
This was one of the weird things about the fascism debates.
It's like, we're in America, and Richard Spencer is this gay little Europhile.
Like, truly, fascism in the way that we think of it, and, like, you know, of course people love fascists.
The left loves fascists.
One, because they're cartoonishly evil, so it's a very easy thing to be like, that's the bad guy.
And two, because we beat them, so it feels like, oh, well, this is the big boss, but we're going to win again, and then we're going to have a big win, and it's going to be really fun, and then maybe we'll have a post-war economy, and it'll be a great movie.
We're going to be Indiana Jones.
But, like, it's so European, it doesn't really work.
You have to have a national project to have a national socialist project.
Right, right.
I mean, you know, say what you will about Nazi Germany.
They had a lot of domestic manufacturing, and it's just, there's, it's a very diverse country that's also just not unified.
We don't have, like, a very federalist, like, you know, it's, we need to bring in the tanks and finish what Lincoln started.
We should need to be one country.
There's all kinds of reasons why that wouldn't work.
As for, like, you know, any potential left trajectory, I think, you know, the kids are going to be a little disappointed about how likely gradual it will be.
You know, maybe there'll be a big revolution, but unfortunately our state, for better or worse, our state has enough stability, even though it's, you know, children institutions are falling apart, to where it's like, well, if we need to bring in the National Guard and mow down a bunch of people to quell a revolution, it's going to be really easy.
Right, right.
Gradualism, it's not what I want, obviously.
I also don't want people to get mowed down.
The Glorious Revolution was actually kind of a bummer, as glorious as it was, a bunch of dead people.
Maybe gradualism wasn't the word, but I think piecemeal.
Like, I think working on program by program, I think, you know, I thought Bernie was right, and before DSA, just, they were right to say our primary campaign should be socialized health care.
It's broadly popular.
It benefits everyone who isn't wealthy.
I mean, like, actually wealthy.
I have good health insurance.
It doesn't cover shit, and it's really expensive, and I hate it, and they made record profits during COVID despite getting bailouts.
I hate them.
I hate them.
Socialized health care, a programmatic thing.
That's one of the problems with the left.
Anurin Bevan, architect of the national health system in Britain, said, you know, priorities should be the religion of socialism.
But we have this in Ben Fong, editor-in-chief of Damage Mags, plug, because I'm on the editorial board, talked about, like, everything all of the time.
Yes.
The idea that you're going to have a platform and not a campaign, that's leading with, like, ideas, posters, statements instead of work.
Pick something.
It is, tell you what, get one thing done, and then you can add another.
If you get one thing done, give trying two at once a shot.
But before you get one thing done, maybe dedicate your resources and energy to the one thing.
Because just being like, this is everything I would believe.
Everyone should come on board.
This fucking, I don't want to hang out with you.
I already have friends.
And you spend your weekends at meetings.
You're not fun.
In terms of ranking those priorities, where do things like building community power and doing mutual aid fall on that list of urgency?
It's cart before the horse thing.
One, mutual aid, I have huge criticism of this in my book because it's like, I can't make penicillin in my bathtub.
That's a big one.
And two, wealth disparity is so bad right now.
It's worse than in the Gilded Age.
It's insane.
I mean, it's like, this is just poor people sharing a car.
This sucks.
And also, it's just charity.
Everyone's like, it's different from charity because blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And then a reason that is not different from charity at all.
It's just charity.
I think you should give to charity.
I give to charity.
I volunteer.
I do all this fucking shit.
But it's because, you know, I love Jesus.
I mean, I do, but that's not why I do it.
But it's like, it's because that's a different part of you.
Volunteering, you know, participating in your community.
That is serving a different part of you.
And that is an important part.
But you should not go into politics to fulfill that part.
Join a church.
I don't care.
Like, it's not, I mean.
I mean, there is an odd similarity on a lot of these things where people tend to go to meetings on Sunday and they fulfill this kind of like moral charity thing.
Yeah.
They have things to do.
Church gives you service churches.
They also have their own confessional rituals.
Like, you have to purge yourself of your sins and shit like this.
It's definitely a similarity.
People don't mean to you.
But no, I mean, like, enjoy some nice Episcopalians that feed the homeless or whatever.
Yeah.
Or just find a shelter.
My folks are Episcopalian.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like, there's all kinds of stuff.
They were Catholic before and then some weird shit happened.
So, yeah, just nourish and don't avoid religious institutions either.
Like, half of that stuff is just, I mean, half the time missionaries, which are still opposed to, don't even, like, fucking build churches anymore.
Like, people are just like, oh, people hate that.
And, like, find service work.
But the mutual aid thing and building communities.
I'm sorry.
Again, it's cart before the horse.
There's, you can't astroturf a community in.
Communities come from belonging to the same thing.
It's a town with a major industry.
It's, you know, it's belonging to a similar church.
It's, you know, having a single hub, like, a public space.
There are entire communities built around, like, a park.
That's, like, it's a big park and, like, you see little league kids and people have parties there.
And, like, it has to be something that is physical, existed in real space, one.
And, two, has some kind of project involved.
Now, I would love to see the old, you know, union halls that had, like, dances and, you know, fish fries on Sunday and, you know, just took up collections to repair the window in the Catholic church or whatever.
I'm starting to sound like a trad cat.
I'm not at all.
I hate those papists.
But, like, you know, they did these things that really were community.
But it's because they all worked together.
Because they were all fighting together.
I think the best way to have a real community is to have people with whom you share stakes.
Now, unfortunately, in America, and we'll say in Los Angeles, just an example, the people who share stakes are homeowners and landlords.
And, boy, do they have a community.
Right.
And, boy, are they organized.
Right.
Let's beat them at that.
They're losers and don't even like each other.
Let's like each other.
Let's fight together.
And then, hey, you'll start to notice people forming whatever bowling leagues and book clubs and, I don't know, what do people do?
You know, they'll have running clubs and, like, you know, dances.
Something aside from posting online.
Things like that, yeah.
Like, community happens after you do something together in real life.
And I think it's strongest when you're fighting together with people.
Hmm.
Hmm.
You write in the book about having a super right-wing shrink.
Yeah.
Yeah, the super right-wing shrink.
What was that like doing this, like, very, you know, difficult interior work with someone who you completely disagree with on everything imaginable?
Well, one, I would say this.
He was a pro.
He would let certain things slip where he'd be like, well, you know, and he definitely Googled me.
He was like, well, you know, and he recommended some right-wing thinker to me.
I forget who it was, but a guy who wrote, it wasn't Sam Harris.
It wasn't one of those people.
Okay.
He was a Hasidic Jew.
He was a Hasidic Jew.
He was a Hasidic Jew.
He would not hang out with me.
He would be like, well, you know, when communism, like, you know, you couldn't do this.
And he would let the little things slip.
But I'd be like, I don't know.
I, you know, I don't know about all that, but I do think having health care would take a lot off my plane.
But it was also, again, very project-focused.
We were trying to, you know, get my then-internet-addled brain just ADHD-ass to figure out, like, habits, you know, cognitive behavioral therapy.
It's like habits and, you know, new rethinking about things so I could pay attention, get things done.
And that's the other thing I think that the left doesn't get.
One, not everyone has, like, right-wing beliefs has it because they hate people.
They think that's the best way for it.
They think that's what's going to be best for people.
A lot of them are very nice people.
But the left thinks, well, if we don't agree on anything, we can't work together.
But here's, like, one project.
There are lots of people they don't agree with on a lot of things.
But if they want to, you know, campaign for socialist health care with me, that's fine.
Also, I'm sorry.
You need to learn to talk to people who don't agree with you.
Like, not argue or debate.
That's for, like, 21-year-olds.
21-year-old boys love debate.
But, like, just, like, fucking talk to people.
Be normal.
Just talk to people.
People are so, that's another negative effect of the Internet.
People are so scared.
They don't talk.
They don't talk to strangers anymore.
I find this example of the right-wing shrink to be really, really interesting.
Because what I find is very common now is that people tend to pathologize their political opponents.
In that if someone thinks, you know, in the red direction, they must be mentally ill.
If someone thinks in the blue direction, they must be crazy or so on.
And so doing this kind of difficult interior work and working towards health without having to cross those political divides is actually quite an interesting thing.
Yeah, doing something with people.
I had to shrink myself that thought the moon landing was fake.
That's awesome.
Yeah, yeah.
And she was, I mean, she was just tremendously gifted in all sorts of other directions.
Yeah.
Very misled about this one.
I mean, like, literally, if you had to, like, pull an example out of a hat, this is, like, the dumbest example of a conspiracy theory to believe in.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
There's totally other legitimate shit to believe in on the Internet.
Yeah, of course.
But you're going for moon landing, like, give me a break.
It's very old school.
Well, she was very wise and intuitive and had all of these other great ideas and just happened to be very mistaken about this one thing.
People are weird.
Yeah.
The psychology, the shrink aspect was quite good.
Yeah.
Whenever they keep trying to do this America is actually centrist thing, I think they've given up on that.
America isn't centrist.
Americans are totally autosyncratic.
There are no institutions to say, here's how the world works.
This is, you know, this is what we're doing as a project to move forward because you're a worker or you're a capitalist or whatever.
People believe the weirdest shit on Earth, but then also things that they would agree with.
It's just like, look, the Iraq war was wrong and, you know, also fossil fuels need to keep going.
It's like, well, just work with them on the anti-war stuff, but also talk to them about the fossil fuels thing.
When I hear people say that Americans, most Americans are centrist, what I understand that to believe is that most Americans have extreme ideas in, like, 40 different directions.
And if you average all of them, it's in the center.
But that's only because they exist on, like, every extremism of the political spectrum at the same time.
It's when you look up the statistics of a vacation town and they're like, well, the average income is $80,000.
It's like, yeah, they're maids and them.
Exactly.
Like, that's average is not a...
Not representative of...
And there's no data, like, plot line.
Like, people just, you know, they're picking up, especially with the internet, they're just picking up what's ever laying around.
I always say that they're balls of tape.
They're just rolling around on the ground, picking up whatever is there because they're trying to figure stuff out and there are no reliable sources and you can't kind of blame them for coming up with weird ideas.
Do you know anyone who got politicized on the internet and turned out normal?
Shit.
Yes.
Yes, but they were normal first.
If that makes sense.
People who were already a little, well, a lot, socially deficient, became absolute psychopaths, but with a different flavor.
I did see a lot of people who are normal beforehand go crazy and get, you know, internet poisoning.
But there were also people who, one, went a little crazy for a minute and came back.
And there are people who always had their feet on the ground.
And I can't necessarily say that it's, you know, exactly this or that.
Having a real job is a big deal.
That anchors you.
Having had a social network that is not online is a big one.
Not being a careerist is a huge one.
Like, having a job but being like, what can I do to get ahead as an unpaid, non-employee member of an organization?
Pure psychopathy.
Not having a political career.
Yeah, but I still want to be in charge.
That's the worst part.
I would respect it more if they actually were getting, like, jobs out of it.
Like, you're just, you're slaughtering your comrades, you know, corny word or whatever.
But I did, the old people I was around used it.
So I'm like, yeah, that's fine.
I inherited it.
No matter what you do to get ahead, we still don't have power.
So why are you being cutthroat?
Those people don't come out normal, especially, they're not even entirely cynical.
They're like, I believe this because it'll endear them to a group of people.
Sometimes they're like that.
Sometimes they're like, well, like, it's a lot easier to believe something if you get rewarded for believing it.
So they convince themselves of things.
Really, just having a position where you don't benefit from the organization itself in a professional or social way.
Those people tend to, real jobs.
Real jobs are, I think, the biggest one.
Those people turn out much normaler.
Yeah.
But, yeah, people go a little loony and come back and some people never, you know, leave orbit and keep their feet on the ground.
And then some people just lose everything and never come back.
And then some people were never here to begin with.
It's weird.
The Internet is, broadly speaking, though, I would say dangerous for politics.
And not in the, young men are getting radicalized kind of way, but in, like, we can't get anything done if you're all doing this.
You're losing your mind.
You write in the book to beware of people who come to the movement and don't have friends.
This seems like good advice.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, it is hard because people are lonely.
You know, there's no place to hang out.
And you would hope that, again, working together would make you friends.
And there are normal reasons for people to not have friends.
Like, maybe they just moved.
Maybe all their friends joined a cult or became addicted to meth, you know.
But people who, like, have, not just people who don't have friends, people who anti-have friends.
Like, the anti-social people or the people who are just, like, desperately, snivelingly, you know, deferential or, because those people are always tyrants and waiting.
Toadies.
They're dangerous, man.
You need, like, normal people.
And part of normal people is, like, not still being in a fuck you dad part of your life, having friends, doing things, like, that aren't on the internet.
If they come and they don't have anybody in their life, just really keep an eye on that person.
You write in the book that you want socialism to be done.
What do you want to do after socialism is won?
What do you want to get back to?
I would rather list the things that I am able to do that I think everybody deserves to do, which is take a day off and go to the beach or take, like, vacations.
I do the best part of L.A. is you get to leave L.A.
The desert, the mountains, the forest, all this stuff.
Take vacations.
See nature.
Go to different cities.
Exercise.
Be able to afford a gym.
Spend time with their family and friends.
Have a pet.
Garden.
You know, just fucking take it easy.
Sleep in.
I want people to maybe, you know, go to their union meeting every once in a while and, you know, not have to go to too many meetings.
Um, and, uh, you know, have, have some baseline political participation that they don't have to be fucking locked into all the time to know what's going on, which is essentially nothing, but it's a lot of, you know, shroom and drunk.
I want them to be able to have hobbies and, and a social life and relaxation and fun.
This, uh, this question of hobbies and what to do after socialism.
Yeah.
Right.
I find that this is actually, this is a really core, important question for people who take radical politics seriously because there's, um, there's a hazard in that you can be living for revolution all the time.
And that this can be like the sole goal, the sole pursuit, the sole hobby or interest that you have.
Yeah.
And as a result, you are underdeveloped as a person that you don't have aesthetic pursuits.
You don't have friends.
You don't have books that you read or poetry that fascinates you or even just a Sunday painter's practice or whatever.
And, um, let's say tomorrow you do achieve that revolution.
What are you going to do with all that free time?
Um, you're going to be miserable because you got nothing to do.
You've lost your meaning.
I had a little bit of that just with my political life after Bernie because, you know, God knows I, I fill my hours in the day with, with a lot of work, self, self-motivated work.
Um, but also I chill and have fun and go out.
But I really felt like I had, and I did, I had a purpose with Bernie.
And I, the whole time I was like, this isn't, this isn't a huge possibility, but it's the biggest possibility we've ever had, like in my life or my mom's life even.
So I got to put everything into it.
And it was my work.
And then afterwards I had like my work work.
I had writing and stuff like that.
And I had hobbies and friends and stuff like that.
But there was this hole that I, I really missed it.
I still miss it.
I wish I had, I mean, I wish something would happen.
Stuff is happening, but not in any way that I can really participate in.
Right.
Like the unions don't really like need me.
I can do interviews and donate and, you know, whatever, promote campaigns and stuff like that.
But, you know, what am I going to do?
I'm a fucking bohemian layabout.
And, you know, there's electoral politics, but I don't see really going for the presidential election these days with that much enthusiasm.
There's some local stuff, but the thing about the local stuff is that it is local.
A lot of the good candidates are basically defeated, especially here by, you know, homeowners association demons and stuff like that.
I miss it.
I hope I could find something else soon.
Amber, thank you so much.
Your work is such a tremendous inspiration.
Your writing is extraordinary.
And I just, I absolutely love your book.
Thank you.
It made me cry once or twice.
Embarrassed to admit that, but I thought it was a really, really beautifully written book.
And yeah, I'm so glad that we got to do this.
Thank you a lot.
I, I, you're doing the Lord's work too.
Talking to these kids, man, it's gotta be wild.
So, um, yeah, but I, I really appreciate you having me on and I, I really, I really appreciate what you do too.
I'm glad that for whatever community of leftists we have, um, can at least find each other in the fucking ghetto of the internet.
I care.
I appreciate it.
I love you, I love you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Here we go.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
