American leftists are like, oh, the fewer people we appeal to, the better.
In the institutional context, we call this elite capture.
Because elite society is all about trying to create vanguard positions that other people have to follow.
If you don't, like, abolish the family, then you're a reactionary.
And I'm like, can't we be on the left and have differing views on this?
No, not for them.
I feel like America is presently ungovernable because all of our institutions are collapsing.
Welcome to Doomscroll. I'm your host, Joshua Sidarella.
My guest is Catherine Liu, professor of film and media studies at UC Irvine.
She's the author of Virtue Hoarders, the case against the professional managerial class.
You are currently writing a new book about trauma in the digital age.
What caused you to look into this topic of trauma?
And why has it become so influential in the last few years?
It's become so influential in such a way that made me go back to my early days of college when I was on the ground when trauma studies was kind of invented at Yale.
I would say by two women, Kathy Carruth and Shoshana Feldman.
What year is this?
This was, I'd say, like between 1981 when I first arrived and 1989 when it really blew up.
In the early 90s, it really blows up.
But I was there like in the middle of these women sort of working through these ideas about trauma and literature.
And if you really want me to go into it, I will.
Because these were people who were very into deconstruction and psychoanalysis.
And their big poobah mentor, Paul DeMond, who's this brilliant literary critic, was discovered to have written for a Nazi sympathizing magazine in Belgium.
Oh, boy. Okay.
So in his early 20s, in the 1940s, in occupied Belgium, he wrote a bunch of reviews that were very like explicitly anti-Semitic.
Fast forward to the 1970s and 80s, and he's best friends with Jacques Derrida, and they're all talking deconstruction.
And then he dies suddenly in 1982, and this stuff comes out.
A Belgian researcher finds it.
And I think that his most like fervent acolytes, who are like cold warriors in the United States, decided that trauma and trauma studies was going to provide cover for this like huge political scandal that erupted around deconstruction.
So trauma for them was really focused on a reading of Freud's Beyond the Pleasure Principle and this memory culture that comes out of Germany, where you are talking a lot of the humanities about remembering things and memorializing things.
And their theories about writing and literature were a lot about like how we couldn't fully remember a traumatic event.
We had to, you know, it burst forth later.
There's a term in Freud called Nachträglichkeit.
And so they do this thing where they start to read all of literature through trauma, trauma studies, the Holocaust.
But, you know, as I started doing my research into the past, because it's really like come out of academia, gone into popular culture, I realized that it was actually in popular culture and it moved into academia because Oprah Winfrey was at the head of making public child sexual abuse.
And all of that was part of a moral panic in the 1980s, many of you are too young to remember this, but the McMartin nursery case was a case of all of a schizophrenic mother who said that her son told her that he had been sodomized at nursery school, that they were killing rabbits, that there was satanic rituals in the basement.
They bulldozed out underneath the building, they investigated, they interviewed all the kids.
This was like late 80s too, around the same time that the literary people are into Holocaust studies, you have this generalized popular moral panic.
I'm really interested in how popular culture and mass culture influences elite and intellectual culture that thinks of itself as high.
I'm interested in the high-low divide and how things get mixed up in the high-low divide.
So I started doing this genealogy of trauma because it started to become a lingua franca of left liberal social media spaces where people are like, you know, I have so much trauma and then we have COVID and we're all told actually at the university that we have to do trauma-informed pedagogy.
I realized that the trauma lens is all about depoliticization and it's all about making suffering this very personal thing, but also from the 80s, it's about gentrifying trauma as a experience because it's very, very middle class and even upper middle class.
It seems even within, and I imagine we're spanning several years here, maybe a decade plus, but there's the individual trauma and then there's trauma that's experienced as a group or a culture or a nation, things that are shared among many people.
What I'm kind of putting together as you explain this is that over the course of a decade plus, this kind of shifts from being a shared historical trauma and experience like the Holocaust, for example, to being this kind of individual trauma.
Is there a general drift within that time period?
There might be, but I also think that even the Holocaust trauma studies orientation actually was already extremely individualized.
The whole thing about trauma studies is about radical decontextualization.
So you have this like confessional literature and the way that we could understand the Holocaust in the 70s and 80s was through individual experience.
Once again, you guys are too young to remember this, but there was a television series called The Holocaust starring Meryl Streep and James Wood and a bunch of big, big stars.
It was like a soap opera and was supposed to be like this really explosive, you know, media event, you know, and raised.
It was shown in Germany.
It was shown on, I think it was ABC here.
It was like, oh, we've raised consciousness about, you know, the Holocaust and what it means.
And it was a totally family oriented, singular story.
So it was already individualized.
There was no analysis of like the Treaty of Versailles, the rise of National Socialism, the burning of the Reichstag, you know, massive unemployment.
It was a very bourgeois, upper middle class, doctor's family that, you know, goes through these horrific experiences.
And it was very like highbrow, but the lighting was very soap opera, like lighting, you know.
Interesting.
Amazing. Made for TV movie?
Yes, it was a made for TV series, miniseries.
And so it was already like the way that the Holocaust is reintroduced into public discourse and consciousness is through individual narratives of suffering.
And I've been compiling a list because the Holocaust and trauma studies became a really big part of the publishing industry.
There are more than 10 really popular fake Holocaust memoirs that come out through the years.
Yep.
Because people understand that if they tell the story of their suffering that they get an audience or their alleged suffering, they get a massive audience.
So one particular case was a memoir by this guy, Benjamin Wilkormiski.
He was a Swiss, like Protestant kid, but he made up this whole story about how he was a Holocaust survivor and he was hidden by these Swiss people.
And he had to like, you know, live in the woods and all this other stuff.
And it was really incredible until like other people started doing research before the Internet.
And they're like, you know what?
He never like fled into the woods.
He grew up in a Protestant orphanage or something like that.
He's probably very traumatized, right?
He had to make up this whole thing.
And he would say to people, well, it was as if I lived this story.
And he was not the only one.
Yeah.
So I keep compiling these lists.
So it's for me, this kind of like individualization, decontextualization of trauma is really part of the class war against the working class by the professional creative class.
They're like, Oprah's at the forefront too.
You know, it's like there's working class suffering that Marx says is about exploitation and is about the damage of labor and is about the diminution of human life and potential in a mass way, in a collective way, in the working class.
And from that suffering comes a revolutionary impetus, right?
And when you have in the 1980s, there's Ronald Reagan comes to power, the American working class is going down.
And then you have these like really rich, polished people, well-educated.
They're like, you know what?
We suffer too.
And it's true.
They probably, they did suffer.
I'm sure Oprah Winfrey was indeed sexually abused.
I don't think she was lying about it, but she's very composed when she's saying this.
And it was a, you know, massive televisual event.
But it was from that time that people realized they could leverage their personal stories of trauma as a mode of communication and authentication.
For me, there was one triggering event that allowed me to sort of understand the continuum of this was actually after January 6th.
We're in 2020, right?
We're in lockdown.
It's a couple months afterwards.
You know, California's been locked down.
And AOC gets on Instagram Live and there's 400,000 listeners.
I was one of them because I was trapped in my house.
I was like, well, I was watching her Instagram Live and she talked about how she had to hide in her office and she heard the pounding on the door and they were actually in the bathroom, you know, because there was one more extra layer of protection.
And she goes like, okay, I'm going to try to imitate her ears.
And she goes, you know, some of you can be really upset, like friends and family.
I mean, I'm sorry, I've never told you this before, but it was very triggering of a sexual assault.
And I was like, what are you doing, girl?
Like, how are you like assimilating your sexual assault, which is really bad, a private thing you haven't even told members of your family and your closest friends and this political situation?
Like, why are you doing this?
And I realized, like, young people who are media savvy in a certain way and, you know, I admired her political instincts always, our understanding, it's like clickbait, it's like drawing you in, it's this very, very, what I would say is like almost a passkey to authenticity that you get when you say, this has happened to me.
Like, part of me was like, when I saw this, I've had a pretty, like, crazy childhood.
And when I saw this and I saw the look on her face, I was like, one, you really did go through something.
And two, you should not be doing this on Instagram Live.
Does that help you therapeutically?
Like, if I were a mom, I'd be like, what are you doing, you know, to herself?
I mean, she's fine.
She survived it.
But I think that there's a kind of online, like, massive social media convention is about leveraging and instrumentalizing your suffering to accentuate your brand.
I hate to be so crude about it, but that's what it is.
That's what it has become.
And one of the things about all of these women, Winfried, AOC, is they say, I'm telling my story so that other women don't feel alone and they can, you know, Me Too is like this, like, this can become a movement and this can be healing.
You know what?
Telling your story as a billionaire, in Oprah's case, does not heal anybody.
But you're selling a narrative of trauma and recovery.
And, like, where does actual recovery take place?
Like, maybe actually in real life suffering, not through an app, not through broadcast.
The real hard work of therapy, fewer and fewer people want to do and fewer and fewer therapists know how to do.
Sure.
So, also, we have a collapse in health insurance funding of therapy at the same time.
Like, in the 70s or some crazy moment, 60s and 70s, like, insurers would fund your psychoanalysis.
Like, you'd go into analysis with one of the gray shrinks of New York and Blue Cross Blue Shield would pay.
By 1980, they're like, no, this is going on forever.
We're not paying anymore.
So, when that insurance company start to cut back on actual subsidy of mental health treatment is when you have all these, like, highly mediatized forms of...
And then the market demand opens up for all the self-help stuff about your suffering and so on.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, that makes sense.
Once the funding dries up for people who are seeking out analysis or talk therapy or whatever, the demand is still there and they end up purchasing these books from the Oprah list or something like that.
Yeah, and especially the professional managerial class people because they're the seekers of self-help, right?
And they were the seekers of psychoanalysis before.
And now you have, like, short-term therapies like EMDR, which is about...
Have you ever heard of this?
Yes.
Yeah, yeah.
It's really basically hypnosis.
EMDR.
This is the...
Eye movement.
Eye movement.
And it tracks.
And as you're doing this, it's triggered mechanically.
I don't fully understand how it works.
But it allows you to recall traumatic memories, just the memory without experiencing the trauma of it.
And thus, you're able to kind of work your way through it over time.
This is my understanding.
A lot of these technologies...
I mean, I've never done this before.
But a lot of these techniques were pioneered to cure soldiers of PTSD in order to send them back to the front lines.
Cure them and send them right back?
Yeah, but a lot of the good...
And some of them were good.
And one of the things they discovered during World War II that they sort of dropped the ball on in the Vietnam War was that if you had a shrink and treatment right on site,
like right after they're having a terrible experience, the soldiers, they go see a shrink right away, they get better and they get sent back.
But if you let them come home and there's a time lag, then it's a lot harder to rehabilitate soldiers to send them to the front line again.
Of course, of course.
A lot of books now are called like The End of Trauma, No More Trauma.
And if you look at all their techniques, they're derived from military therapies.
You mentioned the professional managerial class.
Your most recent book is called Virtue Hoarders, The Case Against the Professional Managerial Class.
What is the professional managerial class?
Well, so a lot of people are saying that it's a professional middle class.
We're mixing up professionals and managers.
But it was actually a term that Barbara and John Ehrenreich pioneered.
And I think they derived from C. Wright Mills' book on white collar.
They're white collar workers, usually credentialed, heavily credentialed, not just an undergraduate degree, but an graduate degree who, because of the second term managerial, manage other people.
Their work is another way of thinking about them is they're not paid by the hour.
They have a salary and their work is supposed to be more satisfying.
Their expertise is that highly socially valued.
And in the case of most professions, there's a professional organization that offers guidelines, you know, like the AMA, the American Medical Association, offers strict guidelines about how a doctor should behave.
In my case, it's, you know, the Modern Languages Association, the Society for Cinema and Media Studies, the Association of American University Professors.
These professional organizations were mostly created during the time when the robber barons had taken over American economy.
And you had college-educated elites who wanted to create a buffer zone between this rapacious, marketized activity of, you know, the Millons and the Hills and the Morgans.
You had this cadre of people becoming more and more powerful because more and more people were college-educated, professionally-educated.
They realized they needed to protect their activities from the pressures of the billionaire class at the time, right?
So, those professions that are regulated by a professional organization, like the bar lawyers, and demand credentialed elite degrees and have a managerial function in terms of, you know, disciplining other workers.
So, some people ask me, like, what about nurses and teachers?
They have professional degrees?
I was just going to ask, yeah.
They don't manage other people.
When they become principals, then they ascend to professional managerial class status.
But they are professionals.
They're not managers.
There's another way of thinking about this, which is what John and Barbara Ehrenreich called the liberal professions, you know, which are part of the culture industry, like the creative industries and people who are more into, you know, expression and things like that.
That that can be also part of this professional class.
When I look at the original essay published in Radical America in 1977, Barbara and John Ehrenreich, the definition of professional managerial class includes all sorts of things that I would not categorize as PMC today, like nurses, the famous example.
When I think of PMC now, I think of blue check journalists on Twitter.
I think of people who work in NGOs, positions that are salaried.
Would it be fair to call them nonproductive workers?
Yes.
Is that also a part of the definition?
Yes.
Yes.
They are workers.
And this is in the classical Marxist sense, like they're workers who produce things, who produce things that the capitalist has in terms of can resell in surplus value.
The professional classes now, we produce images, styles, content like this and manipulate them.
So a lot of it is about performative kinds of nonproductive activity.
But what I think if we want to go through the classical Marxist sense is that the capitalists are willing to give some of their profits to this class because this class has a really disciplinary function with regard to the rest of the working population.
You could think of this class as an intermediate class.
I mean, they're large, larger than they ever have been in American workforce.
It's like 25 percent.
In 1900, maybe two to three percent.
That's because the last numbers I saw were 18.
18.
That's significant.
Well, no, but there are different ways of parsing it.
That's a few years ago.
It depends on how you parse it.
So you have like the 1 percent, which has the 18 to 25 percent sort of doing its bidding in order to oppress the rest of the population.
Yeah, yeah.
The 1 percent has decided we're going to pay these people well so that they can maintain the status quo for us and keep the working class down.
And I think it's been really effective in terms of their activities on the left liberal side of the spectrum because you see the working class politics of the Democratic Party being eviscerated year after year.
I don't remember in my lifetime the Democratic Party ever having a really strong working class agenda.
Everyone says Joe Biden had it.
Certainly not in my lifetime.
Yeah, Joe Biden was the closest to that, having that labor policy.
But now who knows what's going to happen.
We have the perfect, I would say, like postmodern candidate in Kamala Harris.
Because if you look at her campaign website, there is no policy position.
Oh, there's none.
There's none whatsoever.
It's like donate, join the movement.
And so there's this emptying out of politics.
This is like depoliticization of politics for this kind of moralizing, performative activity.
Yeah, the Biden stuff is weird because my friends who work in the labor movement, they will say indisputably that Biden has been the best president for labor within my lifetime.
I'm 37.
Even though he's been the best, it's like incredibly insufficient.
But, you know, a little bit is better than nothing.
So it's complicated.
It's strange.
We should probably also mention that both you and I are part of the professional managerial class as university professors, as elite thought leaders or podcast commentators, whatever the hell it is that we do.
Yeah.
So as we're ripping them to shreds, we should probably acknowledge our own our own position within this.
So I don't think it's so bad to acknowledge our own position and criticize it.
This is the great, like, in terms of my understanding when I was a young person of what the difference between a leftist and a liberal and a conservative was, the leftists have a tradition of being self-critical.
Yeah.
We have to always criticize what we've done, who we are, how we got here, when we lose and when we win.
Because that self-criticism is the spurred progress on the left.
And if you're just swanning around thinking that everything you've done is perfect, then you're not a leftist.
So great.
So I really don't understand why that's such a problem.
Of course, we're not saying, like, we're going to do the Maoist self-criticism where you have to confess and then, like, everyone beats you.
But there is a way in which you can take that on.
I mean, now, cancel culture and the whole, like, leftist, you know, circular fighting squad thing, it's a farcical version of self-criticism.
It's like, you know, I don't think, like, we're making space for this stuff.
And it's just totally passive-aggressive.
Like, stop accusing other people.
Look at the movement and how it's been managed and think about how we expand the base.
Think about how we appeal to more people.
American leftists are like, oh, the fewer people we appeal to, the better.
You know, it's like, it's never like, how can we, like, make this political program the most powerful for the largest number of people?
It's like, how can we make something really, really obscure that the least number of people will be able to identify with and we'll be able to wag our fingers at them?
Because that's the PMC thing, like, just wagging your finger at people and then, like, police each other.
Is that about mutual policing?
Self-criticism is not about mutual policing, which just seems to be the farcical activity of the American left at this point.
I mean, there's a clear class de-alignment in the American left, right?
There's a lot of middle-class graphic designers that look like me and are approximately my age, right?
Those are the people that kind of constitute what we call today's left, so to speak.
There also seems to be a rising class resentment towards the PMC, particularly among working people, but kind of from everyone.
And to a certain degree, I don't blame them.
I don't like people who are richer than me.
Like, I want their stuff, too.
That makes sense.
Who are telling you that they're better people than you.
Telling you how to behave, yeah.
And there's a real cultural resentment of this professed moral superiority.
And that's in the title of your book, Even Virtue Hoarders.
Why do they feel the need to have this moral superiority?
Why are they hoarding the virtue?
What value does that give to them?
On a, like, really primitive psychological basis, I think it's to disguise the guilt about how much better their lives are than the working class.
And the divergence between the lives that you can have, you know, in a coastal elite environment and the lives of the great majority of Americans who are working class, who live in the smaller cities and the rural areas, they've been basically abandoned by the public institutions that we live in.
And then we have, so it sucks, it sucks, this inequality.
But if you're a liberal PMC person, you're like, you know, you want, like, equity, right?
You want everything to be rationalized and you want to stop suffering.
You know, they're always, like, raise awareness of suffering, help people.
And so they have this veneer of, like, wanting to help people.
But it's very clear that we're, we're, they're protecting their privileges at every single level.
And how do you justify having such a good life when most Americans are really suffering?
You have to put a moral patina on it.
And this is a very, very Protestant thing.
This was, this was something that, you know, I think Calvin and John, John Calvin and Benjamin Franklin can all be the authors of.
It's this idea that God rewards the industrious and the virtuous.
So if we have more wealth, it's because we work harder and we're more virtuous.
And that's how the PMC acts.
Like, and that justifies them.
Like, you can have some Wall Street bros who are not liberal PMCs.
They're just, like, laughing on the way to the bank or the tech bros or the cronk bros.
They're like, oh, my God, I just made a million dollars.
Let's go buy a Ferrari.
But the PMC liberals, they would be like, oh, no, I just worked really hard and I'm going to give some money to, like, my favorite foundation.
And I'm going to go get a cleanse and go to Gwyneth Paltrow's retreat.
And they have this, like, more virtuous way of consuming that they think will make the lives of everyone better.
Like, look at their environmentalism.
It's all consumption-based.
It's not production-based.
It's all about, like, let's save, recycle, reuse, blah, blah, blah.
It's highly individualized, highly moralized.
But you are the one who proved that Gwyneth Paltrow's goop and Alex Jones's Infowars sell the same products.
It's all the same.
I haven't, like, wrapped my mind.
I think it's about optimization of the self.
I have not wrapped my mind around how these things can work out.
But the general resentment of it is that the language of the liberal PMC has become the language of human resources.
Human resources are a boss.
Like, you work as a freelance person, so you don't have to deal with this.
The layers of administrative BS that the average American worker who works in a large organization has to deal with now has just expanded exponentially.
Even as your work gets shittier, your working conditions get shittier, maybe you're not getting your raises, the HR, like, language of liberal sort of self-promotion as enlightened, this is just proliferating in ways that we could not imagine even.
I mean, your boss was always bad with aliens, but now your boss wants to care about you.
And that's, like, a different level of, like, invasion and evil.
Your boss wants to change the way you think about everything.
There's, I mean, I see a lot of criticism, particularly online, towards this intense veneer of moral superiority.
What would happen if that was pierced?
What happened if that was just stripped away abruptly?
Because my instinct is that this class is they are, you know, desperately holding on to their material position.
The window dressing of the moral superiority is kind of there for convenience, but if they have to choose one over the other, they're going to choose the stuff.
Who's not going to choose the stuff?
Yeah, I mean, it is, it has been pierced in certain ways by what they call extremism, right?
Left-wing extremism, right-wing extremism.
It's mostly right-wing extremism right now.
But you can see how this class, when there is a real dissenting position, what do they go to?
Censorship.
So I think they're, like, extreme centrists right now.
And anyone who deviates from that position, which allows the status quo to keep reproducing itself,
is immediately labeled, you know, like a sociopath and needs to be scapegoated and taken, you know, de-platformed.
Everything needs to go away for them.
And the cause of our social unrest and everything else is never their privilege.
It's always, like, some pathological instinct that's gone, that's, you know, gone amok.
And they want the platforms to censor.
They want to do all of these horrifying, they want to do these things like clamping down on discourse, right?
There used to be a kind of liberal, it's not existing, who thought, like, more talk was better, right?
Don't censor, let's just stop.
That day is gone.
It's like, no, we can't have any criticism.
The other thing that I've been thinking about, this is completely out there.
I have not researched this, so, you know, just bear with me as I perform this thought experiment.
The reproduction of the ideology of the status quo is happening more and more through educational institutions from K to 12, right?
So, a lot of people are being exposed to the liberal centrist ideology in professions that are already feminized.
The PMC is extremely feminized.
Like, I raised a son in these conditions, and I could see how the young men were all pulled and attracted.
At one point or another, they don't stay there necessarily, but their anti-authoritarian impulses, which I think are totally healthy.
I was also a big anti-authoritarian in my day.
Their impulses are all pulled by the far right, the extreme right, the manosphere, the alt-right.
And it's direct, like, fuck you to the liberal ideology that's coming from their teachers who are mostly women.
So, the feminization of the public sphere, like, pushes people into this position.
Also, like, the PMC is feminized.
The working class, in their mind, is male.
It's like white male.
They're just angry for no fucking reason.
Because they resent freedom, and they're just intolerant.
Actually, some of that is, like, part of the rebellious attitude towards authority.
Because the PMC never wants to see itself as an authority, but it is, they are liberal authoritarians at this point.
They dominate all the public institutions.
And what I was going to say is that they like to say that the right wing is corrupt, that Clarence, you know, Thomas and Samuel Alito have been bought by so-and-so and such-and-such.
But just watch the way in which the PMC also capitulate to the wealthy.
One, you know, one big donor after another can make demands now on the politicians, right?
And they, the Democratic politicians, they will submit as well.
But the foundations, humanities, all of these soft professions that are about ideological reproduction, they are very, very feminized right now.
I'm not saying feminist.
I mean, it's a very, like, if it's feminist, they're very, like, you know, second-wave feminists, like, all about, like, anti-bias policing and everything else.
And you have not just working-class people, but, you know, young men of the middle class being completely left behind, feeling alienated from this profession.
Like, what is their role in the world anymore?
And they're underemployed.
I'm not going to go, like, boo-hoo for these people, but if we're really thinking about gender and equity, then you have to think about, like, not demonizing a gender and not demonizing a class.
But the PMC is really good at that.
I mean, the working, white, the working-class rage book, for instance, was, like, the perfect, I felt like someone was writing it for me to criticize.
And it was like, Catherine, you got to review it.
I'm like, I don't have time.
And it's, like, almost too perfect.
It's like, you know who's really angry?
Working-class people in the countryside.
And they're a problem.
That was the message of the book.
Not that, you know, unemployment, youth unemployment is up 40%, 50% in these places.
The food deserts, the only food available to them is shit.
That, you know, is fast food.
That the families are falling apart.
That the opioid addiction is directly caused by drug dumping in rural areas.
And that manual industrial labor is not only disappearing, like, the dignity of manual industrial labor is disappearing because of our jobs.
But it's actually looked down upon by these people who are, like, digital, you know, digital manipulation all the time.
And it means you're stupid.
It means you're not intelligent enough to work with your mind.
You have to use your hands.
And this is, I think, the primal trauma.
Marx put his finger on it.
The division of labor.
The separation of the intellect from the manual labor produces a, that produces a first-class hierarchy where you have, like, foremen, engineers,
conceiving of the labor process, like Henry Ford, and allowing people to make, you know, cars as cheaply as possible for the greatest amount of profit.
And the person who's, like, doing the, screwing the tires on just does one motion, and then you have this, you know, mind who thinks about everything and thinks about the totality of things.
There was a culture, like, before industrialization, that was, you know, a mode of production that was, you know, backward and feudal in many ways, but that prized the craftsmen.
So, when you have an autarkic or craft-based rural economy, people make everything that they need.
Like, the women make the clothes.
They weave the clothes.
The men, you know, make tools.
They make everything.
And there's this pride in craftsmanship because the craftsman conceives of the object, makes the object.
That process of labor is more and more fragmented.
So, the person who's conceiving of the object, like, be it a Hello Kitty keychain or a Tesla, he's the mind.
And then the person who's, like, making the Hello Kitty keychain and making the Tesla is the hand.
And that is this traumatic thing in the capitalist mode of production.
I'm using that very specifically that's related to the mode of production so that the great masses of people who work their bodies are denigrated, degraded, and exploited.
And you have this, like, mental labor that's more and more overvalued by the owners of the means of production.
You had mentioned before that there's this pull towards the far right for a lot of these young men, right?
Clearly, inarguably, that's happening.
The rise of right-wing populism is happening across the advanced world in the U.S. and the U.K. and Hungary and Poland and too many countries to name.
Is there something about the way the left used to be when I was growing up, that it was, like, a space for vulgarity and pissing off the elites and being punk and being anti-authority that has receded in the last few years?
Because it would seem to me that a lot of these young men who are angry and underemployed and don't have a lot of upward mobility, they're attracted to these far-right ideas.
But then they're also attracted to, like, these kind of, you know, vulgar left-wing comedians that are incredibly, incredibly popular.
So they're open to both of them.
And those people disagree on an extraordinary number of things.
What accounts for that disappearance of the anti-authority impulse among the left in the last few years?
How did we drift over to where we are now?
Well, if you look at the John and Barbara and Rick essay, it's like the PMC took over.
And its values took over all the left-liberal political spaces.
And that takeover is just complete in a way that they never imagined.
Like, they were very idealistic about the class.
They thought the class, like, wouldn't be, would be able to come to its senses at some point and say, you know, we want our lives for everyone.
We have this meaningful work.
We're bound by non-market values.
Like, this should be for everyone.
But this kind of, like, weird inverse of what they imagined could happen, happened.
Where the PMC says, well, we have all the material resources, but we want our values, our liberal values, or neoliberal values, to become universal values, even when they're against your material interests of the working class.
It has something to do with neoliberalism, but also the triumph of a kind of ideological reproduction at a moment when every institution is collapsing in legitimacy.
And the left used to be a place where that vulgar anti-authoritarian left you were talking about used to be a place where you could launch that critique.
And now more and more it's being groomed towards, like, conformity with a dominant neoliberal or liberal PMC program.
It has to do with, you know, partially, like, the mutual surveillance systems that are up on social media.
Like, one of the spirits of punk was that it could be very ephemeral.
It could be, you know, oriented towards these kind of spirit of events or even, you know, just the concert.
But everything is now preserved and shared and memefied.
And there's more of a, I would say, there's both a kind of vicious transgressiveness, but also, like, less tolerance for, like, real vulgarity, let's say.
Which, for, like, not just Marx, but also Freud, was part of, like, the creation of solidarity.
Like, Freud's whole theory of humor was when we laugh together, we're laughing at the takedown of an authority.
Yes.
And that authority could be a superegoic authority.
Like, we're not supposed to say the word egg.
But, you know, you and I go, egg.
And we're, like, laughing because we both, there's a relief from the repression.
I'm just using eggs.
Wit and its relation to the unconscious is the book for people who are interested.
Don't get, let's not get stuck on the word egg.
Just think of another, think of another word that you're not supposed to think about.
And then think about, like, us saying it.
Don't say elephants.
Okay, I'm going to say, I'm going to say this word.
Oh, my God, this is, this is so bad.
I get a lot of pleasure out of using the R word, like, in very intimate circles.
Because, like, you're so not supposed to use that R word, but I'll say it about myself.
I'll be like, that's so retarded.
I did this really retarded thing.
Anyway, whatever.
But the language policing of liberalism has gotten to such a degree that this super, they're the superego now.
Liberalism is the superego.
Is there also an element of intra-elite competition here, where as people are becoming increasingly precariatized and the risks of falling out of the professional managerial class or the middle class, the stakes of that are actually really, really high, right?
Because you're going to lose half your salary, you're going to lose half your income, really significant stakes.
That there's an increased incentive for people to try and become more and more cutthroat and then take out the competition ahead of them and facilitate their own upward mobility within these institutions.
That is increasingly hard to ascend, that there's a kind of significant career incentive there, so to speak.
I've heard this as an intergenerational struggle within the professions.
Like, oh, that old doctor is so condescending.
Like, he said, ladies, you know, and you're this young 35-year-old doctor and you want to get rid of the 50-year-old doctor.
And you're like, I'm really offended by what he said.
So there's intergenerational conflicts about, you know, policing the language of the previous generations and things like that.
And I think all of that stands.
It's like within the class itself, everyone's jockeying for who can be the most virtuous.
And this is going to make me sound like an old fogey, but I've been through the medical system because my mother was very ill and then she passed away.
But what I noticed was with the older doctors, they could hold eye contact more and they could tell you hard truths.
The younger doctors have been trained in, like, your age, who've been trained a lot more of the trauma-informed, you know, counseling or whatever.
They're like, so, you know, it's not, you know, they're looking down.
They're so anxious.
And they have formula, formulas that they've memorized to say to people in these terrible positions and to deliver.
And so they'll be like, well, you know, okay, well, we're going to try to, you know, do this.
And I'm thinking, this is BS, you know.
My mom has stage four cancer and you can't actually say that to me and look me in the eye, you know.
But I feel like those old, like, grumpy doctors, whenever I had one of those, they'd be like, okay, well, things don't look good.
And I just feel like that kind of realness and presence is something that all of this managerial speak is taking away from the professionals themselves.
And I've talked to young doctors who've said, like, all of their time, all of their language is so deeply managed by HR that they have a hard time establishing the relations of care they want to have with their patients.
Because there's this really invasive, there are all of these invasive protocols, and just time, time-wise.
Like, you have 15 minutes.
You've got to deliver the news in 15 minutes.
I can see a lot of these old doctors just being like, I don't care.
Like, come and get me because I'm going to talk to you.
But it's almost like there's a streamlining within the professions that I think definitely has to do with a scarcity of resources, having to do with time, with good jobs.
And none of it is really about actually allowing people to have an authentic relationship with the person they're caring for.
Like, that doctor-patient relationship now is so algorithmically managed.
When we talk about the history of the left in the United States, or even in Europe as well, we sometimes talk about the long march through institutions, right?
So I would characterize this as a period.
A lot of people attribute it to the 1960s.
It begins there, continues onward.
But generally speaking, the conditions for revolution are not good at the time.
They're having a difficult time convincing the working class to act in their proletarian material interests.
And what people tend to do, elite left-wing intellectuals, is to retreat into institutions.
In most cases, that was the university.
It was higher education.
And in the most positive light, I could see that as safeguarding these values for when the conditions are right.
But the other side of that is that those people also developed a pretty niche, narrow class interest for themselves, where they got tenure and they got comfortable housing from their universities.
And they may be, when the conditions were more ripe for revolution, they didn't necessarily want to give up or jeopardize their positions.
And so I wonder if there's a way of looking at this where you see the progression of the American left that is slowly kind of stripped of its Marxism, stripped of its class antagonism, and then becomes the kind of language of elite academia over time.
Does that track with your understanding?
Well, you know, that's a very flattering image to give to some of these academics that they had like a commitment to Marxism.
Because think about Judith Butler.
Judith Butler, she supported Kamala Harris over Bernie Sanders in the Democratic primaries.
Because all of our donations can be made public, are made public.
I remember, I searched them on the government database.
Right, right.
And so I think that they were more like liberal pluralists and pseudo-radicals.
And they got very comfortable in these positions where they reproduced the ideology of liberal pluralism.
And they didn't ever really want or could imagine a change in material conditions.
So if we wanted to have a real change in material conditions right now, we not only don't have a working class that is ready.
I actually think the working class is more ready to revolt than we could ever possibly imagine.
But we don't have the cadres like with expertise, more so now than before, because I do think your generation is more radical than mine, where they could go in and be like, I'm a leftist engineer and I'm going to help, you know, create these, you know, a new infrastructure.
Or I'm a leftist agribusiness person and I don't and we're going to break up our Daniels Midlands.
And this is how we're going to do it.
I mean, the most controversial person in the Biden administration is actually someone who's like a left liberal who really understands monopoly capitalism.
And Lena Kahn, she wants to break up the monopolies.
She really understands how monopolies are bad for capitalism because she's really a capitalist.
But she's like, we need to break up all of these giant conglomerations because they're not helping with competition.
Like we need cadres at every level who are able to we need a leftist project 2025, actually, because those motherfuckers like figured it out.
They're like, we need 10,000 people who are going to occupy the government and, you know, do the bidding of the far right.
Do we have 10,000 leftists who are able to not just like talk about false binaries and go in and go, you know, we're committed to just say like just say Sanders program.
We're committed to reindustrialization.
We're committed to anti workers rights.
We want these are the best solutions.
We're going to talk to each other about them.
We're going to create these forms of institutional support, public support for working class people whose lives have been destroyed.
Whose health has been destroyed, whose housing has been bought by Blackstone.
You know, how do we take down Blackstone?
It's very complicated.
I don't think like the young callow leftist today, the average even understands the complexity of capitalism and how it needs to be dismantled.
So I think there's actually a lot of boiling discontent among the working classes.
But how are we going to translate that into like execution, into governmentality?
We've been so enamored with anarchism and our bullshit, you know, like LARPing politics that we're like, yeah, let's burn it down.
You find the police.
Look, what's what do you do the day after?
We don't have anyone ready for the day after because we don't respect work.
Actually, the left doesn't respect work, too.
It's like a de-skilled revolutionary.
Do you think Lenin and Mao were like, yeah, let's just like party and whatever happens, like let's blow things up.
They were like, no, we're going to be there the day after and we're going to be we're going to be taking stuff down and rebuilding and we're going to have a program.
And if that program goes wrong, we're going to remake that program.
But the problem is like, you know, then, you know, they got drunk on their own power.
But whatever, everyone is what I should say, whatever.
But this is so we go back to these professors who have retreated into the institutions.
And one thing that I would say that what I do agree with you on in terms of the assimilation into their own self-interest is they're really happy about culture wars because it makes them feel really important.
Yes.
Like every time I see a culture war thing, I'm just like, oh, my God, why?
But it's true for artists, too.
The right and the far left, too.
It's like, yeah, you know, we got to be blah, blah, blah.
We got to be blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, because blah, blah, blah are fascists.
And I'm like, really?
OK, because Blackstone's really happy with your blah, blah, blah.
So I don't know.
Like Blackstone's on your side.
Right.
They're anti-fascists.
They're anti the intolerant person that you're dealing with as a class enemy.
So we don't even know what oppositionality is anymore.
One of the peculiar things that's emerged, especially in the last few years, with this collapse of leadership on the left and, let's say, confusion among left wing elites, there is this kind of new right that has emerged in the last few years.
Some of those people, there's a wide gamut of their belief system.
Some of them talk about economic redistribution.
How should we understand these people?
Like Josh Hawley.
Josh Hawley.
Yeah, and J.D. Vance, too.
There's more and more of them every few months.
I know.
I know.
I think it's really fascinating because there's such a void on the left liberal side of talking about working class interests that Josh Hawley and J.D. Vance get to represent that point of view.
I think it's totally fascinating.
They're not pro-union, though.
They're not.
They have this, like, they have this idea.
Josh Hawley voted for right to work.
If I were to debate them, I would say, like, their idea of working class dignity comes from a pre-industrial America.
A real pre-industrial America, the left doesn't even want to, doesn't give a shit about.
But one of the good things.
Like 1920s or what are we talking about?
No, no.
Pre-industrial America is like 1830s.
Okay.
1820s, 1830s.
1830s, when, you know, a man gets, you get land.
No, no.
It's not.
No, it's not a left.
It's a, the idea of a dignit, an American privilege of the dignity of work.
And that really is about the craftsmen, because a lot of the stuff about craft right now comes out of the right wing.
But it is about this yeoman farmer who was able to make a life for himself and his family with a plot of land.
And the revolutionary aspect of it is related to the feudal world that they left from in Europe, right?
They're, we're calling them settler colonialists now, they're all bad.
But European feudalism was a place where the class and caste hierarchy was so deeply ingrained.
And it's still like that.
Most other countries, not America, I mean, where you have a sort of clerical class of elites and you have the laboring peasants, right?
Before industrialization.
And the idea of overturning that hierarchy was actually an American ideal.
And it's, it's Jeffersonian democracy.
I was, I was just going to ask.
And part of it has to do with.
Can we, can we define Jeffersonian democracy for people who don't know?
So Jeffersonian democracy is really based on this idea of independence and autonomy of thinking that's based on one's own ownership of the means of production.
So I'm a farmer.
I know how to farm my land.
Okay.
Jefferson was a slave owner too.
But the idea would be that anyone who could feed himself and his family would have the wherewithal and independence of thought to participate in public life and in democracy.
In order to build the collective world based on equality, liberty, and democracy, we had to give everyone the means of making a life for themselves without dependency on other people.
And so it was pre-industrial, but it was this way of thinking about independence of thought as independence of life.
It was very much based on non-urban forms of living where you have, you know, you're on the farm and you're making things with your hands and you're creating kind of subsistence for yourself.
That world is gone, it's long gone because industrialization took people off the farm and made it a lot easier for me to buy this dress than for me to weave and sew it.
And there are all of these good things about industrialization, but it kind of re-inscribed a hierarchy of labor, manual and mental labor.
So if you want to get to the core of what America contributed to the evolution of modes of production, it might be this aspirational idea of demoting intellectual labor and promoting manual labor, making them co-equivalent so that they could provide the kind of independence of thought for the citizen to participate.
This is the core positive aspect of American populism.
It's been deformed now because the resentment and the anger about a class of experts who tell me how to live, that at the core of American populism has become reactionary.
Like, I'm not going to tell you, you know, I don't believe in science.
I'm doing my own research.
Like those uppity assholes in universities, they're not going to tell me how to live.
I used to think like these populists were so wrongheaded and blah, blah, blah.
But now I'm thinking like the institutions are really corrupt right now and people should be given the tools to think for themselves.
They they're given half truths and, you know, conspiracy theories.
And then so this goes back to what I was going to say about G.D. Vance and Josh Hawley is that there's enough rural history in their backgrounds or wherever they live to say we just need to give American families that kind of independence again.
Like homeschooling, charter schools, not help them, but make like reinvigorate the work ethic and that the government programs have taken away people's ideas of autonomy and that that's that is what is destroying the working class.
That's actually literally what G.D. Vance is saying, like social programs make people lazy and drug addled.
Not the collapse of the economy, the industrial economy or the dumping of 30 million OxyContin pills in West Virginia, Ohio and Appalachia.
No, it's actually dependency.
We have a phobia about dependency that really turned dialectically in a positive way would be about strengthening independence of mind.
But the more these people try to do away with industrialization and go back to this sort of autarkic yeoman ideal, the more they are actually kneeling at the feet of people like Peter Thiel, because they're actually captured by the right wing corporate capitalists.
And those right wing corporate capitalists, they're libertarians.
So this is the heart of American libertarianism is like no government, no dependency.
Everyone like gets a little whatever, their little plot of land and then you can turn it into you can turn it into Microsoft or you can, you know, lose it all at the casino.
But it's your activity.
It's your choice.
It's your individual responsibility.
So I'm saying that they come from this historically positive moment that they've turned into a kind of corruptive version of a kind of nostalgic world.
And they're not actually facing the realities of industrial capitalism because we are so codependent.
We're codependent on each other.
We're codependent and interconnected in ways that the yeoman farmer never was.
Let's just think about the interstate highway program.
Is every libertarian going to build their own fucking highway?
Wait, no, we're all dependent.
This is a giant federal project.
But when you were a yeoman farmer, you cleared like enough of your forest so you could get connected to the road of the town.
You made your own road, like doing your own research.
That day is gone.
But what are the values, the American values of that time, which have to do with making mental and physical labor both critical parts of being an active citizen?
That is something that we can try to preserve.
Like I was in China and connected to Chinese everyday life because my son teaches there and I was back and forth a lot.
You know, the Chinese elites, the Chinese PMC, they're so used to having people do everything for them.
So South Asians in India, like your cook, your driver, there's just so many people, low wage people and Latin American elites in the same way.
It's so freaking corrupting.
I'm like, please, I just want to do my own thing.
Like I'll go shop and like carry my bags.
And these are my small American gestures.
Like I'm an autarkic yeoman farmer.
I don't want you to carry my bags.
I know it's, but it makes me not Chinese, right?
People are like, oh, just call a driver.
I'm like, I can rent a car.
I'll drive myself.
I know how to drive.
But this kind of like farming out to other people, this sense of like other people do my labor for me so I can think clearly.
That is very futile and aristocratic.
And we were against that.
That's what makes America powerful.
Great.
Speaking of.
That's what makes America great again.
So let's revive some of that like deep radical egalitarianism.
Speaking of feudalism and Peter Thiel and this new right.
If a grown adult man came to you and described his politics as a monarchist, what kind of life advice would you give that person?
What kind of what would I give that person?
A monarchist, a neo-monarchist, a crypto-monarchist.
What would I say to that person?
Yeah.
Could you recommend them a book or something like that?
Sorry.
This stuff just seems so crazy.
Well, this is a large faction.
There's a big gamut among the new rights, right?
There's these people who are talking about economic redistribution.
And then there are people who are more on the side of a CEO, benevolent dictator type that call themselves monarchists.
Indeed.
Indeed.
Yeah, yeah.
J.D. Vance is texting with Curtis Yarvin.
There's a kind of weird ideological meeting between these two factions.
James Pogue wrote about this for Vanity Fair, that very long piece.
What was it, a year or two back?
I would do the psychoanalytic thing and say, I know you crave a strong authority figure.
No, no, this is what I would say.
I would be like, yes, it would be a relief if someone were sovereign.
If we had a sovereign we could worship, wouldn't that be great?
I mean, I don't like the practical.
None for me, thanks.
Yeah, yeah, I don't like the practical.
You seem to really like that.
That's what I would say to them.
Like, why do you like submission to authority so much?
There's a lot of enjoyment in that for you.
That's what I would say.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, the ritual pomp and circumstance.
That's very un-American.
You know that, right?
When I got American citizenship, I had to give up all allegiance to foreign kings and potentates.
So I'm like, you like the restoration of a potentate.
Yes, literally in some cases.
Yeah, yeah, that's what they want.
Okay, so that, I mean, I feel like it's a symptom of a failure of liberalism.
I think they would agree.
You know, I'm not totally against dictatorship.
I'd like it to be the dictatorship of the proletariat.
That's what I would say to them.
A priori, I'm not against dictatorships.
I like authority, too.
You know, my son's working in China.
It's very top-down.
But what's really interesting about top-down systems is that the person who's supposed
to execute the will of the very top, which is the Communist Party, they are so responsible.
So they have to implement a program.
They have to translate it to their workers.
And if they fail, the responsibility is all on them.
Today, I feel like upper-middle management in American organizations has no responsibility
whatsoever.
They're all about, like, diffusing responsibility.
So maybe that is one way in which we want someone to be responsible.
On the topic of this breakdown of liberalism, you write in Virtue Hoarders, you characterize
the period between 1947 and 72 as being an affluent society.
And generally, when we look at this history, we're told that neoliberalism started in the
1980s.
It was Reagan and Thatcher, the Volcker shock.
It happens all of a sudden.
And everything before it was placid and going well.
What was happening in 1972?
Why do you peg it to that period of 45 to 72?
What begins to happen around there?
Because that's a period of liberalism in which there are tremendous growth rates.
There's the highest unprecedented upward mobility, right?
This is the boomer generation.
My mother was the child of a single mother growing up in a working class family.
She now owns a home.
She has a master's degree.
She got the best slice of the American economy.
Very different now, just one generation removed.
So what was it that made liberalism work within that period?
And what started the breakdown?
I think the 70s, we still had the afterglow.
But 72 is the year in economic production.
And I got this from Jim English's book on prestige, when the weight of American goods that were produced
in America began to decrease, which means it's the physical weight of things.
And that had to do with a series of economic policies that were meant to discipline the working class.
Among them, the subsidization and the promotion of industrialization of South Korea and Taiwan.
Japan had been already subsidized as a bulwark against Chinese communism.
So offshoring of industrial jobs begins in 72 and begins as a Cold War economic policy.
So 1972 is really about the beginning, the first intimation of deindustrialization.
And what English, because he writes this book about the prestige economy, he says that as the weight
of American industrial goods, the literal weight of it is decreasing, the amount of like weightless
exports like Hollywood films, prestige culture, that takes up more speculation on Wall Street.
The weightless economy starts to expand and the actual industrial economy starts to contract
in 72.
And it also has to do with, I think, industrial policy that was put into place.
Everyone says like Nixon was a very progressive government agent, more than Clinton and when
came after him.
But I do think that he and his policymakers very much thought the American working class
was too discontent and was too unruly.
And one way of disciplining it was to export its jobs.
I don't know if this bears out now, but we would often hear that bringing manufacturing
somewhere else was going to make those goods cheaper.
Americans would then be able to purchase those things at a lower price and thus their quality
of life would increase.
Has that seemed to work out?
Do you think, was that ever true or was that just a piece of propaganda?
In my generation, like I kind of, I can still remember when wages were high and things were
more expensive.
And, you know, the kind of Walmart target explosion happened the kind of when I was a young adult
already.
And it was just a shittier world.
We had cheaper things, but wages were lower.
So life did not get better.
It all has to do with the compression of wages and the compression of wages accompanied with
the cheaper goods introduced from China doesn't produce a place where average Americans can
live without going into enormous amounts of debt.
We didn't have a debt driven consumer economy before the offshore really began.
And yes, people consume less.
But, you know, this is also part of the deindustrializing turn is that you have a consumerist economy where
consumer confidence, everything becomes measures of economic growth and recession rather than
purchasing power, not purchasing, rather than wages.
Wages are going down around this period.
Purchasing power of the American working class wage has stayed the same since 72, too.
You know, relative purchasing power because goods might be cheaper, like consumer goods, but
housing is more expensive.
Healthcare is more expensive.
Let's look at this measure and think about whether or not there is actually improvement.
I think Americans spent a huge proportion of their income on food, 1900.
Food was much more expensive, but people cooked at home.
There was much less fast food.
Fast food relative to wages is much cheaper.
It's also filled with salt, with sugar, with like the worst kinds of food for you.
The average healthy of the American...
Seed oils.
Seed oils.
Sorry, continue.
The average healthy of the working class American is just, is deteriorating.
And so you have cheaper food produced industrially so that Americans spend less of their incomes
on food, but you have malnutrition nevertheless, because it's the profit taking by these large
corporations from McDonald's to Archer Daniels Midland and the giant industrial farmers and chicken
producers and everything has extracted as much profit as possible from the American foodways.
Industrial food production, I'm not one of those green people who are like, no, everyone
has to have rooftop farms.
We couldn't feed 7 billion to 8 billion people with small-scale farming.
We need large-scale farming, but we don't need large-scale corporations profiting from people's
appetites, from people's need for food.
So yes, we can buy more fast food.
People eat out more than they did in 1900.
That is definitely more affordable.
The average American family did not eat out because of a high cost of food.
Eating out was considered like a very elite activity, right?
So we've democratized like eating out in fast food chains, and we've destroyed people's
health.
But it's cheaper and more profitable to feed people in this way for the producers.
If I recall correctly, also 1972 is where, if you look at the American economy, wages and
productivity started to become divergent, where wages are stagnant, but productivity still
increases.
And that divide is small at first, and then around the 1980s is just a massive spike upwards.
What begins to happen in the years following that?
What happens that when you have Reagan in the U.S., you have Thatcher in the U.K., you get
the Volcker shock?
How does that then accentuate this divergence between wages and productivity that was already
active in the 1970s?
Well, I was thinking that this has a lot to do with the disciplining of workers.
You know, American workers are more productive.
They work more.
They earn less.
And one of the things that the Volcker shock and Reaganomics and Thatcher policy did was
they took away the social safety net.
They took away workers' benefits so that people felt like they had to work more just to keep
up.
This is an incredible way of disciplining your workforce.
So you feel like you don't have any room for any kind of opposition at work.
You're conforming much more to the needs of the bosses.
You're applying yourself much more deeply to the rhythm, the infernal rhythms of production,
as Marx called it.
And you instill fear in people when you take away any social safety net.
Because you're like, if you don't do this, then you're out on the street.
Then you're literally, there will be nothing for you.
So there was this thing also, I think, in the 60s that in the counterculture that did
translate to working class discontent, which is that we should socialize leisure time.
In France, they called it like under the paving stones, the beach, right?
We should, pleasure should be redistributed.
When that became like a slogan of the left, I think the right wing economists, the Chicago
boys, for instance, they were like, you know what?
This is not good for productivity.
We need to have a much more scared and frantic workforce.
We don't need to have a workforce who's become comfortable enough because of the affluent
society.
And in France, it was like the 30 miraculous years to actually demand more.
Right.
More wages, more free time.
This is important too, because a lot of people think as the conditions get worse, the more likely
the revolution becomes.
But actually, historically, you do see that the better conditions get, the more bold workers
become in their organizing, the more that they're able to demand.
And that's a pretty important distinction among the left that a lot of people I think
today would actually disagree with, curiously enough.
I just think there's a strong sense that things need to get worse and it's going to erupt into
some type of social revolution.
Accelerationism.
And also inflected with a kind of anarcho-liberalism that the point of posting is not political
education.
The point is to get everyone out onto the street, into the square, and then there's
some kind of social eruption or color revolution that's going to happen.
And what you do on day two after the revolution is never discussed or planned for.
But I would say that that constitutes a lot of the common sense that you hear from these
people.
That's right.
And I feel like the more economically stable the working class is, the more radical the
PMC can become.
Because there's more porosity.
There actually is more conversation and porosity.
There is more intermingling of ideas and positions.
But most people are just trying to put together their rent these days.
They're not going to have time to think about bigger ideas.
They did because of the Evalon Society.
Right, right.
They were more well-read.
They had hobbies.
They had leisure.
Working class people had more time.
We're talking about the history of neoliberalism, Reagan and Thatcher.
So 1980 to 2024, we're spanning quite a long period here.
And neoliberalism as it began in the 1980s, very socially different than it is now, right?
Thatcher, one of the arguments that she made at the time, retracting all these social services,
is that it would allow families to be more dependent on each other.
If there was not a state ambulance that drove you to the hospital, you'd have to ask your
uncle or your mom or your dad or whoever.
And so by removing those state services, it was actually a way of her strengthening the
family bonds, oddly enough.
That's a very socially conservative form of neoliberalism.
But today, when we say neoliberalism, we're often referring to people like Clinton and
Obama and politicians who have, you know, in some cases, very progressive social aims.
How does that, over the course of like 40 years, that's a really significant drift.
Yeah, but I think the commonality that they have is the disinvestment in the public sphere.
And I think that that really begins what, I mean, I saw it in my lifetime where, you know,
public squares, public parks, public museums, public services were all slowly being drained
of budgets.
They started looking shabbier and shabbier.
They started to get public housing.
There was just massive disinvestment in anything that was public, public schools.
And it continued through Obama and Clinton.
And they were executing their privatization of pleasure and their socialization of risk
just as well as Thatcher was.
The whole thing about that program is shown to be completely defeated.
Oh, here's the other thing.
There's a sociologist of Appalachia named Jennifer Silva, Western Pennsylvania is where she grew
up.
I was talking to a friend of mine.
I was like, you know what?
If you really want to know about Appalachia, just read like left-wing sociology.
Don't read J.D. Vance.
But we're so attuned.
We're so programmed to like the personal anecdote.
His anecdotes are meaningless.
The conclusions he derives from having worked in a supermarket have become like part of his
political program.
But Silva is someone who grew up in the same area, more or less, and who really did the kind
of who interviewed people, who does a kind of empirical sociology.
And she says that, you know, there's no, I'm not going to make causal arguments now,
but working class rates of divorce have skyrocketed since the 60s.
And PMC rates of divorce have plummeted.
So the PMC has the most stable families.
And then the radical ones among us are like, oh, we're anti-family.
All those supports that were part of the traditional blue-collar working class life have become
eviscerated out of wedlock births or, you know, skyrocketing among the working class,
non-college educated people out of wedlock births among our class going down.
And so this kind of destabilization of those old conservative values of family values has
been, has almost been completed by de-industrialization.
And if you, you know, in the 60s, the counterculture was like, you know, free love and whatever.
And then, you know, you have the working class squares who are, you know, mom and dad,
white picket fence, and, you know, of all races, they're just squares.
They're probably for the Vietnam War.
And they're just a bunch of boring dullards who don't listen to rock and roll or whatever.
That cultural opposition has completely collapsed.
The working class, J.D. Vance grew up in this way.
He had like five different fathers, right?
There's no stability.
There's no conservative family values.
And there's no social services.
So the Thatcher's program, Reagan's program destroyed everything.
They destroyed public services.
The public services go down.
And traditional working class families are also destroyed as well.
Abolish the family for thee, but not for me.
Yeah, exactly.
Well, actually, we've abolished the family for the working class.
And now we take it as a vanguard position in the PMC.
It's a luxury status symbol now, actually, to have children.
Yeah.
And if you think that...
Which is, I just got to say, that's fucking sick.
That's like a sick society where to create a human being is a status symbol, is a class symbol.
It's grotesque.
It's a very sad state of affairs.
Yeah, it is.
It really is.
But it's happened.
And I think looking at Silva's two books about Western Pennsylvania would give us a much better understanding of what happened to the family structures and social structures of Appalachia than J.D. Vance's thing.
And I think that she's done a really good job of documenting the collapse of the working class family in Appalachia.
In this drift of neoliberalism from socially conservative politics in the 1980s to the very progressive politics that we see today, it is peculiar how some of this maximalist political rhetoric, especially coming from the left, slots in so seamlessly to elite academies and universities and so on.
Right.
Bhaskar Sankara has a great phrase.
He says, in the academy, it's easier to be a communist than a social democrat.
Why do some of these maximalist political positions slot so seamlessly into elite societies?
Because elite society is all about trying to create vanguard positions that other people have to follow.
The more incongruous your position, the more desirable it is among a small group of people to follow.
I feel like it's a kind of highly stylized form of politics.
It's very gestural.
And the more radical the gesture, the more divorced it is from any kind of material reality or action that could be taken on the ground.
Having social democratic candidates, for instance, would be something that you could really work for or fight for.
Some of my most radical colleagues thought Bernie was really too conservative and to be part of Bernie's campaign was to be an idiot.
You know, so we have the Judy Butlers, Bernie Kamala Harris.
Then we have like people like me who were like thought there was kind of like a socialist possibility.
And then there are the really, really radical professors who are like, oh, that's just that's like a compromise situation.
But it's all about like the less realizable a political goal is, the more they like it.
So I also think it's like a very high school American thing where the most radical groups are like mean girls.
You know, like the mean girls in high school who have like the really cool outfits and everything.
They really don't like it when you have like a really cheap outfit or a really yucky outfit.
So they often feel like these circles are run like in a mean girls.
It's about in group, out group things.
So like to be in in the in group, they just assume that you like abolish the family.
And if you don't like abolish the family, then you're a reactionary.
And I'm like, can't we be on the left and have differing views on this?
No, not for them.
And they're not willing to debate.
It also comes out of this like retreat into the institutions that you were talking about before.
It's about creating institutional distinction and anything that translates into a kind of concrete reality is not appealing.
But what I found really sad was that in DSA, all of these things reproduce themselves.
It's like the more the most extreme or radical identity positions would squelch any like practical political organizing.
In some DSAs, this didn't happen, but a lot of my friends who were active in the group were persecuted by not the right, but the far left in terms of their positions.
You're talking about Adolfried.
Yeah, or the people who supported Adolfried, who supported bringing him into DSA.
In the institutional context, we call this elite capture, where there's a class interest that becomes prominent among university professors, people who have tenured positions, who have some kind of elite status position.
And their interests dominate over the ostensibly what is the function they're supposed to do caring for the social welfare of most people.
We can't underestimate the power of the donor class in influencing left liberal academia to take positions that are the least practical, the most divorced from any kind of practical translation.
That's one of the things that I was going to ask you is like, why do so many of these billionaires fund these radical political projects, right?
And this is what you hear from the right very often, right?
Because this is pretty radical rhetoric that's been coming out in the last few years.
And in every case, there's some ultra-wealthy donor who is behind it.
One might think that those things are conflicting in their interests.
And if those people were successful in redistributing the wealth, then they'd be taking it from their donor.
So what is going on here?
Like, this is a real conflict, and people on the left are kind of afraid to talk about this.
No, they're totally afraid.
I know of a recent case where a young professor, well, not name her, but got a huge grant from a donor who's part of this, you know, billionaire class family.
And I actually think, like, the young billionaires, the few that there are, they want distinction too.
Maybe they're sent to millionaires, but they want to have a kind of radical veneer as well.
So there's that kind of funding.
But I also think that there's a drive within, like, a large, a gigantic foundation, let's say, like Mellon, who has just way too much power to determine the humanities.
There's a drive in all of these large organizations for innovation.
So they always want something that's new.
So if you come up with a new identity category or, like, this is old now, but, like, the Anthropocene, you can attack that as much as you like from the left, because I think it's, like, a spurious term.
But for some reason, it's stuck.
And Mellon, I'm going to argue, is in large part responsible for this.
They love anything that doesn't have to do with labor, anything that doesn't have to do with, like, material change, redistribution.
But it's a new term.
And everyone's like, what's that mean?
And Mellon supports this kind of, like, environmental humanities that rebrands nature writing and even landscape painting into environmental art and environmental humanities.
They love that stuff.
It's like you can't just be someone who's, like, doing landscape painting.
Or you can't be someone who's, like, doing nature writing.
Now you're, like, involved in the Anthropocene.
I mean, I can laugh and be, like, really bitter about it, but these are thought leaders.
So this is why people might be nostalgic for monarchism, because actually Mellon is king of the humanities.
They're just pretending to be a liberal, quasi-democratic organization with a board of directors, whatever.
And you know who else is like this?
The MacArthur Foundation.
The MacArthur Prize.
They're trying to dictate the cultural direction.
And they often do.
And it's a cabal.
So I think the monarchist might be like, let's just make the cabal institutionalized with crowns and rites and rituals.
No, that is literally what they say, is let's just formalize it.
It already works like this, so let's just make it official.
Maybe I'm a monarchist.
Yeah, yeah.
God damn it.
All right, Catherine.
You convinced me.
We got, what, two hours into the interview, and now it finally comes out.
Catherine Liu, crypto monarchist, finally revealed there's going to be a lot of think pieces about this.
Oh, fantastic.
Fantastic.
But so here's what I want to talk about in terms of Mellon.
Like, nobody will come out and say what I've said about the Mellon, because everyone's hoping to get a Mellon grant.
So I'm just going to say it right now.
The people in the professoriate right now, if you want to ascend to higher rank, like in the court of Mellon, you have to, like, genufile.
You have to conform to what their program is.
You have to look at how they're configuring the humanities and the arts.
You have to use the language of the court.
They use their language of the court.
So this is a court society, and it is so futile because power has been, and money and capital is concentrated so deeply in one foundation, right?
There are other competing foundations, maybe, but none can touch the Mellon at this point.
So oftentimes I feel like people in my class who have tenure and, you know, who should be exercising academic freedom, they're taking the knee for Mellon.
They may not consciously know this, but there's, in the early aughts, it was transnationalism.
Then it's, you know, there are key words that you have to shape your research into.
And I don't want to be, like, too Cold War paranoid, but I am, and it is totally anti-Marxist, anti-materialist.
Do not talk about labor.
Talk about identity.
Talk about, you know, the Anthropocene.
Talk about Deleuze and Guattari.
But if you want to talk about class politics, you're not going to get there.
We can't talk about desiring machines and bodies without organs now?
Well, now it's a little unsheak, but you could talk about it.
And so I have this sense of my class as a class that's supplicant to the capitalist class, stepping on the heads of the working class, even as we pretend to be, like, liberal, caring people.
The bearers of the vanguard.
You mentioned court societies, feudalism.
A lot of people are talking about this phrase techno-feudalism recently.
Yanis Varoufakis, Jody Dean, Mike Pepe, a number of people have written about this, cloud feudalism, all sorts of names.
Does that sound right to you?
What do you think of their analysis?
It's like a thought experiment that can explain certain things.
And the way in which I very specifically think it could be useful, which is not necessarily the way that Varoufakis and Jody Dean use it,
is that it wants to describe a new form of domination.
It's trying to understand this new form of domination and the stasis that we're in.
It's actually trying to understand, like, why there has been no revolution, given the industrialization of the world.
And so have we regressed to a new, more vicious form of domination and extractive capitalism that we can only understand with regard to feudalism?
And it is an intensification of monopoly capitalism, especially on the part of Google, Facebook, Apple, Amazon.
This occupation of the digital cloud space by these very, very large corporations that don't seem to be able to be broken down.
The feudal order is actually more complex than we want to give it credit for.
Like, there was merchant capitalism under feudalism.
The church played a really important role in creating more forms of literacy.
The radical domination of the peasantry, you know, was mediated by a clerical class.
But there was also a lot more disruption and unruliness.
You know who really does a great job of talking about this early modern form?
I mean, I'm being very European here.
It does translate to other peasant cultures, though.
Michael Bakhtin, talking about carnival, is that there's actually a kind of anti-authoritarian, like, spirit of revolt within the feudal order because the forms of domination are so extreme.
So I want to countenance the metaphor and just say it's so extreme now.
So this kind of like carnivalesque form of vulgarity that we were talking about more earlier might be something that you've been interested in a lot, which is like meme culture.
It's like a nonsense culture, using the platforms, using the clouds, using the digital world to create these really disturbing, anti-authoritarian, nonsensical forms of being.
What Bakhtin said was that in that kind of disruption, the authority of the king and the church were undermined.
And I just think that, you know, the kinds of disruption that people make in meme culture or alt-right or alt-like culture, it just reinforces the power of the monopolies because you just want to be online more.
So I'm not someone who's going to just say, like, denounce that metaphor.
I'm trying to think through how it can be helpful for us to think about power today and exploitation today.
What I think is, this goes back to trauma, is that we are in a moment when these corporations are performing a new act of enclosure.
Marx talks about this as one of the ways in which the Industrial Revolution was created was the driving of the peasants off the land.
When the aristocracy decided that no one could freely farm or pasture their sheep in the fields anymore, that suddenly they owned this land that was once part of the commons.
This literally starved shepherds and peasants in northern England.
They moved to Liverpool, Birmingham, Manchester.
The textile industry there, which is the first, and the steam engine demanded that labor force.
And so it was enclosing this land that had once been common, non-monetizable, non-proprietary, produce this excess, like, labor power and move them into industrial jobs.
And so I was thinking about the trauma thing, is that private life and suffering are being seized by these giant corporations, the social media corporations.
The platforms.
Yeah, the platforms.
And so it's a new form of psychic enclosure.
They are literally monetizing your posts.
And if you're writing about your trauma, they are extracting profits from that in a quite literal sense.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, the eyeballs.
Your trauma posts drive more traffic to their platforms.
They sell those eyeballs to, you know, maybe therapists or to advertisers.
And so there's this kind of, like, immaterial seizure of what was once non-monetizable, which was once non-commodifiable.
Like, your actual experience is more intensively commodified than ever before.
And actually, in my old school way, I really believe in privacy and the individual journey to therapy.
And I really do believe in individuality.
And I think that that is all fading away.
And I think that actually the relative wildness of the mode of production and the variation under feudalism is not accounted for when we think of the feudal order.
And that wildness, that variation, that diversity of modes of production, that is what is being destroyed today.
And feudalism actually had to streamline itself after the Industrial Revolution.
We see that everywhere.
I want to come back to this idea of, is it possible to have a left affirmation of American anti-feudalism?
Because when I talked about the separation of manual and intellectual labor, what we were fleeing was a feudal order.
And every American who, or immigrant, everyone who comes here is partaking in that kind of, like, radical democratization.
I'm not 100% convinced by it, but it might be, it's an interesting mode of pushing our analysis of domination.
I don't know that it works 100%, but I'm still, you know, the jury's still out on it.
And I'm trying to see, like, why it's useful or how it's useful.
It's a difficult road ahead, right?
We're in this new period of capitalism.
People are calling it techno-feudalism, all sorts of things.
Bourgeois competition has broken down.
We're not making stuff in the way that we used to.
There's different models for extracting profits.
A lot of them have to do with creating artificial scarcity and extracting rents, monopoly, lack of competition, all of these things.
Do those conditions bode well for social democracy any time in the near future?
I feel like America is presently ungovernable because all of our institutions are collapsing.
There's very few legitimate institutions.
This is the most ungovernable phase of the country I've seen in my lifetime.
And to reconstitute something like governability, this might take a conservative turn here, is about reinstituting some kind of legitimacy and authenticity within language itself, first of all, the language of critique, and within the institutions.
I don't know that it's possible.
When you say institutions, do you mean universities or do you mean media?
Every single institution, look at the courts, the Supreme Court.
The highest court in the land has been shown to be, you know, eminently corruptible, right?
Look at our media journalism world.
The way in which they reproduce the official lines of the American liberal positions is really unbelievable.
So how do you reconstitute some kind of demand for truth?
I think a lot of the discontent is a discontent about the lies that we've been sold.
Freud said, the voice of reason speaks quietly, but it will not be silenced.
And in this sense, I am a modernist in some way.
And I feel like we need to reason.
We need to insist upon reason.
Not the libertarian reason, the historical materialist reason.
Not Reason Magazine.
I went to one of their events recently.
I was like, there's so much money behind that.
Oh, yeah.
They have big money.
I just want a little bit of that big money so I can have my own institute.
Just a drop of techno capital.
No, I think that we have to insist upon some kind of historical materialist reason.
And I don't have a program beyond that because I don't know how we can change all the institutions.
But I do think we need to prepare a cadre of people at every single level to be able to execute any kind of socialist or social democratic goal when a seizure of power can take place.
So that, I mean, that was going to be my next question is, I also feel it's important to mention that if we're talking about feudalism and we're talking about trustworthy institutions, there was a famous poll a few years back given to both Democrats and Republicans asking, what is the most trustworthy American institution?
The Republicans chose the military, of course, you would expect that.
The Democrats, you might think, oh, they're going to pick the New York Times or something like this.
They chose Amazon.
Overwhelmingly, the most trusted institution among Democrats is Amazon.
What?
It always arrives.
It's one day shipping.
It's very reliable.
And you're going to try.
Oh, wow.
So that's the new feudal order right there.
Yeah, yeah.
My serious question, though, is what are the steps that need to be taken now?
Obviously, you are very much engaged in political education, Cluenon on Substack.
You are posting on Twitter, Bureau Cat Lou, your handle.
You take these intellectual conversations seriously.
You've published numerous books.
We started this podcast episode talking about your forthcoming book.
What is the next step?
Is it labor?
Is it political organization?
Is it setting straight the kind of intellectual disputes that have been so dysfunctional and
unproductive in the last few years?
Where do you even start?
Ruthless critique of the present.
I don't have any other program than that.
I think like and encouraging each other to perform that ruthless critique and to not be
compromising about it.
There's less and less space for it, but that doesn't mean we can't insist upon it.
I know that it doesn't sound world changing, but you have to start with ruthless critique
of the actuality.
And that means on the level of culture, on the level of modes of production, on the level
of history.
I also think like there's a way in which the entire historical, the discipline of history
has been so compromised.
And you were the one who turned me on to Tartaria.
And it started a whole conversation in my household about how could this happen that people have
no idea what history is.
And I guess it does come back to education, not necessarily in the institutions itself,
but an insistence upon a historical perspective in ruthless critique.
I can think of a few named professors at elite universities that are making a million dollars
a month on Substack by riling people up about ascendant fascism in the United States.
It seems that the field of capital H history has been impoverished in the last few years,
to say the least.
And so is it a surprise that people think that there was like a great reset and totally
alternative histories and, you know, wild technologies where people could harvest energy
from the atmosphere and all sorts of like conspiratorial bullshit?
Well, I've started a very small research group in the UC.
So please, if you're a billionaire donor and you want to encourage this kind of ruthless
critique, get in touch with me.
And it's on conspiracy thinking.
And we'll be looking deeply into Tartaria.
I'll do it for free.
No, no, we'll bring you in.
You're definitely coming in to talk to us.
But we want to look at the deformation of theory because conspiracy theory is a form of
theory and like restore theory to the people.
It's like conspiracy theory is half-formed theories and we should not have a monopoly on critical
theory.
Critical theory should be available to everyone.
We should make it as available as possible through a rigorous engagement with history.
I always think like the teaching of history wants to make history as boring as possible,
whereas like a true Marxist engagement with history would show how truly epic our struggles
in the historical field have been.
Catherine, I have to say I have such admiration for your work, your writing.
You've just been such a tremendous influence and I'm glad that we've gotten to do so many
projects together.
And we will.
You're going to come and talk to us about your work in Conspiracies.
Yeah, I'll tell you about all the things I found out that are true.
It's a surprising number, actually.
You did your own research.
I did my own self-guided research.
But thank you so much, Ash.
Thank you, Catherine.
It's just been a pleasure to talk with you today.
Pleasure as always.
Thank you.
