The tech giants that exist now are some of the richest and most powerful organizations
that have ever existed in human history.
I do believe that AGI is very close.
Humanoid robots, we're sleeping on humanoid robots.
They are much further along than people think.
We are in the early days of the singularity.
Sounds crazy to say it.
We are very close to that.
There will be all sorts of possible configurations of power and economics and technology
that we literally cannot conceive of yet.
I genuinely believe this.
That acceleration process is happening, whether we like it or not.
This is very landing on me, but I think, like, I believe in class conflict,
but I think capital is on the verge of permanent victory, basically.
Welcome to Doomscroll.
I'm your host, Joshua Citarella.
My guest is Daniel Keller, a lecturer, an infamous shitposter,
and an artist of the post-internet generation.
You were, as I recall, banned from Ello, this competing platform to, like,
was it MySpace or Facebook at the time?
Yeah, I guess Facebook.
You posted too many Wojacks, and they kicked you off for some reason.
I had a big A, and it was also a Dank Pepe meme stash, and Wojacks combined.
I had them categorized, but it was banned by the CEO directly.
Really?
Back in, I don't know, 2018 when people were very, very worried about them.
And the collection was from kind of 2014 and 2015.
You were telling us before, there's, for people who are not familiar with this,
there's a policy proposal which came out from the Biden administration,
initially, I believe, in April.
It has now been inherited from the Kamala administration,
but this is going to put a tax, similar to capital gains,
on the unrealized gains in the form of equity for people who work in startups.
Yeah, so it is limited to people who make $100 million or have a $100 million net worth.
So, obviously, it is limited.
My sympathy has immediately evacuated.
Well, and sure, that's the natural response, and that's how they get you with it.
But, of course, it's like you don't get to think of, like, even the second order,
or maybe the third order if you want to get fancy.
But the second order effect of forcing people, mostly founders of companies,
potentially with only private companies that don't actually have publicly traded shares,
if you're forcing them to actually sell their stock annually,
it's like a crazily negative pressure on the price in general for everybody else who holds it.
Facebook is, you know, over a trillion dollar company.
It's a huge component of the S&P 500.
It is a huge component of countless pension plans and other people's retirement plans.
It is a source of wealth for all those employees as well.
It's not like it is only going to Zuckerberg.
But if you're forcing him to sell every year, everyone else's value gets erased.
And you're also, you basically, you need to have demand to buy those shares in equal amount,
or otherwise you're going to push the price down a lot every time you unload these things.
So, you just kind of create this, like, very bizarre, perverse incentive where founders of companies
basically, like, will slowly get their companies confiscated from them.
And that's very different than taking part of their money when they sell parts of chunks of their company.
That, I think, is completely reasonable.
And what I will say, there is a real issue, and what is actually unfair,
is the ability to take out huge loans using equity as collateral,
but that not being a taxable event.
So, that, I think, actually probably should get cracked down on to some degree.
I'm not even sure how you would do that exactly,
but potentially just, like, once you put up a certain amount of money,
it's taxed at a daily rate, you know, divided by 365, something like that.
There's other things that are like that.
I can imagine doing something like that that's a much more, like, scalpel-based approach.
But if you do something like this, which has, like, you know, broad populist appeal,
and people, even like you, will be like, $100 million, well, fuck them.
Fair enough, sure.
But, yeah, there's ways of addressing that specific issue, I think, that people,
I think is reasonable to address.
Well, I guess the underlying question here is whether you have faith in any startup model
to outcompete the big monopolistic platforms that exist today, right?
So, in the era that you and I grew up, there was Friendster, MySpace, and then Facebook.
And people used to say that something would come after that.
Sure.
Nothing has come after, right?
This is the final form.
This is the last Pokemon evolution.
And so, in some cases, people are, this is, I'm speaking from people on the left.
Yes, of course.
This is the, I think, as sympathetic as they get to the startup people, which they do not like.
Right.
But they don't want to crush small business with the downstream effect of upholding the monopoly.
Is that what you kind of expect to happen with this?
Do you have faith in any startup to outcompete Facebook and Google and so on?
Right.
Well, I definitely have faith in theory that there could be startups that are competitive.
I currently work at a startup that is attempting to compete with the incumbents with, like,
grand visions of, like, competing with Apple and Google to actually be, like, the center of
your digital life, but a very alternative form, which I think actually would be appealing to
leftists in the sense that it would be highly personally sovereign, controllable, tunable
to whatever your sort of community, you know, finds desirable, as opposed to being kind of
top-down prescribed by monopolies.
I think it's a really, really hard thing to do because the tech giants that exist now are
some of the richest and most powerful organizations that have ever existed in human history.
And I think the elephant in the room is these are also the organizations that have the ability
to develop AGI much more so than startups.
Although you see crazy funding for, you know, startups that have no product yet, you know,
people coming from open AI or whatever to startups with, like, billion-dollar valuations
right away just because you need that to buy GPUs to train an AI model.
So that is, I think, the fact that they are on the verge of achieving some form of AGI
and it's those same companies, that makes it hard for me to imagine.
But at the same time, I also think that AGI will be much more of a deflationary technology
in general that will make things cheaper, and eventually intelligence itself will become
kind of commodified.
And I think even if these giants are the first ones to achieve it, the cost will go down to
so much that it will actually be kind of, like, widely widespread access to stuff.
When you say commodified, does that mean you pay for compute or you pay per prompt or what
is the, how is this sold?
I mean, I think there's so many different ways this could be monetized in the future.
I don't know.
Currently, it is...
Subscription, a la carte, all different...
Currently, there's some mix of a la carte and then, you know, API that is paid for use
if you're doing it in kind of bulk things to be the back end for an application.
I do, yeah, back to your original question, though.
Yeah, I think, obviously, you want to create an environment where there could be challengers
to incumbents.
Like, if you're against monopolies, that seems to be, even if it's harder to do than using
the government to break it up, it seems much more desirable if you have any faith in markets
at all or competition.
And yeah, I do have some.
To give people a little bit of context for our, like, intellectual background, if the type
of stuff that people talk about in the art world is, like, the widest open Overton window.
Other than, like, shitpost or politics, the widest open Overton window is kind of the weird
philosophical discussions that happen in the art world.
And this idea that the emerging, like, transnational corporations, platforms in this case that have
valuations that are equal to the GDP of many small countries, that these things were eventually
going to become a new form of governance, that they were going to resemble states more and
more through identity, cartography, currencies, all of the things that traditionally the role
of the state would be to carry out, delineating where it did and did not exist.
And what we've kind of seen, rather than that vision, is that the platforms were just kind
of slowly incorporated into the existing states.
And we got things that more so resembled, like, the WeChat, WeChat's relationship with China.
And in, you know, typical Western decadence, we have, like, many versions of everything,
like, but maybe eventually we just merge the United States government with Meta or with
Google or so on.
Right.
Do you think that, like, is any of this antitrust legislation actually going to happen?
Like, these things are just such enormous sources of power.
Like, can we actually, is Lena Kahn going to be successful?
Well, yeah, they just opened antitrust into, an antitrust investigation into NVIDIA.
We'll see how that turns out.
To me, that just seems crazy.
If you have, like, on one hand, you have an explicit government policy to compete with
China on chips.
You understand that Taiwan is, like, very key to doing that.
Why would you then launch this investigation to, like, literally the biggest creator of
wealth in the economy right now?
It just, to me, it doesn't, it seems like clearly the government is not...
The right hand and the left hand aren't talking to each other.
Exactly. And I can see how you could have conflicting priorities there, but to me, it seems really
like shooting yourself in the foot, especially as, like you mentioned, these things are very
much kind of organs or, you know, instruments of the state.
Right.
Especially internationally.
And that is not, like, a new thing.
But it's become more and more so.
And I think you don't see that going away with the startups.
I mean, if you consider OpenAI a startup, I also think OpenAI has been de facto nationalized
already.
And you could probably say the same thing for a lot of these other companies.
I mean, the proportion of their funding, there's an enormous amount that actually just
comes from the government.
Right.
You know, there's private funding, but then there's also state funding.
There's private funding, there's state funding, and then there's also, you know, shadowy other
ways of investing or having influence or control.
And there's also, you know, literally secret warrants that can give them power to censor certain
things or withhold certain technologies.
These OpenAI talks, you know, they've mentioned it, kind of, they've been bragging, I would
say, that they showed off their newest innovation, Strawberry, to the NSA first.
And they put an NSA person on the board.
So that influence can be, like, very direct there that isn't just funding.
And of course, like, if, for instance, they did have a big secret government contract, I'm
not sure what that would look like on the books.
Like, I actually don't know how you account for that, if there's something that is top secret.
But also revenue for a public company.
I mean, we've never been able to audit the Pentagon.
So we'll never actually know.
Right.
And probably wouldn't audit.
It might be plausible to assume that there are existing contracts, even.
Oh, there definitely are.
Yeah.
For sure.
I just don't know what they would look like or how you could kind of discover them.
Unfalsifiable.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Right.
Yeah.
What do you think about when people talk about the race for AI, the U.S. versus China?
Yeah.
My thoughts on this are always that just quantitatively, the U.S. has put so much more funding into
this.
But I think there's a particular niche in the security state where people are trying
to, like, drum up fear of this competition in order to, like, basically scare the state
into funding AI even more.
Do you think China stands, like, a reasonable chance to compete with AI?
Yes.
Absolutely.
Really?
Oh, for sure.
Yes.
Okay.
Definitely.
And I do think it's really important.
And I do think it's probably important for a national security.
Because of investment or because of the amount of data that they have at their disposal?
Both.
And it's also just like, like I said, once these models are released and if the weights are
open sourced.
And, you know, Zuckerberg, for instance, he has made the strategy of open sourcing everything
he does because that's going to undermine his competitors' open eye.
But, of course, China can take those weights, adapt them to their own needs.
So, just like we are not locking down technology enough.
And, yes, there is, I don't know, I'm not an expert on this, but supposedly China can't
manufacture chips at a certain nanometer level yet.
Okay.
And that might limit them somehow.
But they can get chips through third-party countries if they want.
It's just like, I just don't think there's any way to actually contain it.
Someone buys it from us and then China buys it from you.
Yeah.
I just think it's going to be like, it is a race.
I also don't think, it's a race in a way that it's a competition, but I don't think
it's a race in the sense that, like, there's a moon landing moment where we flick on the
AI and then we win.
But I just, I think it will be, it'll be a very, very important component of warfare.
You already see hints of that in Ukraine with autonomous drones and, yeah, writing's
on the wall there.
I mean, I have to, I have to agree.
Yeah.
One of the things that both of us are interested in is the kind of emergent politics of the
21st century, right?
Geopolitical competition is a big part of that.
You spent many years, as have I, looking into, like, deep libertarian philosophies, the origins
of neoliberalism, the kind of, like, global vision for what the society would be like.
When we talk about China and we talk about, like, special economic zones and different
kind of competitive environments, do you have faith in this economic model that this kind
of, like, almost, like, feudal partition of economic zones that is deployed in China has
a particular competitive advantage over the United States?
I'm glad you asked me this.
Yeah.
Which is counterintuitive to a lot of people.
Because they think of China as being very totalitarian and top-down.
Right.
But actually, there's a lot of people of the, like, libertarian persuasion that are really
bullish on China because it has these, like, SEZs.
Sure.
That offer, you know, all of your kind of Cambrian explosion of different possibilities and so on.
I mean, so, yes, on paper, sure, but we saw what happened with the Hong Kong crackdown.
I don't think anyone still thinks of Hong Kong as some sort of, like, you know, libertarian
dreamland or a place where it's necessarily safe to experiment.
I also think, you know, there's, I think, hundreds of special economic zones around the
world.
And, you know, China, of course, has the most famous one.
But I also think it's, you know, there's hundreds of special economic zones around the
world, some of them pretty subtle, and some of them very much models of these libertarian
startup cities.
There's a few of them, anyways.
Yeah, yeah.
There's Prospera in Honduras, which is under fire right now because the government has changed.
They signed a 50-year contract with the previous government.
Socialist government came in, wants to annul that government.
Now they're in an international, uh, multi-billion dollar lawsuit.
Prospera are just, like, fucking pirate and Kapistan, like, kangaroo bullshit.
I mean, it's crazy, yes.
I agree.
But, yeah.
So, anyways, like, now I believe that Prospera is suing the government for 11 billion dollars
or something like that.
They've said repeatedly that if they would just let them keep doing what they were doing,
they would drop the lawsuits.
I don't think they're actually trying to, like, bankrupt this poor country.
But that's what it looks like right now.
You very easily could make that.
Oh, come on.
They're not trying to bankrupt the country?
No, I don't think so.
They're suing them for, like, the national, like, the GDP, the annual GDP.
Yes, and which would be deterrence for them to break the contract that they made, which,
you know, the contract said it would be, you know, debated in this court under those rules.
And they said repeatedly if they will uphold those rules, they will drop the lawsuit.
So I think that's very reasonable.
I don't know.
What happens when this is no longer a question of contracts and consent and legitimacy,
and it's just a question of who has the tanks?
Sure.
When the state just sends in the National Guard and takes this territory back?
I mean, I think that's always a very real threat in why all these things are basically,
they're basically experiments that are allowed to exist by the grace of the United States
allowing them to exist.
Or, I guess, local governments, but let's just say America.
So yeah, it makes it all a LARP.
But I just think that, like, if you're against monopolies, if you're worried about global empires
and monocultures and all these things, it just seems very obvious to me that you should be
in favor of there being some place that is geographic where you can experiment with alternative systems.
And, of course, that's, like, especially appealing to libertarians, but I don't see why that wouldn't
be appealing to socialists as well.
Obviously, I could point to some experiments that are kind of like that that are socialist,
like Jonestown.
So maybe that's why you don't want to, like, overly associate with that.
But clearly there is a rich history of leftist experimental communes as well.
That's a type of network state.
And I think there's just, like, we live in this sort of, like, Godwin's Law universe
where just, like, anything outside of the Overton window that could lead to fascism in
theory is fascist by definition and then is out because it could lead to that way.
I just think that's, like, and I see so many criticisms of network state being fascist for
that reason.
And I just think that's, like, that is potentially one flavor of network state, and you kind of
have to tolerate that, especially if it is a, in theory, consensual thing that people are
going to go, like, volunteer to go live in a fascist, you know, fascist network state.
So back to your original question about, like, yeah, like, Holy Roman Emperor, city-state,
world.
I think there are a lot of things that are appealing to that.
I think trying to actually impose that on a geographic area is autistic in the pejorative
sense, you know.
The internet is a ideal medium for doing things like this where you can, you know, freely
associate with people and disassociate with those people when you want to and, you know,
have to, like, pack up.
But I do think, like, yeah, I don't know, like, Prospera, you can go to Prospera and
you can get experimental health treatments that you can't get anywhere else, which is
very much the libertarian cyberpunk dream.
Right.
Right.
You can do it.
Well, you can't do it, I guess, today, maybe.
But you have been able to do, you were able to do it recently in Prospera.
To me, that seems, like, not harmful.
And overall, a net positive to have just more variability in general, like, a pre-Cambrian,
an actual pre-Cambrian explosion and government.
Like, that would be cool.
Well, I mean, my reluctance for the kind of, like, lefty commune exit politics has always
been that I've always been skeptical of those things because I think just wealth and resources
are accumulated where they are.
And so I can't really imagine a prosperous and flourishing society that doesn't involve
some aspect of class war where we are taking back a lot of the wealth that is privately
owned right now.
So if you have very little to begin with and you exit to your own, you know, you own this
territory or this land or whatever, you're going to be putting together, like, bricks
with mud or whatever.
You don't have the resources to build.
You can't grow penicillin in your bathtub.
Unless you have an innovation that is literally being limited because of regulatory oversight.
And then, I mean, then that's the actual blocker.
It's not resources.
And, like, there's plenty of countries, Taiwan included, that don't have a lot of natural
resources, are still incredibly important manufacturing centers.
I don't see how that's very different.
The same thing with even Hong Kong or Singapore.
Obviously, like, services, financial services, technology, whatever.
I don't know.
I just don't quite buy that.
But also, I would, like, challenge your, if you there are, like, class warfare.
Where you just said, like, all these city-states exist because, like, tanks haven't just tried
to, you know, blow them, which is blow them up.
Like, so that is generally, you agree, might is right.
And, okay, well, that's, I mean, that's the logical conclusion there.
So, like, okay, well, good luck then.
I don't know.
I just, like, white is right.
Then how are you supposed to do this class warfare?
It's necessary now to think of a left politics that isn't based in morality.
And so, I would say that the might of the working class is that they have the unique
commodity, which is distinct from all others, which is labor power, which is the source of
value in society.
And so, when that is withheld, that's the might.
But whatever constitutes the left today doesn't care about those things, maybe theoretically
disagrees with them.
I got bad news for you about the exclusivity of that ability.
You have another theory of value?
Well, it's not just that.
I just think that we are genuinely very close to economic output and also economic demand
to some degree being fully decoupled from humans.
I do believe that AGI is very close.
Humanoid robots, we're sleeping on humanoid robots.
They are much further along than people think.
They will be much more ubiquitous.
Are they going to be workers?
They are going to be workers in all sorts of ways.
Yes, for sure.
Absolutely.
I think that literally the robots will be taking our jobs.
I think that we'll be literally robots taking our jobs.
Yeah, for sure.
Maybe not taking our jobs, but expanding the economy without there being any kind of constraint.
I think what is also interesting is all the sort of like pronatalism fear at the same time
as we're actually finally kind of having population growth be decoupled from economic growth, I think.
Like, so I just think like, honestly, and this is very landing of me, but I think like, I believe in class conflict, but I think capital is on the verge of permanent victory, basically.
Really?
Yes, absolutely.
Really?
Even the idea of like workers.
I mean, obviously we're going to have workers for a long time.
I just think that being an identifying feature of a person, I think that's going to become anachronistic.
Really?
I think I'm not even trying to be like, we're going to be in-
Through like a UBI or what do you mean?
Yes, basically.
And I also think like, regardless of what economic system we end up in, UBI is an absolute inevitability and it's going to happen much sooner than we think.
And even if we are in some kind of crazy inflationary environment where it just seems completely politically out of the question, there will be no choice but to have something like that.
And they could take all sorts of forms.
And I also think-
There's all sorts of, for people who aren't familiar, there's all sorts of right-wing proposals for UBI.
Exactly.
Milton Friedman, a popular proponent of it.
Negative income tax.
Yeah, exactly.
Right.
Sure.
Yeah.
There's nothing inherently left-wing or right-wing about UBI.
It's more a, I would say, a stopgap solution.
And, you know, there have been recent studies recently where they did UBI pilot programs in, I think, Denver.
And they found that they were very ineffective in terms of getting people off the streets because that was the goal.
Right.
But that's just, like, missing the point of what this is for.
But they're just giving UBI to people who live on the street so they can buy all the drugs they want?
Well, that was the outcome, I guess.
Yeah.
And ultimately, there was no difference between giving them $50 and $1,500 in terms of who got homes afterwards.
Oh, wow.
So, it's like, okay, UBI is not meant to address mental illness or-
You're supposed to give it to people who work part-time and, like, yeah, or people who work full-time and still don't meet, like, the threshold for their rent and reproducing themselves and so on.
So, I mean, I think we get held up on all three letters of UBI.
Like, I think UBI is already here.
It's not already, it's not evenly distributed.
It's not universal.
In some cases, it's not basic.
In some cases, it's not income as we would know it.
Sure.
And I think, like, even if you think about, like, how the average crypto user, I don't know what the average crypto user is, but a crypto user who kind of, like, hunts, airdrops, various projects.
Yes.
And this is, like, this is, like, some type of UBI.
It's not, again, it's not universal.
It's not really income as we know it.
But it is sort of, like, tokens that are out there to stimulate movement in the economy.
You also, like, there are these viral videos from, like, I don't know if it was a year or two ago of the product mommies, the, like, the women that worked at tech companies in the pool on the laptops and they were doing product managers or whatever.
That is sort of a UBI, you know, like those types of jobs.
Maybe those jobs were real, but there's all sorts of, like, kind of bullshit tech jobs or all sorts of jobs or jobs programs in general.
And so I think what we're going to get is a patchwork of government programs, private programs, not some, you know, top-down, egalitarian, everyone-gets-5,000-a-month thing.
I don't think that's very likely.
Yeah, yeah.
But I do think, like, it will be just inescapable and will need to have some way of having demand in the economy for goods or otherwise everything is just going to, like, deflate away.
I mean, I share your skepticism about, like, the Yang bucks, like, flat payments to everyone everywhere.
I mean, I think that was kind of, like, appealing on a just general political imaginary level, that it was simple, people could grasp it, but in the practical implementation, there's just all sorts of problems of people rushing to areas that have low rent or whatever else once you give that flat payment across all the different districts.
But in talking about these topics, are you concerned with preserving voice anymore?
Do you think that voice is a meaningful, powerful force in the 21st century?
Absolutely. I mean, for sure. And I think, like, I would consider myself kind of a freedom of speech absolutist, and I do think it's very important.
And as much as I, like, genuinely hate my experience of using x.com every day and, like, yeah, I mean, I see more, like, far-out anti-Semitism on a daily basis there than I did in, like, my entire first two decades, I feel like, on the internet, you know?
Every day. But honestly, I don't know how you get rid of that problem while also preserving, you know, you can tune algorithms and stuff.
He could fix it somewhat. But yeah, I honestly, if that's the sacrifice it takes, is, like, hearing a bunch of offensive shit, I'm okay with that, for sure, absolutely.
And I do think that voice, this is, yeah, I'm talking about speech, not voice, I guess, right there. So maybe, like, we can separate the two.
Sure, sure.
Voice is, like, that speech can be converted into political change. I don't know necessarily if it can be converted into political change, but it can be converted into memetic change, and it can be converted into, you know, preference cascades.
And it can still influence people and still have some sort of abstract thing. So, yeah.
Is there any way of meaningfully constraining capital? I've just been reading Globalists, The History of Neoliberalism by Quinn Slobodian, extraordinary book.
And it seems like the project of neoliberalism beginning from the 1930s, we're spanning, like, almost 100 years now, was to create basically a proto-patchwork of these different economic zones through which capital could freely move, but people could not.
And that having this ecosystem would slowly drain the social democratic countries of all of their wealth, their ability to support the welfare state and benefits and all of the, like, UBS, universal basic services that social democracy would otherwise provide.
It seems like that project has been extraordinarily successful in the last few years. But is there any, in your understanding, is there any meaningful way of constraining the leak, the flight of capital?
You're specifically talking about capital flight, not just—when you first asked the question, you said, can you constrain capital? And I thought you meant kind of capital as a force in general, but do you mean capital flight specifically?
No, I mean literally just evading tax, moving to sovereignties that are, you know, willing to negotiate with people who have extraordinary amounts of wealth.
Like, what I'm interested in is how to preserve social democracy, right?
Like, I want the existence of a dignified middle-class life, you know, the stuff that was maybe existed a generation ago that has not been the millennial experience.
Yeah, sure.
How is that even possible to sustain if capital is able to move so freely, right?
And this is where we get into all these kind of speculative scenarios, because it seems like there's just not a lot of levers to pull in terms of preserving social democracy, because capital flight is real.
Yeah, interesting question.
Yeah, I don't think there is a consistent way to do it.
Obviously, there have been all sorts of, I think, to varying degrees of effectiveness, clamping down on it.
But it's also just like people will—that are clever enough and have enough motivation will figure out some way to do it, even if it's more increasingly criminal.
Yeah, I think that that kind of shows you the impossibility of maintaining social democracy as a status quo.
And also, like, maybe you should think of it as more like a local minima, and maybe it's nice, but maybe there's something else out there that we—yeah, we have no freedom to experiment with, basically.
I think also, like, crypto or not, capital flight is going to be an issue.
I don't think—yeah, I think we're going to have to move past the idea of, like, taxpayer dollars funding things.
I know that sounds very abstract, but it does feel kind of untenable at some point.
It's also already a fiction.
Like, we know that's not what we're spending.
Taxes reduce aggregate demand.
Sure.
They don't actually fund things.
There you go.
I'm just—that's one of your tweets.
I'm quoting back to you.
Well, exactly.
Sure, you could take that.
But then it was like, okay, and that goes to your first—where I interpreted your question as being, like, how do you limit capital?
And that would be things like that, like, reduce aggregate demand by just, like, taking money off the table constantly.
No, no, I mean, I'm more—in this question, I'm more so concerned about, like, when I talk to my friends on the left who, like, take these things really seriously, right?
But are not, like, naive about, like, oh, neoliberalism, we turn the switch over here.
Now we just go back to social democracy, and we just, like, you know, click the other button, and everything goes back to how it was in the post-war boom, and it's all great.
Like, this is actually part of a—it's part of the process of historical development.
The profit rates that sustained the post-war boom and thus the democratic infrastructure in Europe and to an impoverished degree in the United States, those profit margins do not exist anymore.
And so I still thoroughly believe that we can get social democracy back, but the total amount of wealth that we're going to be redistributing to fund those services is vastly, vastly smaller than the social democratic period that we had in Europe.
So even getting back to that, like, very humble political imaginary, there is this kind of real problem of historical development that requires larger questions to be asked, right?
I would take that to mean platform socialism.
I would look at different models of economic planning that we're now able to realize through Amazon and Google and things that solve Hayek's knowledge problem, right?
I think that is actually, like, the kernel of politics for the 21st century, which may resemble socialism in some aspects.
They may resemble markets in other aspects.
But I'm just not—I'm not naive enough to think that, like, oh, we're just going to go back to old-school social democracy.
It's going to be thoroughly reduced from what we had in the past.
What's more important there, though, like, the social services or the democracy?
Because I think that there might be a choice you have to make there.
Right, right.
And that's—I think we can get one or the other back probably more likely than both.
This is the interesting thing.
If—okay, just assuming, like, we'll just withhold, like, a lot of the different caveats or whatever, but the possibility exists that there are more authoritarian regimes without the possibility for democracy and voice that will give you the minimum material essentials for a dignified life.
Or you can choose to have all of your democratic inputs and live in dire poverty.
Yeah.
And if those are the two choices for the 21st century, my wager is a lot of people are going to choose this authoritarian model and will get the bare minimum material necessities to survive.
And we will look back at, like, democracy as being kind of like a, you know, interesting feature of the 20th century.
Right.
It seems plausible.
And I think we're already kind of, like, you can see that China and America.
I mean, democracy is not doing well in the U.S. even where we have it, supposedly.
Yeah, and I made the choice to move back to America from Germany.
And honestly, a lot of it was because I wanted more freedom.
Like, I wanted freedom to start a business.
If I had started that business in Germany, I was going to get a crazy exit tax if I ever left.
So, talking about how, yeah, ways to not solve capital flight, like, Germany's policy to try to solve capital flight literally incentivized me after 15 years to leave Germany and go back to America to live in California where I'm paying as much or more taxes.
But I was able to, you know, create this thing without getting a crazy percentage of it confiscated.
That's what it would have meant, this exit tax.
Like, it wasn't a tax on your revenue.
It was very similar to the unrealized gains tax.
So, anyway.
Speaking of freedom, both of us are in an exhibition that was previously in Berlin, is now in Copenhagen, and is going to, I believe, soon go to Prague.
Yes.
You have an iconic sculpture in this exhibition called Freedom Club Figure.
Would you tell us about that piece and maybe some of the interesting materials deployed in that sculpture?
Sure.
It's hard for me to even think of this as my own artwork because it is ready-made on top of another ready-made.
But one of the ready-made, yes, is very special.
It is a backpack that was owned and highly customized and somewhat crafted by Ted Kaczynski, aka the Unabomber, which I purchased from an online auction.
The GSA, the General Services Administration, which is a federal agency that controls all the property, they have an online auction platform.
They were doing this, I think it was back in 2011.
They had an auction of his, all the evidence from the trial.
Imagine Ted Kaczynski, his possessions being sold at an online auction.
He must have loved that.
They did it intentionally, and I even, I heard some officials make some snide comments, and I'm sure they informed him.
Yeah, yeah.
I feel a little bit bad about it, honestly, whatever, but R.I.P., whatever.
Anyways.
I don't think you need to feel bad about it.
Okay, fine, whatever, but I always felt a little bit like, yeah, well, a weird connection with him after I owned this thing because, yeah, the backpack, it actually, like, you have to see it, but part of it is like this hand-knit scarf that he was using at his backpack.
And it smells like a musty cabin and, like, musk.
Like, it kind of smells like Ted.
So, at one point, I wanted to extract the odor of this and just bottle it up and try to, maybe I should still do it, but it's been many years, so it's probably faded.
I was really fascinated with Ted Kaczynski.
A lot of other artists were, too.
So, from that same auction, I found out afterwards, Jan Vo bought his typewriter for many more, much more money than I paid for.
Were you in a bidding war at the end of this?
I was in a small bidding war, and I don't know with who, but it was still very cheap for what it was.
And in addition to the backpack, I also got three uncompleted pipe bombs.
They're just these, like, empty pipes.
What?
Yes.
Holy shit.
They were all bundled up, like, in the backpack.
And then also this, like, handmade level.
That's fucking crazy.
Yes, yes.
No, actually, there's...
The government is selling Ted Kaczynski's incomplete bombs.
Anyone who's interested, they are for sale.
You still have them?
Freedom Club Hand, they're called.
And I have...
There's four of them, so I have a couple of them.
Anyone's...
My DMs are open.
A little piece of internet history.
Yes, for sure.
I always did want to have it end up in a sort of, like, an AI lab or something like that.
That actually sounds very plausible.
Sam Altman, if you're listening, love to sell you Ted Kaczynski's pipe bomb.
And actually, the person who owns one of the pipe bombs is...
He was the...
I think he was the chief of NATO for Luxembourg.
Holy shit, dude.
Okay.
He was just a collector.
One of Krapa's collectors, you know?
But nice guy.
I met him.
Interesting.
But, yeah.
Incredible.
So, yeah.
That was the artwork that's in the show.
And it's my most prized possession.
I mean, it's irreplaceable and incredibly special.
That's, I mean, we've both seen a lot of internet culture in the last few years.
But the grip that narco-primitivism has on the political imaginary, especially of young people, is profound.
For sure.
Yeah, for sure.
Oddly enough, also very popular in the tech world in some circles.
Sure.
And I've seen people...
I'm thinking of one individual in particular who is now...
He's EAC, as he describes himself.
So, he was kind of peeled by the Marc Andreessen Techno-Optimist Manifesto.
Yeah.
You roll back the clock a few years.
He was a Ted K poster in 2018 and 19.
He's made a total 180.
For sure.
It's interesting, yeah.
There's a lot of overlap there.
But I guess it's just sort of like, in general, if you like ideas that are outside of the overwritten window, it's kind of easier to, you know, cycle through them, I think, outside of the center.
And also, you know, there is a trend, I don't know how big it is, but of tech executives not giving their kids access to their screens and, you know, being aware of the harm, whatever, in theory.
So, there's probably, you know, just like, I'm sure a lot of people also, like, even just computer programmers, if you're really frustrated, you're working all day, you're on your Zin and your Adderall, it's like an idyllic alternative, right?
Think of Ted's cabin, you know, and, like, hand making a level out of wood and, like, casting the grommets in the ground and nailing it together and every single millimeter.
I mean, this is like, yeah, I see it.
And seeing in the artifacts I have of Ted's, I see that, like, you know, tangible, like, sensual appeal to, like, what he represents.
It's like, it's like, kind of, yeah, it's something that's also, like, it's not possible at all to achieve.
It wasn't possible for him to achieve.
That's, of course, why he got so angry about it.
You know, he got his silence disrupted by a sawmill or people on their snowmobiles.
So, now I imagine it's much even harder to do something like that.
The real horseshoe is that if you spend a ton of time online with technology, you turn schizophrenic.
Or if you reject technology entirely, you still turn schizophrenic.
Yeah, exactly.
For sure.
I think the last thing I want to ask you is that a few years ago, you were very much a critic of a lot of the things that you're interested in now or sympathetic to now.
And you've had some experiences which have changed your mind about these topics.
That's true.
You know, and I feel like I personally learned a lot from you in the early years.
And I'm curious about, like, what those formative experiences were for you where you change your mind if you're given different information and it changes your worldview.
Is there a specific incident or encounter or experience that really kind of pushed you in one direction as opposed to another?
I think more specifically kind of what you're talking about is, like, many years ago, I mean, I made a documentary about the Seasteaders.
Yes.
With our good friend, Jacob Hurwitz-Goodman.
Exactly, yeah.
And that was very much going there with a critical lens, for sure.
Similarly, you know, I was very fascinated with, like, Curtis Yarvin and Moldbug and NREX stuff.
Again, more, like, in a fascination in this critical thing.
But then I, like, I did meet a lot more people in these communities.
It's hard to demonize them.
That was the first thing, of course.
Like, when you just encounter anybody like that, they become more humanized.
And then also just sort of many moments of negative polarization from the left, also from the right, in various ways, but has just sort of, like, I feel kind of, like, buffeted around in some sort of stream of negative polarization where I am now, like, probably I would consider myself the least partisan that I've ever felt in my life.
Probably not going to vote.
I don't know.
I've always voted for Democrats every time, just kind of, like, that was my moral calculus.
When COVID was a big eye-opener, I noted very much who was afraid first, and it was Balaji.
That's where I heard about it first.
I heard about it from Curtis Yarvin, actually.
There you go.
Sounding the alarm when everyone else was like, oh, this is alarmist.
It's a racist to say there's a pandemic coming.
Exactly.
So seeing that and seeing how certain ideas that, yeah, just are just, like, verboten, basically, if you're amongst a certain kind of, like, dignified liberal elite, seeing that and seeing how right that was, that was one moment for sure.
And then seeing also, of course, like, with crypto and all the sort of reflexive backlash, I guess, against it.
And I think there was plenty of people on the left that are interested in crypto, but the fact that they were just, like, even from the administration itself, just constantly criminalized and demonized, it's like, if I actually want to have a career that involves crypto, it is directly in my self-interest to not have a Democrat, not have Gensler in office anymore.
And it's always, like, you make these jokes about, like, oh, the poor working-class whites that vote for Republicans against their best economic, you know, self-interest because they're baited by social issues.
Culture war, yeah.
Well, I do feel a bit of the opposite.
Like, I would literally be voting to criminalize the industry that I'm in.
And it's like, unfortunately, you can't, you got to pick the whole package.
So at this point, I just feel like, yeah, I am open to a lot of alternatives that I wasn't before.
I don't have any sense that I have a, I know what is best or, like, a policy prescription for much of anything.
I feel more confident that other people don't as well.
And I kind of am more laissez-faire, analyze the situation, try to react to it, but you're not going to, like, change things very much.
And I also just feel like we are in the early days of the singularity.
Sounds crazy to say it, but, like, the horizons are, the event horizon is, like, impossible to see beyond.
We are very close to that.
There will be all sorts of possible configurations of power and economics and technology that we literally cannot conceive of yet.
I genuinely believe this.
And, like, it's sort of, like, almost moot to try to control that process right now.
Like, that is, like, that acceleration process is happening, whether we like it or not.
And we can sort of just sort of navigate it as best we can.
Daniel, I have to say, I'm just such, I've been an immense fan of your work for, I don't know, 10, 15 years.
You're one of my favorite artists.
You're one of my favorite posters.
And I just admire your way of thinking about these things in a complicated, rigorous way.
And I'm just, I'm grateful that we got to do this.
Thank you.
And do it on video, finally, after so many years of the audio podcast.
And, yeah, it's just, it's wonderful to see you here.
Likewise, big fan.
No one doesn't like you.
Congrats on the show.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
