Hi everybody, welcome back to the podcast. Good to see you. Good to see all of you IRL.
For those of you who don't know me, my name is Joshua Citarella. I'm an artist and internet
culture researcher. The piece we're looking at here on the screen is called SWIM, S-W-I-M,
Someone Who Isn't Me. It's an internet acronym. And this is depicting an anarcho-capitalist future
inspired by doomsday prepper visions of the future, scraped from communities on Reddit,
Discord, 4chan, many other similar platforms. This is around 12 feet. This is 8 by 12 feet.
It's a life-size piece. You can see every eyelash on the eye. And figuring out those logistical
problems and mapping them in a 2D life-size space makes you very, very intimately familiar with how
people are planning for the apocalypse. I am also a content creator. I think many people may know me
from the podcast or from newsletters or from videos or live streams. I've actually live streamed for
over 700 hours. I looked before I did this talk. That's a lot of time. So it's a lot of primary
source material that I'm reviewing and I'll be talking about tonight. Podcast guests include
Taylor Lorenz, who spoke earlier this morning, as well as Yancey Strickler, who was the guest
last week talking about meta-label. I think many people here will be familiar with that.
And maybe important to mention that this meme is made by a follower, a listener of the podcast,
and all the stuff that I show today, they're images that are found online. So unless I specify
other words, it's not an artwork that I've made. It's a piece of internet culture that I'm holding
up for everyone here to reflect on. And this project began when I wrote a book in 2018 called
Politogram and the Post-Left. This is an ethnography of a very specific mimetic subculture,
which at the time included teenagers between the ages of 12 and 17, who are interested in all forms
of left-wing politics, and then over the course of a few years, radicalized into something much
darker. Post-Left, as it was known at the time, Luddism, eco-anarchy, green anarchy, it goes by a number
of names. Civilization critique, anti-civilization. The terminology becomes infinitely niche-fied.
When I brought this work to different institutions within the art world, no one was interested to
pay for it, and no one was interested to publish it, even for free. So what I did was I decided to
bypass all the gatekeepers and bring my work to crowdfunding. And it just so turns out that there
were a lot of people who were interested in it, and this project has shaped my practice ever since.
This book was intended to be a guidebook for people who are curious about these communities,
but are unsure where to start. As soon as it was released, probably within the first week,
someone from these communities got a hold of a physical copy, scanned it, uploaded it to Discord,
and then my entire practice has changed ever since, where I'm now in touch with all of these people
all the time. And while we're told that the internet is something like this, this kind of
happy-go-lucky, onwards and upwards, young people freely navigating these spaces, my inclination is
that the internet resembles something much more like this. If you can't read the screen, I'll just
read it out for you. Extreme political opinions detonated into a gaming Discord server filled with
nine-year-olds. This piece was actually, excuse me, this meme, this meme, not an artwork, this meme
was sent to me by one of the young teenagers profiled in that book. At the end of it, the reason why it was
initially in print and not distributed online is because this group of radical teenagers, some of them too
young to drive, literally 13 years old at the time, that was his experience, they're circulating manifestos
from active eco-extremist groups that contain instructions for how to assemble improvised explosive
devices. This is a level of extremism and radicality that is beyond the pale for any kind of civil discussion
of politics and really constituted something that I thought was novel and unprecedented in previous
generations. My work has been cited and referenced in these publications. I don't necessarily think that's
because my work on this topic is so good, but mostly because the media narrative in a lot of these
publications is just so bad. People don't actually spend time with these communities. They haven't
really spoken with meme makers. They haven't made them themselves. So I find myself here doing this work
and talking about these communities in a really in-depth, detailed way. I still make art. I'm showing in
half a dozen different museum shows this year, Hong Kong, Italy, Germany, Poland, several others.
But alongside all of this, I'm also working, I'm one of the only people who is publishing primary source
research on these topics outside of traditional institutions, think tanks, universities, and so on.
So it turns out that the best way to learn about these people is just to talk to them,
and I've spent the last few years doing exactly that. I've been doing interviews with people who
have accounts that look like this. If you've spent, I think a lot of people here have spent time on
social media, so you're familiar with a few of these characters. Tons of emojis in the bio,
very niche ideologies, some of them seemingly contradictory. They don't feel like they should
belong together, but here they are, jammed together in a very unusual way. Incredibly niche things that
have, you know, in some cases a few hundred followers, but then they scale up to have
content creators who have audiences numbering in the millions.
These are, a few of these I think are really, really special. Actually, the AI-backed central
planning paired with permanent revolution and an idea that state socialism could also be meritocracy.
It's, they, you know, when you find the gems that are really crafted like this, you gotta,
you gotta, you gotta take a screenshot along the way. And there are many, many of these accounts.
It's almost impossible to put a number on the size of these communities. There are a few content
creators, specifically I think JREG on YouTube is a good example of this, but you can have audiences
in the millions for some of these. Some of those videos have reached maybe close to the tens of
millions, slightly below 10 million views. And the people behind these accounts have real stories.
They have complex lives. They are navigating a very strange period of internet culture, and they're
trying to make sense of the world. And I've tried to give them the space to understand that and
understand their journey towards clarity in these spaces. The story I'd like to tell today begins with
the second book I published on this topic. This is titled 20 Interviews. And at this time, I'm
interviewing people who are between the ages of 15 to 22. I think it's mostly the same group of people, but
they have proportionately aged upwards. The first book was 2018. This is in 2020. So it's the same
demographic that got introduced to politics in the same period, and they've just aged up a few years in the
meantime. And in this book, there are 10 interviews on the left, 10 on the right, and up, down, and
sideways really all over the place. You'll recognize the book cover, no doubt, as being the political
compass. If you've managed to find your way here, you are undoubtedly familiar with this. But just to
give the very briefest explanation, this is an XY graph. And we have on the X axis, the economic right,
the economic left, and then the Y axis, authoritarian to libertarian. So doubling the resolution of political
identities besides the two-party binary that we're used to in the United States. And for teenagers at this
time, this is an immensely explosive idea, that there can be more resolution of political identities.
We're looking here at a page out of the Rampart Journal of Individualist Thought. This is published
in 1968. And I found this on the archive of the Mises Institute. If you are not familiar with the Mises
Institute, this is a think tank and educational program deeply embedded in libertarian philosophies.
Ludwig von Mises is the Austrian economist who wrote Economic Calculation in the Socialist
Commonwealth. And this came out in 1920. It is widely considered the intellectual work within the
Western canon that discredits the feasibility of economic planning, aka that socialism sounds good
on paper, but cannot work in practice. I would disagree with this, by the way. And I think Amazon does a lot
to disrupt 20th century notions of price signals and so on. But that's a whole other podcast.
The point of this is that these very silly memes are actually a rather sophisticated analytical tool.
We're just looking at these two things overlaid. And right now they're being used by shitposting
teenagers, but they're actually engaging in some kind of exaggerated version of the important debates
that shaped huge political economic outcomes in the 20th century.
I'm going to do a very brief genealogy of how this meme format evolved and where we are now.
We're looking here at two compasses. This is on the left side called the Sapley political compass.
You'll have the XY coordinates that you're familiar with. And we have on the right side of it,
we have a third axis, a Z axis, if you would, measuring your cultural alignment. So from progressive
to conservative. And this is offering yet another dimension of political identity. On the right side,
we have, these are two side-by-side screenshots. We have eight values, which quickly became the
community standard. And we have your familiar XY grid. We have a cultural axis. And then they've
introduced a fourth axis called nation to world. These two screenshots are actually from the same user.
And there may be like a year, a year and a half apart as the different quizzes are trending at
different time periods. But you're watching him through the captions kind of struggle with his
own political identity and trying to map himself using all of these numbers, following different
places between the different graphs. Following this, there is a massive, massive quiz. All of these are,
you know, there may be 50 multiple choice questions. This one, I think, is 150. So it's really, really extensive.
And it has eight different axes. There's also room for negative space for uncertain answers within all of the
different multiple choice questions. You have on the lower side here, different achievement badges like veganism or
feminism or monarchy or Illuminati or things that don't neatly map onto these XY quadrants that you need to have kind of
denotated as like a little in-game achievement badge or something. Importantly, Plutiscales has a really
novel invention is that they generate a custom flag for you at the top of the quiz that has three main
touchstones for what your political belief system is. On the left here, we have work, liberty, and fatherland.
And then there's a custom flag generated on top of that. And then on the opposite side, we have equality,
socialism, and revolution. And these flags will become very influential later.
Quickly, what happens is that the quiz format breaks apart. This is now too complex to compare yourself to
others. And we enter this new stage of the role-playing game as labeling, iconography, and narrative.
These are a few different iceberg memes that are far too detailed to read here. But if you've come
across them before, this is a near infinite list of political ideologies. It's an incredible way to
waste a whole bunch of time. These are two of my favorites, although there's a lot that have
circulated online. And we're looking here at a detailed version of this. This one in particular,
I have actually streamed all of it. 26 hours on Twitch. I Wikipedia and Google searched every single
one of these. And people watched it. I don't know why. But it was painful for me. Maybe that's what was
most entertaining about it. Xenofeminism actually here towards the lower center. I've actually talked
to Helen Hester. She was a guest on the podcast. So what exactly is going on here? There's a thriving
youth subculture. There are content creators with followers in the millions. There are giant subreddits
and super active discords. And there's a lot of people who should all hate each other, but they seem
to be spending time in the exact same place, even if they're all debating and arguing all of the
time. Social media has become a kind of massive multiplayer online role-playing game where teens
try on and off new political identities like they are choosing their character in a video game.
It's quite literally what we see here. You have a choose your character selection screen of different
political alignments. And while there were always young radicals in every generation, this seems
qualitatively different than periods in the past. Part of this is undoubtedly the web to internet,
the attention economy driving strange behavior online. But another part of it is the real political
crisis of today and the unresolved debates of the 20th century.
In 1989, Francis Fukuyama published the infamous essay, The End of History, which put forward the idea
that Western liberal democracy is the endpoint of mankind's ideological evolution and the final form
of human government. The TLDR is that fascism was permanently discredited in the 1930s. Communism fell
alongside the collapse of the USSR in the 1980s. And of the three great ideologies of the 20th century,
capitalism emerged victorious as the only viable political economic model for modernity.
But today, numerous crises have placed increasing strain on the liberal democratic model.
Market and institutional failures make headlines on a weekly basis. We now see populist movements in
both the left and right. Fascism and socialism are once again up for debate. And so-called history
has returned. The Overton window closed in the 1980s, but now it has reopened. Fukuyama calling himself a
social democrat nowadays. Very interesting. So I've made it my practice to collect these uncommon
political worldviews and to map this new territory. This is a piece of mine called ideologies,
E like email. Ideology is an internet slang term used to describe complex ideological labels.
These hyper-specific categories serve as a gamified form of identity play and niche personal branding in
the chaotic landscape of online politics. I'll read a few of these out here so you get the feel,
the vibe of what these communities are creating. And we're starting from the upper left-hand side.
This is left egoist transhumanism, followed by libertarian neo-monarchism and anarcho-primitivist
caliphatism. And all of these begin as images found online. These are posts made in earnest. They're
usually a status update accompanied by a long caption in a blog type format. And teenagers will
print this out using print and demand services, ship it to their house, and they'll hang it in
their bedroom like my generation would have the poster of a band. Some part of this is also attached
to the collapse of the music industry, where the devaluation of music has just thrust subculture
into these niche political ideologies. Here they are in the 34th Ljubljana Biennial. This is a piece
by Simon Denny in the corner here. They were actually hung in the entryway to a government
building, which is a kind of very, very bizarre place to find yourself in. But, you know, art gets
those unique spaces that are usually not allowed, and in some cases illegal, to place the flag of a
different nation or different state within your government buildings. This is etiologies two.
I really like the format of the top eight, so I select these in groups of eight similar to the
MySpace infamous top eight format. It's like enough facets to describe who you are, but not too many
aspects of your identity. It's a squad. Eight is a squad. You know, two is your friends, and then when
it's 150, it's like your whole crew, but yeah, eight is like the right level of curation. And we have
here queer transhumanist anarchism, progress pride constitutional monarchy, anarcho-collectivist
Islamo-minarchism, and my favorite here, just I'm trying to be sensitive of time, but on the bottom
left here, we have the post-Brexit European Union, where one of the stars has been removed.
This is by a shit-posting teenager made it online, but it's important that like there are way more
countries in the EU than there are stars. The stars don't represent the country. They're like points of
like political alignment and values, but it's just very kind of intuitive in the graphic design sense,
so I really appreciate that. Etiologies three, there are, there's a lot of these. This is an ongoing
series, and as long as I'm interested in this space, I'll keep producing them. And etiologies four,
extensive labels for all of these. This has, this format has become a meme in itself now. There's a
JavaScript, you can just generate new political ideologies.
This, this slide is in my notes as nightmare blunt rotation. So, so how much of this, how much of this
is actually real, right? Like, are these people, are they shit-posting? It's don't read too much,
or you will get an aneurysm. It's rather dangerous. It's hard to tell if people mean this in earnest,
if they're using social media to find, you know, a political belief through this process of shit-posting.
It's an ironic hedge very often. There's an incredible tweet by one of these accounts that says,
quote, MAGA communism will bring the return of Pol Pot patriarchy to the United States.
You guys are, you guys are doing great, by the way. Usually people tap out after post-left, but
you made it all the way to Pol Pot patriarchy, so congratulations. This, this group actually,
their political tactics are described as discursive terrorism, where they are inventing new political
labels like red, yellow, Ron Paul Maoism, MAGA communism, which is this idea that the de-industrialized
red states are analogous to the Maoist peasantry, and the urban elites in blue states, you know,
the cities are surrounded by the hills. So, I've made it my practice to talk with these people
and to understand their worldview. This is Zoomer, as he goes online. He's 19 years old. He lives in
Tennessee. His pronouns are he, him. He previously identified as they, them. Now he just uses the
label queer and he, him pronouns. He is a third positionist, which means economically left and
extremely culturally conservative. There are significant implications with that of ethno-separatism,
which I press him on in the podcast, but he does not comment on. He pushes back against that.
I think that is incorrect, but that's, that's his version of it. He is also a practicing Muslim.
He is the child of immigrants from South Asia. And around age 13, Zoomer got into politics through
Gamergate. He was very interested in owning the libs, in dunking on the SJWs. He had super strict
parents, was not allowed to have social media, so he only had YouTube as his online outlet. And he
starts watching political videos with people like Sargon of Akkad and Louder with Crowder, Milo
Yiannopoulos, all of these types of characters in that era. Eventually, he is alienated, especially
by Stephen Crowder with all of the Islamophobic content that he encounters online. And he starts
leaning much more libertarian, anarchist-leading. He reads Joseph Proudhon. His political views start to
evolve. He's still an anti-SJW middle schooler. He's living at this time a rather upper, upper
middle class life. His father is an entrepreneur. It's a very hardworking family, first generation
immigrants. And then abruptly, and very sadly, the father goes bankrupt. The businesses are not working
out. The father leaves the family. The parents get divorced. They now have to switch schools. And they move to a
very low-income neighborhood. And he's now, he's gone from this life of relative luxury to living the very
impoverished reality of a single mother with kids, which is the single data point for the greatest predictor of
poverty in the United States. If you had one piece of information about people being a single mother with
children, that is the single greatest indicator of poverty. So his new class circumstances make him
very unclear about his political ideas. He also begins to realize he's a gay man. He doesn't feel at
home in American conservatism anymore because those people dislike him for his sexual orientation, his
religious affiliation. And he doesn't necessarily feel at home in libertarianism because he's living in
pretty dire poverty now. All of those free market policies were pretty compatible when he was
living an affluent life, but now he could really use a social safety net. So from Proudhon, he gets into
Marx, and he's devouring all of this left-wing content primarily via YouTube. Around that time, he gets onto
Instagram, and he starts posting about his political ideas. He's age 16. Unfortunately, during this period,
the family falls on even harder times. There are no relatives in the U.S. for them to fall back on.
His family, Zoomer, his mom, and his younger sibling are now living out of their car.
They are going to food pantries and soup kitchens for their meals.
And his online lefty community that is always talking about mutual aid and helping the less fortunate
and so on, these people are nowhere to be seen. There are no Marxists or communists at the food pantry.
Instead, he meets conservative religious people doing this form of charity.
In the end, the family's local mosque holds a fundraiser and collects a big donation to help
rehouse them. The kids are in school, the mom is employed, and the donation helps them to afford rent
in a new apartment. Around that time, he makes this post.
The center, we see the Gadsden snake, which is familiar from the libertarian flag, used to symbolize
extreme individualism and self-sufficiently. But in this image, they are all bonded together.
And in the upper right, we have red to signify collectivism. In the lower right, we have blue
for minarchism. If you're not familiar with this, this is a very small government, sometimes called a
night watchman state. And in his experience, this kind of makes sense because there was no state aid,
there was no welfare or safety net that came to their help. Instead, it was a group of conservative
religious people who all bonded together to take care of them. The text below here is written in
Arabic moon and sun letters. It has been told to me, so this may not be a direct translation,
but it says, don't step on us, which seems intuitive in this context.
So this is why I think that these silly memes are important, because behind all of them is a complex
and very human story of young people trying to make sense of the world in a moment of extreme
political and social chaos. From here forward, Zoomer's politics are formed by this experience.
And he has to square his life experience with his abstract political ideals. He begins to
reinterpret his own identity and carve out a space for himself. Zoomer is now a passionate enthusiast of
the Islamic golden age, which created some of the world's first examples of social security and
welfare. These early social safety nets were administered by religious organizations rather
than the state itself. This is actually a little discussed counter history that is popular among the
MAGA communist people from a few slides ago, and rather extreme elements of the horseshoe left,
you might call them. So he is economically on the left, but he is culturally on the right. And
for him, that makes some kind of sense. This is all part of a podcast that will come out
later this month. It's a very edited down, anonymized version of Zoomer's story.
Today, Zoomer works in a factory. I suspect that this is Amazon, although I'm not able to confirm that in
the interview. And he helps to support his family, his mom, and younger sibling who is still in school.
It's maybe important to say that a lot of these ideas are retconned and skewed to fit people's life
experiences. In trying to make sense of the world, we all create lore just like a role-playing game.
It probably won't surprise you that Zoomer's hobbies include playing Dungeons and Dragons.
His character is a dragon-born knight who battles an evil lich named Jeff Beelzebezos.
At that point, the podcast really starts to make sense because he's role-playing in both of the
worlds, and it checks out. So my approach here is to take silly things seriously.
These internet memes are responding to a real political crisis, and they make about as much
sense as the world itself. I want to give an acknowledgement here to a great book by Peter
Frage, which has always been a huge inspiration for me. And he has this kind of XY grid that's
laid out in the book with four competing visions of the future. So imagine, if you will, that the NPC
character is in the center of the graph. This is the crisis of the 20th century, these unresolved
questions of political economy. And then there are four characters surrounding it that are all
competing with their own vision for the future. You know, it's important in those choose-your-character
screens, there's no NPC. You can't choose to play as the neoliberal center. You can only choose from
the extremes, and all those are offering a different vision of the future, a different solution for what is
happening, this crisis at the center of politics. Young people are mining history and political
theory through meme formats to sandbox a new kind of politics. They are looking for something novel
and unconventional that can scale to the size of the crises of the 21st century.
So I have asked them to do pretty much exactly that. This is a piece I first showed at KW Institute of
Contemporary Art in Berlin. Each of these works is accompanied by a radio play that sketches a new
political vision of the future. They are written by teenage meme posters, and then that story is read
by podcasters, some of which I think you'll be familiar with, Matt Dryhurst and Holly Herndon of
Interdependence. Daniel Keller, Carly Busta, and Lil Internet from New Models, our collaborators, our
squad in Channel, as well as Anna Katchian from Red Scare, AP Andy from the Antifada, and Jack
Wagner from Otherworld. So that is a relatively brief sketch of what I've been up to for the past
five years. I'm excited to say that we are making a documentary about this work, where we'll speak to
young people behind the accounts and try to understand how the internet and politics are shaping their
real lives alongside the 2024 elections. And in the meantime, you can find me, well, if you're lucky, maybe
on social media, but I think probably web 2.5, you know, substack, Patreon is a better place, because I, you
know, pop up and disappear unpredictably on Instagram. Yeah, so we've got a little bit of extra time.
Maybe we can do 10 minutes. We'll take a few quick questions for a Q&A. And yeah, thanks everybody
for coming today. This was a real blast.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I'm wondering if there's anything in particular about
the media that we have on board with the internet
and the media that's particularly
in the political identification in particular,
or if that is just more about the times of the living
where the government is dominant culturally
or other that's .
That's a, yeah, that's a great question.
I'll just, I'll reiterate, yeah, thank you.
So the question is about young people, teenagers flowing
into political identities as opposed to music
and whether this is a product of the political circumstances
of the moment or a kind of technological artifact
that is incentivized or produced through social media.
It's kind of my rephrasing of your question.
And I would say that both of those things
are actually present and case by case you can do,
you know, is it 80-20 in this case in one direction
or is it 50-50?
And part of the difficulty with the media narrative
around these topics is that people attribute one causation
instead of another.
I think it's absolutely necessary to say that there are certainly
political topics that just thrive in algorithmic feeds
that incentivize controversy, drive engagement, and so on.
And those things are massively amplified,
disproportionately amplified.
But it's difficult to run with that critique
because then you run the risk of hand-waving away
the actual political crisis where, you know,
these are people of this generation.
They don't have the same opportunities for upward mobility.
I mean, we are watching a serious expansion of the Overton window,
and I think there are actually some pretty important things
that are happening right now with the CHIPS Act,
the Inflation Reduction Act, the Green Deal in Europe,
that really represent a shift away from some of the neoliberal consensus
around how political economies, you know, massive,
like nation-state size political economies operate.
So something is actually happening, you know,
and I think in the period that we saw a relative depoliticization
of Gen X and the millennials, which I would categorize myself as this,
it just wasn't as immediately apparent that there was anything
you could do about it.
You know, I don't think that's too pessimistic a statement
because that just was the elite consensus across all the parties.
But now you see things from, you know, the Republican side
for an expansion of infrastructure spending and jobs creation
and, you know, this heterodox populism of J.D. Vance and Josh Hawley
and all sorts of other people, Marco Rubio to a degree even.
And, you know, they shoehorn it in in a weird way of like,
well, we need to increase, you know, the might of our mighty nation
and military spending and so on.
But they are talking about a form of Keynesianism
that is really qualitatively different from those early debates
of like, you know, what the nerds would call the economic calculation debate
in the 20th century of like trying to organize an economy
without the distortions of price signals that institutions create
and weird cliffs in different markets and so on.
So, yeah, yeah, I think there's a combination of the two.
Can we take maybe one or two more questions?
Can we back here?
Was Zumer able to accrue many followers
and paying these people up through disciples
or would they have a one-on-one cult?
Zumer was not necessarily successful as a influencer himself,
but he was an adherent to a rather niche philosophy
that sometimes blows up on the internet around particularly
a few content creators like Caleb Maupin who works for RT
that are a kind of unconventional brand of patriotic socialism
or something like this.
So you blend in kind of anti-imperialism
with like weird nationalist identities
and they do have significant crossover with forces
that are more so aligned with like the far right.
Sometimes this is called fourth positionism.
This very quickly turns into a meme where people, you know,
just they add positions to like make it more extreme.
But I think for Zumer what he kind of needed
was basically to square who he was in the world
and his lived experience
and that very jarring disruption
between what people say and what they do, right?
We're all kind of like there's a gap
between the rhetoric and the actions
and this is part of what makes politics so insane right now.
You know, like neoliberalism itself
is a kind of niche political ideology.
You know, you have all these contradictions rolled into it
where it's like woke diversity, mass incarcerationism
and you have like rugged individualistic oligarchic bailout.
Like all of those things are simultaneously active
but they're totally incongruent
and it's, you know, people who are the blue check journalists
with the official narrative
have almost as much hypocrisy
as some of these shitposting teenagers.
So I don't think that his brand was necessarily scalable.
He has since gone off of social media
for a lot of people who live their life
through this news feed
that is a positive development in their personal life
and that sense of community
and that kind of desire to role play
and that world building impulse
is largely satisfied through things
like Dungeons and Dragons
which is probably a better political outlet
and I mean role playing games
are a very useful way of sandboxing
new types of societies.
I think of the Seasteading Institute
had a kind of role playing game
where you could opt into their discord
and among them were the anarcho-capitalist,
the worker cooperative
and then, I forget the other one,
maybe it was like a venture capitalist
or something else like that
but they are a pretty useful exercise
in expanding the Overton window.
Yeah, but he himself
was not an especially influential content creator.
We have time for maybe one or two more.
Ruby?
Ruby?
Yeah, yeah, so there's a question
that I'll just try to rephrase
for everyone who maybe couldn't hear
but I think I phrased this in the book
as like what use is a political party of one?
You know, and some of these ideologies
are so niche, it's like you're the only person
who believes this is an incredibly long tail idea.
Like how do you expect to band together a coalition?
And I think you're kind of seeing
two things happen at the same time
which is like young people trying
on and off political identities
but then also like carving out a personal brand
in the Web2 attention economy.
All of that said, part of any political change
like neoliberalism has been the consensus ideology
for, you know, decades upon decades now.
This begins, this was a really niche, you know,
fringe belief in 1947
when the Mont Pelerin Society first gathered
with Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman and so on
and these people were looked on as crazy lunatics
that had, you know, unconventional ideas
that were unpalatable and butted up
against the Keynesian consensus of that period.
But, you know, 30 years, 30 plus years
of lobbying their political ideas
and entering into institutions
completely remapped the way
that we think of politics now
where the idea that nation states
should conduct their economy
in the way that you and I
individually balance our checkbooks is
that's a strange idea in 1947
but now that's how everyone thinks about it.
So there's something about being right
and going against consensus ideas
that if you understand the value
of an idea from early on
I think a lot of this in terms of trend forecasting
and analysis and commentary
like this is part of my job now
is to just patiently wait
and then be proven correct
and, you know, if you have a good track record
of that then, you know, predictive capacity
is ultimately the judge
of all of these different ideas.
So ostensibly there's someone out there right now
who has an idea
things that become much larger
in the next few years
and didn't necessarily seem like
they could even exist.
You know, I would say that the rise of
kind of this Trumpism, heterodox,
right-wing populism seems incongruent
but now it's totally working
and those were, you know,
really, really fringe ideas
just a few years ago.
So things can move from being, you know,
beyond the pale
to very influential rather quickly, you know.
Okay, we can do, I think,
one more talk up here in the front.
I wonder if this has any connection
with, like,
public health office
and Google,
and other, like,
and I was wondering
there are all kinds of
Yeah, yeah, I would say
I'm just watching the time
so I'm going to respond
rather than rephrase,
but, okay,
so there's this massive, like,
expansion of the Overton window.
There are these opportunities
within which, let's say,
there's a very successful hashtag campaign
and then there are niche philosophies
that have been on the margins
for a few years
and then have this explosive
viral moment of visibility.
Within that,
that presents an enormous opportunity
for people who have
a kind of political commitment
that they've been looking
to spread to people
and they've been,
in other decades,
maybe the crazy guy
screaming on the corner,
but now they've got a big megaphone
and everyone's willing to listen.
And you saw this
in the very early ages
of the internet
that libertarian think tanks,
when a certain meme
would blow up,
they would contact
the person who made it,
they would fly them to speak,
and they would leverage
that following against their,
they would literally bring them
to their institutions
to perform in some cases.
And I think that is just
across the board
where there's a moment
for, you know,
different radicals
to kind of seize
the public sentiment
and the political imagination
of the moment.
And, yeah,
I think that kind of comes back
maybe to this earlier question
of the political party of one
is that political change
is often a lifetime
of something.
And, you know,
a lot of the news cycle
that we're used to today,
people get very wrapped up
in these ideas
that they've maybe held
for like six months
to a year
or something like that,
but now it totally defines them.
We've all kind of seen this happen
in our news feeds.
But it really is
this kind of like slow game
of just, you know,
40 years of slowly thinking
that this is correct,
waiting for it to become valuable,
and then looking for the right moment
to seize those things.
And I would say
that there's probably,
be very conscious of the time,
so I'll try to summarize
all of this,
but some of these coalitions
are too small
to really stand on their own.
And so what they do
is they bundle
a whole bunch of people together.
So within,
I had mentioned earlier
some of these like,
you know,
paleo-conservative ideas
that they have like
a Murray Rothbard
kind of like,
you know,
libertarian free market ideology,
and then they also have
like a Pat Buchanan
kind of like conservative nationalism
that requires firm borders
to the state,
a lot of state spending,
and, you know,
the libertarians
are against those borders.
The conservatives
are for them,
but they find themselves
in the same political coalition
even though they have
these incompatibilities.
Eventually those things
will cause coalitions
to break apart,
but in the meantime
they do need to bundle together.
So you saw a lot of people
who were, you know,
of this ethno-separatist variety
just like platform
a whole bunch
of other radical people,
and in the scale
of the impact of this stuff
it's probably important
to remember that in,
you know,
20,
I think 2016
that the kill stream
with Richard Spencer
was quantitatively
the largest watched
live stream on YouTube.
Like,
that's fucking enormous,
that's a fucking enormous
amount of influence
and reach.
So I think we're just
kind of watching
this kind of slow
bleed out of all
those ideas
and kind of learning
what this alternative
media system really was
and that there was
a reason why we had
gatekeepers and editors
to begin with.
Yeah, yeah.
So don't try to save
legacy media,
but don't put all
of your eggs
in the alternative
media basket either.
Yeah.
Thanks everybody for coming.
This was a blast.
See you next day.
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
Woo!
