They really just wanted to use me for their narrative, and they didn't care what I had to say.
They really didn't. What did he want you to say? That I'm brainwashed by technology,
and I'm obsessed with like the internet, and that I have no agency, and I'm just going through
pipelines and just like basically being flushed down a toilet. Right. And I think that that's
what they want. What did you see on January 6th? I don't care what any conservative says to me.
It's about burning it down. The whole system, the whole international system. I know we're not
allowed to say that now, but there are neo-Nazis in the Ukraine, and they wear black suns. You know,
a couple of years ago, the researchers were all worried about them that they were going to start
a white jihad. I remember. Welcome to Doomscroll. I'm your host, Joshua Citarella. My guest is Caleb
Cain, or Faraday Speaks as he is known online. In 2019, Caleb was profiled in the New York Times
in an article titled, The Making of a YouTube Radical, which is widely regarded as the case
study for online radicalization. In 2020, he was featured again in the popular New York Times
Rabbit Hole podcast. Today, he joins us to tell his side of the story. A lot of people, when they talk
about this pipeline metaphor, which that is all it is, because it's not like we can zoom in and
systematically study it as much as people try. A lot of people talk about it as if it's an automatic
process. And in some ways, it is. You know, in some ways, there's a predictability to it. You know,
one of the biggest tagline that people put on the pipeline is, it's the libertarian to alt-right
pipeline. And I would say that that is because the people that are libertarians, they're trying
to solve a problem, and they're moving towards it. And predictably, you move towards that, you know,
ethno-nationalist solutions, civic nationalist solutions. I think that a lot of people that are
pushing that narrative of a pipeline, they want it to be automatic. It's almost how people that are
harsh on crime, they want to believe that, oh, you know, they come into a single-father household,
they go to a bad school, and they're going to be a drug dealer. But that's not necessarily the case.
So I think it's really just advantageous, and a lot of people want to believe that there's an automatic
process. But that completely flattens out the person themselves, what they're going through,
what they're thinking, why they're actually doing that process. When I first started this,
you know, this work about five, six, maybe even seven years ago now, it was in 2018, 2019.
I wrote the book 2018, and then a researcher sent me your video, I think 2019, a few months after.
Yeah, so I put my video out, I'm pretty sure somewhere in 2019. At that time,
I was learning about this pipeline, right? I had learned about it a little bit prior to making the
video. That's why I kind of called it that. For a while, that made sense. And I liked that because
it gave you a structuralist approach. It's like, okay, well, if it's just this pipeline effect, and
it's like just these series of arguments, well, then you can just debunk and work on those arguments,
and maybe inoculate people to the arguments, and then, you know, the pipeline's done.
So I reject the emphasis on it being an automatic process, because again, it just flattens out the
person, and you completely ignore all other variables. Even in this short response, we've kind of
moved between two definitions of this pipeline. Because one, you're talking about predictability,
where someone who has libertarian beliefs is trying to solve the problems of a market economy,
where low price labor is coming in over the border. And then they have to say, well, you know,
the nation state, the thing that libertarians fear the most, actually, we need it to set up borders to
balance this market economy, balance the labor market. So that's one person seeking out a solution,
using their own agency, their, you know, intellectual ability to try and solve a problem.
The other version is that you start watching some libertarian videos, and then they're suggested to
you, and they're suggested to you again, and they're suggested to you repeatedly over the course of
a few months or years. And whether, you know, you were seeking out a solution or whatever,
none of that is important. You were just shaped by the suggestions of the stuff that you got.
This is the fuzzy area in that we're using this term pipeline to mean both of those things,
which are entirely different. Is there something convenient to tell about that kind of narrative,
that people's beliefs are just shaped by recommendations in their newsfeed?
The way that people talk about a pipeline narrative is they want to suck agency out of the room.
And then they say, well, it's just because they're getting inundated with videos.
And I, in my first video, I talked about that. I talked about how I was like, I was mad.
I was mad that like, you know, you guys set up this content funnel and just, just drew people right
in. And there was a lot of, you know, I, later I would go back and I'd learn about, you know,
people going on 4chan, people going on all these social media sites and literally encrypting
their messaging. They do dog whistles. You know, I learned a lot about how there were people that were
being dishonest about their beliefs in order to radicalize people. But if they came from another
planet and we're telling you some foreign story you'd never heard before that had no continuity
to the world you're in, it wouldn't make any sense. No one would believe it.
Just to give a firm example of this, you're talking about someone who might be
of a paleoconservative political worldview going into like a libertarian forum and then trying to
recruit people from that pool. Is that what you're describing?
A paleoconservative can do it, but I was thinking more so like literal neo-Nazis.
Hmm. Recruiting from libertarian message boards.
Yes. And they did that on purpose and they bragged about it. But what I really pushed back on
is this idea of it just being automatic and no agency. First of all, when I first got political
in my life, I was basically like an anarchist. I didn't know what that meant, but I just listened
to Dead Kennedys. You know, I was also kind of liberal because I've watched Jon Stewart, Michael Moore.
So I was already primed to want to look for solutions to things. First person I found was
Stefan Molyneux. And you know, that's, that's the libertarian start.
Uh huh. I know well.
If anybody tried to tell me that I didn't use my brain to figure out that if you've got a crisis at
the border, then that has to be solved somehow. No, there's a problem. And I was trying to figure it
out. My issue is that I was only fed a certain narrative, you know, a false dichotomy. But this,
this idea that I wasn't logically going to the next step, and you see it in my, my progression,
and I've seen it in the other people too that explain this to me. You know, you start out as
that libertarian, and then you think, well, I want a free and open society. Okay, well, how do I get a
free and open society? Well, there's all these things that are holding it back. Well, what's holding
it back? Well, there's no social cohesion, and there's no border. So there, you know, there's
other people coming in, there's cultures coming in that don't, you know, are not compatible. And
there's truth to that. There's people that we wouldn't want as neighbors. But I was going
predictably based on my own logic of figuring it out, and based on the only information that was
presented to me. You go from that to thinking, okay, so if we need social cohesion, what causes the
breakdown of social cohesion? And then you have conservatives telling you, oh, well, it's
degeneracy, it's immorality. Okay, so we have to solve that. And then you start, you keep going
along this path, and you keep seeing how what's not getting solved, and the problem is getting worse
and worse and worse. So you go from being this like libertarian, to being the civic nationalist,
because now you want the wall with like, hostile border guards. And I never quite got to the ethno
nationalist part. But I was sympathetic to those narratives, right? It made sense to me.
That's one thing I don't think people want to accept is that these narratives make sense. And
without another counter example, another way, a third way to go, there's no, there's no way to
see yourself out of it. It's the same thing with somebody on the left. I think that you start out
with certain moral prescriptions in your head and a certain attitude and personality. But it is not
insane to see how someone will just drift down that path. It's just logic. It's almost like math.
We could imagine there's large pools of libertarian communities. I think in the context of the US,
at least, you know, this is how I grew up, I'm a little bit older than you are. But for most people,
being a libertarian is like the third option, right? There's Democrats, there's Republicans,
and especially if you were anti-war, you know, libertarianism is like, that's the other thing.
That's like the one other thing. So a lot of people who just had criticism of the status quo kind
of fell into that unaligned libertarian camp. And then all the free market stuff kind of comes after,
that just comes after. That's the largest pool. If you are looking to recruit political dissidents,
people who are unhappy with the status quo, you go to the libertarians, because that's the
easiest affiliation. And so when we start to talk about these funnel diagrams, we start to begin
with a large pool and then progressively narrow things down, right? That funnel analogy is a very
sophisticated thing. It doesn't come just from advertising click-through rates on YouTube.
That analogy comes from counter-terrorism. It comes from the global war on terror, where we tried to
create predictive models for young men who were approximately around the same age as some of the
lone wolf white nationalist terror that happened so frequently in the last few years, but were doing
jihadi terror at that same time. And they created literally diagrams of tacit supporter, active supporter,
and then at the bottom, this person is a real risk for violence in the real world. How did you,
because you mentioned that in your video, how did you, I didn't know that those terms existed before
I got like a serious education. I read the studies these things are based off of. Where did you encounter
this phrase? How did you even know that existed? As part of my process of consuming content online,
I was trying to think, what can I do for a career? And I was like, well, I didn't go to school and I don't
have technical knowledge. And I got interested in marketing. It was honestly through people like
Tai Lopez. I'll just shame myself. It was through people like Tai Lopez. And I just kept studying
marketing. And eventually I got, I mean, there's literally, there was a guy who had a thing called
click funnels and you would build funnels. And I don't know why it clicked with me. I just sat there
one day and I was like, it's like a funnel. It's a marketing funnel. And the thing about a marketing
funnel is you make an assumption that they are going to go to that place. In fact, you're sending
them there. It's the whole point. Right. And it's funny that you bring up CVE because
a whole bunch of the people that were chasing around jihadis in the desert from their desk,
as soon as that died down and the white nationalist thing cropped up, they all just moved from one
desk to the next and applied all the same things. My question is, if the whole point of a marketing
funnel is to direct someone to the bottom, what the hell do you think you're doing when you apply
it to something that you don't want someone to do? And I've seen them in person, their attitudes,
they have, well, I wouldn't even call it hatred because I think you have to know someone to
actually hate them, but they have contempt and disgust. You know, these left-wing liberal,
and a lot of them honestly are Antifa types, which no shame on whatever you're into, but
they have a contempt and a disgust and a fear for these people. And I would see so many times where I'm
like, you can't just treat them like they're monsters and robots and they're going to, you know,
goose step themselves to fascism. If you guys would talk to them, if you would like change your methods,
if you would, but they will do everything they can to just keep doing what they're doing.
They're setting them up unconsciously to just go right down to the bottom.
I will be the first to concede that many institutions that exist today, their function
is not to solve the problem, but to preserve it such to guarantee their own continued existence into
the future. Where conceivably, you could have an institution that was tasked with combating white
supremacy on the internet. If they eliminated it, the funding for the institution would then disappear as
a result. There would be no more need for them. The class interests of those elite professional
positions is directly in conflict with accomplishing their goals. I'll be the first to concede that.
What I've always thought was the solution for this, which you, you have mentioned many times in the
past, which is why I took your work seriously and I appreciated your perspective, is because this
very analogy of the funnel of the marketing of ideology of pipelines in general, it also necessarily
suggests that belief systems are in motion, that people can be persuaded through different means,
they can be convinced of something else, and counter messaging to those people who are en route
towards the worst ideologies and our potential risks for violence, that this in itself should be the
most urgent response to this problem. Do you feel like these young men who, you know, went down the
rabbit hole, so to speak, did they mostly have agency or were they just a discardable example of
somebody who got impressionably shaped by, by their recommendations? I think it's layered. I think of it
like maturity and growing up. And sometimes I think on a societal level, we are still in our terrible twos.
A lot of people in our society today are coddled in the West and pretty much everybody. And they're
suffering from narcissism. And I don't mean that clinically. What I mean is, they have a limited
scope of their self-awareness and their perspective of the world. And if you just put them in a black box,
where they're only being fed certain arguments, then yes, those are the arguments they're going to learn.
So they're not allowing agencies to step in the room. And then you talk about counter messaging.
I spent time with like this very core group called CVE, countering violent extremism. I was in with
the clique, right? And they're all left-wing and liberal. And it's funny, they'll try to work with
right-wingers sometimes, it just flames out. But their counter messaging, there's a couple points.
First point is, don't debate Nazis, okay? I'm kind of giving you the very vulgar manifestations of this
stuff. I'm familiar. It really does ripple up. Yeah. You know, you might be some, you know,
sophisticated, you went to Harvard, and you're working on the media literacy program. You say,
well, that's a nonsense term. Yeah, but it ripples up. You have the same attitude. You just wouldn't
put it that way. I mean, I would even agree in the context of a university that a lot of these debates
that neo-Nazi groups are trying to reiterate are actually, they're just, they are settled for decades
upon decades, if not hundreds of years. So I would generally agree with that policy. Where I would
differ is that there are people who have been existing in neo-Nazi adjacent communities for a
long time, who, unless they hear a challenge to that argument, are going to believe those things
for the rest of their lives. So it does actually, in some very specific instances, it becomes incredibly
important to debate them, which various content creators, we've talked about this in the past,
some people did that to great success in years previous, and it was absolutely necessary.
But the idea that, you know, we need to have people speak about race science or something like
that at a university setting is probably, I think, not urgent in 2024.
That's a good point. A lot of these debates are just utter garbage. They're not debates.
They're just two people hitting their points back and forth. And a lot of the people that I credited
for helping me, like, see my way out of that, only thing they did was present information.
Because I've seen, you know, I don't care, I'll say names, you can edit it if you want.
You know what? Destiny is a big example. Destiny doesn't teach you to have agency.
Because the whole time, when you really catch on to it, here's the study, this is what it says,
and that's just what it is. I'm sorry, but I just don't think we're all that. I don't think that we
really know what the hell we're talking about. Especially when you get into these sociological
things where you can't replicate any of it. You can't replicate it. So how do you know?
How can you be putting these studies up, like they're the Ten Commandments, if you can't even
replicate them? I don't even want to say it's a religion, because I like religion. It's a dogma.
People have a dogma about their world, and they think that their side has, like, settled it and
figured it out. A lot of times it's not about having a public debate. A lot of times if they would just set up
things where, and I'm not saying it works immediately. I'm not even saying it necessarily
works at all. But you have to try to have a conversation with people. And one thing I've
seen is people will come in and want to talk to you and debate you. I had a Discord server,
and he's like, we'd have neo-Nazis come in, we'd have paleo-conservatives, all sorts of right-wingers
come in. They don't really want to have a conversation. But if you allow them to speak, and you start to
ask them questions and kind of unpack it, it builds trust. You have to build trust first.
I had one really good conversation with someone where I just kept asking them, because I knew the
pipeline. I knew, like, the thought process. And I just kept asking them, so what do you think
about this? Oh, so you're saying that if we don't have a border wall, then people can come in.
You know, and it could overflow the country with some negative culture or disease. You keep asking
them the questions. You keep asking and asking and asking. They don't know what the hell they're
talking about. And they'll realize it halfway through. And unless they're a real, unless their
narcissism is actually clinical, or they're a sociopath and they just don't really care,
they will start to pick up that they don't know what they're talking about.
And they will reach a limit. And it will be like a little worm in their head that they can't get out.
It will cause cognitive dissonance. But when you just hit people with a wall,
and you don't let them speak at all, and you don't interrogate them at all,
there's no cognitive dissonance that can ever be born. I'm just going to go back into the box.
That's a good point, because I've interviewed a lot of people from different political world views,
left, right, up, down, sideways, all over the political spectrum. And sometimes when they are tasked
with becoming a spokesperson for their movement, they kind of have all of these radical posts and edgy
memes and statements to make online that are around the edges. But if they're asked to kind
of like sit down and go line by line of what the program is, it's difficult for a lot of people.
Journalists certainly fall into that. The blue check journalist on Twitter,
very prestigious job, a lot of visibility, a lot of influence.
They tend to tell society stories with a particular type of view. How do you feel
that your story was told in the media?
You're talking about the priest class. And I'll say this about the right wing too,
right? It was just advantageous. They didn't, they just didn't see me, which sucks personally,
you know, that hurts. But I just picked up after a while they really just wanted to use me for their
narrative. And they didn't care what I had to say. They really didn't. They pay lip service to so much.
You know, I could sit down with any of these researchers and say, we know there's a crisis
for the young men. And you know they're angry. And you know what happens when young men get angry
and they ain't got nothing to do. And they'll say, oh yeah, you know, it's a class issue and it's a social
issue. And you know, they need community spaces. They'll say all that. But then once you're on the
battlefield, that just goes out the window. And again, I'm not saying there's a solution. I don't
think we have a solution. I know enough to know that I don't know anything. My frustration is there's
no effort or energy or an incentive whatsoever to do something different. It's be like if you worked
at a factory and it's just the product didn't work and the boss told you, well, you can't change
the product. It has to be made this way. We've got too much running on this thing.
That infuriates me. You said they didn't see you. What did they miss?
On the personal end, it seemed like they really didn't care about me. And this is especially true
of journalists. Researchers, I'll throw a bone because most of them are actually pretty empathetic.
I don't think they're bad people. The journalists are sharks. And I don't like them. And I don't like
to talk to them. And I've sat with them and explained to them what is going on.
And aside from some journalists that I've spoke to in New Zealand, they're like robots. They'll just
go right back to their script. I did a follow-up podcast with Kevin Roos and I don't think he ever
released it because I think it broke his narrative. We're on the podcast and he's like, so it's been a
couple of years and you're running this discord server. And you told me that, you know, YouTube is
where the battleground is. So, you know, Caleb, don't you kind of think that it seems like you've just went back
into the pipeline just in a different direction. And again, what is he doing there? Because I'm in
his direction. So what do you, so what's the fuss? He needs to make it about no agency. It's an
automatic process. Right. So that he can continue to play Fortnite and not deal with the world.
Because there's nothing wrong with society that people are seeking out political solutions on
the internet. Oh, there's something wrong with society. It's just all those nasty right-wingers who
are all racist and all sexist and all evil. It's nothing to do with liberal democracy being entirely
dysfunctional and the markets falling apart and the institutions. And you know what's sad about
that? Racism and sexism are big issues, but in most cases they're subtle. Most of us are racist and
sexist. Look at yourself and ask yourself, really? Really ask yourself, are you not racist? Really?
Really? Let me drop you off somewhere. You know, let's see how you act. They don't want to interrogate it.
They don't want to be honest with themselves. And so what it is, they have to pretend that it's some
other people that they can just go eliminate. It's really no different than how we dealt with
things for all of history. But now we're at a point where we can't fight no more. And Kevin Roos,
he asked me, you know, aren't you just going the other direction? I told him,
no, actually, I think that I'm probably going in a direction where I think that this technology stuff
is just ruining us. And I think people need to get offline and they need to get back into their
communities. He kept reiterating and trying to get me to say what he wanted me to say.
What did he want you to say? That I'm brainwashed by technology and I'm obsessed with like the
internet and that I have no agency and I'm just going through pipelines and just like basically
being flushed down a toilet. Right. And I think that that's what they want. They just want to flush
them down a toilet. He wanted you to read the New York Times. Yeah. I always thought when I saw that
piece and I talked about this in private with a lot of people, but they drive to go and visit you.
They go through de-industrialized Appalachia. They don't notice that the bridges are falling apart.
There's no opportunity. People are ODing on fentanyl and they think like, oh yeah, it was some bad
algorithmic recommendations. I got this guy into politics. There's no other wide open,
very visible crisis in liberal democratic society that needs to be addressed.
Must be this algorithm. Got to get him to log off YouTube and read the New York Times again.
For a long time, I wanted to say that there was something like socio-economic going on,
right? There was a materialist condition. And that's true. That's a part of it. But that doesn't
explain it all because I grew up in those places. And guess what? Not everybody that grows up in a
rough place turns into what you think they're going to turn into. Okay. So, I mean, that's a part of it.
And that I would just say, I hate using buzzwords, but we live in some sort of neo-feudalism.
I mean, the very fact that I can sit here and say priest class for the journalists and the
researchers and that fits. I sometimes think of it as we haven't evolved social technologies.
And I don't like to get all conspiratorial and blame it all on people that are up in high towers,
because I actually think, you know, it's the people's fault too. It's the average person's
fault. It's everybody's fault. Because we're all cowards and we just put up with this. And we just look
the other way. And it makes sense that people do that. Because what else are you supposed to do?
I see a lot of people don't have boundaries, which is a problem of codependent narcissism.
And I see a lot of people don't want to take responsibility for anything. They want to buck
the responsibility off to somebody else. I think that's just bad for the soul. I think people just
feel like everything's out of their control. And, you know, that worked for a long time. You know,
at risk of sounding vulgar, when we were living under slavery and feudalism,
it kind of worked because the king was responsible for you. A lot of people don't like to admit that,
but the king was actually responsible for his people. Today, you don't even see the king.
Jeff Bezos isn't a king. He's a lord. He didn't run anything. The guys that would actually be
considered kings, I don't even, you don't even, you can't even look their names up.
Well, you're not, you're not talking about Biden or Trump or president.
No, those politicians are priest class. But that kingship at the top of the pyramid,
they're invisible. And they have no responsibility for their subjects that they rule over.
Now, I don't want any more feudalism. I want to move past that, because I think we're,
we're getting past that. They're running a system,
an archaic system that doesn't even work for the material conditions. So I don't think it's just that
material conditions are bad. I think that material conditions are not aligned with what's actually
happening. Do you know anyone whose life has improved under Biden, for example? Do you know
anyone who experienced upward mobility in the last few years who maybe thinks of these things
differently? They have a more optimistic view? Has anybody's life improved under Biden? I'd say no. I
I don't think anybody's life got better under Trump or, or Biden. I think maybe someone got richer.
Maybe someone got an advantage somewhere. But I don't think anybody's life got better.
Because I also think that your life is better because the whole is better.
And I think the whole is just, the whole of society has just gotten worse.
I found out about you because I saw your video when you put it out. How did you find out about me?
I don't, I don't know exactly how I found about you. I think it must have been Instagram or something,
but I found your aesthetic stuff that you're doing where you were taking all the different ideologies,
little niche ideologies, sort of making these like, I don't know if you were making them,
be reposting like maps of like techno-fobia and futurism and all this stuff. I just found it really
interesting. And then I think what I liked the most is just that you were trying something different.
I mean, I've never once thought like, oh man, Josh got figured out. He knows what's going on.
I've never felt that way. But I just, I do think you've got an analysis. But mostly I just see you as
trying something new and not cutting down an alternative that could work just because it's,
it micro-aggresses your ideology. From journalists and researchers, they're all hyped on using these
models and diagrams. And I actually, I still use them. I think they're useful. Now I can't argue
with them about, because I don't know enough about policy anyway, but one thing I could argue with them
on because I've felt it and I'd seen it is they don't want to talk to these people. They don't
want to, they don't even want to put themselves in their perspective. I mean, I posted a meme once
that says, you know, I'm going to LARP extremist ideologies to better understand them. It was the,
you know, the Anakin Skywalker meme. And I had this leftist Antifa guy come on and he was like,
well, you know, I'm Jewish, so I don't have the privilege of doing that, blah, blah, blah.
Come on, what, come on the stream? On Twitter, on the thread. I posted on Twitter, he came on the
thread. He said, you know, I'm, I'm a Jewish leftist, so I don't have the privilege. And I
hate that, man, because like, what, now I'm supposed to sit here and like, what, attack your Judaism
and like, tell you that, what am I supposed to say to that? You know, you're just shutting down
the conversation. It's kind of like you're saying, no, no, they don't want to give anybody the room to
even try anything. And it's insane to me, because like, you're saying that the world's going to burn and
fascism is coming right around the corner at the next election. They say that every election.
Well, what's it even matter? What's it going to hurt if I try something unorthodox?
You know, they just are not interested in going off their script and they want to flatten it out
and remove agency. And that's what I hated the most about how people, I keep asking me that question,
you know, what did I hate about how they handle my story? They treat me like I was stupid and have
no agency. It's just, I'm a dumb, dumb, you know, I got worms in my brain and I can't think through
problems. I'm just, and the right says it to me too. They say, oh, you just follow algorithms.
It's so demeaning. Nobody works that way. Everybody has agency, everybody, but they don't want to admit
that. And I know why it's because if I went to war with you, I don't want to think that there's a way
to make peace. I just want to fight you in the trenches. Did they think of you as an enemy?
I think they were constantly looking at me, waiting for me to regress.
Right. Especially you come into these like leftist circles. There was a time where if you came out
on Twitter and said, I left the right, there'd be all these like, they call themselves formers.
And they're basically like neo-Nazis that were like in street gangs. So right there, those people
have no connection to what's going on now. They have a minor connection to it. They don't know what,
it's not the same thing. They'll pull you in. It's like you're getting inducted into a cult.
They love bomb you. And I know they don't see it this way. And I know they have sympathetic
hearts and all that, but once they get you in, they're watching you and they're waiting
for you to regress because, oh man, he was a Nazi once. So I guess he's going to regress.
It's how conservatives see criminals, you know? Oh man, he was a drug dealer once.
He's going to do it again. He's going to, that recidivism rates 70%. You know how that goes.
This is also part of what made your story and your experience so unique is that because you are so
prominently featured to a lot of media experiences, really big megaphone for the story, you then became
a trophy for different groups who would actively try to recruit you because you then represented some
type of ideological victory. You were kind of assailed from all sides by all these different
groups that were trying to, in some cases, just bully you and harass you. In other cases, recruit
you, try to get you to join their movement. And I can only imagine that that is like extremely chaotic
and confusing, especially in a period where you hadn't necessarily made up your own mind about
big, large political issues. That's why I didn't feel comfortable really making videos
after a certain point. I'm still figuring this out. I don't want to figure this out on here so
you guys can come on. And it does hurt. And unless you're some total sociopath and you just can just
walk right over those coals, it hurts people coming in your comments, calling you stupid,
calling you a robot. And you're right, that trophy thing. I noticed that from everybody on all sides.
I had Eric Stryker coming in my DMs. Oh, you know, oh, you know, you need, you know,
think about this and think about that. I had all sorts of people. And yes, the people on the left
were doing it. I had people, you need to read all this Marxist literature. And they do a freaking
info dump like that. And I'm like, what's that going to do? They're insane. It's a cult.
Hey, read three volumes of Capital.
It is just cults. And I can imagine that at one point, everybody was, you know, chasing around
some guy back in the ancient Greece. And they're like, oh, man, you got to come to my cult. Come
on, man. Have you thought about this? That's all it is. That trophy thing. Nobody ever really talks
about your first person. We're talking about that. It disturbed me. It felt dark.
I saw that a lot for you. I saw you go on different appearances for different media.
And all those people were very excited to get your endorsement.
Because that's the position that you were put in, that you would crown someone with,
you know, they have the empirically verifiable truth. I've arrived at this realization through
looking at all of the different internet communities, of which that's one of the things
we have in common, that we do actually take in a lot of different information from a lot of different
groups. And you were uniquely tasked with that. You could crown someone as having ideological truth,
which is the greatest prize for an ideologue.
And I got to tell them, man, I think you're all insane. I think all of you are insane.
If you're insane enough to believe that the goal to a political problem is to bring everybody into the
same cult. First of all, I don't want to live in that world. And second of all, there's temperament to this. There's people that are conservative by temperament.
I'm conservative by temperament in certain ways. And I can't change that. And it doesn't even affect what policies you choose.
It's just your temperament. You can't flatten the world out like that. It's not a freaking computer algorithm.
How do you engage with politics now?
So a lot of the stuff we get involved in is pseudo-politics. It's just ideology, which I'm so very skeptical of that.
I don't think it's useless or that it's going to go away, but I'm very skeptical of ideology.
I've pretty much either earnestly believed in every direction you can go on the political compass or I've simulated in my head.
In terms of like real politics, I don't know.
I mean...
Do you wake up and read the news every morning? Do you scroll your timeline? What's your engagement with like...
Because I imagine at one point in your life, like the newsfeed was very important. Stay on top of all these things, latest developments.
And now I get the sense that you've kind of retreated from a lot of that, that it feels like
you get worked up, you get burned for a lot of your time.
I think about it in terms of like the social technology aspect.
What's the human element of it? Like what's going on in that person's head that's making them choose
those things? And why do they think that that's the direction they need to go?
I don't watch the news. I don't follow any of it. I could tell you what I feel about it.
You know, I think people should have a house. I think people should have food. I think people should
have work. And if we're not going to work, then we have to have some other way to deal with it.
I'm actually very flexible in all that stuff. And that's another thing I've noticed that people hate.
They don't like when you're flexible on the policies.
Caleb, you were kind of appointed as this de facto like thought leader for people who make sense of
social media. You are literally a consultant. People ask for your expertise on these things.
You later started a community and you opened up your doors and your time very generously to people
who had gone through similar experiences. You know, they watch certain videos, they read certain
books, they're thinking of the world through lens A, and you know, maybe it's helpful to step out,
look through lens B, lens C, and so on. What was your experience like in that community? What kind
of work were you doing? What kind of people did you meet?
So in the CVE world, you know, the researcher world, they were basically wanting to bring me in
and put me on a fast track through academia, which I felt uncomfortable with. I was like,
I didn't come here to be an academic. I thought, I went there because I was like,
okay, we can work on the problem. And I was still in my head about, oh, you know, there's like,
there's like someone up the chain and they've got the resources and the influence and you need them
to do something. I wrote a script for them for a video once about the Boogaloo boys and they turned
it into a scare story. I felt that really offensive, really offensive. And I would just always ask them,
so what are we working on? What are we going to do? Well, we got to get the grant. We got to get the
grant. I was like, well, I've been here for a year and I don't know, you know, I don't know what they're
doing now, but it seemed like it was always research paper to get grant, to get research paper,
to get grant. Endless cycle. And I sometimes wonder if that's by design, not on their part,
but so that's what I was doing there. And they were doing preventative, preventative,
they called it pre-pre-CVE or something like that. So it's like, you're really just out of solutions
because now you're just saying, oh, well, we did the pre-CVE and that didn't work.
And then we do the pre-pre-CVE. So what is a pre-pre-counter-violence extremism look like?
They started doing inoculation and it was-
For people who don't know what inoculation is, what do we mean by that?
Use the metaphor of virology where this is a virus, which I agree with in a certain sense.
You say, well, if we don't want people to get the virus, then we have to inoculate them to it. So
tell them anti-racist messaging before they hear racist messaging so that it's in their head. And that
that does work. I'll tell you where it doesn't work when the person just
eats through the content and they experience things for themselves.
I've seen racists that were told all these brown people act this way and they all act this way.
And then I've seen them actually get out of their bubble and go hang out with the brown people.
And they were like, yeah, all the problems that I thought were problems, those are still problems.
But I guess it's not that simple. They're not all like that. But that's what they were doing is inoculation.
And I hate to say it, but what they were doing was just garbage. Just garbage.
It was just like PBS, DEI, you know, diversity training, basically. And nobody wants to hear that.
They're going to give DEI training to neo-Nazis.
They were focused on getting it into schools, getting it into basically the people that would
not have been exposed, which is ridiculous at this point because 10 year olds are exposed to it.
I didn't know we had pre-pre-CVE. It seems like there's a lot of consultants who are tasked with
solving this problem of political extremism on the internet. I've been in this space for a long
time. It seems like there's a lot more political extremists than there were a few years ago.
So are the people who are doing this countering pre-CVE preventative inoculation work,
they must not be very successful at what they're doing?
I don't think they're successful. And I think that that's why they keep rummaging
for blank solutions. And that's why I'm worried about the future. Because again,
if you can't get crime controlled in a certain area of town,
eventually you're going to have to use the police. Because what else are you going to use? And you
say, well, that's mean, or that's imperialist. It doesn't matter. What are you going to do?
Are the police in this case, you're talking about locking down social media under state control?
Or are you talking about sending the National Guard and military police state?
Well, I don't know what it would take to have a National Guard type situation. That would require
the people to start going around and doing stuff. And from what I've seen, I was at J6. It was pretty
bad. But it's not organized to that degree. And honestly, I think the feds do a pretty good job
of taking those guys down. If you want to say that they're good at anything, it's the work where they're
infiltrating groups and taking them out. I'm not worried about violence from neo-Nazis. In fact,
I'm worried about violence from normal people when things just get too out of control. That's what I
would be worried about. But no, mostly the internet stuff. I don't want to call it mind control,
but they want to censor you. And that's really what it comes down to is censorship at the end
of the day, because they've got no other tool. When the preventative work doesn't work, when the
DRAD work doesn't work, and I've seen researchers at the top DRAD organizations just get totally jaded and
just quit. The only organizations that are actually successful in that CVE world are companies that
do data collection and predictive analysis. And guess what you use data collection and predictive
analysis for? You use it for draconian authoritarian methods, censorship. And yeah, I guess eventually
if people get too uppity, you sell the National Guard. Are these private companies? The one I'm
talking about in particular is a private company, yeah. What did you see on January 6th? On January 6th,
I saw mostly stupidity. Mostly stupidity. I did see violence. I almost got stabbed. And this is
partially my fault. By who? Well, I was sticking my neck up. You know, I'm a loud mouth. I saw these guys
breaking into this fenced in area, and there was like an electrical box in there. And looking back,
I'm kind of honestly wondering if they were just trying to use the porta potty that was sitting there.
I started filming them, and I was screaming at them. And then I said a bunch of stuff I really
shouldn't have said. And then they came at me, and that's when it got real. And so I had to like run.
And all the other people around, they don't do nothing. You know, all the other conservatives
around, they don't do nothing. That's what I'm saying. We're in a crisis of cowardice.
You know, I eventually ran off and stood by this cop and told him, and he was just like...
You might have some other stuff to deal with that day.
Well, he wasn't doing anything. He was just kind of standing there. He was just kind of standing there.
He was like frozen almost. Wow. And then I went and stood over. You know, if you got the capital
where they would have been going in on the front side, I would have been over, you know, over here.
I'm like the left of that, right? So I just stood there. And I will say, I was standing by some
conservatives, you know, MAGA people, and they were like, this is a shame. This is terrible. That isn't
what this movement's about. This movement's about love and peace. And I kind of looked at him. I'm like,
I, you know what? I used to believe this stuff. This ain't about love and peace. It's about burning
it down. And I don't care what any conservative says to me. It's about burning it down. That's the
goal. What is it? American democracy? The whole system. The whole international system. Burn it down.
Just blowing up politics. I don't, I'm not saying necessarily with bombs or something,
but destroy it, sabotage it. That's why accelerationism is so tempting to all these people. Sabotage it.
Make sure it don't function ever again. And then that way you can actually build something from
anew. And that is how progress happens. Hate to say it folks, but that is how progress happens.
But that's their prime directive. There was a lot of conservatives there
that that's not what they're about. And they were very ashamed. Describe these two different
factions. So there's people who are kind of on the sidelines that don't like what's happening when
people break into the Capitol building, for example. What kind of things were they saying?
Well, I'd say those people are actual patriots. They still believe in the system.
And they were just basically saying, this is shameful. This isn't how we do things.
You know, I grew up around these types of people. They still believe that democracy works and they
think that they're going to get somebody elected and they're going to change things.
Then there were people that I don't know what their impression was,
but like they're walking towards the crowd with like kids. And then I look over and there's like
kids playing in the lawn. And if it was just a protest, because I'll be honest,
most of these protests you go to are not like this. Actually, the MAGA protests can be quite
fun. People are quite nice to you there. I went to the trucker convoy. It was like a carnival.
But at this one, there was a whole bunch of, I'm just gonna say proud boy types, right? Because
nobody had their colors on. So I can't say what group they were affiliated with. But these guys were in
their predictable tactical gear. But then I noticed that they had blunt objects and weapons. There was even a
guy with a pitchfork, but I don't think he was violent. But the other guys that were all conglomerated
up there, they had weapons. I don't know what they were thinking showing up that day. That is not
something you typically see at these things, even when they get a little hectic. Then there's the
cosplayers, like the guy with the pitchfork and I saw the Predator come out and that's kind of silly.
There was the people that, like I said, standing on the sidelines there, they found it disturbing.
There were the people that just seemed like they were out of reality, letting their kids play.
And they're walking their kids towards it, not necessarily into the crowd, but just like
there's tear gas and stuff going off. I'm not even talking, like it's not a place to have them.
It's not a place to have your kids.
No, it's not.
Good God.
But then the other thing that I saw that kind of does stir my fear that there could be violence
from some of these people is the cops roll up, just incompetent, because they didn't know what
the hell was going on. And I see this like old heavyset cop and he's pulling SWAT gear out of
his trunk. And I'm just standing there watching. I was so dazzled. I couldn't, I wasn't even filming
it. And there's this like very, like somebody that I would have grown up around, like a redneck
type. Right. And he was just like, you effing pigs. Hey, just wait. You just wait. You ain't
got enough donuts for us. You're lucky we didn't bring our guns. Next time we're coming back.
Wow.
Coming back.
You know, it's crazy. You didn't even see that on the news.
I was like, that was actually kind of scary. And the cop just looks at me, he's like, shut the hell up.
Then I saw someone walk by and they were like, all right, folks, it's Antifa. Antifa is the one
that went in. And then I get home and I watched the videos and the guys inside are just walking
around like filming and carrying posts. I'm like, that's why I'm not like too like worried about some
white nationalist uprising unless totally conditions changed and things got real bad and people got
desperate and afraid because it just seemed like so stupid. And I don't like saying that because I
grew up around these types of people. I like these people, but the stupidity.
I always think of that dazed and elderly woman who's just walking around very confused, like she's
wandering the halls of a nursing home or something like that. Do you see this as being a trend line
that is increasing in the next five to 10 years? You mentioned the trucker protests as well. Is this
something that we should be expecting to see happen more frequently? More extreme protesting?
More protests from conservatives, more things that look like civil disobedience occupying the public
square. It depends how this election goes. If Trump gets in and they really do kind of lock things
down, which seems what they want to do, I would say that it's going to be the left that is going to
start firing shots. If they don't get in and it goes the other direction, but it's not going to just be
someone got the idea to go do it. I mean, even when you look at these mass shooter guys,
it is a little microcosm. They're in their little hyper real bubble, but these are guys that have
been pushed to the very corner of their life. Now, I would say a lot of the things that they're
experiencing have nothing to do with what they're criticizing, not directly at least, but they do the
violence not because they're crazy, but it's because they just feel so pushed out. And that's not to like
spread sympathy or something. It's just people aren't going to, there's so much risk that comes with
fighting. Even a lot of these protests where people are fighting and people actually get hurt
and people are swinging bats and throwing bricks, you see the hesitation in them. You see the
hesitation where at Berkeley they were wrestling between a trash can. Well, why didn't they just
say, F that dumpster and just go around and start sucker punching each other? Because they're both
afraid and they don't want the consequences of that. Things will have to really break down.
You know, I'm worried about people starving, if anything, in a bad situation. I'm worried about
the stock market plummeting 80% in one day. That's when it's going to get violent. And I don't,
but here's the thing. The feds work so hard and are so effective at shutting down actual violence
and everything's wiretapped. Everything is. So they know when someone's pushing to that point and they
know those trend lines. What I would be worried about is just total fracture. You know, maybe it
would be, we go to Taiwan and we get our asses kicked. And then just, you know, in Europe, they,
they're having issues with the refugee crisis. You know, things that are again, like what you're
worried about material things, you know, all this social stuff, it doesn't lead to violence. But when the,
when, when, when the tracks break, when you're starving, it's different. And then all that social
conditioning that you've been doing on yourself, now it's like, okay, well, let's go. What do you
say to when people describe, you know, society before the internet was also very fragmented? Do you
feel like there's a period of precedence for this? Like, what was it that held society together before we
had this, you know, mainstreaming effect of very few media options and, and political views
available to people? Like, what were the forces that didn't pull apart society in the way that they
are now? So I'm a 93 baby, so I can only speculate based on what I've looked back and examined.
Imagine we take the funnel and we flip it upside down and we turn it into a bottle. And at the top,
there's a neck and then there's a cap on top. I think back in, I mean, even the sixties,
actually things were more violent then, directly more violent. I mean, there were bombings weekly
during certain periods. Political violence, yeah. Political violence. Weather underground.
I think that was largely fabricated in the sense that people wanted to do that because they were
trying to push an issue, right? They were pushing. If we get into a situation where conditions cause
pressure to build up in that bottle, it'll push everybody up to that bottleneck. And then that's when it
will explode. I think the reason that you didn't have that before is because you didn't have that
pressure. And what would relieve that pressure is, yeah, everybody had very similar narratives.
They couldn't conglomerate online to either centralize or decentralize. And also, I know that
things are never good for anybody in the seventies were really bad time. But to be honest, we're very
sheltered and privileged in this country. And we don't know, even the poorest among us don't know how
good we got it. I mean, if you're homeless, you can walk down the street and panhandle. You cannot
do that in certain parts of the world. There's no one to panhandle. We don't live in favelas in New
York. No, we don't. There's poverty, but there's not poverty at the international scale.
That was a bulwark against it, you know? There was enough material condition. And you can't just have
like one class of people. This is what I think. You can't just have one class of people getting riled up
and having, it's got to go up the chain. You've got to have the middle class start to be upset.
Well, we got there with the industrialization. Then you've got to start getting the upper class.
What happens with this priest class? No one wants to give them grants anymore because this is a waste
of money. You know? It is a waste of money. You're already seeing it. They're firing all the journalists
and doing all this stuff. So when it climbs up the chain, you're seeing it, just watch. That's your
barometer right there. And that pressure will build up and there won't be any, there's nothing to vent it out.
You know, you can't vent it out because you have a common narrative. You can't vent it out because
people just don't discuss politics and they don't tell you who they vote for. And you can't vent it
out because you have relative economic stability. In history, most of the time what happens is to send
people off to war. But ain't nobody going to want to go to war once they see those Taiwan videos of a
drone coming over with fortunate son playing while your kids from Ohio are getting blown up by drones and
eaten by dogs. No one's going to want to go to that war. These people are just going to fester. Pressure's going to build up.
And I just think in the past that, yeah, you had relative economic stability and you had social
technologies that were able to vent this. What portion of this building pressure is an internet
problem? It's like one of those magnetic stir hot plates that stirs and heats at the same time.
So it's, I don't want to blame the internet. It's just, I'm actually grateful for it because without
that we went, I hate to say this folks, but your society's never going to get better unless it gets bad.
It has to, that's progress. You know, that's, they, they've known that for all of history.
We just forgot it because we thought we got to some little end of history convenience moment,
but that was only held up by hegemony and we don't have that anymore.
What do you think comes after the end of history?
We're going to get new things. You know, it's a secret third thing. And I don't mean like a third
position or, or anything like that. I mean, we're in like a cocoon stage now. It's going to unfold like
a butterfly. We're going to have a golden age at the end of this. The world's not going to end.
They're not going to launch the nukes. We're not going to get a virus that wipes everybody out.
Everybody on the planet is not going to starve. It's going to get bad in certain places, but it
won't be bad in all places. It's kind of like going back to the cult example. The cult builds
up so, so, so, so big. It's a pyramid scheme. And eventually everybody realizes the emperor wears no
clothes and that actually the guy at the top doesn't actually talk to God, or he doesn't have all
the sociology figured out. He can't grift anymore. And so the true believers below him start to sell
him out. That's what happened during the French revolution. They all went out and say, okay,
you know what? Screw this King. He screwed up the harvest. He screwed up that. Let's get a printing
press and let's go out and red pill everybody. And who do they choose? They choose the normies.
They'll cause a huge catastrophe. It will be an apocalypse and won't be
Mad Max. People got to get this Terminator, Mad Max, AI is going to kill us. Get this out of your head.
But we will face those problems. They will hit in certain places. And then the people that survive
will be the people that weren't stupid enough to run head first into the problem.
And the people that survive will be like, well, that was insane. And they'll do something new.
It's like letting the normies into the cult's temple. And what do they do once they get into
the temple? Because they have to bring more people in, right? It's a pyramid scheme.
Once they get in, they're going to sacralize it. They're going to bring the animals in.
There's going to be mess everywhere. And then the cult's going to fall apart.
And then new cults will form because I think cults are a social technology that help that
allow us to have conflict and polarization, which creates growth.
But that's what's going to happen. The normies are going to save us.
So all these people that are running around thinking, oh, I've got my ideology.
And man, there's normies. They just don't see it right.
You know, it's funny when you talk to normal people, it's not even a class thing.
It's someone that's not like keyed in on this crap and can think and listen on their own.
I was watching a video of, you know, these guys go around and document the decline of
Britain by interviewing people and looking at the dilapidated buildings and all that.
And they've got it worse than we do. They've got it rough over there.
And he was talking to some random, you know, street guy. He's all rough, criminal record.
And he was just like, you know, I feel like in Britain, I'm just second class citizen.
Like they really don't care about me. They're like, well, what do you think?
He's like, well, they just they care about these immigrants.
But he's like, but, you know, it's like it's it's not like, you know, they should have help, too.
You know, it's not like we shouldn't help them, but we should help ourselves first.
And and then we can sort of help them. So I could tell that guy was not in the cult.
But if someone tried to induct him, what they would do is they would come in.
They would split that narrative in half. They'd say, oh, what'd you say?
They need to put us first. Oh, we can't help ourselves if we don't put ourselves first.
Oh, well, then. Well, then, you know what that means. Right.
Or, you know, it could be the other way. They'd say, oh, you want to help the refugees?
Oh, blah, blah, blah. So someone will come in in the wedge to put a wedge in and split the issue.
But the average normal person is actually in these guys.
I'll tell you, they don't have the highest IQs.
They're not dumb, but they're not geniuses either.
They're kind of in the middle of that curve.
Those people, if they don't have the fear and they're just kind of looking at the issue,
they're very capable of sussing it out. And I think that's what's going to happen.
Those people will take over and think about think about all these buildings that sit empty.
Think about all these businesses that sit empty and nobody even uses the productive value in them.
Well, there won't be any police to police it and there won't be no landlord to come collect rent.
And they'll just go in and be like, you know what? That's a nice building. I always wanted to start an apartment building.
Anarchist utopia.
There will be a period of anarchy.
And these normie anarchists will come in and just do the work because they wanted to do it all along,
but they just couldn't.
They didn't have any access because there was some rent here holding them back.
And then there was a bunch of people over here finagling with the economy,
trying to do some fobby and socialism to fix everything.
And when that all stuff goes away and it will,
because those people are going to put their necks on the line.
And when that happens, they're going to get flopped off.
And I don't feel good about it. I wish they would just stop this nonsense.
But dude, this stuff is written in the Bible.
It's written in all the ancient texts and ancient history that you could read.
It's talked about by pretty much every serious philosopher you've ever read.
They all tell you that things are going to get real bad.
The people that stuck their necks out are going to get it taken off.
And then the meek will inherit the earth.
That's just what's going to happen.
So I'm very positive about the future.
And I also think that we're in a time of acceleration where things happen quicker.
I think this will happen within our lifetime.
I think by the time we're 60, we might get to see that golden age.
And it's going to be awesome because we've got the technology.
We've got the AI.
We've got a lot of things that we could grow up from.
But we've got to get the nut jobs out of the room.
They don't want that bottleneck to come off.
They want to simmer that pressure back down somewhere and take over the pyramid scheme.
It won't work.
Just physically not work.
You've got to bring God into it.
There's probably some dialectical material explanation for it all.
But that's just how it works.
It's a pattern.
Are you religious?
I wouldn't say I'm religious per se.
I mean, I guess so.
But I do think a lot about it.
And I mostly what really got...
I mean, I grew up with that, right?
Yeah, yeah.
And there's a personal angle to it.
But the personal angle is very easy to ignore, right?
Oh, you know, the feelings you get from believing in God or whatever.
But what really got me is I was researching occultism and I was like, wait, all these diagrams
are literally the same political diagrams I'm using to study cults.
How'd they figure that out?
And then I learned about teleology and I was like, oh, there's like a progression and a
logic to this whole thing.
It's almost mathematical.
And then honestly, if you just read the Bible and I understand, like, I have religious trauma.
I grew up in like a fundamentalist evangelical household.
I would never tell someone like, you know, oh, you have to absorb all this.
There's a lot of it that I just don't agree with.
Pick up any ancient text, open it up and actually just read it.
It's telling you what I'm telling you now.
There's a little pattern to this thing.
It's like a spiral curve that goes up.
That's really powerful.
I think the wisdom that we need to get through, it's already there.
It's just we have to deal with the specificities of what we're in.
What kind of job did your grandfather do?
He worked in a company called Fairchild and they built airplanes.
So basically it was like, I guess, World War II is over.
Now they're just making planes.
They're probably, I think, I think they were still making bombers and stuff too,
because we're in the Cold War.
So we're stacking up equipment.
So a factory job.
And then his son worked a desk job at a factory job.
And then when they de-industrialized, he got laid off.
That's what I was going to ask next.
Where's that factory?
Well, that factory probably still exists, but they hired a bunch of,
they hired migrants to come in and do all the work,
which means they can pay them less.
Is the factory in the U.S.?
For the normal workers, they just brought in people that were willing to work for less
without insurance and all the benefits.
And then for the office workers, they offshored them to India or wherever,
you know, wherever they offshore office work to.
Because the one thing I got to say is that sounds linear, chronological.
That doesn't sound like a pattern that repeats.
We're in a little period, you know?
That's like people that think the stock market is just going to go up forever.
So I get what you're saying.
But I think that we're going to repeat a pattern similar to World War II,
but that I don't believe we're going to have a full-scale World War III.
Because it's not physically possible.
The technology and the weapons are as such, and leave the nukes out of it.
The technology is as such that you're not really having a war.
You mean like Cold War, Cold War with China and Russia again?
No, I mean like if we tried to have a hot war,
first of all, all of our simulations fail when we try to fight them.
And if they tried to invade us, they'd fail too.
But like just look at Ukraine.
They are running overtime on both sides to try to finance.
And the Russians are putting turtle shells on their tanks,
because they're getting hit by drone strikes.
So there's this tit for tat that like-
Turtle shells?
That's what I call them.
They're like they're welding on basically like walls onto the tanks.
Ah, they're just welding metal on top of it for more armor.
And the point is, is that it will reduce the impact that you experience inside the tank.
Right.
Right, it's like a little bit of a buffer.
Think about that.
I mean they already had this problem in World War I,
but they were just willing to send people at it.
And then World War II, really they just, the Nazis kind of blitzkrieg,
because they got a technological advantage.
But that war didn't even work.
It's not that it's like immoral, or bad, or we don't want-
It's infeasible.
It's infeasible.
That's why cyber warfare is such a big thing now.
We're already in World War III.
It's just cyber warfare.
It's information warfare.
What would you do about freedom of speech on the internet?
How would you solve that problem?
I really don't know what I would do about freedom of speech on the internet.
I can tell you personally, my first instinct is leave it alone.
Don't come in and censor people and try to finagle, you know, narratives.
I think one of my biggest concerns in terms of free speech is I don't think we have it,
because I don't think that we have, most people have a broad enough perspective.
And I would say that's what I try to understand the most is perspective.
If you've only lived in a cave your whole life, you can't really like, you don't have free speech.
You've only, you only know what you've been told.
So I'm a lot more worried about people finagling narratives and creating false dichotomies and all
these things. Right. But then there is the angle of like, well, okay.
First of all, there's content that exploits children.
Right.
Banned. That should not be allowed.
Absolutely.
And I don't want to hear some argument about the,
she's actually a 3000 year old or it's a robot or none of that.
What?
It's a whole bunch of people.
They try to create these loopholes, these imaginations in their head to where they get
to still consume that content without it violating TOS.
Like some moral TOS.
They will say that she's like an anime character and she's really 3000 years old.
And she's a, she just has the body of a, I know.
Yeah. These people are sick.
I know.
And I've, you'll run into these types on discord a lot.
They will do all these little, just try to justify that because honestly,
I think the internet and pornography is a big issue.
It's not about sex.
Porn is not sex.
It is not erotic material.
It's engineered to just farm you for dopamine and it degrades everything.
And I honestly, I think you can extend that model of pornography into everything else.
I mean, there's video games I play where they're just trying to farm you for microtransactions.
I'm like, this is porn.
I don't want this.
Or like the way people talk about politics where they're like,
hyper focused on this one.
It's almost like people turn things into a fetish.
And that's when I see it as becoming pornographic.
So I do have that concern about the internet and just life in general.
And I don't know how you solve that.
Somebody says something that's illegal.
Yeah.
Right.
Already illegal.
We take it down.
We would probably agree with this.
But then you have to ask what's illegal.
Right now, if, if it's something obvious, like what I think you mean by that.
Like they're hurting kids.
They're making a, you know, verifiable, clear threat to injure someone.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Someone says something that's contested like alternative health advice, medical advice.
And it might be a minority opinion, but the experts are actually, we don't know.
There's not a clear consensus.
Do we keep stuff like that up on social media?
Do we take it down?
What kind of, what are the parameters of the debate that you would, you think are appropriate
to allow?
I wish there was more honesty and transparency on the things that we don't know.
So you talk about the medical health.
I remember before what they were saying about the coronavirus.
I remember things that they were saying.
And then I remember things that they said after.
I'm not even gonna talk about the vaccine, but I remember things they were saying before
and things they were saying after on both sides of the aisle.
No one had the 100% clear picture.
So who should I have censored?
Which idea should I have censored on that?
That's a very complicated one.
Now, sure.
If someone tells you to drink bleach because it's going to like cure you.
I don't know.
They have the issue of irony.
Are they being ironic?
I don't know how you solve that.
And again, like if people are doing things that are very obviously exploiting children.
No, there's no time of day for that.
Like we've had that solved for a long time.
But on these things that we don't have consensus on in which the science is not as clear as people
like to say, I'm very hesitant.
At the same time, I wonder why are we all in the same spaces online?
I mean, I'm not saying there shouldn't be a town square and a crossroads,
but the crossroads are usually where bad things happen.
Sometimes I think there should be just a geography.
I don't know if it should necessarily be enforced, but there should be a geography to it.
I want to go back to like maybe forums or something.
I'm in favor of that.
I'm in favor of private communities on the internet.
And not everything should be shared to a totally horizontal public.
And jokes in the group chat are great.
Joke said to the scale of potentially millions of people on Twitter.
Some crazy person out there is going to take it seriously.
The risk for harm just proportionally increases with the size of the audience.
So privacy is good.
Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Meta, like all this stuff now run by the attention economy.
It just makes basically any kind of discourse socially impossible.
So it's, uh, it's, it's complicated.
It's complicated.
And that's kind of how I feel.
And I wonder if, so obviously, again, there's the areas where just
straight up censorship should be used again, exploiting children.
Then there's all these other areas, you know, you on Twitter now,
everybody just drops the n-bomb like crazy.
Well, you can't ban that.
Go ahead and try and you'll see what you,
you're going to reap some consequences from that.
But at the same time, that's ridiculous that people are running around thinking that's okay.
We need social technologies to adapt to that.
I'm not against like maybe making AI bots that like, and talk to people and interrogate people.
Maybe there's a score system where if you don't answer my question when I'm asking from transparency
from you, I can put a review or a score on your account.
There should be transparency.
This is the people that come on and they're not honest about what they believe.
And they're trying to slowly groom you.
There needs to be some way that you know what you're getting involved in.
It's like we have labels on the back of food.
Don't know how you do that.
Who are you going to trust to make the label?
That's why I think we're getting ahead of ourselves.
The free speech thing, it's, it's kind of like free will.
We're not at a stage where we can be interrogating those things in full
scope because we haven't even explored the depth of them yet.
So I don't want to denigrate free speech because I actually think about it a lot.
I don't think we're, I just don't think we're at a stage where we can really deal with it.
You said the journalist got your story wrong before.
What was your story in your own words?
I grew up kind of an asshole thinking I was better than the other people around me.
I had a big ego and I've tried to work on that more and more and more.
I also thought I was a good person because, well, I see how other people act.
And even if I make a mistake, I didn't do it with this awful intention or, you know,
maybe I was just impulsive.
Like, shouldn't we forgive that?
I've grown a lot.
And I think that it's, it's best to take responsibility for as much as you can.
Even if you've been hurt, you should see what was your role in that?
What is your responsibility in that?
And so I like went through life very bitter and angry.
I also had a bad home life.
You know, I grew up with like fundamentalist family.
They tried to shelter me.
My dad, you know, I learned at like probably 12 or 13, he's not actually my dad.
Because my mom had had me with some guy and then he fucked off.
And then she ended up meeting the guy that I would call dad and had two kids.
And then there was a custody battle and they pushed her out of the picture and kept me
and just raised me like I was their own.
He even had signed the birth certificate because there wasn't a name on the birth certificate.
Kind of grew up in a bubble.
And then I got to probably like middle school and I started rebelling.
I wanted to go out with my friends.
I wanted to do different things.
I grew up in a poor community.
So like when I did start going out,
it was mostly hanging out with people that did drugs and partied all the time.
What age is this?
That would have been 16, 17, probably like 16.
10th grade is when I started going out.
I felt like I was better than all the other people around me.
I thought they were stupid and they were rednecks.
And I wanted out.
It's a very typical story for a lot of rural, you know, people.
But I was terrified of the world and I had no idea how to get out.
And the mentors that I knew, they were just like, well, go to college.
And even in a very positive way, they weren't just throwing me into the wolves.
But that was not going to work for me.
And that's another thing I see is like.
Why not?
Because I'm autistic and I'm impulsive and I'm ADHD.
And my brain doesn't work like other people's works.
And even when I'm on my best behavior and containing myself,
like I worked at a factory for a while.
I was like, I'll just adapt to the surroundings.
It kills me.
That's another thing.
I think that there's like this autism thing or this neurodivergence thing.
Maybe those people always existed and they just got pushed aside.
I mean, when I go on the street and I talk to homeless people or I see people that are in prison,
I'm like, dude, you're like me.
You're not even stupider.
I mean, some of these people, I mean, they must have like 160 IQ.
But you just couldn't, you just couldn't camouflage.
You just couldn't hold it together.
Or you got in a situation where things got out of control.
You know, I think I'm very lucky in my life.
There's probably a lot of times where I could have been in big trouble.
But I look at them.
I'm like, oh, I see me.
I'm optimistic for whenever we have different social structures,
because people like me are going to take over.
I think there's probably some class of society that's scared of that.
That's why they funnel us all into Silicon Valley and make us work at desks.
Did you attempt to go to college?
I went to college and couldn't deal with it.
I was too much looking for the validation and attention of others.
So I would spend time trying to make friends with people and not going to class.
And that didn't really work.
I mean, if I go into a party, maybe 10% of the people will like me.
The rest of them will, it'll be a varying degree of ignore, dislike, contempt.
It's always been that way.
Everywhere I go, it's that way.
I've accepted that.
It's fine.
You know, I go to college.
It just didn't work out.
And I just got depressed and didn't go to class.
I remember I was like, I watched like binge watch TV shows because I had Netflix all of a sudden.
I went for a year.
And halfway through that first year, I wasn't going to class and I was just living in the dorm.
And then I went back, tried to go back the next year.
And just same thing happened all over again.
So I ended up back at home in West Virginia.
Have you ever been diagnosed with depression?
No.
Do you get any treatment or help for this?
I've tried to be diagnosed for things.
And I, someone diagnosed me with PTSD once at a walk-in clinic.
Honestly, when I try to talk to therapists, they kind of give me a wide stare.
I've talked to one person who works in psychology or I don't know, psychiatry.
I don't know what they worked in, but one person that works in the therapeutic field
that was able to see me and explain things to me.
But mostly I've had to do that work on my own.
It's not for lack of trying.
It's just, I don't know.
I think a lot of these people are qualified for certain things, but they're not qualified
for this specific thing, whatever it is.
And I see this a lot with the other people that are like me.
When I was on the internet and had that Discord server I was running, a lot of the other people
had these things.
They were DPD, or they were codependent, or they had narcissism.
And I'm talking about actual diagnoses here.
They were neurodivergent, antisocial personality, whatever, and they're all in the same boat.
Nowadays, they just turn into neats.
You know, they live at home.
They don't work.
They're not going to school.
A lot of people are experiencing that.
You know, I don't want to like take responsibility out of my hands, but it's just, I don't know.
It's like, I don't fit into the slots.
And I tried.
When I worked at that factory, I really tried.
And it didn't work.
That's a lot of the reason that I ended up back at home.
And I take responsibility for all that.
But then I get back and now I'm even more entitled and more angry and more depressed.
And a lot of people that would hear my story, they hear that and say,
Oh, well, that's why he went to extremism because he's hateful.
That is ridiculous.
I was jazzed up by, you know, my guidance counselor and some teachers.
And they told me, Oh, you're so special.
You're so great.
You're so this, you're so that, you know, people treat you like you're a golden child.
And then you go out and you fail.
And so, I don't know.
I just, I wanted the fuck out.
I couldn't stand being there and I didn't know what to do.
And I would try to move places with friends, but nobody ever wanted to do anything because
everybody else is afraid to do anything too.
I just started watching YouTube because it's all I had.
It's all I knew.
It's the only way I ever was able to learn anything.
I found that channel Athene Wins, not to implicate him in any of this.
I found his channel.
I watched that too.
Everybody watched it.
Yeah, Athene.
Well, he started doing this like psychology stuff, right?
He was doing this like, it's actually the first part of the documentary is pretty good.
He teaches about cognitive dissonance, neuroplasticity.
And I was like, oh my God, I'm not just born this way.
I can change my brain.
And then I was also reading Zen Buddhism at the time.
And I was like, well, just empty yourself out.
And I think I set myself up to be groomed.
I don't know, I guess because I was looking at all this therapy stuff,
like this pseudo therapy stuff, Molyneux pops in the algorithm, right?
Well, I guess it's just all fate from there, right?
And he had a lot of useful information on those things.
He really did.
He's a sociopathic narcissist that spent 10 years in therapy.
He learned it all.
He just had answers for everything.
And I wanted out.
And he had a similar life to me, you know, neurodivergent, high IQ guy that is living
with a shit family in the middle of nowhere.
And he feels entitled to more.
He wants to be in the priest class.
He wants to be a lord of the manor.
I thought, well, he's got a life.
He's got a wife, a kid, a house.
He's got a podcast, which is like probably, well, I guess you and me realize it's not the
coolest job in the world.
But I was like, man, that's the coolest job in the world.
That's awesome.
I want that.
Well, how do I get that?
Well, he pretty much explicitly tells you, if you want all this, then I'm not telling you
what to do.
He actually, I'll tell you like what will happen if you don't do what I tell you to do.
And so I just, I was like, well, I'll just do what he says.
There was a lot of stuff that even through the whole trajectory, you know, because you start
out with that psychology stuff, the stuff that immediately impacts and helps you and hooks you in.
And then he starts associating it using these false binaries, associating it with,
well, why is it like this for you?
Why is it so hard?
Well, it's because you're a young man.
And there's a lot to say about that.
Young men really do have it rough right now.
They do.
And it's, it's, it's, it's not very on the surface just because, you know, yeah,
they have a lot of sins in the past, but there's a very unique moment happening.
But, you know, you'd say stuff like that.
And it just, without another way to think about it, well, that just logically makes sense.
And then, so, okay.
So now the, the reason that you're having these troubles and you can't fit in and you can't succeed,
it's, I call them the outcast elite.
You know, it's people that like are not elite, but they think they should be.
That's what the dissonant right is.
That's why they LARP as aristocrats.
They feel entitled to something and they feel like they've been locked out of society.
In a certain sense, that's true.
If they had grown up in a prior time, then they probably could have been alchemists
and philosophers and whatever.
So I felt that and Molyneux telling you, well, the reason you don't have that society
anymore is because of feminism.
It's because of immigration.
It's because of migrants.
It's because there's low IQs.
There's a brain drain going on.
You know, it's funny.
There's a lot of ideas that I actually felt really uncomfortable with and I didn't like,
like the race realism stuff.
And not, and we're not just talking about, oh, there are differences between races.
There probably are, but that's not what they're saying.
That isn't what they're saying.
They're saying there's a caste system, right?
They're saying that there is a fixed, hard, unchanging caste system.
And I hated that idea.
I hated it, but I was like, but it's true.
You know, and this idea of the red pill, well, it's just an uncomfortable truth.
You have to accept it.
And I do believe there are uncomfortable truths and I don't think we've gotten to the bottom of
a lot of them.
But they just tell you that and then they say, here's the solution.
Here's the caste system and then here's what, well, here's what we do about it.
Right.
Yeah.
I was like, I felt like I was this person that was entitled to more in life and I didn't know
why and I thought it was better than other people around me.
I wanted more, but there just seemed no feasible way to get it.
But then this ideology, I won't even call it politics, this ideology seemed like it offered
a promise and that's exactly what cults and mystery schools do.
It's exactly what they do.
And then after that, I just keep watching more YouTube, keep going, you know, you keep
going through the trajectory.
Eventually, um, it actually did help improve my life.
I got a girlfriend, got a job, you know, I wouldn't have done that before because I was
just too like, oh, it's all shit and you shouldn't try, blah, blah, blah.
Then I found myself almost like OCD about everything, right?
And I'm still that way in a lot of ways.
Like, oh, well, the situation needs to be this way and you need to act this way.
It's codependent behavior.
It really is.
You know, when I'm talking about a diagnosis, but that's really what it is.
I remember I would rant at my girlfriend and tell her she needs to watch Jordan Peterson
because she's got all these issues in her life.
And you know what?
She did have those issues, but I'm not the person to be doing that.
You know, I don't know what I'm talking about.
It was like I thought I had like a scorecard and a checkbook and I could just write checks
and solve it, but none of it was real.
And I just kept getting more OCD about it and I actually started to question it.
I think even after Charlottesville, I was like, what the hell is going on?
I was like, why are there Nazis here?
I know.
I was like, really didn't understand what was going on.
And I just started like questioning it more and more.
And then I found Destiny's videos and I watched those.
And I mean, really just the fact that like Lauren Southern, a lot of these people went on
and debated him and they really couldn't even substantiate anything.
It really cracked a lot.
I'm like, okay, so how at that period, there weren't any liberal or leftist people online
that were visible.
Right.
I guess they were, but I don't know where they were at.
Hassan didn't exist yet.
I used to always wonder, where are they at?
And I was like, oh, the reason they're not here is because they're all idiots and they
have no arguments.
It's all bullshit.
Just like I've been told.
That's what I will credit for him.
He drew them out of their cave and watching them all just fumble the ball one after one.
I was just like, dude, these people are morons.
From there, it's a slow walk back.
And then of course, I'm consuming Destiny's content.
You know, later you're watching Contra points.
And so you're getting re-inducted into a new cult, right?
I was doing the same thing in reverse.
Even though I didn't feel that way.
Because if this position is wrong, it must be that position, right?
Right.
Not thinking laterally, not thinking of another dimension of growth.
It's just a flat political compass and you just got to pick a spot.
So I just sort of like very slowly like shed one belief after another.
And it's kind of funny.
I kind of went in reverse.
I went from like this almost ethno-nationalism and basically ethno-nationalism on principle.
I'm just not willing toI don't care about an ethno-state.
Going back to civic nationalism, kind of rolling back to libertarianism and just kind of kept rolling back.
And then I never really went like hog wild running to the left.
I just kind of for a while assumed that there must be something to it.
And so I'd explore their ideologies.
But honestly, a lot of times when I was thinking a lot of that stuff, I just
for a while I told myself, well, you've just been brainwashed.
But there would just be certain things they'd say about what's happening in the world.
And I'd be like, that doesn't make any sense.
You're saying poor people just are violent because they're poor.
I'm like, that's stupid, dude.
I know that's not true.
I know that's not true.
I grew up in a situation.
I've seen violence from poor people and it's not what you're saying.
Stuff like that.
So I never fully like bought into it.
And I think eventually I just, on that side of things,
just saw that they don't know what the hell they're talking about either.
It was just apparent.
And you can always tell because the person that's talking to you,
they're desperate and they're full of fear and they're anxious.
Anytime you see somebody acting like that and they're not willing to reel it back
and give you a disclaimer on, well, that's why I tell you all my, you know,
disaster predictions.
I always try to reel it back because like, well, I don't know, you know,
if someone's not doing that, don't listen to a word they say to you.
That's what I learned.
I think at the end of it,
I just realized that most of the stuff that I was emotionally,
personally struggling with was inside of me,
because no matter what happens with the material conditions at the end of the day,
there is a piece of you inside of you that can persevere through all of it.
We have put people in death camps in history and it didn't break their spirit.
Right.
Okay.
And I'm not saying everyone has access to that.
And I feel a lot of sympathy and empathy for people.
But I think I learned that, no, that's why I call it a spiritual issue.
Right.
What I, I don't mean like dogma, like you have to live this way or that way.
What I really mean is that what you need is already inside of you.
The world can't touch you.
You're going to die anyway.
What's the point to run around screaming and rant and raving?
You're going to die.
It's going to happen.
And maybe you'll go to somewhere else or maybe you won't.
But what the hell is the point to, to run around acting like that?
So I just sort of, um, tempered myself, I guess, over time.
And now I always look to myself to see,
because that's where the locus of control is, right?
That's where your control is.
Where is it inside of me that I can deal with this?
Now there's certain things I can't deal with.
You know, the economy being crap, I can't deal with.
If we all start running out of food, I can't fix that.
What I can fix is just how I react to it.
So I think that's what I've learned at the end of this.
Wow.
Clean your room is good advice because you can do it.
And there are some things that are just outside of the control of individuals.
I've certainly done this.
I know a lot of people who have done this, but they sublimate their personal experience,
their personal life, where they're underdeveloped as an individual.
They sublimate it to politics.
It's not me that's wrong.
It's the world that's wrong.
I got to get some big political solutions, got to come from the top down.
And sometimes it's just good advice to clean the room.
That makes a lot of sense.
It doesn't mean that the challenge that you were worried about before went away.
But I promise you that you will be in a much more clear, sober position to be able to tackle that
whenever you've gotten to that point.
The one thing I'll add is that it's possible to clean your room.
And that's part of why it's good advice.
But no matter how clean my room is, that's not bringing industry back to the United States.
So we got to differentiate these two things at some points.
And after a certain lack of opportunity, downward mobility for a lot of people in the country,
their room could be fucking spotless.
You could eat off the floor and it's not going to bring any opportunity back to their lives.
Yeah.
But putting those things in the right category is how to keep yourself sane through this process.
That's the point I want to make.
You know, Jordan Peterson does that little line
and then he goes on railing about the Marxist and then doesn't want to like do anything about anything.
It's simply about making yourself strong, you know.
And we talked about spirituality and religion.
In spirituality, they call this the warrior poet.
You're the warrior and you're the poet.
You're willing to go out with a sword and deal with what needs to be done,
figurative metaphorical sword hopefully because I don't, you know, if we don't get to that point.
But you're the poet because you have a rich interior world
where when it's time to become the warrior, you're prepared.
You're not running head first into the Capitol getting tear gassed.
You're not running down the street burning trash cans and then getting knocked over the head
and black bagged with a felony on your record.
That doesn't help anybody.
It doesn't help you.
It doesn't help the people around you and it doesn't help solving the problem.
What did you need back then after you stopped going to school?
You went back home, started watching YouTube and you got a political solution.
If you could go back in time now, give yourself some of these answers, recommend a video.
What did you need back then?
First, I'll give the answer that nobody will like.
I'm kind of glad I struggled because it made me stronger, made me realize these things.
I don't think you could just teach this to somebody.
I hope in the future that we can sort of simulate that process in some way
to where it doesn't need to be just the world up against you.
But if I was being totally selfish and I could go back, I'd fix whatever material, economic,
political, whatever the hell it was, if I had a perfect magic wand, I'd fix that first.
If I got to some point where a challenge came and, oh, you're a perfect little world now.
I can't meet up to the challenge.
Well, I guess I'd suffer through it.
But at least I probably would have had a pretty decent life up to that point.
A lot of people are angry at the boomers.
But honestly, it must have been pretty nice to know that there's a job for you.
And I know it's not the case for everybody.
There was a job for you.
There was a pathway to having a family or whatever life you wanted.
I don't think they had better social technologies, but I just think they never had to use them because
and yeah, the material conditions do matter.
The world around you does matter about what
what kind of self-development you need and what self-awareness you need to address it.
They were just very privileged in that way.
So if I was being totally selfish, I would go back and give myself all of those privileges
and give them to everybody else, too.
My non-selfish and my kind of realism, you know, perspective is
I would just find a way to give myself the information I had
so that I could have faced all those challenges and made different choices.
And there's a lot of different choices I would make.
There's people I hurt, there's people that hurt me.
At the very least, if I had a very, you know, stingy genie, I would at least say,
just let me know what I know now.
But if I was totally in my element, I would just fix them, fix the world.
Turn me into a sage and then give us some fun stuff to do now that we fixed everything.
And I'd like to be able to spend all the time in the world with people.
I hate to say this, but I'm 37, so I'm a bit older than you.
And I look back and I made a lot of mistakes in my life.
I made some bad choices, wasted years doing stuff, time that I can't get back.
But I think about where I am now.
And it's a silly question because you can never go back.
You can never go back and tell yourself, you know, what you should have known then.
You know, we have to learn these lessons repeatedly, stupidly, painfully for years and years.
And you see yourself doing the same stupid thing over and over.
And it's like, oh, wow, I did that for 20 years of my life.
I did that for 20 years of my life.
Wow, I never even realized it until now.
And it takes that long, it takes that long to learn about ourselves and our motivations.
When you look back at this stuff and you realize how difficult it was to learn the things that you know now,
how to engage with certain things, how to interpret new ideas, you still feel like you had agency.
When you went through those videos, you went through this whole pipeline, you
you evolved your political belief system, you know, up all these levels to really, really extreme ideas.
You still feel like you had agency through that.
If we're going to break it down to that level of like transparency,
and we're for, you know, we're leaving out all the journalists that want to use this
some narrative advantageous narrative.
I don't think I had complete agency.
No, of course not.
I mean, there's choices I've done.
There's things I've done, hurt people.
And I'm like, damn, I didn't even really, was I even thinking?
I mean, did I, did I disassociate?
Like, why the hell did I do that?
So I do think there's a lack of agency.
I don't know.
I think that we all lack agency.
And I definitely felt like I've lacked agency.
And that's why if I could go back at the very least and just have the knowledge,
I know I would have more agency because it's about, it's not about education.
It's about having perspective.
I'm frustrated that people lied.
They were intentionally grooming and radicalizing people.
And it's, it's a small group of people.
Who lied?
Take the daily, uh, the daily show of people, you know, the, they knew what they were doing
because they've bragged about it.
They said, yeah, we don't tell them the whole picture.
I've had people come in my discord server, like literal fascist neo-Nazis and say, yeah,
you don't tell people everything.
I've talked to people that watched other people groom them in servers and they breadcrumb trail,
like they're bringing them to the candy house in the woods and they're going to chuck them in an
oven.
They're not transparent.
So I'm, I'm, those people are just guilty and they will reap repercussions.
Whether you believe it or not, there's something watching you at all times.
It might not even be an entity.
It might just be a, that, that, that your consequences will ripple out like a butterfly effect.
And you feel like they did that to you.
They did that and they know they did it because I've heard them brag about it.
Now, maybe they didn't do it to me specifically because no one ever reached me specifically,
but I know that there were people that were not being honest and they can say, well,
if I would have been honest, I would have got canceled.
So get canceled.
Well, if I'd have been honest, I would.
So take the consequences of it.
Stop being a coward.
If you're going to go to war, hold your sword up.
Don't hide in the back with a drone in the trench.
That's what they were doing.
They wanted to remote view into people's heads and trick them.
That is not right.
There's a lot of other people that just drank the Kool-Aid and those people,
I guess they're pretty much just like me because I was doing the same thing,
running around trying to red pill people.
But there's a lack of agency whenever you're not given the full picture.
And there's too much in this world that's not disclosed to us.
You've got all these people running around wanting to have disclosure on the UFOs.
I want disclosure on what's happening.
And I know there's people that can tell me.
I know there's people in positions of power, of relative power,
that know things that they're not telling because we're all...
You mean influence over social media?
What kind of disclosure?
Social media companies know the harm that their products do.
And they can't or won't say anything about it because they don't want to get sued.
They don't want to get regulated.
And they don't want this and they don't want that.
There's people that allow poison in the food,
not because they're intentionally putting the poison in the food,
but because that's the cheapest way to do it.
And the only way to solve that is to fight.
However you fight, the only way to solve that is to fight.
What would you say to somebody now who's, let's say, 16 years old,
and they've spent the last few years kind of ping-ponging around the political spectrum,
and they've gone from being an America First person to ANCOM to whatever.
Every JREG video you can imagine.
What would you say to that person?
I'd say they're not your friends.
They don't care about you.
And this friend thing, people think everybody's their friend, they're a friend.
Friends, there's a level system to that.
You and I are friends, but are you going to sacrifice yourself if we run out of food
and put me first, or are you going to put your family first?
Probably my family, no offense.
Your family, and I wouldn't fault you.
I'd be like, yeah, dude, you should put your family first.
So first of all, they're not your friends, and they don't care about you.
And people need to get this popularity and this friend crap out of their head.
Most people in history didn't have that privilege.
They don't care about you.
They will allow you to put yourself up on a stake and crucify yourself for nothing.
Really ask yourself, do you really think that someone got it all figured out in 2016?
Because that's what we're arguing about.
We're just looping 2016.
Has someone had it figured out, all of it?
I mean, even if you go and talk to actual people who are,
you know, you talk to a serious priest in a religion.
He will tell you that we don't have it all figured out.
First of all, that's why you have faith.
And second of all, that's why they're constantly trying to learn more.
Anybody who's serious and humble and honest will tell you we don't have it all figured out.
So they don't have it all figured out.
They're not your friends and they see you as a sacrifice.
What do you do now?
I don't know, dude.
Just eat that black pill that's all fucked and there's nothing you can do and just accept it.
And then just try to focus on what you can.
You'll have what they call a dark night of the soul.
And you'll actually come to clarity on things.
Once you give up what you were holding on to for dear life, you give it up.
And I'm telling you new, it just must be how the brain works.
New things will come in to fill the gap.
Everybody's experienced this, at least in a relationship where they break up with somebody.
You know, they won't let it go.
They won't let it go.
And then eventually they let it go.
And they're like, oh, actually, I don't even like this type of person.
Actually, I could move here and do this.
Actually, there's a lot of things I could do.
And if you say, well, yeah, but I live in the hood.
I live in the trailer park.
I'm, yeah, you are screwed.
So accept it.
And then it's going to give you clarity and strength.
That will help you get yourself out of that if you can.
That will help you fight if you can.
You were kind of sacrificed up on this media altar.
And your story was strategically used by a lot of different people from a lot of different perspectives.
Towards very different ends, how they chose to describe your significant story.
And then did those people follow up with you?
Did they come back?
Did they care about what happened afterwards?
I've got maybe two, three or four.
There was probably a couple more that would have been still supportive in my life.
But I kind of pushed them away because I'm, you know, I'm avoidant, right?
Like I, as soon as I feel hurt by somebody, I'm thinking, oh, well, they're against me.
There's a couple.
Those are also the most people that are closest to the perspective I'm saying where you, you stop giving your control up to everything else.
It really sucked when I just stopped.
I shut my, that was the first thing was shutting the Discord server down.
Right.
And a lot of those people that, and I was just so stupid.
I thought, you know, I spent more time.
Why'd you do that?
I don't regret launching it, but it was a hectic mess.
And none of the people that were in there were well.
And there were manipulative people in there.
And there were, at times, when dangerous people came in there.
Yeah.
Now, when we talk about danger, I don't necessarily mean that you're going to get, you know, knocked over the head or something.
But people that are trying to use you.
But mostly just, it was just too much, too overwhelming to try to, like, bring people into a server and then get them to try to, like, talk to each other to de-radicalize them.
And really, all they do the whole time is spend the whole day fighting.
And then the moderators are angry at me because I'm apparently, I mean, I am responsible for it.
But, like, at the same time, like, well, I'm in the same shoes you are.
And that's what I mean when I say people in high positions can be locked in, too, and have less agency.
You know?
It's like, well, I can't do anything different than what you're doing based on the parameters.
So the experiment wasn't working and you shut it down?
I think there were a few success cases.
But it wasn't because someone got pipelined out of something or de-radicalized or, you know, we counter-messaged them.
It was because they spent time, like, okay, we had this one guy, I won't say from where, but he was fascist.
You know?
He, like, straight-up fascist, read fascist literature, all that.
At one point, he had these guys online trying to recruit him to come to Ukraine to fight for Azov.
Right.
You know, these neo-Nazis in the, I know we're not allowed to say that now, but there are neo-Nazis in the Ukraine and they wear black suns.
And, you know, a couple of years ago, the researchers were all worried about them that they were going to start a white jihad.
I remember.
So they were trying to explicitly groom him to come into that.
So he was in it.
And he would come in the Discord.
And honestly, we would just all hang out in there.
People would argue in the text chats.
But in the voice chats, people actually just started to be normal.
And he told me one day, well, he didn't tell me, he told some other people.
He said, you know, I never thought that I would be, come into a place like this and make friends with brown people, trans people, whatever people.
I still believe what I believe, but I can't hate you all.
Not like that.
That's what I mean.
Like, you have to know someone to hate them.
He learned that it was very difficult to just straight-up hate them.
I would say stuff like that was success, but that's work he did.
All I did was provide a space.
I shut it down because it was too much stress, and I was getting into doing the research work at the university.
That was the first blow where, like, a lot of those people, now it's very clear they don't care about you because they're not hitting you up and talking to you or anything.
And that's fine.
I mean, that's like you stop going to a local pub, you know?
But I just had too much.
It's a little different than the local pub because you were useful to them.
I know.
You were useful to them for their own strategies and objectives, and once you were no longer useful, they didn't want to talk to you.
I think drug dealers experience this where they stop selling drugs, and then people, they realize those people weren't really their friends.
And then, you know, the YouTube thing.
Drug ideology.
The YouTube thing as well.
Like, you know, I used to get emails and calls, and it's so stupid.
Like, when I would get a call from a journalist, I'd be like, oh, they want to talk to me.
No, they don't.
What would you want to say to those people that maybe haven't heard from you for a little while that if we can give your story back to you as you've told it today, what do you want them to know?
What do you want the world to know?
Don't think that this is me coming back because mostly I just want to be here to help you.
You asked me to do this, and I do think of you as a friend.
I care about what you're working on.
So I don't know, man.
You could ask me to run across coals.
I probably would have done it.
I'm jaded on it.
Probably a year and a half, two years ago, I was going on Twitch panels, and you can't have a conversation.
The person doesn't want to talk.
They just want you.
They say, well, what's your opinion on this?
Like, they literally asked me my opinion on free speech, and I tried to give the answer I gave to you.
I was like, well, here, let me diagram, and this is the structuralist, and they were like, no, but what do you think?
I'm like, what does it matter what I think?
So I'm very jaded that the conversations aren't actual conversations.
I put a video out about my concerns of technology because I was going through a Luddite phase, which I've come out of, and no one understood what I was saying.
And I even got positive comments, but no one even understood what I was trying to say, and they didn't put the effort in to try to, nobody asked questions.
So maybe a couple people did.
I just find it a freaking waste of time, and I didn't enjoy it.
So that's how I feel.
Yeah, I just write for myself now.
I do art for myself, and I love it.
And maybe one day I'll put that out and drive people insane because they hate me.
Or maybe they'll come back and be like, oh, my God, I want to join your cult now because this was so good.
And I'll just be like Thomas Pension, and I'll just put it out, and I'll just say, all right, bye.
I look forward to when you publish that work and you share your work with the world, and I very much understand why you're not online right now.
I really appreciate that you came here to do this and have this conversation.
I would encourage you, stay offline as long as you need.
It's better.
It's better to be off there.
And then when you're ready to publish, share your work with the world, and you come back.
Caleb, thank you so much.
Thank you, Josh.
It was great.
It was great.
