It looks like we're rolling on these, what it seems like.
We could do the fake documentary thing that everybody does on Netflix,
where it's like me sitting down pretending to be mic'd up.
Oh, yeah, yeah. They all do this now.
Every single doc starts like that now.
They sit down as if they're giving you behind the scenes.
Are we rolling? You know, like, how to look at the camera?
Okay.
I thought you were doing that for real.
Welcome to Doomscroll. I'm your host, Joshua Citarella.
My guest is Jack Wagner, a writer and director and host of The Otherworld podcast.
Yeah, I did not expect to get into the paranormal.
It all kind of started for me on my old podcast.
It was a comedy podcast.
Yeah, but still, we like interview people, goof around.
It was hosted by the comedian Brandon Wardell.
I mean, you were on it. You know about this.
When we first started doing episodes together.
Yeah, but it was silly.
And I did a Halloween episode, mostly because I just wanted to find a way to use, like, one of my friends' specific ghost stories that was funny to me.
And so I tweeted just asking people if anybody had a ghost story, if they had experienced the paranormal.
I didn't even have a lot of Twitter followers at this time.
I think it got, like, 12 likes or something.
Like, it really did not get a lot of engagement.
Wow. Humble beginnings.
I didn't even check my email for, like, a long time.
Like, three days.
Because I was sort of like, okay, 12 people like that.
Like, I doubt one of those 12 has a story.
Right.
But I ended up checking the email, and there was a lot more than 12 emails.
There was, like, a lot of emails from people.
Okay.
And I was reading through them, and, like, the stories were crazy.
They were confused by it.
They didn't really, like, tell many people about it.
And, like, a lot of times they were telling me for the first time.
One thing that stuck out to me, I remember interviewing this guy about seeing, like, a Bigfoot, a Sasquatch.
And it was a crazy story.
I remember him, he told me that he pulled over, while driving at night, he pulled over to mess with his, like, old iPod.
He pulled over to do that, because it was, like, so unsafe to drive and, like, scroll through your iPod.
Yes, right.
So he was on the side of the road, dicking around, found a song, turned it on, and, like, looked up, and there's a Bigfoot in front of his car.
Yeah.
And I remember him being kind of awkward, telling me that, like, the Sasquatch had breasts.
It was a female.
And he thought it was really, really weird.
And he, like...
I guess there's got to be females.
He was...
This is a...
Like, I've since learned that this is a thing.
But at the time, he was really awkward telling me it.
I don't know.
I just remember having a moment...
With all of these stories, usually there's, like, an aspect, a little detail where I'm, like, most people aren't creative enough to invent something like that and throw it in there.
Like, that was stuck out to me, where I'm, like, this guy is telling the truth.
Like, this guy is telling the truth to me.
It does seem like a weird thing to make up.
Yeah.
Well, we first started doing guest episodes and collaborations around this time.
I was looking into a now infamous meme that has spawned an entire genre on YouTube of these very lengthy icebergs.
The chart of truth.
With tears, yes.
The chart of truth.
The original one.
And when did we start doing that?
Was it, like, 2020 or something like that?
Whenever you first showed me the chart.
Yeah.
That was an inspiration to me.
This was early, before the genre existed.
Seeing you start to poke into things inspired me a little bit.
And I was struck by, like, the level of curiosity that you had for this material.
Because a lot of people, like, they see it.
It's kind of amusing.
It's, like, conspiracy theories and paranormal stuff, like, tickles your brain in a certain way.
But, like, I thought to myself, like, Jack is really interested in this material.
Oh, yeah.
Like, there's, like, a deep curiosity.
And then we kept going back to it.
And we spent, you know, now we've done, I don't know how many hours of material together
looking at these different, like, weird stories that you find on the internet.
But I imagine, for some period, you were kind of, like, working in this one vein.
But then also privately kind of researching this material.
This paranormal, esoteric material.
It's all the same to me, to be like.
Really?
I mean, it's all stuff that I was, like, up at four in the morning, like, with insomnia
looking at on the internet, you know?
Like, I mean, to me, kind of, yeah.
Like, I don't, even funny things, I'm like, I don't know.
That's always been a driver of my creative force, I guess.
It's just, like, being up way too late or awake way too early, like, looking at garbage
on the internet.
But, yeah, I mean, it's funny.
Like, we're talking about being a poster or whatever.
I was a searcher and, like, a viewer, a consumer of the internet more than anything.
Just, like, deep diving garbage.
A deep researcher.
Yeah.
So to speak.
Deep, yes, exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
Not necessarily good research, though.
Just, like, going down rabbit holes.
We've talked about this before, but there's a general, like, cultural arc of the internet
of when both of us were young around, like, I would say, like, 2011 is the height of this,
of, like, cringe Reddit atheist bullshit.
Yeah.
And the arc of, like, the following decade is actually moving towards, like, a much more
complex, much more unknown, esoteric understanding of the world.
Cringe Reddit Catholic?
Yeah, exactly.
Cringe Trad Cath bullshit instead of Reddit, yeah.
This is not really, like, necessarily related to what you were saying, but I have this really
funny memory from when I was in college, like, art school.
I went to Columbia.
Columbia College, Chicago.
Usually I would just say Columbia and, like, let them assume it was a better school, you
know, but, but, yeah.
Wait, did you go to school in Chicago?
My good friend Brad went to school in Chicago.
Of course, yeah.
And our good friend from Germany went to school in Chicago.
They overlapped for a little bit.
Our good friend from Germany?
Yes.
I don't know.
You didn't name him before.
Sounds like code.
He's going to be on the podcast tomorrow.
Okay, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, our unnamed friend, our anonymous source, our CIA handler, so to speak.
I went to school in New York.
Yeah.
I have a really funny memory from, uh, Columbia, where I remember this guy in my class who
told me, he was talking about being an atheist, and he told me that, like, him and his friends
meet up, his other atheist friends meet up to read the Bible and, uh, disprove it.
And I'm like, bro, you're doing church.
Really?
You're doing church.
You're doing atheist church.
I just remember thinking that I'm just like, because I grew up going to church every week.
I had no church.
Yeah, me too.
Yeah, yeah.
Like, my mom made me, I could not skip, just, uh, no option.
But, yeah, hearing that, I'm just like, bro, you're doing church, you're doing the bad part
of religion, which is having to go to read.
Right.
Like, what are you doing?
This is ridiculous.
Like, you're more interested in religion than, like, most religious people.
What are you doing?
Mm-hmm.
I don't know.
I always found that, like, even people who claim to not be religious are dogmatic in their
own way.
Sure.
Almost more so, right?
Well, that's, like, the quintessential definition of being a reactionary, is that, like, you
despise the thing, but then you preserve a kernel of it and keep it alive in this, like,
horrific, magnified way, right?
Yes.
Where they literally meet up, read the same book to make fun of it.
Like, it's the exact same activity, actually.
I think about that guy a lot.
It's kind of a perfect, perfect example.
Yeah.
I wonder if he's still doing it.
No, that guy's for sure got to be a trad cath or something.
My plan was to make music videos and commercials.
Like, that's...
I didn't even want to make, like, movies.
For some reason, like, I...
Yeah.
I, like, limited my own dreams.
I'm like, I don't need to even do the movies.
Like, literally in college.
I'm like, that seems too lofty.
Like, I don't even need to really achieve my dreams.
Like, I don't need to do a movie or anything.
Like, I'm down for commercials.
I'm down for music videos.
Like, I just want to, like, make something kind of cool, be able to have money and, like,
live, you know?
Right?
In the 90s, though, like, commercials were, like, funny.
Huge.
Yeah.
They were funny.
That was kind of like an art form that was...
I understand that.
Short form, yeah.
So, I was like, music videos, commercials, that type of stuff.
That's what I want to do.
That's what I was pursuing.
I was trying to get attention so that somebody would trust me to do those things.
And that's when I was like, hey, I feel like I can get followers on Instagram by just,
like, abusing hashtags and, like, shitposting.
I didn't call it that at the time.
I'm just, like, posting stupid things I find online that, like, aren't on there.
That's how I came across your work.
The plan was to circle back.
Like, so, my career is a series of, like, I'm going to do this for a little while, but
then, like, once I can, like, just only live off directing commercials and music videos,
Right.
I will stop doing that.
Yeah.
Suddenly, there are basically no more music videos and, like, there's almost no more commercials
anymore.
Right.
That's, like, really not a viable job.
Right.
Because there's almost no more TV.
Mm-hmm.
I also wanted to be an MTV VJ when I was a little kid.
Oh, my God.
But it's like, you know, so, like, it's like those are no longer career paths and, like,
being an influencer is.
Yeah, yeah.
It's like being a blacksmith somehow, yeah.
Yeah, like, because I did, like, post my way into getting an opportunity to make, like,
like a web TV show for a minute.
You did.
Like, and I did get to direct music videos and all sorts of cool stuff that I'm proud
of.
And, like, once again, plan to circle back to, like, classic film, right?
Right.
I had no interest in being, like, a public figure of any kind.
Like, I've only wanted to make my own stuff.
Do you still, do you still plan to do that?
Kind of, yeah.
I mean, it's all been, like, dude, it's been a series of, okay, I'm going to do this so
that I could, like, then be able to do that.
Yeah.
And usually the that collapses, right?
COVID is another thing.
Like, I, once again, was, like, going to go back to directing and being, like, I feel
like I've done embarrassing stuff for long enough.
I could probably be more of a serious director now.
Really go for it.
Right.
Then COVID hit and, like, now, yeah, it's really, like, the film industry's collapsed in a way.
I mean, doing the embarrassing stuff is definitely something I relate to.
Like, it's just humiliating every time you have to post a selfie and promote and do, uh...
By the way, I feel very uncomfortable talking about how bad the film industry's doing in
front of multiple cameramen that are staring at me, like, seeing him sweating, staring
at me.
I mean...
I lost my shirt.
Yeah.
Sad.
I mean, it's, yeah, it's rough out there.
I mean, it's not a secret, right?
It's, like, there's a kind of revolution that's happening in all of these different creative
industries, and there's, like, AI that's right on the tail of that.
And, yeah, a lot of the work that people would pick up is, like, you know, you're perpetually
a freelancer.
As a creative, you have, like, your main thing, and then you're constantly doing other freelance
stuff to parcel it out and, like, fill, you know, the total amount of time that you have
to sell.
And, like, those things are just the rates are going down for every creative sphere.
And then there's also this, like, rise of automation at the same time.
And there's just, you know, pronounced precarity across basically every facet of creative life
in the U.S.
Yeah.
I mean, the only thing, being nimble is the only thing that's, like, made my career work.
Because, like, even starting the podcast, that was an afterthought.
Like, yeah, but still, I had just made, finished shooting, like, this show Like and Subscribe
that was, like, you know, this, like, web series that we made.
And I was, like, look, this podcast would be, like, a fun little creative thing I could
do on the side.
I just like making things most of the time.
So I'm, like, this is going to be a fun little gig that I could do and probably stop in a
little while.
But then, like, the web series industry collapsed.
Like, all these, like, new streaming companies shut down.
Literally, the streaming company that was making that show and funded it shut down, like, right
before I was supposed to release the trailer.
I got a phone call from The Hollywood Reporter during an interview.
When they were interviewing me about it, they were, like, hey, did you know that Go90
shut down?
Or actually, I think they asked me, like, first question, like, what do you think about
the Go90 news?
And I'm, like, what news?
What news?
Oh, God.
Yeah.
Wow.
So, like, and then, you know, that ended up coming out.
But, like, I thought that was going to be, like, a, this will launch the new wing of my
career.
Right, right.
It just so happened that, like, podcasts kind of boomed.
Right.
And so I kept doing that.
And it sort of worked out, right?
But it's just been a little, like, leapfrogging between, like, collapsing bridges, sort of.
Right.
There's a similar thing, I think, in the podcasting renaissance, as it's so called, which was that
in the attention economy-driven social media, people just got so frustrated with short-form
conversation and flame wars that they were then interested, again, to listen to, like, rich
contextual conversation.
Yeah.
Not because podcasting and RSS feeds and microphones are a new technology.
No, no.
Like, all of that stuff is, like, decades and decades old.
No, everybody uses mics.
It's been around for, like, 20 years.
But then there was a podcasting boom.
Like, what accounts for that other than this bubble of, the bubble for long-form conversation
being blown by dissatisfaction with the attention economy?
Yeah.
So I see those two things as being directly related to each other.
Here's the thing.
I've learned by now, I mean, I'm probably still doing it to an extent, but, like, I've
learned by now to, like, you really can't plan for anything.
You just have to be nimble.
Right.
And, like, I didn't plan on, like, hosting a show about the paranormal.
Right.
But when I launched this, I noticed it had some kind of momentum that nothing I had ever
made has had.
Right.
And I recognized it and was like, okay, I'm going to try really hard at this and just,
like, see how it goes.
Mm-hmm.
I love it.
I love what I do.
Um, but it's been interesting.
It's like, we'll see where this goes.
It's all been, like, a series of accidents.
And, uh, I mean, for me, it's been, like, a series of, like, rapidly adjusting to a quickly
changing world, um, without even consciously knowing that I'm doing it.
And I think my experience on the internet has helped me be okay with that.
Mm-hmm.
You know?
And be kind of used to having to do that.
I've been editing since I was 13.
I learned to edit, like, young when it was difficult.
Like, this was before, it was really hard to get video onto a computer.
Right.
At that time.
Right.
Kind of dating myself as an old head.
But, like, yeah, it was, like, it was difficult.
It was a pain.
We were, like, shooting on tapes.
So, like, the fact that I ended up getting a card for my computer.
Like, I mowed lawns and, like, bought a video card that I could, like, rip video.
This was, like, really impressive for me in the school.
And, like, I was able to do a lot of class projects that got me easy, good grades just
by, like, editing videos.
But, like, that was, um, a novelty.
Yeah.
Because I had a skill that other people didn't have.
Um, that changes fast.
I thought I was gonna be a professional editor after that where it's, like, yeah, not many
people know how to do this.
Like, you make a lot of money because, like, somebody needs you to cut together a commercial.
Now, like, anybody can do that.
Right.
Right.
There's apps that will do it.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Like, my phone now is 10 times more powerful than my computer when I was in high school.
Yeah, yeah.
Um, probably more.
Like, probably more.
I'm probably getting that way wrong.
Technology can kind of, like, pass you by.
And it could eliminate that job, unfortunately, which, like, sucks.
But, um, it's forced me to adapt.
I mean, look, I very much relate to this kind of, like, unpredictability where I had a certain
idea in my head of what I was gonna do as my job, what I expected my life to be like,
um, the field I thought I would go into and what I did with that.
And then, yeah, a lot of things have just kind of, like, transformed even during my lifetime.
Right.
Like, when I studied photography in school, there was a whole generation of people who
had been brought up on the darkroom.
Like, they developed film.
They printed on paper.
They used, like, chemicals and light exposures and all this stuff.
And then there was Photoshop and there was ink jets and, like, you could have this printer
at your home and it produced stuff that was the same quality.
And so, there was this total revolution in how the thing was made.
And as a result, a lot of the people who had spent their lives kind of planning on this
one way of doing things all of a sudden were, like, looking for new work.
And I feel like that happened within the span of a generation, but we've already seen, like,
three of those just in our lifetime.
And my sense is that this is only going to continue happening.
There's, like, more volatility, more unpredictability.
And so, I find that, like, and this is, I'm just speaking, like, personally here, like,
less to do with career stuff.
But, um, to be able to have, like, a meaningful and creatively fulfilling life during all of
that, like, you have to be actually guided by a certain core interest rather than, like,
a technical practice at some point.
Or just, like, being dedicated to doing something and you, like, the pattern emerges.
Like, there's a pattern to everything you've made.
If you were to explain, like, I doubt that you thought for a while you would be professionally
interviewing little kids that, like, believe in, like, Nazi stuff or whatever.
You told me before, you're like, we're having a serious business conversation.
You're like, yeah, I'm not going to be interviewing little kids.
You told me with a straight face.
I was laughing so hard.
Yeah, yeah.
But, yeah, I mean, like, I'm a big fan of that work, interviewing, um, youth with radical
political beliefs.
Right.
But, um, yeah, you probably didn't think you were going to, like, be interviewing little
kids for...
I don't know, I don't know if I've told you this, but it's very inspired by your editing
and interview style for Otherworld.
Really?
Yeah, yeah.
The way that you, because I have to imagine as you're recording these interviews, like,
you're a lot more vocal and you're asking questions and you're prompting people.
And then the way that you hear the story is kind of just, like, this first person reciting
their experience.
Yeah, yeah.
But often when we tell our own stories, like, we forget to add details.
They'll say, like, oh, yeah, I opened the door and then I looked on the table and then
I went into the other room and you're like, wait, what was on the table?
And then in the final edit, you just introduce that anecdote to the story, which makes the
whole narrative make sense.
Yeah.
I learned that from your editing style, actually.
And I took a lot of pointers from that.
That's amazing, Josh.
But instead, it's someone being, like, an esoteric crypto monarchist or a national syndicalist
or something like that.
Yeah, yeah.
Instead of a UFO story.
Oh, as long as I'm gassing you up, I will say one of my favorite Josh beliefs, I guess,
is, correct me on the details of this, the idea of nationalizing the internet and having
it run by the post office.
State book.
State book.
Yes.
Nationalizing Facebook.
Sometimes I think that, you know, my controversial opinion is that people should have to go by
their government name online.
Yes.
Because more so just for convenience, not for, like, you know, arresting people for making
threats or anything, but just, like, I think it would help if you could see who it is.
Because, like, sometimes you go online and you see the crazy shit people say.
Yeah.
Or just really dumb stuff or extreme.
It's really important to remember, like, a lot of the time that you're arguing with a
12-year-old.
Right.
Yes, literally.
You're just trying to make you mad.
Like, you're literally arguing with, like, a 12-year-old.
I would take the government name even a step further, and I would say that your profile
picture should be your driver's license.
No, exactly.
Like, we should have very standardized, like, it's your first name, last name, and it's
you.
And, like, the checkmark, the verification of your identity should be administered by
the government.
I'm into it.
Not by the platforms.
I'm into it.
Like, you know, my...
I also think it should be a bank account.
You should be able to have, like, your own private bank account on your state book page.
We'll do digital postal banking.
I'm very open to all of this.
I'm into it.
I think, like, my wife...
I went to public school.
My wife went to private school.
And we talk about the differences.
She had to wear a uniform.
And, like, I mean, maybe this is just something new with her school or Southern California
versus, like, the suburbs of Chicago.
But, like, when I describe, like, the cliques, the amount of cliques and, like, subcultures in
our school and, like, the drama between them, when she describes her high school experience,
like, granted, maybe she just went to, like, a more pleasant high school.
But, like...
I'll talk about things I experienced, like, the bullying and, like, the fights and, like,
drama and, like, the amount of cliques and, like, subcultures.
And this is, like, foreign to her.
And I'm, like...
Like, I talk about, like, the tiers of, like, popular kids, unpopular...
She's, like...
Everybody's kind of the same at my school.
There's, like, people who hung out with different people.
But, like, there wasn't as much of that.
Now, I'm trying to explain to her.
I'm, like, no.
There's, like...
It's not just nerds.
There's, like, ranks of nerds.
Like, there's cool ones that, like, bully, like, the really low ones.
And then, like, even they bully lesser nerds.
Like, there's...
Eventually, you do get to, like, the bottom, bottom tier.
But, like, there's...
I'm, like, there's juggalos.
There's, like...
You're getting, like, in fights with people just based on, like, how you're expressing yourself.
Right.
And a lot of that is with clothes, right?
Clothes, yeah.
So, I do think that I'm...
Part of me is, like...
Music.
Yeah.
When I think back to elementary school, a lot of that is just...
You're cool based on what you're wearing.
Like, I...
Growing up in elementary school, like, I thought that the popular kids were all beautiful.
And, like...
Like, I remember the popular girls in elementary school, middle school as being, like, good-looking at the time.
Right, right.
When I look back at the yearbooks later, I'm like, these people are busted.
Absolutely.
Uggos.
Like, they just wore cool clothes.
Like, their parents have bought them cool clothes.
You socially perceived them at the time as being, like, movie stars.
Yeah.
And they're, like, a five, actually.
It was literally just because they wore cool clothes.
Yeah.
Right.
And I was wearing trash.
Right.
Um, but, literally, school uniforms, I'm into that.
I don't know if I'm going to say national uniforms, that's like...
But, I'd say profile, driver's license profile picture, I like it.
I'm into it.
It also takes away from people, you know, catfishing, you know.
That's true.
Some famous Twitter users that, uh, they're catfishing with that old profile picture, you know.
Benefit.
But, yeah.
Journalists, a lot of, uh, a lot of provocateurs online are using some dated, very dated profile picture.
Just to complete the theory, anonymous shitposting will still exist, but it will exist on the private platforms, and will have the public alternative that's your face and name.
I like that.
That's the aim.
That's the proposal.
What else is true and not true?
Right.
That's really scary.
Um, I think that's partly what people experience when they encounter the paranormal for the first time.
Uh, and part of why most people are quick to forget it, you know.
Like, you're walking down the street.
This is my job now talking to people who have experienced this stuff every day.
Like, whether or not you want to believe it, that's up to you.
But, like, now my job every day is, like, talking to several people who have experienced something extremely unexpected and unexplainable out of nowhere, and then typically never experience it again.
Just walking their dog, and all of a sudden they see a creature in the bush that's staring at them.
How many, how many interviews would you say you've done?
I'd be like 300 for other words or something.
300, wow.
I don't know, I was thinking about it today.
For whatever reason, whether this is right or wrong, there's a kind of general partition in society right now where the liberal dogma is to believe science,
and the conservative persuasion is to dismiss the science, to question it, to do your own research.
Yeah.
And what I'm curious about is that people who have experiences that, in some cases, defy the laws of physics, appear to be paranormal, the existence of UFOs, for example, things like this,
whether those people fall along either of those lines of liberal or conservative.
If there's, like, an openness that aligns with one of those political belief systems over another.
I mean, in terms of people who are legitimately experiencing things, like, I don't know that it happens to one more than others.
I think, like, ideology affects how people interpret them.
Like, that's the funny thing, like, you know.
Like, like religious ideology.
For sure, yeah.
I mean, like, and with a lot of stuff, you know, there's a lot of people who say that there's UFO references in, like, the Bible or, like, Catholic texts.
There are so many viewpoints people have on UFOs.
It's like, do you remember when Daniel got, like, UFO-pilled rapidly and, like, went through all the stages of UFO grief?
He's even killed on a few things at a few different times.
No, but, yeah, like, every day I would talk to him.
He would be, like, on some other stage of it.
Yeah.
And I think he's now back to, like, not believing.
Denial, bargaining, grief.
No, literally.
Yeah, I mean, but, yeah, that's, um, that's an interesting one because, yeah, of course, it involves the government.
It involves, like, a group of shadowy people that are more powerful than us.
Right, right.
And maybe they're concealing the technology.
Yeah, which maybe that's true.
Why are they keeping it from us?
Yeah.
Like, we could be utilizing this, but we're not allowed because this shadowy organization is in between us and the tech.
Yeah.
A lot of those implications, yeah.
I'd think, like, maybe if they know something, if UFOs are real, if they know something, like, I doubt they know much.
Like, my position, generally speaking, is that, like, most people are dumb, including myself.
Like, that's a big part of, like, what I've brought into making Otherworld and, like, what's been reaffirmed even more in the process of making this show.
I think a lot of people go through life, no matter who they are, assuming that there's, like, a smarter person out there.
There's, like, these smart people out there who are figuring things out, right?
Like, that's, like, to bring it back to what we were talking about with COVID, like, everybody assumes there's, like, this smart group.
Like, oh, there's, like, these smart people that are working on that.
Experts who are in charge, yeah.
The experts that are figuring, they're figuring it out.
Like, they're solving cancer.
They're qualified.
They're getting to the bottom of all these answers.
There's, they're making sure we don't devolve into anarchy and, like, our economic system stays afloat and doesn't crumble.
Like, no, there's not a smarter person.
Like, that's something I've realized is, like, there's not a smarter guy.
Like, there's not.
There's not that group of smart people.
The one thing I would say about UFOs as a political distraction is that I have to wonder what they think they're distracting us from.
Like, it just seems like the state of affairs, like, everything is quite literally falling apart.
Like, the bridges are collapsing.
And the UFOs are real.
But I don't feel distracted from anything.
It's just two things happening at the same time.
It's funny.
Like, I've been doing this job for, like, almost two years now.
Yeah.
And I talk, like, as if I'm so removed from it.
Like, I literally interview people about UFOs and crazier stuff every single day.
Right.
Like, I don't not believe it.
But I guess I just kind of, like, put it in, like, a box, you know?
I'm noticing myself the way I talk about it now.
It's just kind of funny to me.
Like, as if I'm not part of that or something.
I'm like, oh, yeah, the paranormal people.
I mean, this is not exactly the same.
But I spent, you know, however many years interviewing young people with, like, really radical ideas that are totally outside the Overton window.
Yeah.
And at a certain point, you have to approach it with a degree of removal.
If you let yourself get invested and you feel like you need to sort out these giant questions for people, it's actually, it's irresolvable.
You know, it's not possible to solve them.
So you have to have a buffer between you and the subject or the question, the particular topic.
Yeah, and same for me.
Like, I'm every day dealing with, like, very big questions.
And, like, I've had to kind of put my own beliefs aside a little bit because I think belief can be really potent and dangerous.
Yes.
And, like, it's kind of like a drug.
Like, if you believe in something, like, truly believe in it, it can, like, get you really, like, you could go zooming high off of it for a while.
But, like, when those beliefs kind of crack, you can crash very hard.
It's not fun.
It happens incrementally, right?
Like, you can have this buffer up where you're talking to someone who sees the world entirely different than you do, right?
They might believe in some kind of shadowy organization or UFO conspiracy or they believe in libertarianism.
You know, the most fringed, deranged example of all three of those.
But, um, over time, things start to creep in, right?
So, for me, I encountered these young people who had radical political ideas.
And in rare cases, they would pose a question that I was not able to answer as an adult, right?
And I wouldn't, like, concede this or mention it in the interview, but I would privately think to myself afterwards, like,
wow, you know, I really don't have a good, a good solution for that.
The cumulative effects of that happening over time through extensive interviews from talking to people from all different corners of political and ideological belief systems,
I found that it did have an effect on me.
And, um, it made me actually question my own beliefs.
It made me reflect to a degree things that I felt very strong and, um, settled in my beliefs and convictions around certain topics.
I then had to reevaluate because I'd never really been challenged on them.
Yeah.
And I find that is just, that's an unavoidable part of this process.
It's, uh, over time, as you're progressively challenged in your beliefs, you have to, you know, reconsider the way that you understand the world.
I think it's important.
It is important.
I think it's, like, the most important.
Yeah.
Yes.
And it is that thing that has kind of disappeared from society, I would say, is that, like, with the creation of, uh, filter bubbles, echo chambers, and just general cultural and political polarization,
people are not challenged in their beliefs, and they actually, as a result of not being challenged, do not know what they believe.
Something I've experienced, like, feeling destabilized, you know, in a way, I, by the way, it's freeing, too, like, to, um.
Right.
It can be freeing to have your core beliefs kind of, like, cracked.
I don't know, you get really set in your ways sometimes.
It's really easy to get set in your ways, to think you have everything figured out, not necessarily in a confident way.
Sometimes it's in, like, a negative way, where you're, like, I have everything figured out about my life, and it sucks.
You know?
Like, that's, like, being depressed.
Yeah, yeah.
It's, like, um, the feeling, to me, the feeling that you have it figured out, and, like, nothing's gonna happen.
Like, that's what depression feels like to me.
There's nothing worse than certainty, actually.
Yeah, like, I'm certain that, like, every day is gonna be the same forever, and it's boring and, like, bad.
Yeah.
You have, like, a kind of reactionary, crunchy hippie that is, um, distrustful of Western medicine, distrustful of government, um, has all sorts of, like, esoteric beliefs, and will refuse to get vaccinated, for example.
You know?
Like, there are, um...
My audience.
Our people, yeah.
It begins with things, like, filtering your water, and being skeptical of fluoride, and then it kind of, like, extends to a whole bunch of other things that are, like, far more esoteric and not necessarily, uh, material.
Yeah.
And so, I'm interested where one belief system bleeds into the next, you know?
And trying to find, like, what those pathways are.
Yeah.
Does someone get into health food, for example, and then, um, you know, believe that we should have a totally isolationist state and not allow immigration or have a welfare state or social democracy or something like that?
I don't blame people for, like, questioning things.
They should.
Like, you'd be, at this point, you'd kind of be an idiot if you didn't, sure, question things.
Right.
Right?
I mean, just, like, look at what we've lived through.
Past few years.
We're talking about, like, trusting science.
Make you question a few things.
I'm not, like, anti-science or anything.
I'm not, I know I host a paranormal show or whatever, but, like, I don't know.
Um, talk about trusting science.
Like, what is that anymore?
Like, what is that anymore?
This shouldn't be, like, a dogmatic thing that we're talking about.
Like, science is, like, this one, like, monolith.
Right?
Uh, who's science?
Who's, yeah.
Like, there's a...
Especially when the experts disagree.
They disagree.
And not only that, like, in our lifetime, we've witnessed horrible things done by, like, science.
Right?
Like, the opioid crisis.
Right.
For a long time, the medical industry was, like, saying this was something.
This was, like, going to change pain forever.
And, uh, professionals were pushing it.
This was being sold across the country and, like, ruined lives.
Right.
This is a city's community.
It's like, we've seen so many versions of that.
Like, how could you, like, you would be an idiot to trust blindly.
Right.
And there's a kind of cascading effect from this, which is that if you, if you lose faith
with one legitimate institution that you're supposed to trust and believe what they say
is true, you become skeptical to the next and the one after that and the one after that.
And so, there's this kind of domino effect that, over time, yeah, people, like, of course,
why should it surprise us that they're doing their own research on the internet?
Yeah.
That they're, like, putting together their own narratives.
Because the people that they're supposed to trust who are giving them the official proper
narrative are just blatantly lying.
And in some cases, it's killing people.
And so, how can you, how can you blame them for trying to seek out truth on the internet
using whatever tools they have at their disposal?
Like, I think that's just a rational response, actually.
Yeah.
Like, that is actually, that's the irony of this whole thing is, like, that doing your
own research is the rational response.
Because the, like, rational empirical science, as it was told to us, gives such an irrational,
chaotic, terrible result.
Right?
Like, once you learn to distrust the official sources, you have to find it somewhere.
Yeah.
And so, these alternative media figures have become kind of, like, Robin Hood-type archetypes
for, you know, they're stealing from the illegitimate society and they're giving back to the masses.
Yeah.
And I think that is...
I like that, Josh.
It makes me sound pretty cool.
It's directly correlated to the demise and the crumbling of institutions, I would say.
What keeps you doing the show?
It's a lot of work.
What keeps me going is that I like being challenged.
It's fun.
I know it affects people in a good way.
It affects a lot of people, actually.
Yeah.
I do get to hear stories like that a lot.
It's like, when you're so busy, it's hard to, like, really take it in.
But, I mean, I do hear, it's cool.
Like, I don't, you don't know how it's going to affect people.
I was talking about that feeling you could get from, like, allowing your worldview to be questioned or, like, shaken and, like, that foundation to be maybe destroyed and, like, get the chance to rebuild.
It's cool, like, I don't, like, I don't know what the foundation is that's going to be, like, shaken from people.
I don't know what they're going to do after, but it's really interesting to see how the show affects people.
I've gotten some, like, pretty extreme...
It changes people's lives.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I mean, I told you one earlier that was, like, something I can't repeat, but, like...
Yeah, people...
That only happens once.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Jack, your work, both in the field of podcasting, shitposting, of all of the years that we've followed each other and collaborated, it's just been such a tremendous and incredible influence.
And so, I'm so happy to continue working with you.
I'm so happy that we got to do this.
Josh, thank you.
And it's just been an absolute pleasure to talk to you today.
Same.
I have actually...
Can I give you something before we go?
Please.
One sec.
You're going to like this.
Oh, boy.
Wow.
Okay.
The original for posterity.
I think you got to wear it, too.
The very first...
I'll put it on.
Hopefully, I don't cut into my mic here.
It looks great on you.
The original chart of truth meme that we did our first episodes about.
You look amazing.
It's actually...
I feel like it's not that bad.
Schizophrenic Tony Soprano.
Yes.
No, it's kind of cool.
The iceberg looks cool.
Literally, it looks cool on you.
Well, hopefully, I get to wear it with a little bit of style.
Can you read a couple of these for me?
Yeah.
So, for people who are not familiar with this particular image, this is one of the very
long, original iceberg memes called the chart of truth that has, I believe, what are we,
tier nine?
But it's even longer than the shirt.
It's even longer than the shirt.
I think there's tier 10 or 12.
I had to compress this quite a bit, yeah.
Because the aspect ratio is like, it's a scroll.
Yeah.
Yeah.
But there are 50 to 70 different conspiracy theories on all of these.
Maybe because I'm wearing the shirt, I'll ask you to read a few of them because I can't
necessarily read it upside down.
This is tier four.
Uh, dude, some of these are so ridiculous, I don't even know.
Dighton Rock, Bunkers in Mars, Triassic Mystery, Montanism, uh, Operation Paperclip, I know
that.
I'm familiar with that one.
Cuban Yellow Balloons.
Let's go to a different category.
Web Driver Torso Codes.
Where's level nine?
Solar Plexus Clown Gliders.
That's, I'm really into that.
Skin is an alien parasite.
See, when you go deeper, you get ones that are more statements, which I'm really into.
Smart Dust.
Secret Gate.
I like the...
Chakra Removal.
Chakra Removal, I'm really interested in.
Sexual slash Erotic Energy.
What else do we got in here?
Big Soy.
Big Soy, that's real.
Big Soy is, yeah, yeah.
Tier four.
Okay, tier three.
Have you heard of Sentient?
Interdimensional Monk is a great one.
That's a good tier.
Have you heard of...
Gatekeeper's Remorse?
Gatekeeper's Remorse.
Oh, this one will get you banned on YouTube, I can't say it out loud.
That's the...
Yeah, there's a few...
Wait, but...
Is that the Reptilians over there?
Is that...
I'll say we got it out.
Jews forced to be in power.
Those are my favorite ones in the trial of the truth, where it's like, okay, the conspiracy
is real, but it's not their fault, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah.
So, but you look great.
I like it.
I like it.
I think I'm gonna...
I'm gonna wear it, and I'm gonna put it into the thumbnail for this video, actually.
Yeah, you look wonderful.
Maybe you should be wearing it the entire time.
I'm gonna shop it onto you, because I'm not gonna be caught dead wearing this shit.
I'm joking.
I'm joking.
Jack, thank you so much.
Thank you for having me.
This was so much fun.
This was really fun.
Yeah.
Thanks, Josh.
Thanks, Josh.
