Your favorite album will probably be an album that you hate the first time you hear it.
That's the definition of the avant-garde, right?
There's some kind of like culturally progressive force,
but then there's also a like willingness to experiment with a new tool, new piece of technology.
So media consumption has been individualized.
Subculture has been individualized and commodified.
The cautionary tale of my last record, which was essentially like,
don't get red-pilled and black-pilled.
Try normal life-maxing.
Welcome to Doomscroll.
I'm your host, Joshua Citarella.
My guest is Matty Healy, a musician, an artist, and the frontman of the 1975.
My work has always kind of served as like a cautionary tale for emerging technologies,
how we're communicating all within the context of what traditional pop music will talk about,
you know, like love relationships and stuff like that.
I'm sure we'll talk about my last show, which was kind of a cautionary tale about the situation we have with
young men who are dealing with articulating a kind of a modern form of masculinity and how maybe the left,
which I'm historically a part of, doesn't quite have the equipment to bring in these or capitalize on this,
this group of floundering young men, because, you know...
We don't have the language for it.
We don't have the language and also we don't have the archetypes.
We didn't have tools like professional managerial class.
I mean, we had them.
We had them from 1971.
They existed, but they weren't in popular use.
They weren't colloquial terms that people could like, oh, that's like PMC.
We're in a different society now where it's all about self-actualization.
It's all about becoming the most best authentic version of yourself.
Right.
Without any institutions to kind of guide you of how to do that, it's difficult, right?
So a lot of young men will find a Jordan Peterson video, not to talk shit on any particular academic.
I'm not a very partisan person, but you will get people who will be like, basically,
understand that idea of being like, oh, you're a man who wants to be a man.
Right, right.
He has literally 12 rules of how to do, you know what I mean?
So it's only 12.
Only 12.
Sounds actually quite easy to do.
So my last show was in part kind of a traditional rock show and in part a performance art piece
that kind of operated a bit like a play in its first act and a traditional rock show in its second act.
And the first act came from the COVID years and me becoming single over that time and basically
starting to consume from what started out as a kind of interesting, a perspective of being
interested in these subcultures of internet.
And I started being fed all of this algorithmic kind of extremism.
Oh, they got you.
They got you targeted.
They got me targeted.
Yeah, yeah.
So luckily there's people like us that can kind of see that as an objective phenomena and not be
too influenced by it.
But I became aware of how influential it was.
And I basically was trying to navigate of how not to get caught up in that world.
The one thing I would add to this, because we tend to use these words like extreme and fringe and so
on, but we're in a unique period of society and history where we actually have quantitative
metrics about how many people watch this stuff.
And the question I keep asking guests who come onto this podcast is how do we describe something
that is fringe, subcultural or outside the mainstream if it is quantitatively larger than
the mainstream?
Right.
Is there something that we need to redefine here?
Like if everybody is watching this, like maybe that just is actually the new extreme,
the new mainstream, and it is not extreme.
It is not fringe.
This is the problem that we get into, that we'll get into in a little bit.
Yeah, you're totally right that anything that becomes...
Listen, consumer capitalism understands trends better than anybody.
Yes, it does.
So as soon as something is alternative, it becomes immediately corrupted by the mainstream.
Yeah, yeah.
Now, you see that in music a lot now.
In its most, I think, extreme way, you have these, I don't want to single anybody out,
but I'm sure you can imagine who it is.
There's this group of TikTok punks, essentially.
TikTok punks.
Well, kind of, there's this, basically, there's this new scene of very overtly alternative artists,
in the way that we would describe somebody who's gone to Hot Topic.
Right.
Do you know what I mean?
And we're in this weird place where, for their young audience, they are presenting these ideas
as kind of, and these aesthetics, chains, skirts, doing that.
Yeah, yeah.
Being alternative in the way we were 50 years ago, 40 years ago.
And they're basically presenting authenticity as just another commodity in an aesthetic.
So, the fact that they are, fuck the man, but all signed to, like, Island Records.
And they're also referencing Sid Vicious in the same sentence that they reference Good Charlotte and Avril Lavigne.
Now, our generation knows that that version of punk was a bunch of white dudes in suits going,
oh, people like Silverchair and Nirvana, we need a pop version.
And that's where you got, like, your kind of early 2000s alternative music,
which were all the biggest artists in the world, do you know what I mean?
And would you say that part of the rise of this new kind of reactionary online culture
has to do with that commodification of the, like, counterculture?
Oh, yeah, totally.
The idea of punk that you and I both grew up with.
Totally.
And if that is now mainstream and sold to you through, like, Hot Topic and everything else,
then, yeah, it's kind of not surprising that, like,
the inverse of that then feels like a little bit more dangerous or something.
Well, it's weird for me because as I've gotten older, I think I've been able to articulate these ideas
a lot better.
But I've been feeling them for a long time.
So, for example, when I started, the band became known in this very, very interesting transition
or kind of passing of the baton from traditional linear media institutions to social media,
which was so you basically used to have the enemy that would choose a band,
put them on the front cover, give you one song and say, this is your new favorite band.
I'll just kind of define for the audience the performance piece that was really a centerpiece
of your last live show involved beginning with a plate of what appeared to be a healthy,
hefty portion of raw meat, which you proceeded to consume in front of the audience.
You then do a bit of a workout routine.
You're doing some shirtless push-ups in the beginning.
Behind you is what appears to be, I mean, I would not be surprised to see this performance
in an art gallery or a museum. This was just a piece of performance art in the middle of a rock
show. There's a wall of TVs behind you. They're playing what appears to be protest footage,
different news clips. I recognize a few faces from kind of the conservative alternative media sphere.
And towards the end of this, you literally crawl through the television screen and go down the
rabbit hole, so to speak. So I thought it was a beautiful piece of performance art. I thought it
was very empathetic. I thought it was an interesting way to explore the phenomena of masculinity that I
know both you and I are very interested in, especially in the last few years. Like we're
both kind of artsy, creative types. We were not like macho jocks in high school.
Yeah, we were beaten up for being gay.
Yes, exactly. And I wasn't even gay in high school.
This is the whole thing. And I had long hair and that was enough.
Yeah, exactly, exactly. And now it's like these things have all been like thoroughly
redefined. And it's a kind of interesting media experiment, but then also kind of like
interesting social experience just to see how the definition of masculinity has shifted within
that period. And so you were exploring this through art. It naturally went absurdly viral
on TikTok and a number of other places. And the reaction, the public reaction to that has been
kind of an interesting real-time test of all of these different media theories at once.
It made me aware of this new culture that Brad, Brad Trammell for people watching,
which is our good friend, who wrote part of the show with me. The phenomena that he coined as
literalism. Yes.
So this idea of, I consume the art and the moral values within the art adhere to mine,
and the person who's making the art therefore aligns with me morally and socially.
Right.
Now, art used to be less of a mirror and more of a door that we opened, you know? And if you look
at like the nineties with your kind of the culture of Gen X, they were very interested in opening as
many doors as possible to see what their limits were and then going, yeah, I'm good with that.
But not that that shouldn't happen. Right, right.
So what I thought was interesting is that for me, it was obvious what I was doing from an artistic
perspective, but to some, to a lot of people, even people with context, it was quite confusing.
And I think that the reason it was confusing nowadays is because let's call it a meme culture.
So the primary discourse in like youth culture now is, is kind of through memes. So it's sharing
these images or these ideas that are immediately very understandable and relatable. Yes.
So if you consume something now within that environment, be it in a, in a clear net environment,
um, tick tock or something.
Clear net is, uh, for the audience, big open social media platforms that are free to use,
that are driven by advertising. So Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, anything you don't have to
pay to post, there's no paywall and et cetera. So clear net, everyone can see it.
Yeah. And we'll get into that later that underneath that you have this kind of dark forest with emerging
kind of platforms. And then the one that we all know underneath that is the, is the dark web,
a topology of internet culture. So we'll get into this, but clear net right now,
we're just like big open social media and the responses are, uh, driven a lot by attention,
by attention and by incentive as well. So you have lots of phenomenas that we know about in regards to,
I wasn't playing any, uh, good or bad character. I was trying to be as objective in my performance
about, listen, this is not where you want to end up. Do you know what I mean?
Right. Right.
So I would be doing these things that were, I think when you look at them on, on the screen,
quite provocative, but a part of the show felt a little bit more surreal and kind of acceptable
because you were in an environment where you were there to watch art. You weren't like in your
kitchen. Yes. Yes.
And I think that when you're exposed to things that require context or are supposed to elicit
a real conversation, um, in an environment that isn't really about that,
you get all of these emerging phenomenas happening.
Would you say that part of the conversation that ensued online was, um, perhaps a fulfillment
of the piece to, to, to provoke these conversations to be had in the first place?
Yeah, it was. And it also got into a problem that, that basically there would be all of this
conversation around what I was doing, why I was doing it and what it meant. So we, everyone knows
that that's kind of the point of performance art. Right.
To generate a conversation which becomes part of the art itself. Yeah. Yeah.
So I've, I learned very much in the early days of social media that you can kind of control a
narrative, right? You can control the conversation that you want to be had around you fairly well.
The weird thing about that show is that every other performance like that,
a performance in a gallery, a theater performance, a movie, a standup comedy thing, you can't film it.
You're not allowed to film it. A rock show you were invited to film it. Right. Yeah.
So I had this scripted thing that on day two went live to the whole world. So I had to kind of keep
rewriting it. So then I was reacting to what was being said. So it was becoming this quite like
meta kind of thing. And, um, this is something that you can relate to. So me and you used to,
with our social media and stuff. And I think me from a brief inquiry onwards, we would
draw from the most extreme parts of the internet. Yes.
And we would post about them because we found that culture interesting. And
shadow band over and over all these kinds of things. Now, what we were doing was presenting
this new phenomena of behavior and asking people to engage with us in a conversation of what it was
about, whether we make art about it and stuff like that. And because I was doing that, whenever people
would miss the point, I think that I got into the habit of being like, well, my track record speaks
for itself, or this is art or context, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah. But what I realized that I was
actually getting myself into, and I've heard you use this sentence before, is a kind of a series of
moments of context collapse where people became genuinely unaware of what I was on a lampooning,
what I was unironically platforming, what I was supporting and what I wasn't. So I've stopped doing
that as much anymore. I think that the, you know, there's a certain, uh, section of my fans that are
very like me, that are very interested in this thing that like the kind of posty thing, because
like me and you, they like taking silly things seriously, which is, I think that we, we, we take
that idea very, very seriously. But for a lot of people, you know, what I realized is that I don't
want to, I don't want one of my posts or something that I say or do to alienate some young person
who takes their affiliation with a community, say it's like even being into the 1975, like seriously,
I think that I've grown to have a bit more responsibility with the way that I talk about
these kinds of things. This is precisely the question is what, um, what are the threshold or
the parameters of responsibility with a large audience? Right. And I'm, I'm personally conflicted
about this. This is maybe something we can explore a little bit more deeply, but, um, for, uh, uh,
just to give the citations here. So context collapse is a term that was coined by Dana Boyd,
who was the founder of data and society, which is a think tank that specializes in social media.
It is also sometimes, um, analogized to pose law, which was, uh, a rule that emerged on 4chan,
but basically anything that is said in jest or an irony on the internet given to a scale of like
millions and millions of people, someone in there is going to take it a hundred percent seriously.
And so this, um, this is kind of the media theory behind why we need to have certain, uh,
levels of individual responsibility in what we post. Now the, the flip side of that, um, my concern
is that when we enforce those things too heavily, um, and we're saying that people are not able to deal
or interpret or should not be exposed to complicated art. We're saying that most people are too stupid
to get involved with art. Right. And that's actually a profoundly anti-democratic thing that
they're too dumb to make up their own minds. If you extrapolate that out a bit further, it's like,
well, they can't have aesthetic preferences. They can't choose what art and culture they like to
participate in. Should they be able to vote? You know, there's like really weird downstream
implications when you start to say that most people are too stupid to make up their own minds.
So I, you know, I'm willing to concede that there are certain parameters. I, I behave a lot more
better on social media now before I would share all sorts of like extreme material. I mean,
I literally wrote a book about it. I'm willing to have a long form conversation.
I find what is maybe similar to your experience. What really, um, restricts the kind of like
outrageous posting that I would do before is that now I'm part of an organization and part of a
community. Right. And so I think about how my personal post is going to affect the career of like
a 24 year old BFA student who they put their work on to do not research. And this is like,
you know, the, the thing that they get up in the morning to do, they really care about that art.
And it's like, I would hate for my shit post to be misinterpreted and then negatively affect this
kid who's just like aspiring to get his foot in the door for some creative career.
For sure.
That's really, that's really, I have the same thing. Like, um,
I ran into a series of issues with basically, you know, I am an artist first and I also run more
creatively run my record label. So I'm, I'm not a boss, but I'm a figurehead for a lot of other
artists. Now what conflicts me is I don't want my right to express myself exactly how I want to
negatively impact on those people that I'm genuinely trying to empower. You know what I mean? And it's
difficult being like, uh, different artists and being disparate and all trying to kind of operate
under the same, I don't want to call it like a moral framework, but a, um, a, you know, a, I don't
know how you would describe it. A kind of a way of behaving that adheres to a 20 year old girl or a
35 year old man that's been doing something else. So, um, one of the challenges for me is, um,
um, doing something like a show at the garden that people leave saying, wow, that was a really,
really interesting music show. And you did, you did this piece of performance art at the garden.
Yeah, we did it at some of the biggest kind of venues in the world. The energy in those rooms was,
was electric because I think people will get into the cancellation of the future. But I think that
when people go to environments and they experience something that is even in a new, in a, in a, in a,
in a small way, new, it's, it's, it's, it's very exciting. And I think that I just wanted to, um,
do something that felt a bit more reflective of what media is like now. Do you know what I mean? And
how the, how it makes you feel it's difficult to kind of explain, explain the show, but one of the
things that I had to become aware of is that we're like quite a big band and there's what I'm
interested in. One of the things that I think that is important for me is to take
more academic ideas from my peers and my friends, like you or Tremel or whoever it was,
and kind of present them in an, in an understandable and kind of appropriate way within pop music. So,
you know, the reason that I didn't do, we didn't want to do a show at a, um, a gallery or something
like that is not just because of our resentment for institutions, but also is because I wanted to
do it in an environment that had a large audience and kind of was as much as I could make high or art
with, with a broad appeal, you know, because it's actually ironic that as long as there's,
there's groups of people like me thinking the same way, you've kind of got more chance now of going
to a rock show and experiencing a real piece of art than you do going to a museum. Yes. Yeah. I mean,
the, the great irony, and this is a similar to what you mentioned before of, uh, as Fisher describes
the slow cancellation of the future. So for, for my fans, your fans will know all about that.
Sure. Just explain that. Cause this is a theory that me and you riff on all the time.
Yeah. Yeah. Hauntology, slow cancellation of the future. These are ideas that are coming from,
uh, a pop culture theorist. Let's say pop culture, political theorist named Mark Fisher,
whose famous book, Capitalist Realism written in the, uh, the fallout from 2008 kind of explores this,
um, problem of the 21st century of not having a political alternative. Socialism was defeated.
It's capitalism from here on and forever. What Fisher is writing about is the developmental
arc of neoliberalism. When we talk about lost futures, there's a perpetual nostalgia for the
eighties. Now, what happened in the 1980s? It was Reagan in my country and Thatcher where you grew up
and, uh, the Volcker shock with profound interest rates and, uh, shoring up of the money supply and the
advent of neoliberalism in which everybody got a lot more poor and started to work harder for less.
And so the, uh, kind of utopian imaginaries, the optimistic visions of the future that had emerged
in the sixties, seventies, leading up until that point began to recede from popular culture.
If you look at the kind of imaginaries of like, you know, I think of, uh, the original series of
Star Trek, which I grew up watching, like they had communism in the future. They had post-scarcity.
It's like, yeah, it was like utopia. No one, people just pursue their own intellectual
interests. No one wants for anything. Um, they have replicators that just like 3d print
their food all of a sudden. And the future imaginaries of the 21st century are things
that are like totally dystopian. They're all falling apart. It's all like, you know,
the, the future has extreme wealth disparity and people are living in poverty and, uh,
we're uploading our brains to the internet and then the robots are going to kill us.
Uh, that's the future imaginary that we have now. This slow cancellation of the future, uh,
something that you and I talk about a lot corresponds to in aesthetic stagnation on top of the political and
economic stagnation in that the amount of creative risk that people could take in previous generations
was proportionately more. And that was mostly because the wage for was high. The cost of living
was low. And so the total amount of decommodified time, like you could spend 25, 30% of your time
just making punk music or doing your weird art practice. And you never have to worry if you like
sell that album or you sell that painting and you can just kind of experiment and like, you know,
experience the joy of creating stuff, aesthetic pleasure and so on. And as society has become
more and more privatized over the course of neoliberalism, the total amount of free time
that people have to pursue creative practices is, uh, basically that has disappeared from
contemporary life. Yeah. And what it's created is this hyper commodified, uh, sphere of art where
the only art that is worth making or is, or is possible to make is, is art that is successful
financially or does numbers has to be immediately successful, has to be immediately successful.
So yeah, listen, you're so articulate and, and, and the, what you just said had all of the
information, but some people might be, might have to watch that about three or four times.
What you're kind of saying is that like, in like the nineties, you could have a job
in the service industry and you could work as a musician at night. Do you know what I mean?
The economy allowed you to do two things. So you could make experimental music that went out to a
certain group of people and you could work in a coffee shop and you could afford rent.
Exactly.
So the economy allowed for you to do that. Phoebe Buffay was the, the ultimate, uh, pop culture
example of that kind of, uh, economic, uh, result of, of, of a type of artist. When, like you said,
once neoliberalism kind of started to totally decay, any socially democratic aspects of society and
your art funding went away and stuff like that, young people were forced to, well, there was
actually this really interesting thing that happened that when we were growing up in the nineties,
the one thing you didn't do was sell out. So if you, so if you were making just enough money to live
off your art, don't sign the check for Nike because you're kind of getting into bed with consumer
capitalism, the hour at the time community of artists is fighting against. Once it was so obvious
that consumer capitalism and the, the, the marching horizonless, uh, kind of a motion of neoliberalism
were had won. Young people had to change this idea from selling out to getting the bag.
Yes. So now, so now you, you get the bag. Yeah. Yeah. That was the millennial experience.
It's like, I'm a bootstrapping entrepreneur. This is it. Right. So I think that like, um,
I think that what happened was that young people became encouraged to make art for money. Right.
And the art that young people can make for money is homogenous art for big companies. Yeah. So for
example, the most creative young graphic designer now is probably just making some flat design for
an internet startup. Do you know what I mean? Because that's the only thing that they can afford
to do. You have that issue. And then from a kind of class issue, which isn't so much of a thing that
I see spoken about in America, because you have such a huge middle class, it's very different, but I was
brought up in an incredibly class orientated environment. My dad was a, I come from a kind
of second generation, upper middle class. And my dad was a, um, was a welder who became an, a standup
comedian. And then he became an actor in this TV show called RV design pet. And it was a show about
Thatcher's, uh, the era of kind of the, the loss of subsidization of industry in the north of England,
and all of these working class blue collar men and communities of men having to go to Germany
to work, to make money. And this show, it was a comedy and my dad kind of became like a political,
cultural figurehead. So I grew up in all of this kind of anti-Thatcher, very much aware of how social
mobility worked and the social mobility in my family was acquired through art. Now, the issue that we have
now with neoliberalism is neoliberalism has decayed. This is a Fisher thing, but it has decayed any
socially democratic aspect of society that previously allowed the working class to be a dominant part of
the cultural production of our society. So basically poor people used to be able to do that. So my dad was
a welder, right? And he won day down tools and wanted to be a standup comedian. And from the government,
just by asking them got enough money to buy an ambulance and him and his friend decided to do the
first ever, they were, they were touring comedians in comedy clubs where toothless henchmen would be like,
I'll give you 20 pence to make me laugh. You'd be like, fucking hell. And they, they were like,
fuck it. Let's go and do a play in these environments. So they put a small set in an
ambulance and they would drive to the Dunstan working man's social club. Incredible. And they
would do a play to these confused people. But what that turned into was a company that still exists
on the key side in Newcastle called the live theater company. And it still is a
environment that invites young people to come in and experiment with theater. Now,
Incredible. Those kinds of things just aren't funded now. So we have these
physical monuments that I actually kind of go to see. What's the word when you religiously go and
Pilgrimage. I almost go with pilgrimages to these monuments to see not only what my dad created, but
what the, the kind of economy and the social fabric that I was brought up in. And I was kind of
promised, created. That's the lost future right there. That's the lost future right there. And so
what I have been really interested in over the past couple of years is, uh, we lost Fisher tragically
in 2017 in the only way I think he could have gone. I would have been really interested to see what
he thought about my band because I couldn't articulate these ghosts in our society that we
can all feel, but we don't really know how to put our finger on what he was basically saying for a lot
of people who don't know his work is that the 21st century is defined by its inability to
articulate itself aesthetically and politically. Fisher puts it the 21st century is just the 20th
century on higher resolution screens. And, um, indeed it is. And, and, and the only before the
comments fill up with, um, with people talking about the, the, the, the elements of maybe slight
short sightedness in those writings, because I think the emergence of real subcultures that didn't
last for very long, like witch house and the influence of, I think the most influential band
of the past 20 years is three, six mafia, hands down. There is no band or there is no group or people
who made music, whose pop music references more. It's the tempo of trap music. It's the, they started
doing this. Rapping became like that. That's all three things. It's all pop. It's all trap. So black music
started to articulate the 21st century a bit when we got to around about 2011 and onwards. And that's
kind of when I came out again, just to, to explain this theory to, to my fans who maybe not quite
understand it is that we've gotten to a place now where we can't quite imagine something truly
revolutionary and new and spending the time and acquire building the audience for that new
revolutionary thing is too expensive. It's exactly my favorite example of this is, um, and it's a
fantastic film, the Irishman where, uh, when the film was sold, it has, you know, stars Robert De Niro and
he ages, I don't know, like what, like 40 years in the course of the narrative. Uh, it was easier to
sell the film and to later invent the technology to de-age him rather than to invest in another young
actor who could play the younger version of him. And I think, uh, this is very pronounced in film,
the kind of classic, the easy example of it is just this infinite reboots of films that have already
been made. And that's not like necessarily, oh, well, um, we were overdue for another one of these.
Like we, uh, we do these every 10 years. It's because from a financial viewpoint, it's a really risky
investment to put money into any sort of new IP. So people accumulate this massive amount of data.
They become very risk averse in a, uh, in an environment that is not yielding a ton of profits.
And they're like, I'm going to invest in the safest thing possible. And that means I'm going to do
500,000 Marvel movie reboots. And that's the only culture we're going to get.
Okay. We're going to get more Star Wars and we're going to get it every year on Christmas or whatever,
but we're never going to invest in something that is aesthetically new.
You see this across film. You see it across music. You see it across art in the art world
in particular, which is my background. You see everything has now taken the shape of a 30 by
40 painting that fits over the couch because that's the only thing that can sell and being
risk averse in a condition of declining rates of profit is just a very rational thing. But this
underlying political economic situation is shaping our aesthetics and our culture. And so when you see
this played out in different fields, it feels very, uh, kind of safe and boring. And it doesn't
have this like radically new aesthetic experience that we had in decades previous.
Before you start this, this is what I want you to talk to you about. And I've written this down.
I want to talk to you about the museum of ice creamification.
But this is our thing. Yeah. Yeah. And this is only stuff that I write down when we're on the phone
that I want to go into more with you. But what I wanted to ask you was about this concept, the museum of
ice creamification of art institutions, how they have become an adult daycare centers,
and the loss of gatekeeping in art institutions being a bad thing in general, how alternative
institutions need to be subsidized to recreate a culture that is defined by creation rather than
consumption and AI and clear net platforms being anti-creation and pro-consumption. So explain to my
audience the museum of ice creamification of art institutions.
Well, okay. So, um, if you're a young creative, you have probably grown up with this idea that,
um, what we need to do as like progressives, very broadly speaking, is we have to overthrow
the corrupt institution. That's right. They're like, that's the man, that's what you should be
fighting against and whatever. Uh, and I would say that there's actually, there's a conflict right now
amongst the ruling class about how they prefer to organize society. Some people like to be patrons,
uh, but others do not. And so in the period that both you and I grew up, one of the things that was
offered to young creatives was a platform in which anyone can post. There's no editors,
there's no curators, there's no gatekeepers. You can bypass any opinion and just post what you want
to the platforms. Those people, this is very curious and pronounced in the art world, they never donated to
museums. Unlike the, the Carnegie's, unlike the Fricks, unlike all of the robber barons of the 20th
century that, you know, pillaged society, but then gave back in the form of these extraordinary
libraries and museums and public institutions like the opera, for example, the new 21st century
Silicon Valley robber barons have not chosen to give back to culture. And that's actually
very unique thing in the development of capitalism, because usually when people take a lot off of the
table, they give something back in some way. I think that's an ideological decision because what
they would say is that we actually built all the platforms in which you can upload all of your
thoughts to YouTube, you can post them to Twitter or whatever. And so now everybody is an artist and
we gave you the means to do that to publish and so on. So everybody's an activist. And well, that is,
that is naturally, naturally one of the results. So I like to take this kind of contrarian position
in that what we are seeing is actually an erosion of the public of the public sphere and of public goods
through this competing structure of the platform. And so I think actually the generation, the logic
that we were raised with to rebel against the institutions is kind of pretty outmoded by like
20 years, right? These are relatively new phenomena, like the mass adoption curve of Facebook is like
2012. So, I mean, the way in which the academy catches up to these things, we're still a few decades
away. Like we're still learning this kind of Foucault boomer, like rebel against the institutions,
whatever. But like the institutions are more weak than they've ever been. They were actually
thoroughly defeated. And so I'm a big proponent of not using the platforms as our desired alternatives.
I think we need to build new institutions. Exactly. I'm not saying the existing ones are
savable. I think that the task of our generation, people like you and me, is to build new institutions,
new trustworthy institutions. Because the platforms are turning everything into the
fucking museum of ice cream, where everything is content for ad views and so on. If you look at
the new Van Gogh experience, the new Van Gogh experience, which is an institutional art,
is an art institution saying, come and see our art show. They are not actually expecting people to come
and revel in the aesthetic delights of projectors. What they want you to do is come and create content
that becomes advertisement for the institution itself. Same with the Museum of Ice Cream.
They are no longer art institutions. They are essentially adverts for the concept of an art
institution or the art institution itself, which is why you'll go to a gallery and you'll walk in and
you'll go, the cause times Rick and More-y experience. And you'll have some art speak.
But what it's actually for- I could actually see that happening.
Right, right? What it's actually for is- It's a Brad post next week,
and it's a real thing two weeks later. This is the whole thing.
One of the things, let's start with that idea of the idea of the ice creamification of art
institutions. Now, it's not just art institutions, but it's big media corporations. So take whatever
example of a huge artist or a concept like Marvel. Again, Tramiel will talk about this. The most
enduring product that has been created by those companies is the consumer identity of the people
who are into it. Right.
So what Marvel or other artists have realized over the past 15 years with social media and people's kind of
projection of who they are is that being a fan of something is now a form of political identity. So when I
grew up, when I grew up, if you were a super fan of something, if you went over to someone's house
and they were a super fan of something, before you went in their bedroom, they would go, listen,
I'm not fucking weird. Just, just don't judge me.
Are you thinking of like a specific person right now?
Yeah, there's a couple of people who were like, oasis, and you'd walk in,
and their room was a shrine to this thing. It's just everywhere.
And the relationship was, I don't know how the camera can pick me up, but say there's a poster
on your wall. Your relationship was looking at this poster. Your relationship with fandom now is,
is going like this to the poster, like showing other people who you are through your kind of fandom.
And you therefore become essentially a part of the promotional labor force of the company itself.
I mean, this is practically speaking, it's called user generated content. It's built into
advertising campaigns. Exactly. So how many people you can get to spread the post and share it and
engagement? Exactly. I don't like doing that because I think it's very, very contrived. So I
try and stay away from that in the kind of, in the 1975 sphere. And so that's one of the interesting,
one of the interesting things and about that kind of our institutional problem, art and aesthetics
is how we compute and understand time. And when that dissolves,
the depressive flattening of culture is what Fisher talks about. And again, for my fans,
let me just give like a really obvious example. If I said to anybody, the sixties or the seventies or
the eighties, the first thing that you would think of is the cultural producers of those times.
Fifties rock and roll, sixties hippies, seventies disco and punk, eighties rave and a new rave into
rave and stuff like that. They were so overtly articulate in, in, in, in their time and who
they were. And even if you look at compilations of the nineties of films where people go, it's the
nineties. Yeah. Yeah. We knew kind of where we were. If you say, what was the sound of 1974?
What was the sound of 1984? You can normally figure that out. You can always track that to the month.
Yeah. Whereas if I said, what's the sound of 2009?
A lot fuzzier. It's a lot fuzzier. Right. And it's, and Fisher says that it's one of the issues
is that when we got to the two thousands, culture stopped feeding us this idea that a future was ever
going to come. So again, to stick with the nineties, you had movies like fight club and the matrix,
which were, I don't think I've coined this term. Maybe I've heard it, but we're cubicle movies where
the protagonist was trapped in an office cubicle. Modern life is boring. And every movie was about
the future crashing into earth. Independence day. It was all about this future coming. And we were
promised futures that involved a lot more physical technologies as well. So what happened with music
is it got to the two thousands and the biggest artists from that time were Amy Winehouse and Adele,
and they were doing versions of the sixties. Yes. So what Fisher said was like, look, if you took a
piece of music from the nineties, we took a piece of Aphex twin back 30 years. Oh my God.
It would re-imagine their content. They would go, this isn't even music. Right. Right. I am so stunned
by how unrelatable this is. Yeah. If you took a piece of music now, even from the far left field,
and you took it back to somebody 30 years, which is the nineties and you played at them, they'd be
struck by how understandable and how relatable and how not different it is. Yes. Now we've, we've touched
upon one of the reasons for that being that when neoliberalism and its horizonless kind of progression
started to erode any art funding started to erode any space where a squat or a rave or anything truly
culturally generative could happen, it flattened what art is like. That is, um, partially an issue to do
with economics, but it's also to do with physical technologies disappearing very simply the sixties
Jimi Hendrix and the overtly distorted guitar. Okay. The seventies Brian Eno and the synthesizer
the eighties, uh, kind of the fair child, you know, with Peter Gabriel and throbbing gristle.
And then the nineties Apex twin and the DAW and basically logic and pro tools. Right now in music
since the mid nineties, since a DAW, which is a platform where you can create music on your
computer, there has been no new physical technologies. It's all software. Everything is
software and everything is codified and everything happens in a screen. Now, if you look at the story of
like when throbbing gristle moved to psychic TV and a sleazy went off to do coil, when he started coil,
he was a young person and he was part of a culture where young people were literally thinking because
they could economically and stuff like that. I don't know if I want to start a band because I don't
know how it could be new. There's nothing physically new that can make what I do new.
Right. So I might not do it. And Peter Gabriel before kind of, I think it might have been before
so, or maybe a bit earlier was kind of thinking the same thing. Then the fair child existed
and it opened up all of this new stuff. So one of the issues that we have now that is, I think that
that's the definition of the avant garde, right? There's some kind of like culturally progressive force,
but then there's also a like willingness to experiment with a new tool, a new piece of
technology. Yes, that's right. A new piece of technology that is inherently going to alienate
people that are already into something that's previously successful. Right. And the paradigm
under which I grew up, and I think you as well, is like that was kind of the point of art was like
exploring these new horizons for human expression. Yeah, it's really weird because like I said,
when you, we don't only live in a 20th century culture on 21st century screens, we also still really,
really understand ideas that were so prevalent in the 20th century. Like your favorite album will
probably be an album that you hate the first time you hear it. Right now, getting a young artist who
signed to a major label to make a record like that, this, this, this long term investment, you know,
I mean, like it's, it's just, it's not a profitable, feasible way of doing anything anymore. So I think
that one of the problems that we have with the stagnation is that the revolution of music has
only happened in the space of distribution. It hasn't happened in the space recently of creation.
Yeah. Yeah. But I think that me, you, Brad, whoever it may be, there's these groups of people who
are aware of how cringe is, but also aware that like in the sixties and the seventies,
these young artists were really interested in kind of changing the world and changing the way
that things went. And now you're not really encouraged to do that. It's kind of a bit,
it's a bit, uh, yeah, you're getting too big for your, your bootstraps. And I think that
one of the things that I think that me and you and other people are taking on now as a challenge,
and we're just starting to have conversations about alternative institutions and stuff like that.
And I want to talk to you about this charity initiative that I'm, that I'm recently involved
in that is hopefully going to try and challenge the idea of a lack of art funding where I came from,
stopping young people being able to do music and art. But, um, we are very, we are quite good at the
diagnostic, but nobody's that good at the prescriptive, right? So we can diagnose all of
these issues. How we actually create a new alternative is very, very difficult because
you start to think, right, well, okay, then new music isn't that new. So how do I make it new?
So people start experimenting in these kind of futuristic ways. Whereas if I said to you,
what does futuristic music sound like? We all still think it sounds like craft work.
It's already a genre.
It's already a genre.
Yeah. So futuristic music is actually a 20th century genre in the way that
punk or reggae is. Do you know what I mean? So it's kind of like music that we think robots would
listen to a little bit.
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. And I think that whereas I suppose what
Fisher is saying is where are the artists who come out that sound like they've never heard music
for? Right. Right.
Right.
I don't really know what my new record is going to be like, but the thing that I've been experimenting
with is because the only revolution in music recently has been within the distribution, has been the
emergence of new distribution platforms, trying to use those platforms as instruments itself.
Huh? So, yeah, yeah.
Practically, you're kind of looking at Geisen and Burroughs cut up technique, which has essentially been
what everyone's been doing as a form of collage. But for me, sampling, I'm obsessed with from a kind
of Fisher kind of idea. You know, if you want to read Ghosts of My Life, there's a beautiful
piece, a moment where he talks about crackle, why I've never even thought about the thought of crackle
in modern music. But not only is it telling you that this music isn't of now, it's also reminding
you of the of the technologies in which we used to consume it. And this idea of we're totally lost in
this kind of timeless malaise. A nowhere time, as he calls it, in the way that a nowhere place would
be an airport or an industrial estate. Years have started to feel like airports are industrial
estates. I can't remember the aesthetic difference between 2019 and now.
Where time has stopped, time is standing still.
Time has really stopped, or the future has stopped. Do you know what I mean?
The future isn't coming.
The future isn't coming anymore. And so with them sampling before the internet,
the only things you could sample were things that were on records. So music or spoken word.
Now we have everything on the internet. TikToks, personal, whatever it may be.
Trying to use that as much as an instrument, it can be difficult to try and aesthetically
theorize something, right? As you're trying to like, all right, well, how do I come up with
something radically new? It's like, well, you wouldn't know. You have to just kind of do it
and figure it out in real time. But I feel like, yeah, one of the things that is unique to our
experience of this moment that did not exist years ago is the way that people post. It is social media,
right? That's where a lot of like young creative experimental energy has gone.
And I did this experiment where I tried to become a meme in the last few years. And I
thought that that actually like using influence as a medium was an interesting 21st century experiment.
And there's a few artists of my like, broadly speaking, the post internet generation that have
experimented or done projects in this field. But you know, similar to how like VHS and experimental
video work was like, that was new and weird in like the 80s. Exactly.
Like, I think this is actually a good medium to be experimenting.
This is for me, when I look at the work that we take, that we talk about as taking silly things
seriously. The reason that like video, like VHS art was not considered a serious pursuit.
If you were making video. Now it's in museums.
So weird. Yes. And this is, and this is the thing. So everything, yeah, it's not perceived as
legitimate. It's perceived as kind of kitsch. Yes. And this is the thing with, with memes,
which is where me and you talk a lot about taking silly things seriously. The reason that we take
meme culture, the reason that we take it very, very seriously is, is because behind this new model of
communication and discourse predominantly going on amongst you, you people is a real set of social
circumstances and economic circumstances and environments that they're, that they're kind of
reacting to and talking about. And I think that in the way that I've always been a massive champion of,
of comedy, not just comedians, but the idea of using humor to delineate important ideas, because
the idea of comedy is to take the biggest ideas possible and convey them in the fewest words
possible. It's the same with music and lyrics. And it's the same with memes. Like sometimes a joke,
when somebody, sometimes in comedy, somebody will say something to an audience and the audience will go,
oh, yeah, they never go. Yeah. Yeah. You get the same thing with memes. The truth is the laugh. Yeah.
And then after that is the acknowledgement of whether I should be allowed. That's the super
ego coming back in. That's the super ego. Yeah. It can slip under your critical faculties.
So what humor does is it's the sharpest knife in the drawer. Like a meme, a perfect, like for example,
we were talking about the concept of a late stage social media. We're in it. We're deep in it now.
We're deep in it now. And we could talk academically about all of those points and you could do a video,
Tramiel could do a video. I could do an album on it. But the best example of late stage social media
was that tweet I sent you the other day. Which one was that? I just had a dream that I had to download
the cilantro app to use my bunch of cilantro. Yes. Yeah. Yeah. And we're not too far away.
We're not too far away from that. Yeah. Yeah.
When you're in the studio, you have a rule that now, well, as you, as you told me, you have a rule
to not bring up anything on Spotify, to not bring up references of like, oh, this is a preexisting
track from another artist. Like let's take inspiration from this. You're trying to innovate
something new and not get like stuck in repeating old genres of the past. That's true. So that was
something that I've become really, really strict with that. My good, good friend and long time
collaborator, even though a lot of the stuff that we've made has never seen the light of day, B.J.
Burton. We were making a record for a while before I went off and made it with Jack and George made it
because we were really, really interested in this idea of, of newness. And I actually got into this
full circle place on a brief inquiry where we'd made such a, what I felt was 21st century record in
with notes on a conditional form, which yes, constantly referenced music from the past,
but in a way that I felt was inherently 21st century. Do you know what I mean? Like I said,
I've always said I'm from the generation that creates in the way that we consume. And I think
that doing that, the, the kind of the, the break away from genre was quite a new, hopefully
fishery thing for us to kind of, kind of do. But you mean like a generationally,
like the kind of genres that we grew up in, it's like, you think of yourself as like a punk or a
metalhead or something like that. That's right. And I think that basically, yeah, you, you would
historically make music in a genre. Right. And in 2009, when all the, in the record labels,
the institutions were coming to see us, they were confused because I would play them
they'd play four songs that sounded totally different. And they'd be like, but I don't
get it. And I'd be like, but my generation will, they'll just inherently understand.
Well, you were right about that.
I was right about that, which is why I ended up owning my own label and all of their labels died.
The Jay-Z kids I interview and talk to, none of them identify with like, oh, I'm this specific
genre. They just consume from everything.
We'll get into why that is in a minute. But, but for me on the last record, I was like, okay,
I've just made a experimental modern record, right? What is actually fresh now? Because we
talk about witch house, we talk about that emerging subculture. And I remember hearing
artists like triple X, X, triple X, Y, Y, X, X or whatever it is. And you would hear this music
that was created by a 15 year old on a laptop. And that had never happened before. So when you heard
this, you'd be like, you'd be like, what is this? Now, when you hear something, someone's made on
the laptop, it's like watching Transformers 2. It doesn't mean anything. I know that it's impressive.
It doesn't mean anything. So I got to a point being like, right, well, we're past the bedroom.
What's interesting? I was like, what can we do that other people can't right now? And I was like,
oh, we've been in a band for 20 years. Maybe just like being a band, that's actually quite
revolutionary because there's no bands. So leaning into the traditional of the aesthetics of what a
band is, maybe we should do that. So I did that for a record and that required, I suppose, not
necessarily referencing, but understanding the history that we were drawing from. And not from a woke
perspective also, but because we're such a rhythm based band, I'm always referencing black music
more than I'm referencing white music. And it's an important to acknowledge that, you know,
so it's always been important for me to kind of like pay homage to the people that do that. But
basically on the last record, I was like, I'm going to make something quite rootsy and traditional
because rootsy and traditional is actually quite subversive now.
Hmm. After we made that record, the idea of stopping ever referencing anything came in. So
we try not to, we try not to listen to other music or pull from other things that exist.
What about just the existence of bands in 2024 is kind of like an anomalous thing. Everyone,
you mentioned before, like 15 year olds making music on their laptop, like everyone, or not everyone,
but most people I know who are in music are in kind of like, it's either one person or maybe it's a
duo, but very rarely do people have like full bands, definitely not ones that have been together for
multiple decades where they have instruments and they have like whole performances. It's a,
we live in a very kind of atomized musical landscape right now.
We live in a very atomized landscape. Like, you know, I think the death of the living room is just as
relevant to the death of the band, you know, the, the living room use nowhere to rehearse.
Well, not so much that, but the way that the, um, the, the, the fire, the fire was replaced by the
TV, the radio and then the TV. So the TV used to be in the living room where we would all live
together and we would come together and we would watch one screen and we would talk about what was
happening on the screen. We then got our own screens and what was happening on the screen,
we no longer said to the person next to us, we tweeted to a thousand people.
Right. Right. So instead of having mum, dad and the teenager and the eight year old all watching
the TV at night and fighting over what they want to watch and the remote stuff and the teenager who
always changes the channels. Um, now you just have everyone on their own screen. So, so media consumption
has been individualized. Subculture has been individualized and commodified. So when I was growing
up, if you wanted to be a goth or a punk, you had to find out where they hung out. You had to physically
go there. Yeah. You had to build up the confidence to talk to them. You had to immerse yourself in a
world of cultural and aesthetic references that you didn't know that you either had to pretend to know
and then go to a library. And all of these people's references, you knew were authentic because,
because social media didn't exist, you know, that they had read this book or been to this show or
seen this movie. They hadn't just revised a Wikipedia article on it. Do you know what I mean? Right.
So you would immerse yourself. There was a barrier. There was like a hurdle, uh, a small barrier to
entry. Yeah. You had to do certain stuff to join the subculture. This is the thing. And yeah. And
a process of qualification. Yeah. And with that process of qualification, you acquired a kind of
social identity. You immersed yourself in a community and you felt, you realized that if you
bind together with a group, we do this a little, quite a lot now, but in real life, you know,
your IRL friends versus your online friends, if you bind together in real life, you can create
something bigger than yourself as an individual. That's where the 1975 came from. We should bind
together and just make this aesthetic world for ourselves. Do you know what I mean? Which meant
that when that happened and we went out on tour, we were together. We were a unit. We had a community,
any oppressive, um, Machiavellian forces from the media or whatever had to come up against like the
four of us who were willing to like physically fight people. Do you know what I mean? Yeah.
But when social media came along, the idea of being a band isn't incentivized. The idea of being an
individual is incentivized. Sure. Sure. A lot of a band, you'll see each member will have their own
social media. Right. So whether they talk about it or not, they are in competition with each other
as individuals. Exactly. Exactly. So that's not healthy for the greater good, right? You shouldn't
kind of have that in a band dynamic. Now, I think that the idea of, of doing that, it also gives yourself
kind of like a bit more confidence because there's, there's four of you. Do you know what I mean? And
I think that, so, so people don't adhere to subcultures anymore. And also people don't dress like
groups of people anymore. I was in New York yesterday and I bumped into Albert Hammond from
The Strokes. He's a friend of mine. Now, if I'd have said that 15 years ago, I would shat my pants.
I mean, the last band, white band to change how everyone dressed. They changed how an entire
generation dressed. No bands have done that since. Right. And I think that what people do now is they
dress like, or they adhere to individuals. Right. A particular Kardashian or whatever it is. Do you
know what I mean? The idea of grouping, I don't know what a scene of kids look like, which is why I think,
like Dazed or Vogue are constantly trying to make everything a trend or a trend or a trend or a
trend or a trend or business core or long hair core or whatever the fuck it is. Like if you went to
like the lunch table, the proverbial lunch table, like how would you identify, it's a different
school, like what your crew is. It's like you'd look at their t-shirts and their pants or something
like that. That's much more difficult now. Like groups of friends don't look like each other,
or dress like each other. The best articulation of that concept of how fast
a generation's values has changed. Because if you look at like the, the, the generational
values of young or the cultural customs of young people from the seventies to the eighties to the
nineties, there's a, there's a bit of a change, but 21 Jump Street does it so well because 21 Jump
Street is about two guys who in, I think it's like 2009 were at high school and five years later,
they come back to high school and Channing Tatum is concerned about what way to wear his bag and he's
met with loads of climate activists who are all queer. Yeah. And he just fucking hits one of them
because when I was in school, if you were gay, you got hit. And the whole school was like, bro,
what the fuck are you doing? I got checked into lockers for being too gay.
This is the whole thing. And that happened. That's what it was like when we went to high school.
And that immediately changed. Do you know what I mean? It's because like, so, so I don't really
know what a scene or a subculture kind of looks like now. Well, this is not, not to get like too
meta on it, but, um, the generally like speaking, the disappearance of a mainstream and a counterculture,
I would say as a direct result of what you described before of like, there was this one
screen that the whole family was around or like the whole group of friends or whatever. And they had
each their own kind of individual preferences, but they were constrained by there only being one
screen. And so someone who might've preferred to watch the sci-fi channel versus someone who
preferred to watch animal planet, they had to like negotiate over who got what time and their,
their options were constrained by having this one TV. And now when everyone has their own,
their own individual screen is not really clear what the mainstream preferences and what the
countercultural preferences, they're all just individualized. And so the, uh, the counterculture
and the mainstream have all kind of like disappeared into just advertising revenue for platforms.
Period. And it's not really clear, like what kind of oppositional cultural forces are like
how you delineate belonging to a subculture and not belonging to a subculture because everything
is basically just a product of your consumption habits. Like you're clicking into this or clicking
into that. You're not showing up anywhere. You're not like dressing in a certain way or like doing
activities with certain people. I think that's why me and you, you know, I keep saying me and you
as if we're going out, but I think that one of the reasons that we use the word clear net to describe
that space is because the mainstream doesn't make sense. Right. When you've got, you know,
what is it? What was that acronym? The ID, the intellectual dark, which, you know, that group of
intellectuals and the, the, when you've got them or the daily wire or Steven crowd or, or, you know,
the contra points or any side of it, when you've got these people amassing more views than CNN and
Thingy Bob combined, do you know what I mean? Right. A lot more views. What is the actual,
what is the actual mainstream? Yeah. Now, this idea of kind of what is alternative has plagued me
since the beginning. And it's one of the things that I've had to really stick to my guns with because
I think that culture has caught up to the 1975 a lot more than we have kind of adhered to culture because
we were hated when we first came out and we were hated in particularly by the enemy and the fly.
Now I personally hated them back for personal reasons, but part of me now would love
an institution that is run by a series of people that yes, may be self-serious and cringe in regards
to how cool they think, but have at least gone through a process of qualification and are there
because of their taste that are feeding me in feet that are giving me pieces of art that they think
are interesting as opposed to being fed pieces of art that are doing well. Right. And I think that your
work is anomalous in this field because the overwhelming incentives, the power law distribution of the content
that thrives in a platform method of distribution, whether that's Instagram or streaming music or whatever it
happens to be, when there's not an editor or a gatekeeper or a curator in place, most of that
content, most of that material is just dopaminergic slop. It's just bad work and there's no space for art.
Yes. I can't think of another mainstream artist that would dare to put a fucking piece of performance
art in the middle of their rock show. Yeah.
That just simply doesn't exist. And so this disappearance of the possibility or space for
art in society, if we cede everything to the platforms, algorithmic filtration, recommendation
of everything, we're going to have a society without art. We're going to have a society with just content
and it's going to be vertical videos, slop, feeding culture into the meat grinder and just spitting out
TikTok reels on the other side. Also, and if we allow that to happen to more entertainment, because you can,
let's put art as in the realm of art is great when you've eaten and you're not having an argument
with a loved one. No, that's true.
You're not interested in art if you're hungry or if you're having serious issues. So let's call
art entertainment. Yes. If we allow the decimation of art or if we allow art to become completely for
you pageified, the same thing will happen to all human experience, which is one of the dangerous
things about the phone. What Silicon Valley understands about the phone is that a lot of
people will say this thing, which is true. I know about my phone use and how it's dangerous,
but I need my phone. I need my phone for work. Yeah. Yeah. I need my phone in case someone contacts me.
That's true. The problem that we have is that the way the apps are laid out and prioritized is flat.
So you will get a notification about somebody that you've never met in your life,
liking a photo that you made three weeks ago with the same tenacity or priority as a text message from
your mom. Right. So we just bounce between genuinely authentic human experience, talking to people
to just going on Reddit for 10 minutes and then flitting back between it. And I think that the
flattening out of all experience and the incentivization of short-term pleasure over long-term
satisfaction is a problem. You know, like long-term satisfaction was what I was trying to go
to with the show. You know, it's a bit like you can't make a TikTok at the beginning of this show
and understand it without watching the whole show. Like the first chapter of a book doesn't have any
context or make sense until you've read the whole book. Do you know what I mean? But that's not the
way we operate anymore. We don't have time to read a whole book. Do you know what I mean? So that's what
my show was trying to do. In a world of short-term pleasure incentives, the dopamine, the like,
the chocolate bar, the wank, versus the walk, the making the meal, the meaningful conversation,
as you would call something part of normal life maxing. Do you know what I mean? Which is really
important to practice. But just to go back to the point that we were talking about before about how
alternative culture has been a confusing idea for a long time that I was talking about how I was
hated. The reason I was hated back in the day is because we came out as a band and every band that
got signed over us was a band that was essentially doing an impression of the Arctic Monkeys. So what they
were saying is a band has to be kind of from an economically deprived place in order to have
authenticity. It needs to be kind of gritty. It needs to reference the kind of, at the time, the kind of
the aesthetics of post-punk. So like, you know, all of your joy division, industrialization,
Thatcherism-y kind of brutalism, all those kinds of things. And we just didn't adhere to any of that.
And because I was saying we create in the way that we consume. So we were like, hated for essentially
being a band that was the opposite of heavy. And I was like, well, after the shape of punk have come,
to show the shape of punk to come came out. Incredible album. The last punk album. And it knew that.
Anybody who wants, you have to get into Refused. You have to find the documentary. It's only on YouTube,
in Swedish about when their last show got shut down and they split up. They split up because they
were politically so different. Wow. Can you imagine that now? Yeah. They just couldn't
politically align. So they split up. And in their last show, the cops came. It makes me want to cry.
I get chills thinking about it. The cops came in and all of their fans turned around and shouted the
line from rather be dead. I'd rather be alive. And they're just shouting, I'd rather be alive.
I'd rather be alive. As Refused, physically disbanded. Like, incredible, right? For me,
when I saw that, I thought, I can't do something heavy that touches on that. Because for me,
Heavy was like, unless you're like Glassjaw, Converge, Refused, or further than that,
Heavy's fucking lame. Do you know what I mean? Like, since hair metal, Heavy's... Yeah, yeah.
So the reason we're not Heavy, and we can do Heavy all day long, but we're not because it wasn't new.
We wanted to be something quite new. Now, the only time, the only thing I could think of at the time
of being new was being representative of this new form of cultural consumption, which is everything,
everywhere, all at once.
To give a little bit of the historical frame, when we talk about the left in the context of the U.S.,
there's the old left, which is like Eugene Debs. This is like 1910s, 1920s. The International Workers
of the World, the IWW, the Wobbliest. And these were like the struggles that basically shaped American
life within that period. The rebellions at the West Virginia coal mines that like rednecks,
like literally with the red scarf where they're like shooting at the people who own the coal mines
and trying to take back their town. Really like kind of radical struggles that were very much based
in like the workplace and the degradation of life under capitalism. When we talk about the new left,
we're talking about a particular slice of students, particularly the SDS, the Students for a Democratic
Society. So it's almost hard to draw continuity between these things that like one was just a,
you know, an enormous kind of workers movement. And the other was kind of like a niche intellectual
movement in like, you know, elite universities or whatever.
And the situationists and people are like, well, that was after.
Yeah, yeah. But there's this kind of like, there's, there's a lineage here of basically
really broadly summarizing, replacing the historical subject or the revolutionary subject,
not being the worker, but being the student or being the activist. And so for me, from my perspective,
this is a fundamental category error, because being a student and having ideas is not the source of
value in society. Like value comes from labor. That's what produces society's wealth. It is the
only political lever that actually matters. And so if you don't have a strategy or political theory
that addresses the actual lever of power in society, you're not going to get anything done.
Exactly.
What was also very popular among the new left, broadly speaking, was a kind of embrace of individualism
rather than the class identity. So there was a real focus on identity politics of the era that
has a certain continuity to now, especially as it enters elite academies and universities.
And then there was also just kind of like a personal libertine ethics and a kind of like,
you know, finding yourself through consumer preferences that is totally copacetic with
navigating the platforms and consumer identities and so on.
So a lot of the kind of unlearning that we're having to do in this period of American life,
especially on the political left, is just kind of like parting with the bad ideas that were taught
to us in certain universities that were inherited from the boomer generation, that were totally
ineffectual, that in many cases...
You don't want a salary. Stuff like that.
Well, I think some of them got just a little bit kind of too comfortable in many cases. Like,
there's a great book, we've talked about this before from Fred Turner,
from counterculture to cyberculture. And this is going to sound totally wild for people who have
not encountered this before. But literally, the people who moved out onto the land, particularly
in California in the 1960s and 70s, started all of these kind of lefty communes, they then moved
back into the Bay Area, literally found Silicon Valley, and then become the people who inaugurate
the internet. And embraced...
Yeah, they become these kind of like...
And all of these new kind of...
Exactly. Yeah, these like kooky fucking, you know, libertarians of the 90s. And so that drift from
within, you know, 20 to 30 years of being from on the radical left to being on the radical neoliberal
right, there's actually a continuity of idea within that. Because they prized individualism
over their solidarity and class identity, it was very easy to make that transition over the course
of a few decades. So having good principles when you start out, having good political theory,
all of those things, I think, are super important. We're also both fans of the extraordinary
documentary series by Adam Curtis, All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace.
I mean, all of Curtis's stuff, you know, from hyper normalization, whether it can't get you out of
my head, but All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace, I think is our...
Personal favorite. Personal favorite. Yeah, I used to show it in class. It's just like,
it's really, really incredible. I would also, for fans of mine watching, if they can,
try and get hold of Josh's syllabus, if you're interested in the kind of content that we share,
or that kind of seems to inform a lot of our work. So hippieism is a reaction of going,
okay, well, if we can't transform society, if we all transform ourselves as individuals,
by proxy, we will transform society. And then the 70s, still trying to articulate this kind of
new form of individualism. You have woo woo, 70s, new age kind of stuff. And then when you get to
the 80s, you get consumer capitalism, essentially going, oh, you guys want to be individuals.
I can help you with that. Here's a fucking coke and a car and stuff like that. That's how I've always
recognized that kind of movement of consumer capitalized, consumer capitalism's
understanding of the emergence of the individual. Do you know what I mean? Because you don't have
a lot of framework to operate as individuals in places, you know, in our kind of places. But again,
this is a question that I'm asking you. Well, I would say that the emergence of a theory where the
individual is a unit that changes society, that comes from liberal political theory, right? There's not
a kind of class analysis in that. And I think the problem that the new left faced, which is,
you know, in fairness, a very difficult problem, is that in the period of the 1960s, like liberal
democracy was working quite well. You know, like my mom's a boomer. She's of that generation. She had
the best slice of the American economy, was raised in a working class family with a single mother. And now
she has a master's degree and owns a home. And like things generally, like that kind of upward mobility
is actually quite rare in, you know, capital L liberal think capitalist society. Yeah. And so
what the new left, the kind of student radicals face at the time was like, broadly speaking,
the working class was not receptive to their message, because things were going well, you know,
like, what's the alternative? You want, you want to go to the Soviet Union? Like, things are working
better in the liberal democratic model. Which is where the red scale was kind of propped up by
that kind of idea, right? That the fear of communism was a kind of a fear of status quo change and the
status quo being incredibly comfortable, right? Yeah, yeah, yeah. Whereas now where we have a young
desperate to break out of the kind of environment. Exactly, exactly. Well, because now, I mean,
liberal democracy is clearly not working for most people, right? There's just kind of endless
quantitative data about this that, yeah, I mean, look at, look at our cities, all of the infrastructure
was built. I think we're in the same place where they do like the same studio where they do soft
white underbelly, which I think is a good example of how, where we are right now is kind of surrounded
by so many kind of people who have been failed by this. And this was not the case of, uh, in American
life, you know, a few decades before, but in this, you know, uh, economic climate, a climate of
neoliberalism, like if things are just so incredibly expensive that most people are not given like the
dignity and, um, you know, necessary materials to have like a dignified life. So, um, part of that,
I would say is the, um, the retreat from the class analysis that was necessary to have an organized
labor movement to like demand the political changes that we saw, which allowed for that kind of
prosperity in the era of the post-war boom. Right. So, um, that's a big part of my project,
my kind of thorny contrarianism against the kind of new left ideas is that one,
they didn't work. Uh, and two, we just have to do a bit of relearning for the things that actually
did work. You know, we need material leverage and the individual approach, the activist or the
student activist approach is just not sufficient to scale to any of these real material problems.
Like the individual approach for climate change is never going to work.
Well, I think that as much as we need like institutions to come back to kind of gate,
keep certain, uh, to, to gate, keep the kind of integrity of certain,
whether it be art forms or kind of positions, I think we really need the same for like activism
again, because what social media has done is made everybody an activist.
Yes. But what that's done is completely degraded the work of real activists.
Right.
There's that, there's that like modern, there's that, uh,
Norm Macdonald's joke, which I'm, which I'll murder. But he goes, um, when he's talking about,
you know, people get described as a modern day philosopher. And I think that's quite offensive to
modern day philosophers. And there's a kind of, there's this thing where,
you know, whether it be an actress or a model, they'll be like actress, mother, coffee lover,
activist. Oh yeah. Everyone's got this in their bio now. They won't be like actress, coffee lover,
neurosurgeon, you know, because they know that they're not a neurosurgeon. Yeah. Yeah. So activism
is something that now is the most important job in the world. Yes. But everyone is it. Right. Right.
So, so I think that even the concept of being active now, we are bored of, remember like the SJW
thing of like 2016. And then you got the whole, this back forward of everybody on the left being
in Dr. J by the right, because it was a way of owning the left. I mean, all that kind of thing.
Like I had a very, very, it's really interesting how, I think what we've come to understand is that
what people need more than anything is some form of attention and some form of, now this is a very
trite observation, but at the core of it, where a lot of these behaviors coming from,
do you know what I mean? I think we wrap them up in politics, in intellectual thought,
but the truth is a lot of it is just about getting attention. I don't want to, I've had,
I've had dinner with this guy before. He's sweet, nice guy, Winston from Mumford and Sons,
not talking shit about him. Don't want to talk shit about anybody, but just to use
him as an example, he was the banjo player from Mumford and Sons. Okay. And one day he tweeted,
he was actually in a month of tweeting about what he was reading. He'd tweeted previously that he was,
um, reading Mal to, to know the action. And one day he tweeted that he resonated slightly with a book
by that guy. Is it Nick Ungyo or somebody like this? Is it Ungyo? Some right leading
Okay. Okay. Pseudo academic. And he got cancelled on Twitter and massively cancelled,
or in his version massively cancelled. And what happened to him is that he decided that this was
going to be the hill that he was going to die on. Happens to a lot of people. Happens to a lot of
people. And what happened was he got, uh, he became adopted by the right, um, essentially in order to
own the left, which is what happens with left-wing fingers. Now, the thing is, what I think that
people know, I genuinely believe that he, I don't doubt his sincerity in this journey, but I think that
what a lot of these people aren't quite aware of what's happening is that, you know, it's, it's really
because we're in an attention economy about attention. If you're the banjo player in Munford
and Sons for 10 years, there is X amount of attention you're going to get in real life or on
online. Right. So you get used to that amount of attention. Then one day you do something that gets you
more attention than you've ever got. And you're 10 years into a career of a band that's kind of on
the down and you're presented with an option. Do I want loads of attention or do I want the same
amount of attention I've always got? I want the more attention. So what he, so the mental gymnastics
that goes on is goes, oh, I'm actually a martyr for the right. Yeah. As opposed to...
This thing that I literally just read and had no familiarity with before. I'm now a martyr for
this cause. So that's one of the things that this is the thing with me and my show as well. And you
know, when I talk, it's easy for me, you know, I laugh with you and my friends and I read the stuff
going on when the stuff's going on about my show. But for me, because I am essentially a kind of
a musician and a writer, but kind of like a writer on these phenomena, I always see internet phenomena
objectively. And it's really interesting because we were talking about it before. Sometimes the
subject of the phenomena is me. And I think that people can't understand...
Because people are the protagonist in their online story,
the difference between me is that me and social media, social media for me is this is what I do.
Social media for most people is this is who I am. So if social media is this is who I am,
you can't imagine using social media or experimenting with that in a way that doesn't literally reflect who
you are. Right, right. So people essentially...
There's not a space for art. There's not a space for art. So people would, whether it's
criticized or analyzed by behavior, and they would be like, yeah, well, well, Matt, you will be thinking...
And it's like, it's interesting because people will think that you take it very, very personally.
There's an incredible rigidity in how people interpret things that are said online.
And behind that is seemingly an amount of political certainty that's unquestionable.
Right. There's two things going on there. So you've got like, you've got the fact that
being measured doesn't work anymore. There's a really, really interesting study recently about
being measured. So for example, if you are measured on social media, you don't get a reaction
very much. So here's a good example. Who's a good, who's a good, like, I've already mentioned,
okay, Jordan Peterson, fine. No, no, because I've heard Rory Sutherland use this example.
I use the same example as Rory. If I tweeted, I kind of enjoy listening to Jordan Peterson
in small amounts on certain topics, right? That's a totally fair thing to say, right?
Sure, sure. The reason that you've learned not to say that is because with that, you're going to
annoy both sides. You're going to get negativity from the Jordan Peterson side, and you're going to
get negativity from the anti-Jordan Peterson side. You need to choose a side to perform to,
right? So not only being measured doesn't get you the desired outcome, they've actually done
studies in this that it doesn't actually feel good. Huh. On behalf of the poster.
On behalf of the poster, when people tweet something really measured, they don't get the same feeling.
Just a reasonable opinion doesn't give you a dopamine buzz. It has to be something that's a
little bit electric and a little bit spicy. So if you apply that, then we're not really taking
any ideas seriously. If I'm criticized online, don't do it online. I can't take opinions that
seriously that operate in a Twitter or an Instagram kind of space because you're not rewarded for being
measured. The incentives are just, yeah, yeah. Everything has to be the most extreme, the most
sensationalist, the most outrageous version of itself. Which is why I think that my show worked
at pushing those buttons because it elicited an immediate reaction that kind of stayed the same in your
clear net spaces. And then at the deeper of it, Reddit being the right at the below of the clear net
underneath. That's when the conversations about actually what was happening was going on. Do you
know what I mean? Yeah. I remember before verified accounts, we were very active in early social media
with the 1975 because we, I had this obsession with, where are we? 2012, 2013. I was like,
we have access to all information, right? Every single band is on, sounds old, is on MySpace,
is on Pure Volume, is on YouTube. If you can't find something on Google immediately and understand it,
it's inherently quite sexy. That was how I felt at the time. So when the 1975 came out, our early EPs,
especially our first song, Face Down, in the blogosphere, it came out at the same time as like
Peso, A$AP Rocky, the early weekend EPs. But yeah, we were very interested in playing with the internet
as a form. So basically saying it's this huge information pool and there's too much of it and
you can find out access. So why don't we make people unsure as to whether we are a brand or as to whether
we are a solo artist or a musician. Let's just open it up. Do you know what I mean? And we had
a lot of fun. So what I was saying that is when, before verified accounts became a thing, the way that
social media platforms would verify you would follow you back. So we were the first band or art
page to be followed by Instagram. So when Instagram had followed 20 people, the 1975 was one of them.
Wow. It was a big deal when it first happened. That's internet history. So what we would do is
we, for a start, went on an American tour, which 10 years ago couldn't have happened because people
wouldn't have heard our music if it wasn't for the internet. We went and we played these shows in
America. And what we would do every day in the Tumblr Instagram era was take a Tumblr-y,
Instagram-y photo of the environment that we were in, not of the band, not of anything else,
just something abstract. And we would post it. And the allure was massive. People would just love,
because it would, it felt like in the way that when you used to have a band and a vinyl,
the only thing you had was the artwork and your imagination. You know, you need to, art needs to,
art can't be too didactic. And because you can't have questions answered for you, you need to bring
your imagination, your personal experience to it. I would say that your work, in particular your
performance during the last live show, I also think of the video for Love It If We Made It,
that these are two pieces, and there are many others, but those two are I think most prominent
in my mind, that these are probably the rare encounters that a mass pop audience has with high
art. That if I walked into a gallery or museum and I saw this performance, I wouldn't be surprised.
It's, oh, this is the kind of work that belongs here. And similarly, if I saw that video being
played in an exhibition at a museum, gallery, what have you, I'd be like, ah, this is a piece of video
art that makes sense. It's put together, there's intention behind it. And those things are actually
like very, very rare in society. They are.
They are.
That experimental space is extremely, I can't think of another person who's doing that.
Well, thank you. And I wish there was, maybe there is on a smaller scale.
There needs to be more because the thing is, it's so exciting when it happens, even if you're somebody
that really, really understands all this theory. So for example, when we did the Hollywood Bowl show
that me and Brad wrote, and because the staging was different, we had to riff and write loads of
bits. Followers of Tramiel or yours will know his famous Casper mattress joke, which is one of my
favorite online jokes anyway. And what we did that night was we wrote this piece that's still out there
somewhere called The Sponsored Apology. And it was about the idea that, you know, the idea of sponsorship
and authenticity, these cross sections kind of overlap. So what I did was I was in,
you know, I was getting, whatever you want to call it, getting canceled, or there was
a required apology from me. And what we did was we took five minutes in the show,
and we wrote this fake, but soundingly real apology that started out with me saying, you know,
I don't want to, I don't want everything I do to be perceived literally, but also I don't want people
to mistake my intentions with my desire to kind of create like artistic environments.
And then at the end of the apology, I said, you know, but everybody wants to better themselves,
you know what I mean? And there's no better way of doing, you know, and I said, I turned to the camera
and I said, and for $17.99 a month, better help. And then an advert for better help came up, right?
And we did that. And it got this huge laugh. People were so confused. And then we went into
It's Not Living If It's Not With You, one of our biggest hits.
I love that. Now, Brad knew what we were going to do. And afterwards, Brad was like,
it's amazing that we're doing this. We're doing that type of art that critiques the things that
we really want to critique at the Hollywood Bowl, going into a song that has however many hundreds
of millions of streams across the thing. So as much as I can be like, yeah, it is good that I'm doing
that. I'm more like, how are more people not doing that? As much as I understand,
in the same way that I understand, like to become a billionaire, you don't really care that much
about culture. But I don't know how there isn't one billionaire that's really into music that goes,
walks past CBGB's, sees that it's now a John Vavart Oss shop and goes, I'm just going to buy
that and turn it back into CBGB's. Do you know what I mean? I don't know where-
No, I couldn't agree more. There's a, so we talked to Amber Frost, right? She,
she wrote this incredible article a few years back. I used to teach in my syllabus. It's called
The Declining Taste of the Global Super Rich. And I absolutely agree that there, we have a crisis
among elites. There used to be this idea of noblesse oblige that if you were unfathomably wealthy,
yeah, it's in the notes. Exactly. This is a responsibility. If you take so much from society
and you have all this wealth, fucking give something back. We have some shitty elites. They
just built us social media platforms and they didn't give any libraries or museums or anything else.
Give me a fucking break. This is the problem. So let's talk about noblesse oblige in the context
of, you know, the elites not doing what is required. So the idea was back in the day that you used to
have, we used to have the, we used to have the aristocracy, right? So you were born into these,
these upper classes, you were born into the aristocracy, right? But with that back in the day,
when that was the ruling class, you know, it was, there was this sense of noblesse. There was a
responsibility that came with it. So a lot of these people would go into civil service,
civil engineering, whatever it may be. There was this inherent feeling of, I need to give back.
Now, once the aristocracy as the ruling class in the seventies got replaced by the exam passing,
basically the academics and intellectuals who had passed exams became the kind of new,
almost like ruling class, that sense of noblesse oblige started to disappear because there was
this an idea of, you look at Silicon Valley or you're kind of iron ran.
Yeah. The new, new money does not give to culture. Exactly. So, so, so with that is that now
there isn't this inherent kind of social pressure to, to give back, you know what I mean? And I think
that, um, yeah, I mean, I think, I think we should be, um, publicly shaming these people for it. Not
that that's, not that that's enough pressure, but just to kind of like, to lay out what the,
the conflict, the crisis is here is that the alternative to the institutional model,
which necessarily requires patrons. There's got to be some rich person who, who foots the bill for
the opera, for example, right? Like offers an opera is never going to operate as for profit.
Everything that exists on the platforms operates for profit. And the underlying assumption of,
of this is that all culture needs to be supported by consumers and that nothing should be decommodified
or not, not operate under the profit motive. And so the institutional model from with that,
from within that framework seems vastly preferable to me that there should be basically some rich person
who foots the bill. And then there's a giant air conditioned, beautiful opera for people to attend.
And, and, uh, yeah, if you don't have that, eventually you get people with pitchforks and
we know where they'll be coming for. Yeah, exactly. I mean, opera is a good example as well,
because things are starting to become, uh, everything's starting to become opera in the way
that opera is a refined, a refined, uh, I don't know what you want to call it performance or,
or something crystallized. It's a crystallized activity.
A little time capsule. Is it that we go to, to expect no change? Do you know what I mean?
Yeah. Yeah. And I think that like, you know, like music and art is becoming like opera that like,
you go to experience like a kind of predetermined idea of what experiencing music or art is.
Yeah. The 20th century, 20th century Bohemian LARP. Yeah, exactly. That's very powerful.
It is. And it's still, uh, it's still pervasive in a lot of creative industries,
you know, that's unfortunately, that's not the world that we exist in anymore. But like the,
the idea of like having that kind of romantic life of like coming to New York in the 1970s and like
working part-time and bumming around and making some weird art or music or whatever, like that's just,
there's not going to be an Abbie Hoffman now, do you know what I mean? Who's like writing,
fuck the system or something like that, that becomes a massive. And also one of the things,
the problem is, is that like all of this trickle down stuff, like when I spoke about like
Throbbing Gristle or like Peter Gabriel at the same time, looking at the Fairchild and thinking
what to do with it, like Throbbing Gristle or like art school kids with no money that were making this
noise that people with money took inspiration from and turned into a mainstream kind of
sonic change in music and stuff like that. If that's not happening, you're not going to get
inspiration from anywhere. Do you know what I mean? So, um, yeah, a lot of artists now,
like this small crew of us, whether it be me, Dijon, Bon Iver, McGee, whoever it is,
we're all constantly talking about like, what does it sound like to make music now? Do you know what
I mean? And we're all trying to kind of push ourselves forwards. Well, I mean, I think we,
we share this, uh, uh, this interest that a lot of the most kind of interesting, weird,
experimental avant-garde culture has moved online in the last few years. And, uh, if I'm pulling
inspiration to make new material, like that's where I look, that's where I look for the new exciting,
that's where I look for the exciting new thing. Yeah. Your forthcoming album title, uh, pulls a quote
from a very interesting online subculture. Do you want to tell us a bit about the rabbit holes you've
been exploring? I'll say one thing first. I think that we spoke about Marvel before and we spoke about
other, you know, let's say like huge music artists that operate more as like a corporation.
They've, they've really cottoned on to this postmodern meta thing that happens in art now. So
a Marvel movie will be 60% in jokes and callbacks to other Marvel movies.
Yeah. Yeah. And in the franchise, exactly. And these artists now will put out a record where half the
record is self-referential jokes to the law that exists outside of the record. And what they end
up start doing is kind of forgetting that that's all cool detail. If you've made something objectively
good, right? So if this objectively good album or movie has a subtext that's interesting, that has
all of these theories, that's great. So, so I say that because what I want to do is make a great album.
I, I, I'm not you, you know, I'm not going tomorrow to teach at the school of design and aesthetics and
do some kind of academic treaty. I'm making a record. I'm literally doing that tomorrow.
Yeah. And I am going to make a record that people like. And, and it's not that I've never made music
for an audience or made music that, that I expect people want to listen to, but you know, I,
I, I just naturally make melodically quite relatable music. So my next record will be
hopefully an enjoyable 1975 record objectively. And it will be about all of the theory,
what my records are always about, love, sex, death, communication, things to make art about,
you know, the, the, the, all the big things, but the, the framework in which I talk about that
from a brief inquiry onwards has kind of been the same. How are we and why are we communicating in
the ways that we do and what are its impacts? So the last rec, the new record is, um, is I suppose,
it was born from me nearly going insane. And that being a kind of an internet induced insanity
combined with the cautionary tale of my last record, which was essentially like,
don't get red pilled and black billed. Try normal life maxing.
That's good advice. It's kind of about the intersection of those concepts. So how religious
fanaticism plays a significant role in the evolution of kind of internet insanity, online
schizo stuff. My, my Instagram feed now is just mentally unwell people expressing themselves in
different ways, not from a, a voyeuristic in enjoyment place. I'm just really, really interested
in this new environment that people have. And there's a, um, there's a big intersection
between the themes and behaviors observed both in the red pill community and the kind of, let's call
it the online schizo community. Yes. And I think those are the, the intersection between apocalyptic
and kind of millenarian beliefs. Yes. The, the dichotomy between good and evil, the concept of
prophets and gurus, um, the rejection of mainstream authority, the kind of, um, symbolism and numerology
that these communities get obsessed with and, um, the moral absolutism of both sides and the kind of
sacred texts and doctrines that they hold dear. I'm seeing a big cross section there. And I think
that because a lot of my records and my ideas are delineated through even imagery, you know, like,
like my, my campaigns that surround the album are just as important as the album itself. And those are
the theories that I'm kind of, that are, that are the framework for, for what we're kind of working on.
It makes a lot of sense as someone who pulls inspiration from social media that, uh, I would
say that our current design of the platforms are kind of like designed to be schizophrenia inducing,
right? Where if you feel a little bit paranoid or delusional that there's a whole bunch of people
who are following you, tracking your every move, like finding hidden messages, and then they're
going to maybe advertise to you. I'm not sure. That's just literally true on social media. Like
it is a schizophrenia inducing machine. That's right. And so people who are a little bit mentally ill
then become very mentally ill once given social media and that's happening to smaller degrees to
all of us because these tools are so powerful. They're so overwhelming and it has devastating social
effects. It really does. Yeah. And the way that, yeah. So, so what, what I'm trying to kind of get
to is, you know, is broad examples, songs that kind of speak of it without being songs that try and be
academic papers, you know? The one thing I would add is that, um, sometimes people feel, uh,
they feel a little embarrassed or like self-indulgent if they're making work about like
romance and heartbreak and sex and leisure and just kind of like the everyday experiences of life,
uh, because they feel like they're supposed to make art about like big political topics,
right? And I would say that this is, um, we've been having a very political conversation,
contextualizing all of this. I think that is, uh, a necessary part of the discursive component of art
is to understand the underlying political economic mechanisms that produce culture, right? All these
things are downstream of our economy, but I think those are actually great things to make art about.
I think some of the best art is actually just about heartbreak and it's something that you can
actually pursue through art. Whereas you, you try to pursue activism and politics and so on,
art is not very well equipped to do that. So understanding the appropriate context for these
things I think is actually an important distinction. There's very, you have to be a very particular
person to read a, whether it's even a piece of pop philosophy or an, or an academic kind of thesis
and be transformed immediately as a person. Whereas you don't, you can be kind of anybody but a
philistine to hear a record and be completely changed as a person. Do you know what I mean? Like music has this
really transformative power that, that, that words and like I always say, you know, words, visuals,
literature, they're kind of suggestive of how you feel, but music, even ambient music commands you how it
feel. I've heard you talk about sincerity before. I think that irony and irony poisoning, especially
for the, uh, the demographic, the subculture of young men that you've been interested in pulling
from, uh, for the last record, a lot of them, um, were so boiled in that irony that they didn't really
know what they actually thought about the world in many cases. And I wonder if you would share maybe
your experience of moving through irony to sincerity and, uh, understanding yourself in the world,
understanding what you really think about a topic. Um, I think that being English, you're kind of
taught that, um, embarrassment and a kind of a really scrutinized version of, of self-awareness
is paramount. Do you know what I mean? So we're always kind of ironic in the face of authenticity or
irony. Do you know what I mean? So basically what I learned and I, and I've said this before is kind
of summarized in that David Foster Wallace quote, where he says, um, to be truly human is to be a bit
goo prone, a bit soppy, a bit naive and open to earnest. Uh, you know, sometimes what could be
described as soppy things. And I think that it's so much easier to fight or combat those things with
irony or just taking the piss. But if you dethrone sincerity with irony, you eventually
get an equal tyrant, you know, that's kind of the kind of the way that I feel about it. It gets to a
point where it's not a replacement. It's just another way of doing it. And then it's not really
a means to an end. Like irony is for me now a tool to highlight very, very specific things that need to
be highlighted. Whereas it used to be a defense mechanism. Yes. I think my turn towards sincerity
from my third album onwards was, was, was also a reaction to being part of the, the indie music
scene of the two thousands in the UK. So the indie music scene was defined by
being a slacker. So you, when you were on stage, you had to essentially be like,
I am going to pretend that I don't care. So I can't be judged for not being very good.
Right. That was kind of the concept. I'm going to replace all ambition.
I wasn't even trying. I'm not even trying.
It's not that I thought. I don't really care. Like, for example, like
there's this idea of, yeah, I'm going to pretend to not care. So I don't get judged about not being
very good. And everybody was a bit shit on their instrument. And I used to feel like, well, if,
if you don't care, why the fuck should I care? Right. Right. Like I, I care about stuff that I
wouldn't read something that I didn't feel somebody like cared about. Do you know what I mean?
So I think that one of those things as well, it was this sardonic, ironic, I don't care attitude
that defined being successful in, in rock music. Sure. Sure. And I just found like, I was like, yeah,
cool. But that's just that, how long is that going to last? Do you know what I mean? Like, it's not,
it doesn't really mean anything. And, um, which is why I was always more into One Last Wish or Fugazi
than I was into like Minor Threat. Do you know what I mean? The hardcore stuff was cool,
but the reflective emotional stuff that wasn't immediately co-opted by just like skinheads and
people who wanted to have a fight. Right. Right. I mean, I was more attracted to that stuff.
So yeah. So I think that sincerity, like I said, is, is really important because it's not
incentivized. You don't get a lot of credit for it. Yeah. You know, and also it kind of comes along
with sincerity for me has really encouraged me to focus on in the, in the, in the frame of what
we're talking about being online is, um, being cons always being concerned with doing the right
thing as opposed to being seen to do the right thing. So doing the right thing often requires
quite a lot of sacrifice and very little reward. Being seen doing the right thing requires very
little sacrifice and often garners a lot of reward. So when I'm think about, am I doing the right thing?
I often think, am I going to be rewarded for this? If I am, I'll try and limit the ways in which I
could be rewarded for it, for the thing that being of service for other people, especially when you're
like a front man in a band, they're very important to kind of stay grounded. But, um, so, so yeah,
that's why I think that it's been very, very important to kind of not adhere to
the cynicism that is kind of out there on either sides. Do you know what I mean? Like, uh, the, the,
yeah, the, the is now existing on the kind of extremes. I just think that like sincerity,
long-term satisfaction, being measured, empathy, listening, they're just, they're just not incentivized.
They're just not really part of what we're doing. And I think that like, we need a being a normal
person maxing. We need being a normal person maxing. And I think that one of the privileges
that I have is that I have the ability to make long form pieces. I told you this story,
right? I was talking to a kid who was like the son of a music executive. I've said this online before
and I said, what kind of music do you like? And he said, I don't really know. I was like, well,
what kind of, um, what artists do you listen to? And he was like, I was like, well, what, what's,
what songs do you like? And he said, he said, what full song?
Oh my God. Oh boy. So he's doing them on Tik Tok or something.
The decimal point of where we thought the smallest denomination. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. The song, the album, the, the catalog it's moved. It's moved.
The Tik Tok. So, you know, so you have people now making records with two minute songs and stuff
like that. And, and the thing is with that is such a symptom of the incentivization of short-term
pleasure that I'm quite happy to make long record, essentially long form statements that require
concentration. Do you know what I mean? Yeah. And, um, a lot of people are not in the economic
position to do that. Right. You know, but a lot of people are. And they choose not to. And they choose
not to for really neglectful reasons and really like kind of, I think like disrespectful reasons to the
form. Do you know what I mean? Like, um, there's too much content in general, but you could argue
that we are now in the golden age of TV. Now I think that started happening because that's happened
because you kind of have these almost like Gutenberg moments. Right. So, so I think that
when there's this Douglas Copeland, we'll talk about this idea that, um, when a dominant media platform
is superseded by a new one, it opens the previous one up to become more artful. So for example,
sure. So, so, so yeah, just to explain to people, the TV used to, you, you could only have a half hour
show on TV because the TV was the only thing we had. So you couldn't take up two and a half hours
because everyone else has got to do their thing. Yeah. Yeah. When the internet came on and people
started watching content in other places and the TV became not so constricted by actual time,
you got the Sopranos, you got the wire, you got six feet under, you got all of these shows
that had like Dostoevsky level narratives that went on for years. Do you know what I mean?
You can even, you can even say the emergence of photography, that it unburdened painting with
the task of having to represent the world. And so you got video, video, radio, all of these kinds of
things that will, that is happening with the internet a little bit. Now, as we start to talk
about the delineation between the clear net space and the dark forest, dark forest kind of environment
that is happening. There is a more creative subversive form of art happening on your Patreons,
sub stacks and below, which used to be people writing for magazines and people being involved with
institutions. And I think that even there's a lot of content out there, you could argue that we're in the
golden age of TV right now. And you could argue that we're not in the golden age of film, but I don't
think that we are that outside of your big mainstream movies. I don't think we're that starved for good
filmmaking that is kind of pushing things forward, even on a mainstream level, if you look like the
Safdies or if you look at like, you know, music though, is not in that place. And one of-
Why isn't music in that place?
I think it's because I'm not going to summarize it. I'll just give you an example.
You're a cute young girl or boy on the internet and you establish a fan base as a young model
from the ages of 17 to 21 and you get millions of followers.
Sure.
As a person, you get to an age where you want to start authenticating this or giving this a reason,
kind of like, you know, you want it to have a reason as opposed to my tits or my haircut or how
good I am at whatever. What a lot of them will do is pick up a ukulele or an acoustic guitar.
Right.
And within a month, you will have a bedroom EP from this artist.
Yeah. Yep.
And so you'll immediately get a link to their SoundCloud. So they'll go from being an influencer
now to a musician. There's a shortcut through using social media to get
a job or a position or be regarded as a musician. You can't do that with being a screenwriter.
You can't do that with being a director.
You can do it in your bedroom.
Yeah, you can do it.
You can make it on your laptop.
You can make it on your laptop.
It can be, uh, it can be given to a wide audience. You know, it's not like...
So it's not seen as what? Like if you are this, this social influencer and you go one day,
here's my SoundCloud link. People go, oh, if you go, hey guys, here's a link to my script.
Or here's...
Not a lot of clicks for that.
What? Here's your what? You're a what? Why use that? I don't care about that.
Do you know what I mean? Whereas, so I don't know. There's partially,
I feel that that's happening in music a little bit.
My sense of this stuff is that, um,
we, growing up in the society that we did, um, you're, uh, accustomed to having like a level of
trust in institutions that, um, when I grab the box of cereal off of the shelf is not going to
have metal shavings and wood chips in it. Like there are bare minimum standards that someone has
looked at this. It meets safety protocols and why we got on the plane. Yeah. Yeah. And this,
I mean, this is why when a medication is, uh, you know, revealed to have negative side effects,
then there's, uh, penalties, financial penalties to, to, uh, the, the pharmaceutical company and
whatever. But in the last few decades, especially, I mean, think of the opioid crisis, think of all
of like the negative health effects and all of the endocrine disrupting chemicals and just the
shit that's in all of our foods. Like that shit is, I mean, it's just the fucking wild west.
Like we are in a blasted libertarian hellscape and there is no institution that is checking any
of this for safety protocols. And everything's definitely not social media. No. And so the
negative externalities of the terrible design of all of these platforms is making people literally
fucking insane and schizophrenic and also just producing really, really unhealthy social patterns.
Yeah. And because I think, you know, we grew up in a period where our parents had, you know,
the relatively like stable period of life in the advanced world. We just had this kind of
benign, naive faith that these institutions would take care of us, but they are not at all.
No. And we're just living in the wreckage of all of these things.
It's all at the expense of neoliberalism's intent on-
Oh, the market will regulate it. That's what they'll say.
The market will regulate it.
Exactly.
Oh, people will just divest. They'll like spend their dollars elsewhere if they don't like it.
It's all about choice at the detriment of what those choices may entail.
You have to be able to self-determine. You have to be able to self-actualize. That's the,
you have to be able to do that. That's what we're going to provide the individual. And it's like,
yeah, but we're eventually just going to burn out and we're eventually just going to-
Right. There's a limit to like consumer responsibility. It's like, am I supposed
to individually conduct all the scientific tests to see if there's like plastic in this food?
Exactly.
You know, are you going to have to look at like every individual car to compare them?
And I think because social media-
You have to trust someone at some point.
Yeah, exactly. And because social media has just been inherently put into this part of our life,
which is about self-expression and self-determination that we are terrified of regulating it for being perceived as-
I mean, other countries have figured this out. You know, I hate to make the comparison,
but like you log onto TikTok or Douyin as it's called in China, like you're limited to an hour a day,
right? And the content is also curated. It's like educational, it's wholesome or whatever.
And then in the United States, we have all of these libertarian ethics where it's like, well,
if people don't like it, they'll look away. It's like, no, you just gave a slot machine to
every child in the United States, 250 million monthly active users. And they're all just
fucking swiping slot machines like boomers in a casino. Give me a fucking break. Like, no,
you need someone to regulate this shit. It is unhealthy and it has bad effects.
Yeah, there's loads. Exactly. Because it teaches also like an environment. I would suggest people to go
and watch your work that you did on Josh did this kind of analysis, this kind of, I suppose,
this rabbit hole piece where you went into this part of the internet that was filled of kind of like
young people that were operating as like a video game server in the way that they were communicating.
And all of these political ideologies kind of being jettisoned into this environment.
And consequently, what resulted of that is, you can see in Josh's work and Josh's piece.
But it is very difficult to kind of think of how to regulate these things because
you know, you can look at an empathy issue if the, you know, when you're a young person,
you're trying stuff out. Louis CK has said this before. It's like, if you, the first time,
you just try and stuff out when you're kids, you try out being mean and you're in the playground and
you say to a kid, you're fat. And that kid goes, oh, and then you go, oh, that didn't make me feel
good. I'm not going to do that. Whereas if the first time you say you're fat is on
in a, in a, in a comment thread and you get no emotional reaction, you get a thousand likes.
Yeah. Yeah. Your, your view.
This feels pretty good. Exactly. So I think that the idea of kind of like
of how, but again, this is the problem. It's the same thing with like guns, like, or prohibition.
If you give, if you provide society with something.
Oh, you make, you make it desirable when you're not allowed to have it.
If you like give society alcohol and then you go, nah, that was a bad idea.
You get what happened during prohibition. Do you know what I mean? You get, or if you give society
guns and you get to like now and you try and regulate it, you get in the issue that you've got,
you can't really take something back from a society that you've kind of allowed to become fabric of
because let's say an amnesty of social media only addresses the people that want an amnesty
within social media. It's same with guns, same with these kinds of things, you know what I mean?
So I don't actually know how you start now regulating things without it being something
that seems totalitarian.
Have you, have you considered though? So, um, and I'll say, I'm not totally sure my, uh,
my feelings on this or, or whether this, uh, this bears out in like five to 10 years, for example,
but I have noticed a trend. I always give this example of, uh, there were a duo of artists at the
School of the Art Institute of Chicago. And at the time that we all got on social media,
they happened to have more followers than Pace Gallery, which is like this, you know,
hundred million dollar, like very lucrative blue chip gallery. If you've made it up there,
like your career is set, you're at the top of the market, top of the museums. Um, and the early
adopter benefit for millennials on social media was enormous because we were actually just,
we had a quantitatively larger reach than some of the major brands because they were slow to get
on there. But, uh, what we've learned now, one generation removed is that the Gen Z kids,
if they try to get on social media, they've got like a hundred followers of their friends,
but Pace Gallery has like a hundred million or maybe it's a hundred thousand or somewhere like that.
But, uh, there's not the early adopter benefit. And so sometimes it's difficult to not over-index
the millennial experience that is just our experience of social media.
And there may be the possibility, I've heard the most, um, crude, cynical way I've heard this
phrased is that, um, millennials were the only generation, uh, selfish enough to like get on social
media, narcissistic enough to get on social media. And maybe actually for kids younger than us,
they might just opt out of the whole experience. That's the most optimistic.
I think that just because of the way that being a teenager has always existed. Being a teenager is not
being a grownup. So whatever grownups are doing. Yeah. Cause we're all adults on social media.
What a teenager is, is looking at grownups and going, that's gay. Sorry, you don't say that.
They're all doing activism on social media. I don't want to do any of that shit.
That's fucking lame. I'm not doing that shit. So if everybody who's older than you is just going,
Kamala is brat or whatever the fuck they're doing. Teenagers who are normally at the, this is the thing.
Young, Fisher's problem was that the 20th century being defined by lots of ideas was also defined by
this idea that young people are always at the forefront of cultural change. Right. Right.
And that was for loads of reasons because of naturally what they're like. And also because
of the way that the 20th century kind of economically was set up. That could exist then.
So you saw the birth of the teenager in the fifties and the, with the beats really.
Then the articulation of that idea with the hippies into the, into the punks. Right.
And I think that like being a young person has always been inherently counter-cultural or
aligning with a culture. So you were either like in Vietnam or like completely.
Oh sure. Yeah. Yeah.
So, you know, it used to be a very, very kind of thing. The youth was leading the culture for all
of those decades up until, I mean, when is it like 2008 where that cuts off or like,
cause it doesn't feel that way now. No, it doesn't feel like when the, when the,
no, it doesn't, it doesn't feel like that, that now that it feels like young people are subjected
to listen, you just said to me, you said to me, there's not anybody doing
what you're doing in this, in this particular space. Right.
It's like, I know. Right.
And there really should be. And it's not just because I'm ambitious, there should be young people
being funded to have those kinds of lofty aspirations. Like that's the issue that we've
got. Like the, the most talented young person who's really creative, you know, like I said,
will be doing the flat design for some internet company.
Last year, you made an exceptional video series, a piece called a theatrical performance of an
intimate moment, three part, four part series. It was, it was, we did four of them at that time.
Yeah. Episode two, I was very much touched by. Thank you.
The fort episode, as I call it. I really, I really love that. Thank you.
Uh, it got me my childhood experience very much. What did you want to explore with that series?
Why did you choose to make an art piece like this? You're, you're busy enough, aren't you?
You're touring, you're making the next album. Why was this important for you to make?
It was a reaction to, um, our social media, which is essentially a content platform being used
primarily to just advertise the show. So it would just be a series of kind of images of the show.
And after a while, you know, I've all, I always loved, we grew up in emo. So any kind of BTS
I used to love like tour documentary stuff. And I've always kept cameras, even though we filmed
everything, I've never put any footage out of our studio sessions and there's not that much BTS
stuff just because I've been making this film for 10 years that I'll probably never even make,
but I've filmed everything. But, um, it, it for a theatrical performance of an intimate moment came
from the fact that that's what the live show and my entire life had start to feel like,
do you know what I mean? This, the intimate moment being me essentially, um, simulating masturbation
in my house on a stage. Do you know what I mean? It was a theatrical performance of that. The, the,
the me literally, literally, it was, it was literally that. And I think that I wanted to extend
that concept out until what was happening around the show. So instead of, instead of just doing a
straight up tour documentary, I wanted to do something that was a little bit conceptual,
that still kind of explored some of the ideas that were in, that were in the show. The first one was a
kind of, uh, almost like a jokingly on the nose, uh, parody of like Woody Allen, you know what I
mean? Because we were in New York and we were just, me and Jordan, we were just doing it on the fly
and we would just write these little skits and then we'd go out and we'd shoot them. It's actually,
it is essentially, um, the kind of precursor internet web series version of a proper thing that I'm,
I don't know when I'll do it, but that I've been working on, on trying to do. The thing with, um,
the theatrical performance is that all of these, um, ideas of my art or my expression being permeated with
this feeling of surveillance and I would say, um, eeriness to quote Fisher again in a specific way.
If, if you, if you look up, you know, his difference between weird and the eerie,
I had a very eerie upbringing as much as I had an amazing upbringing, wonderful relationship
with my, my, my family and you know, that kind of millennial brilliant childhood that a lot of us had.
Um, but I was quite a thoughtful, um, introspective kid. And for example, my, so my mum was two examples
that I remember massively that have informed all of my work was my parents doing two different shows.
My mum once was in a Catherine Cookson TV show, which was a, uh, a writer who would write about,
you know, dramas, period dramas. So I remember being five years old, my mum left for work and I was going
to go and see her at 4 PM at work. And when I arrived at work, it was the 1800s and my mum was an old woman.
Well, and I was five and she was still my mum and she came over to me and everything was really,
but I was presented with this concept of subjective reality of being like, okay, this isn't real.
This is all an artifice, but I can get lost in this at any moment.
It's a fully dressed set and everything's totally immersive.
Yeah. And it felt kind of eerie because it felt real and unreal at the same time. And I think that
that feeling was driven home when I went to see my dad in a play called Art and my dad played out of
three men, the, the, the, the least strong, least masculine, least assertive of this friendship group.
Right. And in the play, the two characters who are bigger than my dad get into an altercation.
My dad gets in the way and ends up getting punched in the face. And it's this big emotional point in
the play where everybody goes, Oh, cause you really don't want that character to get hit.
Yeah. Now I was watching that in a theater and I saw my dad get punched in the face and I wanted to
react to it, but my reaction would have been socially inappropriate.
I mean, as a child, as a child, so people would fight like my dad could beat up your dad.
The biggest nightmare of being a small child as a boy is watching your dad lose a fight.
Yes. Yeah. Worst fear.
Watching it and then not being able to react to it because it would be rude or it would stop people's
enjoyment of watching it. I remember thinking, okay, there is a very, very flimsy line between
reality and not, do you know what I mean? Which is when I got really interested in postmodern art and
people like Andy Kaufman and all of these kinds of people that would play with these environments.
One of the reasons that I'm not really interested in doing press with any traditional media, even if
we do desire the return of institutions is because, um, the, my mum was brutally hacked and surveilled
by, um, by like, uh, a soon to be known news organization, same news organization that ended up getting
the news of the world canceled. And, um, so when I was younger, I learned of all these stories that
I'd slept in hotel rooms that had been bugged and people that I had met with my mum had actually
been essentially kind of like media spies who had taken me off to try and befriend me and then get
information from my mum. And only over the past couple of years, I learned that I was actually hacked
for five years. Every phone conversation I had from the age of 18 to 24 was listened to. And this
is an era when my brother was very ill. My parents were going through a divorce. I was kind of dealing
with, I think I was probably just around about starting to deal with my heroin habit and everybody
knows the feeling of, um, not, well, a lot of people will know the feeling of how it feels after
somebody has been into your house and stolen something. Yeah. You feel so in personally
invaded. You, you, you feel dirty and you feel uncomfortable and you feel unsafe. And that's
because somebody has come in and taken or played or, or fucked around with your things.
When people do that with your thoughts and your, your conversations, you know, people don't realize
like how much that old way of treating people in the media. Like Sienna, Sienna Miller, Sienna Miller
didn't talk to her mum for four years because a newspaper hacked her answering machine and released
information that she had only ever spoken about with her mum in public. And for her, there was no way that
her mum didn't do that. And she didn't speak to her for four years. Yeah. Now, how like degrading that can
be to your personal relationships, especially like your relationship with the media and stuff like that.
And, um, so was this, was this video series a way of kind of like controlling your own life,
taking back your own character and identity? Yeah. I mean, I don't want to take it like
that seriously, but what, what it was, was me starting to experiment with, you know, kind of creating
something that I felt was like authentic and also kind of scripted, but not scripted in order to
conceal information, almost scripted to reveal more than what a normal prosaic conversation can.
You know what I mean? People used to watch dramas and they would invest in the narratives of the
characters. When reality TV happened, we very quickly went, oh, this is great because the consequences
are real. That's when that happened. Then with your big brothers that started to articulate that, they went,
oh, you like the consequences being real. Do you want to phone in and decide what actually happens?
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Then we get into this model, which I think was the precursor for how we now
operate with famous people on social media. Do you know what I mean? It's almost like-
Oh, sure. Yeah. Proto social media.
Yeah. Yeah. We kind of, we would like to be in control of the narrative of this person. Do you
know what I mean? Especially if they give us loads. So I think that whether it's the last show
or a theatrical performance of an intimate moment, I'm always kind of interested in, in playing with,
you know, with those, with those ideas, it's difficult to articulate actually.
Well, scripting something, I think of this as a way of taking back your own words of like owning
the things that you say, whereas if you're surveilled, the things that you say are taken from you.
And so reenacting these things as a way of, yeah, kind of like owning your own experience,
that it's yours. You choose to release it. It's voluntary rather than it's something that happens
to you involuntarily. I think you're very right. I think that's probably what it, I think that's a
massive part of what it is. Yeah. That I, at least I can construct the narrative myself. Do you know what
I mean? Even if it is constructed and needs to be constructed. Once you start constructing
a real life personality, you want people to believe this is the real authentic version of me.
That's something that you need to like, keep up with. And that's difficult, you know what I mean?
Because people are dynamic and they change their mind. And, and I think that, you know,
um, yeah, I think that being able to control some form of narrative in an environment where that's
just completely taken away from you, do you know what I mean? Is, is, is important to me just as much
with that, with that stuff as it is with like the show. Yeah. You become the director of your own life
again. If I have to, you know, like it, yeah. Is there anything you want to say about the new album?
Themes you're going to explore, material that inspires you, topics you want to address?
Well, like I've said to you, I'm not really interested in doing press surrounding it. Mainly
because outside of the show and the album, the albums that I've made, which are truly the only
things that I'm interested in. I think because I study and talk about culture in my work, I think
people may be misinterpreted that I'm as personally invested as I am interested in the phenomenology
of what's happening. So for example, last year I became a, a way more, a way, a way more well-known
public figure for loads of different reasons. Yes. And the only reason that I was interested in
is kind of like what I was doing. So I think that a lot of artists, they become very interested in
their law or they become interested in the things that have happened outside of their art that people
know about and they want to address that. And fair enough. Do you know what I mean?
But maybe on my first record, when it was very much like a series of journal entries with like
little bits of heartbreak and all of these stories about relate, I used to write about relationships
a lot more and stuff like that. Maybe I'd be inclined to kind of like reflect on my experience
as, as, as, as a, as a person, do you know what I mean? I'm more as an artist, but honestly,
I would just, I would kind of just be lying, you know, like if I, um,
made a record about, I don't know, all the stuff that was said about me or my, um,
casual romantic liaisons or whatever it may be that I've kind of become known for just because
I was famous. I think that that that's an obvious thing to draw from. And I'm just not interested in
it. And I think that like the maintenance of the status quo is something that I always like fight
against. So the idea of making a record about something that personally happened to me that
by the time I put it out is going to be like two years old. Do you know what I mean? I see people
doing that as well. And it's just like, it's, it's, it's not like, you know, it's not interesting. So
again, my, my, my work is, I hope, you know, interesting art pop that provokes the, that maybe helps
popularize academic subjects that, that I'm really interested in. And because I don't have a blueprint
of how to make a record that people want to hear. The only thing I've ever done is just be like,
make something you're really interested in, you know, and that has, and so that's kind of,
that's just basically what I'm doing. And, you know, we're as interested in the culture war
as we are interested in some kind of niche, archaic economic model that we've read about.
Do you know what I mean? I'm just not interested in, in that kind of stuff. It doesn't make interesting
work. And I think that if everyone's else's work is going to be about that, I'd rather kind of stick
to what I'm good at, which is maybe being like a kind of outsider on the inside.
I'm not interested in being provocative or contrarian at all. I find it kind of tired
weird and, um, quite old fashioned and also a kind of a type of behavior that I've already drawn
inspiration from and shown examples of. I, um, I just want to make work that in that is in,
that is inspiring and not necessarily, I don't want to make work with an audience in mind.
I want to have my work exist outside of a lot of contemporary music that is very interested in
short term gains, whether that be getting attention, whether that be getting credit.
Um, I'm really, really suspicious of those ideas. And I'm also a, yeah. So, so I think that I just want
my work to be something that challenges people in the moment, as opposed to delivers
what they think they want. So that's what I want to do. Like, I kind of just want to like quietly,
calmly and in long form way, like have an effect on, on the culture, you know, uh, in a different way
to the way that I did when we first came out, you know, because a lot of these, this idea of
the same artists being around 20 years later, right. A lot of them are dialing it in and it's fine.
But I think that like, you know, if you're going to still be there, you've got, you've got to keep
making a reason why you're there. Do you know what I mean? Um, so that, that's what I'll try and do.
So unfortunately, no, no heartbreak, no, like kind of, well, I'm sure there'll be some like,
maybe like some kind of love songs on there, but there's not, I think that, yeah, I'm not in the world
of, did you see what happened? Here's my version of it kind of thing. You know, I think that that's
for, uh, for, for other artists to do, you know, Maddie, thank you for sitting with me here today.
I have to say, I'm just such an immense fan of your work. You're an extraordinary musician.
You're an incredible artist. And I'm glad that we finally got to have this conversation on camera for
once and talk about some of these ideas, bring attention to the work and the ideas that we care
about. And it's just been wonderful sitting with you here today. It's such an honor being able to
do this with you because the, you know, there's a handful of people that I really,
I really look to or admire in the art world. That's how we kind of became parasocial and then IRL
buddies. Um, so yeah, no, I, like I said, this will be an interesting cross section of my fans and your
fans. So hello to all of the Josh stands. Um, and thank you for having me as you will probably know,
you know, Josh is brilliant. And I would advise all of my fans to check out your work as well,
even if it's just to give more context on to kind of what I do and what we're this kind of group of
artists are trying to achieve, even though we're so multidisciplinary. Yeah. Our, uh, lack of faith
in the existing institutions means that we need to work together to build the context through which
to understand this work. So I very much feel that Peership with you. I feel it with Brad. I feel it
with the new models podcast and the shirt that I have to be wearing today. I feel like with do,
do not research again, something that I would tell people to check out because like you said,
these conversations, they're great for the prescriptive element. But I think that once
we've had all of these, we need to move into the diagnostic stuff. We need to start looking at
what these alternative institutions mean. And one of the things that that requires is dropping
any form of kind of like art school, hipster cynicism for a sincerity that allows you to try and
like change the world. You can build something you don't believe in. Exactly. That's so true.
So thank you for having me again. It was, like I said, it was, I didn't, the me talking on camera
was not on my, what do they say, bingo card for the next two years. So it's funny that you, um,
that you called me up, especially in between campaigns. But I think that it's been perfect because
due to a lot of the, the contact context collapse that went around the last show, I think that it's
been important for me to check in with my fans, because I think that, that the, there was this
maybe concept that because what I was doing was spiky, um, I was maybe being a bit, um,
thoughtless, do you know what I mean? Or performative and people started to lose
their grasp of who I was as an artist, which was the point. Right. Um, but, uh, it's been really,
really nice. Uh, and sorry, since then I've not spoken, I've only performed. So I've not been able to
kind of, you know, to reassure people that I'm not a, um, a red pill down the rabbit hole,
edgelord. Um, I'm, I'm merely somebody like, like yourself who was, who has been truly fascinated
with the phenomena of, of, of how we're communicating. And, um, so thank you again. And I, um,
um, I'll talk to you on the phone, but I'll put, I'll see everybody else. Like when I do a show.
Matty, thank you so much. Thank you so much.
