A lot of white women told me to die from the time I was 11 to 13.
A lot of white women DM me being like, die, and I'd be like, oh God.
And I was 11, and I went really, really hard against gay marriage.
Who are your followers?
Like, old men who are 40.
I got really, really into God.
I believed God was real.
I was told by my parents that I was going to be a pastor.
As a young man who just lost his dad, you should be angry.
If it's not all true, then none of it's true.
Just like seeing that progression of having a Republican Facebook page called Obama's
gay to getting arrested at a Black Lives Matter rally, a lot of YouTube videos.
Welcome to Doomscroll.
I'm your host, Joshua Citarella.
My guest is comedian Peter James Fowler.
He joins us to discuss his highly influential political meme account that he ran at age 11.
I had a Facebook just like when I was in fourth grade.
I got out to there pretty early.
And then I started posting things, and it became like too problematic.
Like, people would DM me that I knew, and it created like, when I would be outside,
people would talk to my parents and be like, hey, he's posting these things.
And so I was like, I should...
What kind of things are we talking about here?
Who's the guy on Fox that like, before Tucker?
Bill O'Reilly.
Bill O'Reilly?
Bill O'Reilly, yeah.
I was a big Bill O'Reilly stan when I was 10 years old, dude.
Bro, I loved him, dude.
I didn't know what he was saying, but I thought I did.
And then, like, I kind of decided to make a different Facebook that nobody knew would
be me because I was getting, like, already having problems.
And so I made this Facebook.
It sounds so insane to talk about, but it was called Obama's Gay.
And it was like, instead of the A, it was called...
It was at...
It was at...
Which I was pretty...
Now, I'm like, how nobody saw this and was like, this kid's kind of really funny.
But it was called Obama's Gay.
And I kind of just started posting things on there.
And then, like, I told some of my friends.
Some of my friends followed me, which is, like, how I would say it got, like, a little
traction.
Because back in the day in Facebook, it was, like, not what it is today.
Like, there was no, like, algorithm pushing you into, like, the mainstream of, like, people
are, like, clicking on this so you get to it.
So you had the organic growth of...
Well, I had to do it the original way, bro.
Through word of mouth.
So I made it.
I started just posting, like, really chill.
I remember some of my posts.
I remember I was like, this new Tucker Carlson guy is really great.
Which is really funny.
That, like, considering who he became, I was like, this young guy's got fucking fired, dude.
I would post shit, like, dude.
I would post shit, like, yo, y'all tuning in to Bill O'Reilly tonight?
And people would, like, like it and share.
And then they'd be like, this is...
This was great.
And then we'd talk about it.
And then I kind of started getting into, like...
Things started to happen that I thought were affecting me as I got a little older.
And I kind of got, like, upset.
And that became my avenue to, like...
What were the things that were affecting you?
Michelle Obama changed school lunches to make them healthy.
And they took away our snack bar.
They took away our, like, Hot Pockets.
Every Friday would be Hot Pocket Day.
And they took that away.
And I was really, really pissed.
So, for a while there, I just went after Michelle.
And this was before all the conspiracy theories about Michelle.
I didn't invent them.
I wasn't on the money.
But I was going after her.
I remember tweeting, like, give me Hot Pockets or posting on Facebook.
Give me Hot Pockets or give me death.
That was a thing I posted.
And somehow people connected to it.
And that kind of got shared to people.
Which is so interesting.
It's, like, Twitter.
I didn't even have a Twitter then.
That was, like, getting shared around.
I don't remember what kind of reaction it got.
But I remember it, like, got a pretty decent reaction.
Which is so funny to me.
That give me Hot Pockets or give me death kind of, like, blew up.
And then the gay marriage thing happened.
And I was 11.
And I went really, really hard against gay marriage.
Only because, I would say, I was raised very Christian.
Like, my dad was a pastor.
And my stepdad was a pastor.
Yeah, yeah.
So, I was, like, I was raised that if you were going to get gay married, you were, like, going to hell.
And at that point, I really believed in hell.
And I was, like, we can't allow this because they're going to go to hell.
Right, right.
So, I posted.
I was, like, upset about this Supreme Court ruling.
I don't remember what I said.
I don't think it was anything crazy.
But I was just, like, really bummed about this new Supreme Court ruling.
And then people would comment.
And then I would engage with them.
And at this point, it was just me and my mom and my siblings.
And I didn't have a dad at this point.
He died, like, a couple years earlier.
That's kind of when I started getting, like, really into it.
And so, I went to a different school than everybody else.
And I went later.
So, I would have the day, kind of, like, a couple extra hours of computer space alone.
So, I would post these things.
And I went hard after gay marriage.
And I remember feeling, like, super guilty about it.
Because at the time, I had an extreme addiction to lesbian porn.
So, I, like, would post about it.
But I was such a hypocrite.
Because then immediately after posting about gay marriage, I would just go look up lesbian porn, dude.
And it was, like, took me a while to really realize what I was doing.
Plus, like, the religious guilt started to set in.
Of, like, you're watching of all porn, lesbian porn.
But I didn't want to see any men.
I was, like, too young for that.
You know what I mean?
I feel like lesbian porn is the entry to all men, young men.
Yes, that's true.
Yeah, it took me a while before I was, like, okay, I'm ready to see a dick, you know?
So, I started watching that.
And then I would, like, kind of just do these posts about, like, I remember Jesse Waters I was really supporting.
I would just argue with people, too.
Like, people, adults started to DM me.
Are these all, like, text posts?
Are you doing memes even at this point?
I would post pictures, like, embarrassing pictures that I would find on the internet of, like, Obama in, like, a weird situation.
Or, like, Michelle looking crazy.
And I would kind of, like, comment under the things, like, what my thoughts.
Sometimes I would do that.
But it was a lot of just, like, that wasn't that popular.
This was, like, right when Obama got in, kind of.
And then the next couple of years.
Yeah, this was early.
There wasn't, like.
Like, 2008, are we talking about?
I would say 2010.
When were you in fourth grade?
2010, okay.
I would say 2010.
So, it kind of wasn't, which is so crazy.
There wasn't even a share button, really, for a while.
Wow.
When I first started posting on Facebook when I was 10, there was no share button.
And then they created the share button.
And that kind of helped me out a lot.
Because I was getting no attention on my actual page.
The only people that were reacting were the people that were, like, in my friend group already.
I look back on it and I'm, like, I can remember the things that I think are funny.
Like, really.
You know what I mean?
At the end of the day.
I also, I remember, this is a true story.
I mowed lawns for a living.
When I was, like, not for a living.
I was, like, 10 years old.
But I would do it and we were, like, really poor.
For allowance.
Yeah, for allowance.
But I would use it to, like, buy my school lunches.
Because my dad had just died so we didn't have a lot of money.
And I would mow lawns.
And then this Hispanic guy came to my neighborhood and started mowing the lawns for cheaper than I was.
And he took all my lawn mowing jobs.
And he was, like, 30.
And I was, like, literally, like, 11 or 12 at this point, probably.
And I lost all my mowing jobs.
So I started to just, like, go hard against immigration.
Like, really hard.
Because I was, like, this is insane.
And I remember that really helped me out, I feel like.
Because people, I still don't know why.
But in Arizona, especially where I was at, like, they really care about immigration.
Like, even if I talk to my mom today, she'll be, like, oh, these immigrants.
And I'm, like, you have no immigrants around you.
You live, like, completely separated.
But she'll, like, for some reason.
And even in, you know, what's going on now, they always are talking about it.
And that helped me blow up.
And I remember just being, like, very hard against immigration.
I don't quite remember the specific post.
I remember posting one time Mexicans are stealing our jobs, which is, like, so fire.
And what's even funnier is, like, adults.
Now that I think back to it, adults were, like, loving this.
Yeah, yeah.
Who is DMing you?
Who are your followers?
Like, old men who are 40 who have, like, American flag pictures on their.
And then I would get liberal followers, too, that would, like, come at me.
Which is really funny, too.
Because I would just argue back with them.
I'd look at their page and, like, say shit about them.
I'd be, like, your wife's ugly.
Or, like, shit like that.
And they would get so mad at me.
And I don't think they understood that there's, like, a child on the other line.
You know what I mean?
Like, on the receiving end of this.
Right.
Because you don't have, like, there's not a profile picture.
No.
There's not.
There's nothing.
It's just an anonymous account.
Yeah.
There's nothing about it.
Ostensibly, someone thinks this is, oh, they're talking about political issues.
They're following elections, Supreme Court decisions.
They think this is a grown adult.
And they don't realize it's a child thought leader.
Yeah.
The future, dude.
Adults are taking political advice from.
Yeah.
How many followers?
Just to put a size on this account.
Like, what's the reach of some of these posts?
I said in the TikTok video I had 30 because I was trying to amp it up.
But I probably had, like, 9,000 or 10,000 at the time as a kid.
Organic growth on Facebook is pretty good.
Yeah.
I don't have that many followers now as a stand-up comedian.
So, I'm like, now looking back, I'm like, that was a pretty good move for me.
I ended up, like, kind of stopping.
I didn't end up liking it because I would get so many DMs.
I started getting DMs.
And that was, like, really uncomfortable and weird to me.
Also, the hate DMs were weird.
It was really hard as, like, an 11-year-old.
For someone to call you a name and you didn't, I wasn't able to justify, like, oh, this is
a fake account and they're crazy and you're also crazy.
I just would take that personal.
So, it ended up becoming, like, I would feel bad.
I would feel bad about the things I would post.
And it's something I kept away from my family, even, because of their reaction to my original
Facebook page.
Yeah.
I was, like, really scared about it.
And it was funny to me at the time.
And it was, like, not even super funny, but it was, like, something I believed in.
And it was an avenue for me to post my beliefs.
Why I needed that when I was 11, I don't know.
But at the time, it was, like, super kind of helpful to me and just gave me something
to do just in my day-to-day of just being, like, watch the news.
And then, like, I would go talk to my family about it.
And they'd be, like, Peter, we don't give a fuck.
So, I would be, like, I'm going to go post on my Facebook and watch what happens.
So, I don't know.
When I look back on it, it's weird.
And I'm, like, kind of, I don't have a negative reaction to it.
When I tell some people this, they kind of react, like, especially in New York City where
I live, they, even when I'm doing that joke, talking about it, I'll get crowds that will,
like, immediately turn on me or people that I tell that immediately turn on me.
And I've kind of always been, like, was it as bad?
Like, does that reaction that they give you, is it justified?
But I don't know because I'm, like, I was 11 and I don't count anything that I did when
I was 11, like, seriously.
Yeah, well, this is the problem with liberals is that they're blaming you as an 11-year-old
for using an exploit in the bad design of social media rather than looking at this as
an indictment of boomer conservative politics that it's being led by a fucking fourth grader.
Yeah.
That is the level of political comprehension.
Yeah.
It's actually a critique that's on their side.
But the liberals are just so ideologically bitter.
They're feeling both in charge and persecuted at the same time that they're unable to make
sense of it.
Our audience is going to find this very interesting.
It will definitely be on your side.
Okay.
You don't have to worry about that kind of reaction.
You know, maybe I don't, like, really care if they didn't like me.
I would be like, I don't give a fuck, dude.
I was 11.
That's what I say.
But I also think that people don't give me the credit of, like, understanding that,
like, I grew up both, my dad was a pastor of a church, evangelical church.
There's pictures of me when I'm, like, two wearing a Bush sticker on my back.
Yeah.
On my dad's back, I got a big-ass Bush sticker.
Like, I was raised in a way that God is real and George Bush is the savior of this society.
Well, so tell us then, because I think if people don't have the historical memory of
this period, it was common for big evangelical churches to, in some cases, like, hold up
an image of the president.
You know, we think of this separation church and state in the United States, and that was
very much not the case in the kind of environment that you grew up.
To evangelical Christians to this day, politics and their religion are tied in.
Yeah.
But that's because they believe that the Antichrist is coming.
Yeah.
And we have to, like, even though it says it's coming and there's nothing you can do about
it, they still are, like, actively working.
So, I was told by my dad that, like, if Obama got into office and beat McCain, that the world
was over.
Like, it was going to end.
Yeah.
So, as a kid, your dad is telling you that.
You're just like, oh, my God.
We got to stop Obama.
Right, right.
Which is so funny, because now I'm older and I'm like, he wasn't that bad.
And that was a hard thing to go through, too, because you're raised this way and you
believe it.
And then you're even going to the point of, like, I would argue with anybody, anytime,
anywhere about politics, even though I was so off.
I would be like, I would argue with Christians who were, like, wouldn't believe, didn't believe
in evolution.
I would, like, argue with teachers who would be like, the world is, the earth is, like,
I don't know how many billion years old.
And I would be like, actually, it's like 5,000 years old.
And they would be like, they couldn't even say anything to me because in school they didn't
want to be like, no, your religious beliefs are nonsense.
You know, so they would just be like, oh, that's your belief.
So, like, I kind of was, nobody would check me, really.
And I kind of just got in this role of, like, okay, I can argue with these people.
And then my dad passed away.
And he was, like, the guy that I would watch this shit with.
We would sit and we'd watch the news, like, every night.
And then I kind of lost that.
And I think that's where that Facebook came into play, is where I was like, now I have
an avenue to talk about this.
You got to finish his work.
Yeah, in a way.
I mean, he wasn't working towards it, but he definitely, like, was very much, like,
evangelical pastor.
And he was a good guy, too.
He was complicated because we were in a small town called Yarnell, Arizona.
And we had, he had a church of, like, I don't know, 20, 30 people in the church.
And he's a complicated guy because he's so Republican.
But I remember, too, when I was a kid, there, we found out that in our town there was a KKK,
a Ku Klux Klan meeting in the town.
What the fuck?
Yeah, dude.
That's, like, how redneck this was.
There's, like, 5,000 people in the town, maybe, maybe less, maybe, like, 1,000, 2,000.
And he found out there was a KKK meeting.
And this is a, like, a Republican guy.
And he went into, the next Sunday, he went on, like, his podium or whatever the church
thing is called.
And he said to his, like, people, he was like, if you go to that meeting, if you're a part
of the KKK, like, I don't want you at this church because, like, that is bad.
And then we lost, like, half of our denomination.
Holy shit.
From that.
And he didn't expect that at all.
My mom didn't expect that.
So they were kind of like, we just lost half of our money for our bills.
And I remember this because it's, like, a thing my family still talks about to this
day of, like, how crazy it was.
And it kind of makes me look at, like, every, it makes me think of just conservatives as,
like, they're so serious about some things that are ridiculous.
But he's not a bad guy because, like, I don't know many conservative people who would be willing
to do that.
Right.
And his hate for Obama wasn't.
Give up half your income for your principles.
Yeah.
And, like, our hate, the hate that I was told for Obama wasn't because he was black.
And that's what a lot of people, even in New York, will be like, you guys don't like him
because he's black.
And it's like, no, it's purely ideological of, like, we don't like him because he's a
Democrat.
Yeah.
That's it.
They probably would have loved to have Obama be a Republican.
They would have taken him in a second.
It's definitely something that, it's like, I don't have that time to explain that to
people when they, you know, a crowd.
Yeah.
To be like, actually, no, you're taking this the wrong way when I make a joke about Michelle
Obama when I was 11, you know.
Well, there's very few people in today's society that move between different cultural
or social spheres.
So, the idea that someone could be raised in a red household or a blue household and
then vote differently in their adulthood, very possible, you know, maybe just a generation
ago, even my family, you know, one of my parents was a Republican, one was a Democrat.
They agreed on enough that it didn't matter.
Those weren't, you know, meaningful disputes and that they couldn't share a space.
And now people get kicked out of Thanksgiving dinner if they voted the wrong way.
Yeah.
We're in an increasingly polarized society where people, in the case you're describing, can't
even extend empathy to children.
Yeah.
To children who have, you know, in some cases, let's say, reprehensible views.
I've interviewed people who have a lot more radical politics than you did who are just
around your same age.
You know, people with tens of thousands of followers who's a, you know, a narco-capitalist
12-year-old.
Very influential.
A lot of radical people following them, posting all the time.
You know, largely Instagram, memes, different, you know, Twitter, different types of communities.
But I think your story is actually increasingly, increasingly common.
Yeah.
And when I first started doing this work, I think I published the book in 2018, people
didn't fucking believe me.
They thought I made up all the accounts, like 50 accounts, 100 accounts that I was like,
oh, this is Josh's weird art project that I made all these fake accounts who are like
into politics and also like teenagers.
It's like, no, I just see them post a selfie on the bus to school.
Yeah.
That's how I knew this person was 12.
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
That's crazy to think about.
So I think maybe people are just not yet grasping, you know, the type of experience you had.
They're not yet sure how to digest that.
But it's going to become increasingly, increasingly common.
Yeah, yeah.
It's really crazy that I guess you're right.
So some people don't change their political views.
So maybe they don't think other people can.
You know, I also, in New York, I think a lot of people think that if I say, oh, I used
to be Republican, they think I'm just saying I'm liberal now to fit in, which I understand.
I do think a lot of people do that.
But for me, like my experience with becoming, if you don't mind me becoming liberal, it's
like, and when I say liberal, I don't even mean Democrat.
I just mean like completely detached.
I vote Democrat, but I'm not very involved in politics today at all.
That's probably the right response.
Yeah.
There's no meaningful political say, like, why be involved?
Yeah.
I mean, I vote, but that's, what am I going to do?
Watch politics all year just to go make one decision at the end of the, you know what I
mean?
It's like, also, it's been pretty boring recently.
So I'm like, what's happening right now?
But for me, man, coming out of that, like, Republican ideology was, I got really, really
into God.
I believed God was real.
I was told by my parents that I was going to be a pastor.
And then I got a little older and I just started kind of realizing, like, inaccuracies, like
starting some religious things didn't make sense to me, you know?
Like, there's just, and the hypocrisy too was interesting to me that, like, once I got
old enough to actually read the Bible and understand the Bible, I was like, oh, you guys
don't live this way at all.
This is, and you incorporate politics into it.
It's supposed to be completely separated.
And then I stopped believing in God probably when I was around, like, 16.
And then I was like, if there's no God, then, like, a lot of these moral reasons we've been
fighting for are kind of, like, pointless because their whole ideology is why can't there
be abortion?
Because God.
Right.
So if there's no God, then you're like, why can't we have abortion?
We can do whatever we want.
You know what I mean?
So I kind of just left that.
I became an atheist, would argue with my family about, you know, politics any chance
I got.
I became like a, like a aggressive atheist, you know what I mean?
Where I would, you also know who got me?
Stephen Colbert.
Really?
Got me to really, like, kind of.
Because he's a Catholic.
Yeah.
Huh.
But he used to play this character where he was like a Republican guy on Comedy Central.
Right.
I would watch that as a kid and not catch that he was joking.
I'd be like, this guy is fire, dude.
Which is so crazy.
And then I caught on that he was joking because I would send it to my mom, dude.
And my mom would be like, this guy's great.
This guy's so fucking funny.
But then I got older and I was like, oh, wow, he's totally joking.
And then I started watching Stuart, which is interesting too.
And that kind of just opened me up to be like, I would research these things about like,
oh my God, he's right.
Like, why are we?
Why?
And then I started doing a lot of drugs.
I started doing a lot of shrooms, doing acid.
You're a teenager now?
Yeah.
Probably like 17 around this time.
And I'm kind of just like, why would we be against it?
Like, you just start breaking these ideals that you've held and you have no reason to hold them.
It's just like a belief you have where I would be like, we can't let illegal immigrants in.
And they'd be like, why?
And I'd be like, God, God, God, God, God.
How does that one fit in with this?
It doesn't fit anywhere.
It's just racism.
That one's just straight up racism.
Which the irony is a lot of the immigrants are very religious.
Yeah.
Very more religious than the people here.
Let me ask you though.
So one of the reasons why I relate to your story, I care about the things you're telling me.
My family was very religious growing up and we were Catholic.
My parents ultimately left the Catholic Church after the rampant child abuse.
Really?
That was a big issue for them.
They left.
They were raised Catholic.
They went to Catholic school.
Their whole family brought up in it.
And they just thought that was so abhorrent, unforgivable.
Yeah.
That the institution they trusted the most would be single-handedly the most responsible for the most evil in the world.
They couldn't do that anymore.
Today, my dad is a deacon.
Wow.
And a Catholic church?
Oh, Episcopal.
Episcopal.
Not Catholic anymore, but Episcopal service, very similar to the Catholic service.
Yeah, but they're very much culturally progressive.
They've got lesbian pastors and all this sorts of stuff.
So very different experience than the Catholic church, but it looks similar.
So I go to church every now and then, mostly because I got sober like a year ago.
And I kind of had to like tap into like some belief that I could get sober.
Yeah.
And I go, and I still am like, I'm like, man, this is so weird, dude.
I'm like, this is so weird.
I've been going to Catholic churches.
And I went to a Catholic church on like 59th.
And I'm so raised Christian that there was like a trans altar person.
And I really had to be like, that's okay.
I had to be like, I love that.
But I caught myself being like, I love that.
And I'm like, why are you saying to yourself that you love that?
It's just like, but I was like, oh, my family would freak right now if they saw that.
And they also too believe, evangelicals believe the Catholic church is like the most evil institution
of all time.
Right, right.
But no, they do.
Which it kind of is, dude, if you look back at like, yeah, it's bad.
I mean, yeah.
I mean, I think abusing kids is kind of the most.
Yeah, abusing kids is not cool.
Involvement with the Catholic church is a guaranteed ticket to hell.
That's confirmed.
Your family, though, is conservative leaning, obviously.
Oh, yeah.
Still.
So what kind of the, because you had mentioned before that you were posting stuff under your
own personal account around age 10.
Yeah.
That caused alarm for people in your community, people who knew your parents.
Like, what kind of stuff would you be posting that was, because, I mean, they sound pretty
conservative from what you've described.
Yeah.
What made people alarmed about it?
Was it just your age and the type of content that you were posting about you to be involved
in politics at all?
I think the age and the like aggression behind it.
I was like a little, yeah, I was a little like.
He's a young man who just lost his dad.
He should be angry.
Yeah.
Which at the time, again, at the time, nobody knows those things.
You know what I mean?
Like, even my mom.
I had six siblings, too.
So I get lost in the mix pretty easily, which is why I was able to do these things and never
have any like attention because I was, my mom's working to try to keep us alive.
And then my siblings are off doing their own thing.
So I just remember like people commenting.
And then my mom did say something to me at one point.
She was like, and my older sister, I have an older sister who ended up working for like
the time.
She was actually, remember that scandal with Uber happened?
Which one?
Yeah.
It's so funny.
Well, Uber got in trouble for sexual harassment.
She was like the whistleblower on that.
She used to work at Uber.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then she ended up becoming like the cover of Time Magazine and it like blew up and my
family was getting like all kinds of calls.
But she went to college and she left the house pretty early.
By the time she was like 14, she was like out of the house and already in college.
She's like a genius.
Yeah.
And she would kind of really be like on me about my post from the beginning.
She was like very much like, hey, don't post that.
The internet is forever.
Don't post this.
Don't post that.
And she kind of also drew me out of like, she would send me books.
She still to this day, she'll send me a book, dude.
And I'll be like, I'll read the book.
And I'll be like, dude, she sent me Crime and Punishment and I read it and I thought
it sucked.
I was like, this book sucks, dude.
It's so long.
It's just, I don't know, dude.
I would the whole time.
But she'll, she really brought me out of that because she kind of got educated and I would
listen to her because I kind of respected her.
She went off to college.
She got into like University of Pennsylvania.
She then worked for like all these companies.
And then she ended up working at the Times around the time I was like 13, 14.
And she was big.
Like she would message me and be like, yo, take that post off.
Take that off.
Take that off.
And I would just like listen to her and kind of be like, okay, she's right.
I went too far in that time.
And then she would sometimes tell my mom and my mom would be like, take that off.
So I kind of started to get just some heat from them.
And I was like, if I make my own account, nobody will know what's going on.
I see.
I see.
Yeah.
This is the, so this is the difficulty when people are confronted harshly in relation to
their belief system.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They will often just take it into a private space, do it anonymously or not tell the outside
world of what they're doing.
And so unless someone knew that you were connected to the account you were posting on, you could
do all these things in secret.
And a lot of people, when they are challenged with their beliefs, they will learn to mimic
the mannerisms of the court or however they need to behave in the workplace, whatever they
need to do to get along socially.
I've interviewed a lot of people who have told me this anecdotally as well, that, you
know, they live in a kind of progressive mainstream liberal society, but they have this repulsive,
just grotesque shitposting account where they say all sorts of things that even they don't
believe, but they just like a vent for their anger or something like that.
Yeah.
For me, it was always like things I believe, which is even crazier.
I wish it was like, yeah, I was just trying to get on people's nerves.
But no, I was like, we got to talk about these things.
We got to really address them.
And you know what's funny?
When I left, when I kind of started to back out, I kind of felt like lost because I was
so...
How did that process start?
So you're getting these like books and links and like suggestions from your sister.
You react poorly to that.
But you're running this account.
You're experiencing success.
You have thousands of adult followers.
And then what, how do you start to lose interest in it?
So I guess I start to just kind of like, my mom remarried.
She made her another pastor.
I got really annoyed about that.
So we're back in church after being out of church for a couple of years.
My mom would still go and she'd drag us with us.
But we went from being like in church every Sunday to now we're just free to do whatever
we want.
And now back to like a control.
And like my stepdad took away my Call of Duty games, like all these things.
And I went from being like free to like not free.
And that really upset me.
And then I kind of just started to see like, I judged him as like, my dad was a pastor,
but he was like a really, like he played that role really well in every minute of his life.
Like you wouldn't see him have these moments that were un-pastor like, you know.
And my stepdad, he kind of just, we'd get in arguments and he would get a little wild.
And I would kind of just started to really have a bad relationship with them.
And then it made me look at them in a way of like, I felt like they were hypocrites.
I was like, you guys are hypocrites to the core.
So that kind of just made me start to leave God once I really was like not believing in
God.
And that happened from like tons of YouTube videos.
Tons of YouTube videos about evolution, like hearing, is it Richard Dawkins?
Is that the guy?
Yeah.
So is this around, just if I take a guess, 2012?
Is this the...
That's probably, no, that's probably around 2014.
I kind of stopped the Facebook page.
Because there's a big like new atheist movement that is very influential in like the 20 teens.
Sam Harris.
Yeah, Sam Harris was one of them.
Yeah, for sure.
Sam Harrison.
They're a little libertarian and then they're a little like neocon.
Yeah.
Kind of, yeah.
I think it's Dawkins has this video of him teaching evolution to Muslim kids in a school
and he's pointing out evidence and they're just like, no.
But he has like real evidence proving to them.
That sounds like a Richard Dawkins video.
Yeah.
But I watched that as someone who believed in evolution and I was able to be like, wait,
he's making really good points right now.
And I was raised that like, and that's where they, I think my family fucked up.
It was like, this is Christianity.
If it's not all true, then none of it's true.
Right.
Like we have to defend every point of it.
So if those points start falling in a little bit, you start to be like, this isn't real
at all.
You know what I mean?
So after watching enough videos, I kind of just, I'd watch like atheist debate, all kinds
of people.
And then I kind of just came to a point where I was like, none of that's real.
And then I was kind of like lost really.
That's where I started doing like drugs and like, because I was like, if one thing they
said is false, I felt like the rest of it was false.
So I kind of just started doing whatever I want all the time and it kind of created some
chaos in my life because I was like, I didn't know how to live a life.
I had thought that like, if you sin, you go to hell, but then what if there's no such
thing as hell?
You can sin as much as you want.
Right.
And I didn't understand that like, don't lie so that you can live in a better community.
I didn't understand that like, there were these rules to help you live in a community
better.
Don't steal, don't lie, don't, you know what I mean?
Like all these things were to help you.
I didn't understand that.
So it kind of just became free range, ended up dealing with like drug addiction over the
next on and off over the next, like, I don't know, up till that time I was like 24.
Wow.
Pretty just like go in and out of it had no concept of how to deal with these things or
that anything was wrong in my life because I just thought they were totally insane.
And it kind of, it's kind of sad if I'm looking back on it.
So when people are like, how could you be like this when you were a kid?
And I'm like, you don't know what I had to go through in myself to just like relearn values
and build my own value system.
Right.
It's not an easy thing to do.
Right.
Yeah.
You don't have a, you don't have a map for your life.
You don't know what your values are.
None.
Your morality, all of this you need to build from the ground up.
And I was taught nothing other than Christianity and like religious politics.
So if that's gone, you're just like, I got to build my own theme.
And that's kind of where like the books helped.
I read like Communist Manifesto and there was like a year where I was like a communist.
Yeah.
Which is so insane.
What year was that?
That was probably when I was like 17.
I was like really into like.
A lot of 17 year old communists.
Yeah.
Yeah.
It's really funny now.
And then that led me down to Bernie face.
That like, Bernie dude brought me into like, you don't like Bernie?
No, I'm just, I'm trying to like keep track of the whole arc here at the evangelical Christian,
Obama's gay, age 11, new atheist to communist to Bernie Sanders.
It's, I love it.
Yeah.
I love all of it.
It's super weird.
A funny thing too is after my dad died, my mom kind of had like six months where she was
kind of an Obama supporter because we had this, where we lived, the place was trying
to get us to pay flood insurance on a, like a house that was near like, kind of like a
duct.
Oh, okay.
And it was like too far though.
And my mom was like, I don't need to pay flood insurance because there's no way that
like we should do this.
So then she wrote a letter to Obama and he wrote back.
Yeah.
He wrote back.
I'm sure like his assistant wrote it and he just signed it, but he wrote back and then
the flood insurance company dropped it and they were like, we're sorry.
So he probably said something to them, but he was like, it's taken care of in the letter.
Wow.
I think my mom was fucking Obama.
Now that I think back to the, like Cheryl smashed Obama.
Like, look, my son, this account, we're trying to get him under control.
Don't worry about it.
But yeah, she had like a period where she was like, still to this day, she'll be like,
Obama wasn't that bad.
That's amazing.
Yeah.
That's amazing.
Kind of fire that he did that.
Yeah.
He's right to the president and he solves your insurance.
I mean, what age was this?
You must be like 12 at this time?
Yeah, when she wrote to Obama, I'm probably like 12, 13 maybe.
And that didn't impact your views onto, no.
No, I was like, I thought he was from Kenya.
I was big into that Trump conspiracy theory where I was like, that's what something is
so interesting that people don't understand is like when they're like, oh, Republicans
are conspiracy theorists.
I would grow up listening to Rush Limbaugh with my dad in the car.
Conspiracy theories in the Republican Party have been around for a very, very long time.
And that like Rush Limbaugh was preaching, you know, Hillary's killing people, which is
a conspiracy theory for sure.
You know, who knows if she is?
Who knows?
There's no evidence.
Don't look into it.
Not directly, let's say.
Not personally.
Don't look into it.
But that was like...
Responsible for certain decisions, I might say.
Yeah.
She may have killed a couple people.
But yeah, it was like, that was totally okay.
You know, that kind of belief system was like, conspiracy theories are all right.
So then when it started amping up and Trump was like, you know, Obama, where's your birth
certificate?
I would, I believe that because I'd already been introduced to like, they're lying to you.
The Democrats are lying to you.
Everything they're saying is not true.
So for me, it was like, that's real.
You know what I mean?
I was like, of course, he's from Kenya.
What about the types of messages and stuff you would hear from your followers, from people
who were watching this account?
Because this is running, it's gaining influence.
A lot of times, and I've talked to people who have relayed this in the past, that, you
know, there are political organizations that watch these things, things that organically
crop up in social media.
They look at it against their, you know, outreach numbers for nonprofits or advertising numbers.
Did anybody reach out to you to do like a sponsored post or ask you to plug something?
No, no.
I think that was kind of before, I think it was honestly kind of before the time of like,
that was a thing that was like really happening.
And I would say that mine was pretty niche.
So I wasn't, nobody reached out to me, but I would get messages being like, die from like
people being like, a lot of, a lot of white women told me to die from the time I was 11
to 13.
You know, a lot of white women DM me being like, die.
And I'd be like, oh God.
And then I would get messages.
I had a message one time, somebody asked me to speak.
They're like, can we see you speak?
Like give a public lecture?
Yeah.
And I was like, no, I can't.
Because I was like, I'm 11.
I can't give up the jig, dude.
You would watch conservative media with your father growing up.
I'm guessing this is something like Fox News at the time.
Yeah.
Fox News all the time too.
Bill O'Reilly.
Talk radio, stuff like that.
Rush Limbaugh.
Yeah.
And when your father passes away, you take to social media to kind of preach the conservative
gospel as it were.
Yeah.
That's definitely a way to put it for sure.
Yeah.
Your posting is, you know, vigorous.
It's aggressive.
It's you're 11 years old.
So you're probably just repeating a lot of stuff that you saw.
100%.
Yeah.
There's no actual.
Bill O'Reilly.
Yeah.
Yeah.
That was kind of shock jock entertainment at the time too.
Yeah.
Absolutely.
You know, that catches the attention of your family, which doesn't necessarily, they don't
try to dissuade you from your beliefs.
They're just a little concerned that you're posting them publicly is what it seems like.
Yeah.
Yeah.
100%.
And so your response.
Which is so interesting.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
They didn't have like an intervention.
And, you know, I mean, most people are, it's unusual to be interested in politics.
Like politics is not a big part of everybody's life.
It's kind of like a hobby entertainment or something like that.
It's like following a sports team more or less.
But it does become concerning when, you know, you see your family member who's posting on
Facebook and they're just like saying all this crazy shit.
Yeah.
Like, oh, something must be going on with them emotionally.
Yeah.
That's what, you know, is often the case.
Mm-hmm.
But your reaction was not to stop doing that.
Yeah.
Your reaction was to start this new account under a different name and to post to incredible
influence and success and to generate a following of like adults.
For my age, yeah.
Who believed in these things.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Organically without algorithmic recommendation, without growth hacking techniques, just like
you had a, you know, an organic growth of a dedicated audience that listened to your
political opinions.
Mm-hmm.
You started to lose faith with religion.
Mm-hmm.
That was kind of the underpinning belief of a lot of your other conservative ideas.
Yeah.
And when you started to question the existence of God, it has this kind of domino effect,
which I probably, I probably went through a similar thing myself where, you know, you're
raised in a religious household.
One thing starts to come apart.
It's just like pulling on that thread.
Yeah.
And then the whole fabric, you know, the whole sweater, the whole blanket, whatever is just,
it falls apart.
And that sets you off on a pretty different mission where, you know, a lot of the new atheist
stuff that's on YouTube, those guys are also very pro-drug.
Yeah.
Very pro-experimentation, doing psychedelics.
Yeah.
You know, it starts with weed and then you do mushrooms and DMT and all this other stuff.
Yeah.
And then you got into harder things.
Yeah.
Definitely got into taking, just doing coke.
First time I did coke, I was like 16.
Just because I didn't think, believe anymore.
It was bad.
I did coke before I ever did any psychedelics.
Wow.
Probably.
And then I started doing the psychedelics.
And then, yeah, that led to when I was maybe 20, 21, dabbling in like Percocets and Xanax.
And then I somehow kind of stopped because of money, which is interesting.
I just didn't have the money to do it.
And I kind of just had to save your life.
And I never really had a withdrawal from Percocets when I was younger, which is interesting.
And then obviously that led to when I was like 23, 24, really getting into Percocets and Xanax.
And then when I would try to stop having physical withdrawals, which I had never experienced before, where like you go mentally ill and you feel like you're dying for like a week if you don't get another one.
But yeah, leaving that, like going from so conservative and so religious, when you stop believing in God, you kind of lose.
It's like, how many atheist Republicans do you really know?
Probably not a lot.
More rare?
More rare?
Yeah, very rare.
How many religious Democrats do you know?
Couple.
More than, you know what I mean?
More than the atheist Republicans.
Which I would always feel like that makes no sense.
How can you be a Democrat when I was that age and be like, and then be pro-abortion?
Right.
When you're killing, in my mind, you were killing babies.
Yeah.
So I was like, how could you, they're insane, you know, from my perspective at that time.
And with that ideology, it makes no other sense but to vote Republican.
So when you lose that ideology, you know, it's like obviously the other guy.
And I end up voting for, funny story, I was going to vote for Trump in 2017, but I didn't have, I didn't know you had to register.
Which I'm so glad, in a weird way, dude.
I'm like, so glad that I didn't vote for him.
Because I was like, right before I was allowed to vote for him, they were like, are you registered?
And I was like, I was like, what do you mean?
I'm sorry, what?
But then I ended up voting for Biden.
And I wanted Bernie, which is just crazy that I went from, even when I was like 17, I didn't believe in God anymore.
But I thought, this is where the meme shitposter guy came out of me.
I was like, I thought Trump was funny.
I thought he was a funny guy.
He is.
Yeah.
He's funny.
I was like, this guy's hilarious.
I felt the same way that they all do, is that these others, Hillary doesn't give a fuck about me.
Why would she?
She doesn't.
Yeah.
She does not care.
That's true.
She doesn't care about us.
So let's vote for this guy, because at least he's talking to us.
Right.
He's at least talking to us and mentioning us in his speeches.
You know what I mean?
These elites were involved in some way.
And then I saw him do his four years.
And then I saw him try to, what really dissuaded me was him really kind of trying to steal the election.
That for me was like, okay, I got to get involved in politics now.
And I've been a Bernie supporter.
And I kind of hated the Democratic Party, because they kept just being like, oh, Bernie.
And then right when it happened, they'd be like, no, no, Bernie.
So that was hard for me.
And then I decided to just go with Biden, because I was like, this guy's trying to actually, like, destroy our democracy in a way.
And I think a lot of people, the reason why they're still on his side is because they think it needs to be destroyed.
You know, when you talk to a Republican, they don't give a fuck that he's getting in this trouble.
They do not care.
They do not care that he basically started an insurrection.
They do not care.
They want religious law in some cases.
And that is not subject to democracy.
A theocratic regime does not have democratic inputs.
They definitely, they won't say it ever, but there's a large percentage of the Republican Party that wants a religious law, for sure.
And you live now in New York, which is, you know, the imperial core of liberal elite society.
And, you know, obviously there's much more to New York, but it's very different than where you grew up.
Yeah.
So, you've kind of seen a pretty wide gamut of the American experience and sampled different sides of the political aisle, different cultures.
How do you look back now and you see young people who post in the way that you used to post, with vigor, with power behind their beliefs, really thinking that, you know, they're impacting the world, they're making change, maybe not dealing with some of their personal stuff.
Yeah.
Um, what do you, what do you think now when you scroll through your newsfeed and you see young people posting with such political passion?
Um, I think it's so funny.
I think it's so funny, dude.
And, and that's the problem I have with the internet is like, and even with politics is taking it seriously.
And there'll be moments where I'm like, oh shit, this is serious.
But I have such a trouble just like watching it and being like, that's so funny to me.
It's a big thing like, um, that you experience in Arizona is, you know, Arizona does have a pretty like racist underbelly to it.
And something like, from what you described, that sounds very serious.
Yeah.
And it's very homophobic underbelly for sure.
And it's exactly like with the same way I relate to the politics now is that like, I'll make a joke about it.
And then say you make a, a gay joke and it's between you and me, or if there's a gay person there, it's like, it's lighthearted and we're just making a joke.
But then you make a joke out there and like the three people around you are like, yes.
And you're like, you're like, oh wait, I'm not just making jokes to people that we all know we're making jokes.
It's like, these people are taking this shit seriously.
They're not laughing because they think it's funny that you made a joke that's ridiculous.
They think it's funny because they believe in the joke.
And that's like the same, I feel with the Republican system is that like, or our political system, I should say.
When I see a 12 year old, I'm like, I laugh.
But then I'm like, geez, like, oh my God, dude.
Yeah.
Yeah.
People are getting really radicalized over the last 15 years to a level that's like, scary.
Like our government should take this more seriously.
This is like some pre-French revolutionary shit.
Oh, don't worry.
They're very involved in the social media.
I feel like their, their arms are all over this thing.
Yeah, I feel like they're like, almost involved in it in a way I did.
I was at a Black Lives Matter rally during the like George Floyd stuff was going on.
I ended up getting arrested at the Black Lives Matter rally, which is really funny.
As I just went to-
Not what one might expect from a 11 year old running a conservative meme page.
Yeah, but I, I went to go support the rally when that stuff was going on.
Cause I was getting pretty like, just far away from any Republican ties whatsoever.
And I kind of just thought the country was becoming insane.
And I went and I got arrested and I've had to do a night in jail.
And I was like, that's the last Black Lives Matter rally I'm going to go to.
Cause that shit was scary, dude.
Um, but like, for instance, there, there was a, during the rally,
there was a group of white guys that looked like police officers marching with us.
They just looked like police officers in plain clothes.
They probably were.
And I turned to them and I was like, oh, you're a, you're a, you're here for George Floyd.
And they just all looked at me and they were like, no.
And they just kept walking.
They just said no?
Yeah.
They didn't even pretend?
And I turned to my friends and I was like, these are cops marching with us.
Wow.
These feel like cops marching with us.
And then I watched how that all went down.
And it felt like a classic, like Russian, uh, Soviet Union controlling both sides of the media shit.
Because I was like, why is, why are police officers, and they're chanting.
And they're like saying stuff and they're getting involved.
Like, to me, that was like so crazy that like they are, you know, and in some ways you're like, okay, the stuff is happening and it's ridiculous.
But then you kind of take a closer look at it and you're like, wait, this is weird.
Like.
What would your, what would your friends back home say about the BLM protests?
Um, it's a mixture, right?
So I have some friends that have gone through similar experiences of me.
And then I have friends who would be like, oh, it's insane.
You know what I mean?
Definitely if you're a hardcore Republican, you think it's like crazy.
And they're very Blue Lives Matter flags.
Like.
Sure.
They love the cops there.
They love them.
My stepdad is actually like a police, uh, like, uh, what's that word?
A pastor for the police.
So when they're going through something, he goes and he talks to them, which is so crazy
that instead of going to a therapist, they go to a pastor.
Yeah.
Where they have to see something traumatic, which is crazy to think about.
Wow.
It is really wild.
But yeah, dude, coming from that, just like seeing that progression of having a Republican
Facebook page called Obama's gay to getting arrested at a Black Lives Matter rally.
A lot of YouTube videos.
Well, speaking of boiling your brain in the gutter of the internet, uh, you have recently
been watching some very interesting YouTube videos, which may or may not create the experience
of leaving your body, astral projection, uh, the gateway tapes, as they are so called,
which is something that both you and I are interested in.
Yeah.
And you've been messing around with these quite recently.
Yeah.
Um, so I, I discovered them from the, the Reddit CIA files.
There's like a whole Reddit page where you just like click links and it takes you to like
all the CIA, weird CIA files.
Analysis and assessment of the gateway process.
Yes.
Yes.
And if you read that, it's crazy, dude.
I still don't understand what, if he's like saying it works or if he's just reporting to
like, this is what the people said it does.
Oh, he's saying it works.
Yeah.
Wayne McDonald is the author of the document.
Okay.
And he's even, there's a page that's redacted.
There is the, uh, Monroe Institute, which was the, uh, the research institute that carried
out a lot of this initial research named after Robert Monroe, who was the founder of this
process.
They released, I forget the name of the page, but that was actually made public, uh, just
a few years back, I think in 2020.
So, um, we now have it.
Conjecture is that it was withheld from the public because it makes some statements about
similarities between all world religions, uh, was maybe deemed too sensitive at the time.
No one particularly knows.
Maybe they just left it out to create intrigue.
Yeah.
A lot of different theories.
But yeah, that's a, uh, it's a very powerful document you're messing around with.
So as soon as I read it, I was like, I went and I looked it up and then I found some tapes
on YouTube and my girlfriend thinks I'm insane, bro.
Cause I'll just be sitting there and there's a part where you have to hum too.
Did you get to that part?
I've done that.
Dude, I'll just be sitting in my bed going, nah, it looks insane.
If anybody walked in, this guy's crazy, dude.
But yeah, I tried a couple of them.
I'm not really getting any results, but I'm so early in the process.
I think it like is training you to do that.
Yeah.
Yeah.
You got to get in a good number of hours, usually around like when you get to, uh, focus
12 stuff starts to happen, but you'll just clock a lot of kind of their guided meditations.
What have you got to?
I've, I've done, oh, I don't know.
I might be like 30% through it.
I've also just, I mean, I've administered them to myself.
I've done all of the, uh, you know, entrainment exercises.
I've done the chanting.
I've also just a few days in a row where I'm like working on stuff that's quiet.
I just listened to like 12 hours of the binaural beats to see like what it does to my brain.
Do you think it does anything?
I feel weird.
I feel weird after.
And I've interviewed people.
I've interviewed people who have these out of body experiences afterwards, but I've not
been able to achieve that myself.
I do feel the need to point out that, um, you were, uh, ideologically programmed or deprogrammed
by new atheist videos at age 12.
And now you're quite a bit older doing some self-guided research on the internet for these
gateway tapes.
So YouTube has been a pretty prominent topic in this so far.
It's so hard for me because I have this curiosity with just like reading weird shit that's going
on.
And I love the CIA files because you can just read, they just have a lot of them out on
their website and you can just read them and you're like, what the fuck were they
doing?
It's like so great.
And those are the ones that are released.
So my part of me is like, what else is out there?
But I read that one because I, from a YouTube video, I think I heard about it.
So I read the whole thing and I was like, there's no way.
And so I've been trying to do it.
I haven't, I can barely get through it, dude.
If I'm being honest, I keep falling asleep.
I told you about that earlier, dude.
I was like, I just will zone out and I'll fall asleep, which is kind of fire.
I've been using them a little bit as like, I need a nap right now.
Let me get in the mode to take a nap.
But I also did the like thing where you, some of it's so weird for me, man.
And it's like, so I feel like such a weirdo being like, pretend there's a bubble around
you.
And then he's like, let's just explain for people who haven't listened to this before
that don't know what we're talking about.
Yeah.
It sounds fucking crazy.
Yeah.
Yeah.
What is the gateway process?
What is this thing that you're looking into?
Dude, I can't even explain it, but it's tapes that are, like you said, trying to, it's
from the CIA is what the CIA studied.
And I guess the, I don't even understand what it's doing, but it starts off being like, pretend
there's close your eyes.
So you have to meditate, you play some sounds in your ears, and then it makes you like do
mental activities almost with your brain while you're in like, just laying there.
And the first step is like, obviously there's like a box and you have to envision yourself
putting all your energy into a box and then you have to close the box.
I don't even know how to do that because I'm like, I start critiquing, am I like, am
I doing this right?
Because then dude, I realized when I first did that step, I would like put, I'd be like
in my brain, I'd be like, okay, I'm putting all my energy in the box.
And then I'd put it and then he's like, close the box.
And then I was like, wait, no, he wants you to put everything in the box.
So then I was like, how do I do that?
Like, it's so, for me, it's like, I'm not even able to understand what he's trying to
get you to do.
You know what I mean?
And then what's the one after the box?
He makes you hum, I think, while there's like a chant and breathe.
You're resonant tuning.
Yeah.
Do you believe that?
I don't feel any different, dude.
I'm like, this is just horseshit.
But I want to see, like you said, if it's actually real.
This is their description of it.
We can get more granular with this, but it's changing the frequency of the oscillation of
your brainwaves.
This is called brain entrainment.
And when you get that frequency up high enough, this provokes an out-of-body experience, as was
first had by Robert Monroe, who's the founder of this process.
And you can move throughout the room.
You can move throughout the city.
You can move throughout the solar system.
You can go anywhere, anywhere on Earth.
So the reason why this is interesting, the document itself is actually from the Department
of Defense, which is then inherited by the CIA and then declassified, right?
So there's a whole bunch of these different documents.
There's decades and decades of what are called research into psychoenergetics.
That was the government research name for it.
And is that the Men Who Stare a Goat scene?
Exactly, exactly.
Yeah.
Gondola Wish, Center Lane, Project Stargate.
There's like a whole...
Oh, there's more.
Yeah, there's years and years of this stuff from the 1970s onwards.
So coming into it at 1984, analysis and assessment of the gateway process, we're actually kind
of towards the end of the story.
But there's a long lineage of documents leading up to it.
But the reason why the Department of Defense was so interested in this is because if you
wanted to have a spy that was completely undetectable, right?
They're not going to leave fingerprints.
They're not going to leave a strand of hair.
You just have them astral project and they observe.
They like see what's written on the document.
They sit on the Soviet meetings and whatever.
It's so crazy to me that they would even like sit there and take that seriously in the
slightest.
Oh, they took it very seriously.
Which is weird, man.
They paid for it.
Which is weird.
They sent government operatives to learn the meditation process to see if they could retrieve
information.
Which is the thing that made me be like, I should try this out because I feel like, hey, if
the freaking CIA is like, let's try this, then it's got to...
Like, these guys aren't dummies.
This is one of the smartest organizations that have ever existed or like most effective,
I would say.
Possibly.
Maybe not most effective.
They're pretty effective at overthrowing governments and doing poos and assassinating people.
Yeah, if they can overthrow government.
Selling drugs.
They have the power to overthrow a government.
I figured they might be right on this.
Right, right.
Exactly.
That's pretty...
I couldn't do that.
I couldn't overthrow a government.
I've tried.
No, but it's like weird, man.
Because I haven't even gotten that far in them because I keep falling asleep and I have
to restart them.
I really need to spend like a whole day, like you're saying, to just like listen to it.
I need to buy the tapes, dude.
What people do, if you're curious to experiment with it, is that they do 30-minute segments.
They listen to a tape, right?
You do your 30-minute meditation.
You do that once per day and you're slowly, you know, getting yourself into the process.
But what starts to happen, a lot of people do listen to it as they're falling asleep.
You got to be careful about that.
Why?
Because what will frequently happen is as you're falling asleep, you're listening to the tape.
Many people wake up in the middle of the night because humans are, you know, we sleep in
different phases.
It's not uncommon to wake up in the middle of the night and pee or whatever.
They'll wake up in the middle of the night and they'll get up out of their bed, which
is sometimes described as kicking off or shoving off, and they'll turn back and see themselves
asleep in the bed.
Oh, that's fire.
So if you listen to it before you're going to sleep, you are setting yourself up for
that type of process.
I want that to happen.
It's a little scary.
That'd be sick, dude.
That'd be so cool.
Yeah.
So be aware of that, that you might be setting yourself up for one of those things.
I think it's, for me, it's like because I'm sober.
I want to like have a drug experience.
Yeah.
So like for me, if I saw that, I turned back and I saw my body, I'd be like, uh-oh.
It's drugs for sober people.
Yeah, it really is.
It really is, dude.
But I haven't gotten to anything like trippy.
The craziest thing that happened is like, you know, when you close your eyes, you see
like all these lights and shit, the lights went away and I like zoomed in to like looking
at something darker.
That was the weirdest thing that's happened to me.
It's like focusing on something like, you know, when you close your eyes and you have like
a spot, you know, I would just focus on the spot and the spot would start getting bigger
and it would like elapse my whole, and then like everything would go away.
What color was the spot?
It would be like light, a piece of light that like you close your eyes and you see it and
you just stare at it for a while and then it would start to just get bigger and bigger
and bigger until it opens up and it would be just like darkness, which is like super
weird.
I experienced that, but nothing like.
In terms of visuals, people will describe green auras, seeing them at the periphery of
their vision.
Oh, that's kind of interesting.
I would say, I don't know if it's green, but I have seen like a thing open up and then become
like kind of like eclipsing my eyes when they're closed, you know what I mean?
Which is kind of interesting.
Yeah, that's a pretty commonly reported experience.
So you went through all the tapes?
No, I've gone through, I mean, there's like, I don't know, 40, 50 hours.
There's so many.
Do you think if you go to the end, do you reach it?
People, it's, well, it's different for everyone, but within, there's a certain indication that,
you know, maybe like tape 12 is a really good one to provoke the OBE, out-of-body experience,
or tape 30 or whatever.
There's certain things that anecdotally we can put together.
There's also, you know, to be clear, there's like many, many of these tapes, like the Monroe
Institute still exists.
They're still doing this work.
They release new tapes all the time.
Yeah, yeah, it's wild.
And this is, you know, for many people now, especially who have like self-guided internet
research for their beliefs, this is like a really interesting thing.
I've spent the last few years talking to people who have had their political ideological
worldview shaped by content online.
And here is a podcast you can listen to that will literally change your brain.
So it's a very, very powerful thing.
And it becomes, because if you get deeper into Monroe's cosmology, there's a material plane,
there's a spiritual plane.
Yeah.
This is a totalizing belief system.
So weird, dude.
I don't know if I was like...
I don't even know if you want to know.
Okay.
Go ahead.
There's something called loosh.
Loosh is a energy that is produced by humans.
I thought it was a sex ointment.
It sounded like a lube or something.
It sounds a little, it sounds a little slippery.
Yeah.
And it's being extracted from human beings by non-corporeal entities above the material plane.
Loosh.
That are feeding off of mostly our negative emotions, our fears, our depression, our anxiety.
And some people speculate that these non-corporeal entities, these vampiric entities, are manipulating
the material plane to cause as much misery as possible because they're feeding off of
our loosh.
Okay.
So when you start to hear, if you're talking about right-wing conspiracies before, when you
start to hear about like the prison planet, that's loosh.
Like that is the-
Where does this come from?
Earth is about it.
This comes from Robert Monroe's imagination.
Oh, wow.
He, in his book, Far Journeys, he's writing about this.
I think that book is published in 1985.
So that's, you know, towards the end of his career.
But it was revealed to him by an entity named someone who is from somewhere that loosh exists.
There's a universal supply and demand where these entities above the material plane need to
get it.
They can only get it from us, which is, you know, interesting that the price theory of
neoclassical economics is showing up in the astral plane, but it's none of my business.
And what people then theorize after this is that Earth is a battery that is being fed on
by the Demiurge who is extracting all of the negative experiences of humans to empower and
enrich itself.
It's religion.
Sounds like straight up Christianity.
It is.
It is.
So like the demons are trying to take it.
So you were just trying to get a nice like meditation, some relaxation, maybe like get
some drug experiences.
And I'm fighting the demons of loosh the whole time, dude.
Exactly.
I gotta stop doing that.
I'm gonna stop doing that right now, dude.
I don't want to do that.
When I say, just to qualify all of this, when I say that I believe in it, what I mean is
that I believe the experiences of the people who report them to me.
I am skeptical that serious, high quality, high resolution information retrieval is possible.
Yeah.
I have yet to see really compelling evidence that someone could look at a Soviet document,
for example, reproduce it afterwards.
Um, but I firmly, firmly believe that these people are experiencing it.
But you think people can like go walk around New York City or something?
I've talked to people who've done it.
Yeah.
Crazy.
What's that like for them?
It's like, it's pretty vivid.
It's spiritual.
It's re, it's revelatory.
It's, um, it's so vivid.
They describe feeling the wind on their face.
They have tactile experiences.
Fuck that, dude.
It's, it's wild.
I think I would go mentally ill.
I mean, the mind, the mind is incredibly powerful.
Like these are, you know, these are for all intents and purposes in their own perception,
these are real experiences.
I want to go visit a ditty party.
I want to go visit a ditty party, dude.
I don't mind.
I want to worry about going there.
Open the door.
Oh, God.
Yo, man, I want to do, they're all ditty parties.
That shit, dude, is like so scary to me, man.
Cause like, I want to do that.
But then I think if I did it, I'd be like, I don't want to ever do that again.
It's scary.
It's scary.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Those religious experiences, dude, like even growing up in, uh, this is so funny.
Growing up in like church, I went to like a summer camp for like Christian kids.
And they try to get like, because evangelicals believe in speaking in tons.
Yeah.
Yeah.
So they try to get like all the kids to speak in tons at the end of the weekend.
And I for real thought I spoke in tons, dude.
And I felt like weird.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And then I was like, got older and I was like, that was just like an environmental religious
experience.
That was crazy.
But I remember like a guy putting his hand on me and like praying over me.
And I felt crazy, dude.
Like I felt like a spiritual experience for sure.
But then you get older and you're like, oh, you have those through a meditation process or
through something like that.
But that kind of stuff, man, if you, if I astral projected, you're never seeing me again,
dude.
I'm just in my bedroom the rest of the day, actually projecting the whole time.
That shit is like, it's scary too, though.
I feel like it's very scary.
You got to be really mentally stable probably to like go do that and then like handle that
well.
Are there any of those experiences growing up?
Because, you know, I was similarly raised religious.
And I remember at the time I just, I fought my parents viciously all the time.
I never wanted to go to church.
I hated doing it.
But I look back now and it's like, you know, there was, I was taught some like morals and
values.
And I think I probably, you know, not explicitly live by the teachings of the Bible or something,
but I still have a lot of that morality.
You know, I still agree, you know, in the broad strokes of what I was taught.
Are there any things that you've been able to take from your childhood experience and
bring to your adulthood?
Um, just recently, man, I've been like, kind of understanding that and I kind of mentioned
it before that like when they say don't sin, I used to think that meant like, or you'll
go to hell.
For the first time in my life, I understand, which it sounds stupid to get to this at like
25.
But like, no, if you're doing bad things, like stuff will just start to cave in.
Because everything I think is about a community.
And to live in a community and be a successful person, you kind of need to follow some rules.
So for me, I look back at that as like, there's a pretty decent code, you know what I mean?
Of like how to live your life so that your life's easier.
Really, that's what it is.
Like it's to make your life easier, which something that's super interesting, I'm getting
too deep here.
But whenever Jesus heals somebody in the Bible, he after after he does that, he says to
them, he says, don't sin anymore.
And it's always like what he's saying to them an impossible thing, but he's given them a piece
of advice that's like, don't sin anymore.
And I've always like wondered, what does that possibly mean?
Because why would he say that to them?
No, but then also say that like, you're all sinners, you're always going to sin.
That's like the whole point of Jesus is to like, get rid of our sins.
But then he's telling people we don't sin anymore.
And it's kind of just like a piece of advice of like, your life is going to be easier.
I think if you're just not lying, cheating, stealing, you know, committing adultery on your
wife or something like that.
It's all like to just make this process kind of an easier go.
And for the first time in my life, like leaving it and then coming back to it and being like,
okay, I'm not going to try to speak in tons, but, but maybe, you know what I mean?
Like, don't be shitty to everybody in your life.
Yeah.
And that's kind of what I've like been learning is like, yo, treat people just how you'd want
to be treated and see if your life is better.
And I had to do a lot of drugs and kind of like get really, really to a low point to
come to a place of like, okay, everything I thought that I'm doing is incorrect.
And maybe my parents aren't, you know, completely stupid.
Maybe they have a couple of good points and that's like changed my life.
But that took, it sucks that I had to go, I feel like kind of dumb because I had to go
through all these things to like figure that out.
Yeah.
But my parents told me like, hey, don't smoke weed because in their minds, weed is just as
bad as like doing heroin in their minds.
So then you smoke weed and I've never done heroin, but I've gotten pretty close.
But like you smoke weed and I got arrested for weed when I was like 17.
My parents kicked me out of my house because they, in their minds, they're like, you're
doing an insane narcotic right now.
So.
Which is legal now.
Dude, I had the cop that arrested me goes to my stepdad's church, which is crazy.
Oh, wow.
Dude, I've had to see him a couple of times and it's been like super awkward.
I want to be like, yo, dude, remember when you fucking almost ruined my life?
Jesus.
Yeah.
But like when you're told that and then you get arrested for weed, you're like, I had
no education of like their reaction to weed is the same as someone's, their reaction to
cocaine or Percocets or, you know what I mean?
Any kind of medication.
I mean, also it's in like, well, why not do cocaine and Percocets if I'm getting punished
for it anyway?
That's what I did.
Yeah.
That's what I did.
And then you go to NA and it's like, oh, now we're going to do the Lord's Prayer.
Everybody join hands.
And it's like, fuck.
That kept me in like a really bad cycle because I was trying to get sober.
I ended up going to a rehab, but I would go to, some people would invite me to these
rooms.
And it was like, I was like, this is religion, dude.
This is religion to the core.
And you can say it's not, but then they open the book and they're like, the first step
is like, find, their second step is find a higher power.
And I'm like, this is religion, dude.
And then they all check in on each other and they call each other and they like have a
little family.
I'm like, this is just exactly what I came from.
Yeah.
It's a little culty.
100% a cult.
Now I still go to meetings sometimes whenever I feel like I'm getting a little crazy.
I just need to hear some people be like, who are in it right now.
You know what I mean?
Who are like dealing with that addiction.
I just need to hear them say that.
But yeah, man, it's like, I don't know that stuff still, man.
I wish I didn't have that like resistance to it.
Well, you know what?
Better to be in a cult than be dead.
Hey, I don't know.
Easy choice.
I don't know, dude.
No?
Some cults are weird, bro.
Slim.
Some cults are really weird.
I thought about joining Scientology for a while because I was like, if I am going to pick
a religion, I want one that's going to help.
That was my thought.
But then it gets weird.
And you know what's weird about AA2 is something that really kept me away from it is like, you
know the steps?
There's 12 steps.
I've been going through the steps.
Yeah.
But then there's a step where you're like, you have to confess your wrongs to another
person who's your sponsor.
And I was like, that's straight out of the book of Scientology.
Because Scientology have a point to get to a higher level.
You have to like sit and tell someone everything bad you've ever done.
And then they like use that as power against you.
So I was like.
Blackmail.
That's totally Scientology.
I was like, this is cult right here.
This is the first thing of a cult.
And they're like, don't go.
My sponsor was like, you can go say it to somebody else.
I haven't yet.
I got to go say my wrongs.
Maybe I'll do them right now.
I'm kidding.
No.
Starting with this meme account I used to run at age 11.
Yeah.
It would just be porn, dude.
I'm just going to go have to sit with a priest and be like, I watch a lot of porn.
He's going to be like, ah.
Me too.
Yo, dude.
I was speaking for the priest.
Actually, I've been doing NoFap.
I take that very seriously.
Yes.
For how long?
I did 90 days once.
How'd you do that?
Cold showers.
It was difficult.
Cold showers?
Yeah, yeah.
Every time you want to jerk off, you can take a cold shower?
For real?
Yeah, yeah.
That's crazy.
I take the self-experimentation stuff seriously.
People try to reprogram their brains for YouTube videos.
All of these things that people say they tried online, I do all of them.
I do it by the way, just to see how it affects me.
I want to know how people's belief systems are shaped.
Well, yeah.
They make it so you're not going to jerk off.
That's so funny, dude.
That's so funny.
They go, you have a boner?
Take a cold shower.
It's more difficult than it seems.
Yeah.
Yes.
Yeah, yeah.
I did that.
I did all of the programs.
I sunned my balls.
I avoided xenoestrogens, phytoestrogens, ball sunning.
Where you expose your testicles to the sunlight to increase your vitamins.
Dude, I tried doing that and I got arrested, dude.
You expose your balls to sunlight?
Yeah, yeah.
There's some study in the 1930s that direct exposure to, I don't even know what doctor was
performing this, but they were taking a UV lamp and shining it on direct portions of the body.
So, they put it on the arm.
They put it on the leg.
One of those options was the balls.
Some guys just like...
Exactly.
Yeah, yeah.
And they cover everything else so it's not exposed.
And they're looking at your vitamin levels based on this targeted exposure on specific areas.
And the people who are exposed on the balls had a hormonal precursor, which is not exactly
testosterone, but is one of the building blocks that leads to it.
That's a very short explanation.
Increased by 200% within the period that they were exposed to this light.
So, what people like to extrapolate now is that if you sun your balls, right, like go
outside and just expose yourself to the world.
But how do you do that?
Without getting arrested?
Like, how did you do that?
I had a window in my apartment that was not visible from other...
Trying to describe this.
So, I was basically like below a ledge here, but the sun could still get me, but I wouldn't
be visible.
Yeah, there's nobody looking at you.
No, it looked out into a courtyard that was not visible.
I started thinking, it was like, okay, I've spent enough time on the internet.
Like, there's a lot of these like forum, like self-improvement rituals that are just
an elaborate form of hazing, right?
It's like, oh, this person isn't here.
It's like, yeah, you got to eat, you know, four raw onions a day if you want to max your
T levels or whatever.
And then like kids will literally eat four fucking raw onions, puke at school, and they'll
be like, guys, I've been doing it, but I feel so sick.
It's like, it's just like, you know, it's hazing a new guy.
Yeah, that's great, dude.
I love that.
And so I thought, oh, this is all a strategy, like it's totally a meme, there's no science
behind it, and they're just trying to get people to embarrass themselves.
Well, no, I did it, I did it.
You put sunscreen on?
Even if it was, even if it was, no, no, not at all.
Even if it was a total meme, like I ate, I also drank the raw onion juice.
I did that too.
Yeah, yeah.
Like if it's real, if it works or not, like I'm just, I'm doing it to get myself in the
headspace of how these people view the world by like eating their same diet, doing their
same activities, go lift, like whatever, all this stuff.
Nofap was one of those things, ball signing was one of those things.
And even the cold shower though thing, that's not a prank, right?
Cold shower reduces your cortisol levels, and cortisol levels allow you to build more muscle
and they prevent muscle wasting.
So if you have very high stress and you're dieting, you're going to lose a lot more lean
mass.
You're going to lose a lot more muscle.
And similarly, if you're trying to put on mass, you'll just retain it better if you have
low stress levels.
So people do either a full cold shower or they do a hot shower and then the last like
minute is cold.
It's very uncomfortable.
It's very, it's like, I don't, I don't recommend it.
I just, I find it really unpleasant.
I don't do that now in my everyday life.
I certainly, I learned stuff from doing that process, but I'm not drinking raw onion juice
every day.
Yeah, that's good.
I'm just eating eggs.
I'm like having a high, you know, high protein, high fat, high cholesterol diet.
And like, that works for me.
That's fine.
I'm glad you told me it was like a prank because I would have been later today just sitting
on my window, dude.
I would have rubbed sunscreen on him too.
Well, the study, the study is from like 1920, 1930, something like that.
And there's, you know, without getting like too in the weeds on this, there are tons and
tons of precursors for what are called hormonal cascades where you have to make this, which
then makes this, which then makes this, which eventually makes testosterone.
And if you're trying to increase your T levels, there's just normal dietary things you can
do, like eat six eggs a day, you know, have like a big, uh, you know, five omelet, uh,
breakfast that'll do more for you than the sunning the ball stuff.
It's, it's basically nonsense.
It's clickbait.
It's, uh, it's very silly.
The testosterone stuff is weird.
I went to a doctor maybe like a month ago because I thought I was, this is weird to talk
about, but I thought I was too horny.
Yeah.
I was really like, cause I'm always trying to have sex with my girlfriend and sometimes she just
wants to chill and like watch TV.
And I'm like, if we're around each other, I'm like, let's have sex.
And she's like, no, you're in the same.
Like we can, we don't have sex all the time.
So she was like, I think there's something wrong with your testosterone.
So I was like, you're actually right.
Cause I don't like think other people are this horny.
So I went to a doctor and he did like the test and he was like, yeah, no, you're just
25 years old.
Okay.
Yeah.
But I was like worried.
I was like, I think I have a medical condition going on.
And he was like, no dude, you're 25.
And he was like, it's going to slow down when you're older.
So I was like, okay, that's pretty sick.
But I really thought, I was like, there's something wrong with me.
I'm too horny.
And they, apparently I'm just a young guy.
I was kind of bummed.
I was like, fuck, dude.
I'm glad you're in good health.
I'm glad you're in good health.
No, dude.
I was like, ah, I want it taken away.
You want it taken away?
Yeah.
I want to fuck like once a week.
Okay.
It's the goal for my life.
You want to, um, well, you can do a intermittent no fat.
You could do six days on one day off, you know, try, uh, creating some artificial scarcity.
Be like, look, Jeff, we can only do this on a Saturday.
It's the only day.
What if she wants to do it though throughout the week?
So what's to say now?
Oh, you're, you're stimulating demand by withholding supply.
I don't know about that.
Don't worry.
All of economics is made up.
Tell me, tell me about the place you grew up.
Tell me about like, if you go back there now, I don't know if you visit home, you visit
your family.
Every now and then I'll go back.
What, uh, what kind of election signs are people have?
Oh, there's Trump signs.
Yeah.
There was like a jail Hillary sign for sure for a while.
Um, yeah, I'll go back there and they're like Trump.
I'm still holding out hope for that one.
For Hillary go to jail?
Yeah.
Wow.
She's an old lady, dude.
She just, you know, illegally spent these campaign funds.
On the Steele dossier.
I just really think that we need to, you know, full bring this thing to completion and prosecute
people who misspend campaign funds.
Really?
Yeah.
Felony conviction would be appropriate.
That's the one that like, even though they're going to Trump for like the same shit, I, I kind
of relate to that, dude.
I feel like if I had campaign funds, like I would be spending no money on anything but
the campaign.
So I don't know.
He did it.
That's the, that's the long conspiracy on this.
Did he use them to pay a porn star?
Well, he.
To cover up.
He spent it that way and he took the felony charge to set a precedent for when he wins
in 24 to then prosecute Hillary.
Oh, wow.
That's what they're saying.
He's kind of a genius, dude.
He has 3D chess.
Yeah.
That's so smart, actually.
You set her up.
That's good.
That's really good.
Dude, that almost makes me kind of fucking be like, Biden's not thinking that far ahead.
He's not thinking more than, yeah.
He's not thinking to the end of his sentence.
That's so crazy.
Yeah, but I'm raised in, born in this town called Yarnell.
Born at home.
I think that's where a lot of my problems start.
So at home birth.
Because my family didn't have insurance, so I was born at home.
I see.
And my mom had already popped out like six kids before me, so she was like, I got this.
So they had me at home.
And then I kind of just grew up there, like going to church, homeschooled.
It's a big thing, too.
Wow.
So not a lot of outside influence.
And then we moved because my dad stopped being a pastor and he went to go become a teacher.
And then he started preaching at prisons.
And then he passed away.
And we moved back to Wickenburg, which was like, I kind of got out.
I had like black friends for the first time.
And then Wickenburg, no black people at all.
It's like hyper, hyper small town conservative.
Like white people, white trash, too.
Not even like uppity white people, like just like trailer park, white trash.
And we lived there for, I lived there till I was like, till I got kicked out when I was
like 17.
And the town is so conservative.
There's like the bull riding capital of Arizona, that type of shit.
It's like they bleed Republican.
Like you can't be anything else there.
There's really not a lot of like gay people.
It's not diverse at all.
It's and in that culture.
Is that why your sister left?
What did you say?
She she went to college early.
Yeah.
She like, well, from the beginning, she just wanted to be even before my dad died.
She's a little older than me.
She wanted to just be like away from it all because she she kind of just thought it was
crazy before I did.
But I didn't really get a lot of experience to get out before that, you know.
But yeah, man, it's like a very going back is weird, you know, now my family, we don't
talk about politics.
We can't.
I don't even let myself get in that conversation because it's just like a pointless endeavor.
You know what I mean?
Like asking them, oh, who are you voting for?
And they're like, oh, Trump, of course.
You're just like, OK, like and, you know, from their perspective with what they believe
too, it's like, why wouldn't they vote for that guy?
Well, I mean, their beliefs.
Yeah.
And I mean, in fairness, the Democrats have done very little for people who live in
nothing, red states.
Absolutely nothing.
And I think they're trying to win them over.
They think they're really stupid.
Yeah.
Which is not cool.
It's like, why would you vote for somebody that thinks you're stupid?
Some of the stupidest people in our society have the most expensive degrees.
I can tell you that much.
Oh, yeah.
I've met I've met a lot of anonymous meme posters who have a more realistic grasp of
the world.
Many people who work in elite positions of journalism and academies and universities and so on.
And they don't like realize really obvious things because.
I don't know if they can.
Oh, no.
Their whole their whole worldview is tied up.
Yeah.
Yeah.
And they can't acknowledge certain things because then they're out of a job.
Like, it's very much like you have to believe this way to totally self.
You know what I mean?
Totally.
Yeah.
It's really it's just so crazy to me.
I like I talked to my brother and he was in the military and he says he would vote Democrat
in a second if they would just chill on the guns, which is interesting.
And then I talked to my parents and they're like, we would vote Democrat in a second if
they would just like relax on one or two things.
So they're losing a victory every single time, like economically, like the country.
I mean, I'm like a person that believes that like we should have health care.
You know what I mean?
And if they actually want to get these things done, if that's the priority, you can't concede.
They would win every election if they just like stop talking about a two percent of the
population and actually went for like the what my parents are.
Why?
Because that sounds so incredibly common sense.
Why is that so difficult to communicate to people who are in the entertainment industry,
in the media, in the academy?
Like, how can you be a scholarly, prestigious university professor and think that you're
going to pass massive democratic reforms that exclude half of the population?
Why?
I think that they don't actually I think that people in Wickenburg, Arizona have a better
understanding of people in New York than people in New York have a better understanding of them.
They don't even know they have this idea of them that they're like stupid and like
unable to speak to and they're all racist and they're all, you know, bigots of some kind
and that they won't move around in the aisle and they actually don't want economic change
and they don't want these things.
You know what I mean?
They they just think they're dumb and they don't spend a minute to know them.
They've grown up in these little tight communities, much like I was when I was a kid, and they've
never left to talk to anybody else.
And not that you would change your beliefs completely, but you would be like a little more sympathetic
to be like, wait, the reason why they're voting for Trump isn't because they're insane.
It's because every person you've given them before has done nothing for them at all.
Absolutely nothing.
Like and that's just a fact.
And you can be like, oh, well, you know, they want to, you know, let they want to stop all
these bad things.
My family would give up the immigration thing, like stopping upset about immigration if
they felt like they had good jobs and they had a president that cared about them.
Like my family will speak highly of Clinton because they're like the economy was good.
At the end of the day, they I feel like they just care about the economy and maybe one
or two other things.
Yeah, it's well, it starts to get complicated there because Clinton was the first of what
we call the third way Democrats, where the de-alignment of previously back up for a second.
So the Republican Party consists of manufacturing of what we call productive capital and regional
capital.
There's two interests that, you know, form a coalition for the party.
Democrats consist of finance, capital, and then all these other little things, right?
So what has happened previous to Clinton is that there was a big labor coalition that was
part of the Democratic Party.
And the phenomena of like the past 40 years, but very pronounced in the last 30 since Clinton
and so on, is that the portion of labor representation within the Democratic Party has just receded to
such an extent that it's basically non-existent.
And so we've seen people who, this is the trend across all of the advanced world, across
Hungary, Germany, the UK, across too many countries to name, basically anywhere in the advanced
world, is that the parties that used to vote for labor, the constituencies that used to
vote for labor have now drifted towards right-wing populism.
Let's say there's a photo taken of you, you're getting arrested at the BLM protests.
Yeah.
And your 11-year-old self is posting it on Facebook.
What would you caption that?
Oh, that's so funny.
What would he caption that?
I think he would be like, wow, the future me became gay or something like that.
Definitely.
He'd be like, I didn't know I was gay in the future.
Definitely what the 11-year-old me would say for sure.
100%.
But yeah, I don't, I don't know if you feel the same way.
You like, you look at your life and you're like, you look back and you're like, oh,
old me would have been like, I think old me would think I'm sick now.
I think 11-year-old me would be like, yo, 25-year-old Peter is the man.
But like 17-year-old Peter, you know, 19-year-old Peter, loser, dude, for sure.
I think he would be like, you got a girlfriend and you get to fuck her?
That's pretty sick.
That's all you mean.
That's pretty fire.
Yeah.
Peter, thank you so much.
Thank you.
For coming on the podcast, for talking with us today.
Your experience is just, it's such an interesting story.
I relate to so many parts of it.
I'm so grateful for you sharing this with us today.
And you're fucking hilarious.
Thank you, bro.
Your work is great.
I love all of your stuff.
Everybody here at the podcast has just been really impressed by your work.
So thank you so much for talking with us today.
Thank you, bro.
I appreciate it.
You're the man.
You're the man.
