Why should you still be beholden to ideas of one-person-one-vote democracy as the kind of
default? I want to spend a moment on this topic of monarchy. That's good, because the time
horizons of a monarch, supposedly, are longer than the time horizons of a CEO, let alone a
four-year elected congressperson. David Friedman is literally the author of Anarcho-Capitalism.
The Machinery of Freedom is his most important book, but he also has written a couple fantasy
novels. If you want to check out Salamander, then I encourage you to. LARPing as well, literally,
cosplay. Yeah, I mean, not just that. He was one of the kind of pioneers of the LARP cosplay movement
in the United States, setting up an annual function in northern Pennsylvania. So that...
This would be really funny if these people weren't in charge of the world.
Welcome to Doomscroll. I'm your host, Joshua Sidarella. My guest is Quinn Slobodian,
a professor of international history at Boston University. His books, which have been translated
into ten languages, include Globalists, The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism,
Crack-Up Capitalism, Market Radicals and the Dream of a World Without Democracy,
and his forthcoming, Hayek's Bastards, Race, Gold, IQ, and the Capitalism of the Far Right.
He has been an associate fellow at Chatham House and held residential fellowships at Harvard and the
Free University of Berlin. He is the co-director of the History and Political Economy Project
and is on the board of editors of the American Historical Review. Prospect UK named him one of
the world's 25 top thinkers in 2024. He is considered by many to be the world's foremost historian on the
subject of neoliberalism. Neoliberalism is probably the most misused and abused word in today's political
discourse. Yeah. If you look on Twitter, you will find things like neoliberalism is printing money,
neoliberalism is austerity. Neoliberalism is also somehow gay people in the military,
but then it's the social conservatism of Reagan. How should we approach this term? What does
neoliberalism actually mean? Yeah. Well, I mean, I think the problem is it gets used and thrown around
in such promiscuous ways. And I tend to think of it being used basically in three main ways.
One way is to kind of describe a period of history. So often people will be like,
when did neoliberalism start? Was it the closing of the gold window in 1971? Was it the Volcker shock
in 1979? Was it Thatcher and Reagan's election? And then the second question is, when did it end or
is it over? So it's a way of sort of creating an epoch understanding of this era of global capitalism.
Another way it gets understood as a kind of bundle of policy instruments. So a bunch of things that you
could go down the laundry list with privatization, deregulation, liberalization of trade, free trade,
austerity, cutting back state spending. These are then seen as a kind of a pick and choose kind of
package. And you can look at a country and say like, that country went neoliberal in year X because
they did things one to five, or they didn't because they only did one and two. So that can kind of move
around the world and you can point at different actors in different countries and say they're
neoliberal. A third way though, is to think of it as a kind of intellectual movement or ideology.
The same way you would study the development of anarchist thought or socialist thought or
conservative thought, you know, you can find key thinkers, key texts, key moments when their ideas
broke through. And that's the approach I tend to use because in fact, since the 1930s, people have
described themselves as neoliberals. They've stopped since for the most part, but nevertheless,
you can see this kind of evolving conversation from decade to decade, which is fascinating and kind
of diverse and complex because the challenges facing capitalism at any given time are evolving too.
So the work that I've done, especially in globalists and crack up capitalism is to sort of say,
what were neoliberals worried about most in year X? Like in the 1930s, it was socialists on the one
side and fascists on the other, two varieties of collectivists. So you needed to kind of find a
middle ground. By the 1950s and 60s, the kind of high point of the welfare state and Keynesianism and
social democracy, they were actually more worried about kind of the soft social democrats in places like
West Germany and France and the United States than they were about sort of Stalin and Khrushchev and
the communists. Flash forward to the 90s, it's about environmentalists, it's about feminists,
it's about people pushing affirmative action, civil rights. These now are seen as like the primary
opponents. So neoliberalism in that definition and the way I've defined it is the kind of ongoing
project to protect capitalism from different forms of democracy. And what democracy looks like at any
time sort of varies. But I think another really important sort of revision that I'm doing that
relates to your first question is this sort of shorthand idea that neoliberalism means like
the marketization of everything, or just like markets set free, markets unleashed, markets unfettered.
You know, the idea that in the 1990s and 2000s, the market ruled the globe and states were withering
away or like maybe even moving towards disappearance. States are totally necessary for the functioning of
neoliberalism. There was never a moment where, you know, markets took over and states vanished.
In fact, what I describe in the book is we need to think of it less as kind of unfettering markets,
and more in terms of states encasing markets. So setting up new laws, setting up new institutions
to make sure certain kind of market outcomes happen, and other ones don't. So that's, you know,
neoliberalism to me is actually less a theory of markets and the economy. People like Hayek actually
thought that the market was a kind of sublime object, which could not actually be understood.
It was like resistant to knowing. So all you could do actually was set up a framework of laws around it.
So in that sense, neoliberalism is kind of more of a project of state design and legal design than it
is of, you know, perceiving the truth of markets per se. People have stopped referring to themselves
as neoliberals. I think that's because everyone just assumes that this is the political consensus.
Like you would not need to refer to yourself as a fish in water. If neoliberalism is the elite
consensus of how we should organize states and economies, then you don't need to describe yourself as that.
But maybe to lay the foundation here, we can start your research surrounding the Geneva School
of neoliberalism specifically. They set up these institutional frameworks. What do we mean when
we talk about neoliberal institutions? Like what are some practical examples of that enshrining private
property rights above the sovereign powers of states? Yeah. Yeah. So that, I mean, historically,
that's the big intervention of globalists because I think that even someone who's maybe taken a class
in college on this, the working definition you might have a little more, you know, defined than just
market set free for neoliberalism might be something like you get on the cover of David Harvey's brief
history of neoliberalism, right? Right. Which is four faces, Deng Xiaoping, Ronald Reagan, Augusto Pinochet,
and Margaret Thatcher. And what he tells is a story of like a crisis of profitability in the 1970s,
inflation, overly aggressive demands from the working class, you know, a period of great strike activity in
the 1970s. Then a counter-revolution sort of nation by nation against the power nascent of the working
class. So you begin with a kind of iron fist of Pinochet and the death squads in the 1970s and the
outlawing of competing socialist parties. And then it gets rolled out in slightly, you know, modified forms,
country after country after country. So if pushed, people would probably say, well, the genesis of
neoliberalism is somewhere around there, like in the kind of democratic crisis of the 70s, the crisis
of profitability of the 70s. What I say in globalists is actually, no, you have to go back much, much
earlier. And I look actually at the end of the first age of globalization. The first age of globalization,
which historians talk about quite a bit, but isn't really necessarily part of the kind of
common knowledge, is from about the 1870s to the outbreak of the First World War.
So that's a period where, because of new technology, because of steamships, telegraphs,
and the possibility of people and goods to move around the world with such relative ease,
anchored by the gold standard, you were getting a kind of a convergence of world prices towards
a kind of a common standard. So if you could sit in Hamburg and buy a kind of a pound of coffee for
next year, and that would immediately activate a whole network of kind of activity and production
and negotiation and sort of downstream economic effects that would then eventually come back up
to the distribution of that coffee, either in Hamburg itself or someone else. So you had what we think of
as globalization, you know, a single world market, a sense of interdependence, a high level of labor
mobility. That was already happening before the First World War. The First World War kind of
smashed that up. And I think you can understand neoliberalism partially by a kind of a nostalgia
for that lost unity of the world economy before the First World War. In particular, the people that
I look at in that book were operating in the Habsburg Empire, you know, anchored in Vienna. The Habsburg
Empire, the biggest free trade zone in Europe, managed to actually pull off this sort of solution
to a puzzle that has, you know, stumped a lot of other policymakers, which is how can you have like
one economic space in which people can travel around and compete as workers, sell and buy things and
compete as consumers and producers. And yet you can also give people a sense of political representation
and kind of national identity. So the Habsburg Empire was both a single economic space, but a place with
many nationalities who had their own schools, their own sense of political representation. So it managed
to kind of square this circle of like unity and diversity that arguably, you know, foreshadowed the
challenges of globalization like 80 years later. So that thing that Peter Thiel was talking about, how can you
have a continually interconnected economic space in which polities compete with each other, is kind
of, you know, some version of that was active in the kind of fragmented patchwork of something like
the Habsburg Empire, and of course, the Holy Roman Empire before that. So the people like Friedrich Hayek,
like Ludwig von Mises, who were socialized in that milieu, who saw the shattering of the world economy in
the First World War, were really kind of fixated on the question of like, how can you reassemble some
version of that, where people are happy culturally, they don't feel like they're being oppressed
overly, and they'll play along with the security of private property, you know, in any parts of the
space, they'll play along with the idea of labor competition. In the 1920s, things were going the
opposite direction, right? All of those countries that had been part of the Habsburg Empire, Czechoslovakia,
Hungary, were creating their own kind of mini manufacturing states, and they were nationalizing
things, and the categories of politics and economics had been kind of collapsed. The terms that I use in
the book to describe that as the ones they use themselves, which is the categories of imperium and
dominium. Yes.
So, in Roman law, and later international law, and for some of these neoliberals,
imperium is the rule of governments and of people. So, you can think of states in the traditional sense
as kind of the space of imperium. But on the other hand, you have dominium, which is the rule of
property and things and ownership. And the challenge for neoliberals up across the 20th century and into
the 21st is, like, how can you create states, imperium, who protect dominium, right? Who will
not try to interfere in the space of private ownership, private investment, private trade.
So, the vision that comes out of this is one in which the world isn't kind of split north-south or
east-west, but in which there's a kind of a sphere of property sort of hovering over a sphere of government,
government, and you try to sort of reconcile conflicts between the two. So, the Geneva School
that you mentioned was these people from Vienna, you know, often expelled after the Nazis rolled into
town, and through the Anschluss between Austria and Germany, moving to the center of what was then
global governance, Geneva, Switzerland, and trying to figure out what kind of institutions could kind of
protect property rights and free trade in a world after empire is starting to dissolve.
Right.
So, there we would normally think of the League of Nations and the United Nations as kind of
mostly representing national self-determination, the rights of peoples, people speaking a certain
language, ethnicity, having their own space. But they were sort of asking, could these international
institutions actually be used primarily for protecting like free trade, private property,
investor rights?
Right.
And that's the story that's told in the book then, is from the 20s up into the World Trade
Organization in the 1990s, this sort of stepwise emergence of an effective global economic governance
infrastructure, which manages to kind of scale up that Habsburg model by the end of the
century to the scale of the planetary.
So, we're following this story over the course of, let's say, roughly 100 years. We're watching
the creation of international institutions. I think a practical example of this is that if I,
as an investor, put money into an oil drilling operation in Venezuela, there are neoliberal
international laws that will prevent that state from sending in the army and taking my property.
Yes. So, it's like placing capital rights over state rights. And that, you know, was relevant in the
interwar period of places like Czechoslovakia, as I mentioned, but it really became relevant
after the Second World War with the end of European overseas empires. So, the wave of decolonization
that hits Africa and Asia in the 1950s and 60s and early 70s means that you have all these new states
that are like, great, we have independence. That means we can make use of all of the resources within
our borders because that's what self-determination must mean. What else could autonomy mean if you
can't, you know, use the copper underneath the surface of the earth and you can't use the oil
in your fields? Which would necessarily involve expropriation from the foreign investors.
It would, and it did. So, in the 1960s and into the early 1970s, there were huge waves of expropriation.
Yeah.
Of nationalization of foreign-owned entities, often extractive industries, and then turning
them into, you know, public ownership. Right.
And interestingly, that was not considered a taboo at the time. So, as long as you gave just
compensation, that was considered to be kind of standard and acceptable practice.
There was, for the first couple of decades of the 50s and 1960s, a kind of norm by which, indeed,
political economy could translate into a certain amount of economic sovereignty over these kind
of things. What happens in the 1970s, that's actually very important in a way, it's kind of the pivot
of my book, is the oil crisis and then something called the new international economic order.
So, the nations of the UN, which had been, you know, the UN had been totally dominated by imperial
and European powers. As more and more nations became independent and entered the UN General
Assembly, they were able to use the UN as a kind of a bully pulpit, but also a sort of a platform for
agenda setting and demands making that went against maybe the interests of the United States and the
European powers and even the Soviet Union. So, the new international economic order in 1974 basically
said, I think it's one of the most consequential efforts to oppose the project of neoliberalism
across the 20th century because you had a coalition of poorer nations, African Asian and Latin American,
who said, you know what, imperium actually trumped dominion. If our states, often they were one-party
dictatorships at this point, but still, if our postcolonial states decide they want to do certain
things with their resources, then they should be able to. And international global economic governance
should not work just to enshrine property rights, but it should work to stabilize commodity prices,
create maybe even the space for colonial reparations, and allow sort of technology transfer between
poorer nations. So, it was really an attempt to kind of make global economic governance something that could
work for redistribution and like manifestly anti-neoliberal terms.
They must have loved that.
I mean, it became, you know, neoliberals were just hitting the big red panic button in the 1970s.
It was like, oh no, this is not good. So, the counter-revolution against that
was really what accelerated and set into motion a lot of things to like roll back the rights of nations
to do what they will with their own resources. So, the example you used was kind of international
investment law, which exists now. It's a great example of how we absolutely don't and never have
lived in a space of like unfettered markets. Actually, we have tens of thousands of bilateral
investment treaties, which nations sign between each other before a rich nation invests in a poor nation,
which says exactly as you say. If over the next few years or in the future, that nation does anything
to kind of decrease the profitability of that investment, then the poor nation can be sued
by the rich nation or by the corporation itself that has invested in a third-party arbitration
court. They can demand damages, and they often have and do. So, the kind of possibility of an
alternative modernity or an alternative form of globalization, which we sometimes associate with
like the 90s in opposition to the WTO, was actually like a big Global South-led campaign in the 1970s
that just got smashed with a sledgehammer.
There's a famous thought experiment around the financial crisis, which involves the total number
of countries in the world. And this then lays out some interesting implications for
governance and statecraft in the 21st century, particularly if you're concerned with wealth
preservation. Yeah, so this is the anecdote that I begin the book Crack Up Capitalism with is
Peter Thiel in 2009 speculating about how many polities there should be in the world. He sort of says,
how many do we have now pushing 200? Why can't we have more? Why can't we have 100? Why can't we have
a few thousand? And the idea was to produce a kind of competitive ecosystem of government the same way
that they felt they had created a new kind of set of disruptive, competitive platforms and service
providers in Silicon Valley. You've taken out legacy institutions of banks and journalism. Why not do that
now with the biggest kind of contract provider there is, which is government itself?
We are used to thinking of neoliberalism as a project that links a global society of free trade,
but the method for achieving that involves, I think in the interim, this competitive patchwork of
special economic zones, of which I think there's something like 2,000 active SEZs.
Many more than that. More than 2,000. 5,000. I'm out of date.
Peter Thiel is a perfect case in point, right? I mean, I begin the book with him in 2009 basically
saying we need to start experimenting massively in the government space and like we need to start,
you know, getting out of this place as soon as possible. But seven years later,
he's speaking at the Republican National Convention in support of a very, you know,
a candidate operating with a more or less conventional model of representative government
and he hasn't budged since, right? I mean, the point I make there is that it's much easier to
take over an existing state than to try to create one of your own. And if you've managed to kind of
bully and pressure the existing state into conforming itself to your needs, then voila, like why,
why get out? Why exit now? So I think that it's cozy in here. You don't need to leave.
No, I mean, you can move around the country. I mean, we didn't talk about that, but you know,
there's still competitive jurisdictions, state to state, and the kind of taxes that different
states levy on their, on their residents. So hence Musk moving from California to Texas,
like so many others. But this fusion of private interests and service providers with the state is
something that is, I think, realizing the private state model by other means, right? You don't have
to do a new private state. You can simply privatize further the existing state. And that's something that
Musk arguably pioneered with space hacks. I think that's, you know, underappreciated how important
that is for him as a kind of a spearhead of policy intervention. When he first tried to compete to
launch military satellites for NASA, he actually had to sue the US government because they didn't
think that they needed to offer this to a private service provider. But within their own kind of
pecuniary laws, they actually did need to find the lowest cost, the cheapest provider. And so he was
able to win that first contract. Is this like the post office to space?
So now he is the one who puts up all their satellites and they can't do it without him.
I see.
So that's, you know, that's the trick here is like, make yourself indispensable to the sovereign,
right? And then, you know, talking about monarchic characters, I mean,
Donald Trump is starting to get there, right? In the sense that he seems to have an immunity
to criticism for a majority of this country, almost, right? That he has, he exists in a kind
of a stratosphere of exception that seems to have transcended just a normal one of legal accountability
and kind of electability. So, you know, I think that all hail God Emperor Trump meme from 2016
was kind of on the money in certain ways.
So, speaking of this period from the late 1970s to 1980s, we've covered a lot of territory. People
will talk about the election of Reagan in the US, Thatcher in the UK, the Volcker shock,
this moment in which neoliberalism like starts as a historical era, as a period.
Yeah.
But that's when they achieve power. That's when they're actually enacting policy,
they're in office and so on. Where should we properly begin the story? Is it 1947? Is it the
1930s? Like, where do you start this history of neoliberalism?
Well, I mean, I think, you know, historians are famous for always saying like, well,
to understand that we need to step one step backwards. So, I mean, for me, the existence of
this kind of collective of people hashing out ideas in an unbroken genealogy from 1937 onward
makes it kind of a useful way to kind of bookend, all right, when did this idea of neoliberalism come
about? Because the neo part was the idea that sort of laissez-faire small state liberalism of the
19th century in which the state just took care of kind of, you know, ideally the night watchman state
that just took care of like- This is classical liberalism.
Classical liberalism. They believe that was inadequate for an era of democracy because you
couldn't anymore just, you know, fire people on mass to bring your currency back up to parity with the
gold standard the way you did in the 19th century because they had votes and you'd get booted out
of office next time. So you needed to figure out a newly activist state designed to promote and
protect competition even under conditions of mass suffrage and eventually under conditions of global
national self-determination. So those are like the twin challenges that I see in the 20th century that
were quite unique, which is like, how do you protect capitalism and manifestly sort of a system that
produces inequality by its very nature under conditions of mass democracy and decolonization in which there's a
general trend towards a principle of equality and redistribution. So that takes a lot of work, actually.
And some of it is, you know, making people happy as consumers rather than as workers.
Some of it is distracting them with adventures overseas, as with the Falkland Wars in Thatcher's
case, which probably saved her premiership, you know, early in the tenure. The iron fist that goes
along with the free markets, Invisible Hand is a big part of, of course, histories of mass incarceration
in a country like the United States and a country like El Salvador right now. Darling of the free markets
has just been given a new big loan by the IMF has also imprisoned close to two percent of the adult
population, thereby bringing the homicide rate way down, but sort of at what cost? I mean,
he has an extraordinarily high approval rating. So he seems to be winning consent from Salvadorans.
But I think that when talking about the protection of capital and property,
it's also important to see how, you know, methods of policing incarceration,
especially obviously of people of African-American descent in this country are ways of dealing
with an economic problem where housing a surplus population, but also producing, you know, investable
city centers and things like that for, you know, real estate interests.
Yeah. One of the recurrent themes that you find with any of these like market ideology type people is
that although they talk about the efficiency of markets and allocating resources and so on,
there is always this negative externality or something that needs to be excluded. Like,
you let a market run long enough and you just inevitably find this extreme polarization and
asymmetry of resources. And so their commitment to using the market to allocate resources means that you
are at some point, you're saddled with this problem of having to get rid of the expendable people.
Absolutely. Well, that I think is the kind of the essence or what makes this
new kind of exitarian strain, going back to Thiel again, kind of so symptomatic of this impasse
you're describing, right? Because the idea of exit is to, you know, have all the benefits with none of
the downsides, right? I mean, so rather than figuring out how you can create a large country like the United
States in which there's pockets of prosperity surrounded by like a hinterland of like precarity or
poverty, and then just figure out how to keep the poor out of the pockets of prosperity and police them
away. It's just like, well, what if we just took that pocket of prosperity and just relocated it outside of
the actual territory of the United States? Right. And they look around the world for examples and they see
places like Dubai and Singapore. I mean, how do both those places work? They work by importing a
majority of their residents as workers with zero rights and zero claims on anything resembling
citizenship who are, in the case of Singapore and Dubai, you know, housed separately from the
wealthy parts of the population on a kind of hire and deport rotation. In the case of Dubai, often
hardly paid or not paid at all through these exploitative systems of the Khalifa labor system.
And those things that too, sort of, you know, good liberals look like downsides are to,
I think, Exeterians like the secret of their success. So the secret is, is to create a situation
in which people don't have a platform upon which to make legitimate claims. I mean, if you are an American,
you can always stand up and say, like, this sucks. This isn't what our country is about.
We need to do better. If you are an imported migrant worker in the model of the cruise ship,
which is really the kind of prototype for Exeterianism, then if you say, hey, this sucks,
I'm a part of this cruise ship too, they just put you off at the next port and hire the next person.
Literally, it was called Project Blue Seed from the Seasteading Institute.
Yeah.
They tried it on a cruise ship.
Yeah, no, absolutely. There's a lot of that stuff. And there's also really funny accounts of what
happens when this actually is tried in real life. There's a great Guardian piece called the,
about the SS Satoshi, which is great partially because it reveals that the fantasy of the sea
as a kind of unregulated space is far from it, right? It's actually dense with regulatory claims.
International waters beyond the power of nation states can't regulate them. They can't touch you.
Exactly. That sort of Hugo Grotius' vision of the open law of the sea is actually true to some
extent as far as passage, but all vessels need to somehow be anchored somewhere on land and when
you need to come back to get food and fuel, suddenly you're back in the kind of legal morass
of the bad world as they see it. So yeah, I think, you know, I look at these far out anarcho-capitalists
and Exeterians alongside like real world examples of models they're seeking to emulate, right? So I
think it's interesting inherently that someone like David Friedman, Milton Friedman's son in the 1970s,
was trying to figure out how you could privatize all services that states provide and create like
a totally opt-in contract-based society, sort of taking the gated community as a model
and then, you know, maximizing that into an absolutely private polity. I think that's interesting.
David Friedman is literally the author of anarcho-capitalism.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. The Machinery of Freedom is his most important book, but he also has written a couple
fantasy novels. If you want to check out Salamander, then I encourage you to.
Yeah. He's got an interesting hobby of LARPing as well, literally cosplaying.
Yeah. I mean, not just that. He was one of the kind of pioneers of the LARP cosplay movement in
the United States, setting up an annual function in Northern Pennsylvania where people, you know,
come and put on the attire and in the extreme versions like himself, you know, make no reference
to the modern world, use no modern amenities, and act as if you are, in his case, a 13th century
Berber Muslim priest. This would be really funny if these people weren't in charge of the world.
Well, it's like, it's a certain level of like radical revolutionary commitment.
Yeah.
Which I think anyone on the left can kind of like laugh at at first, but then kind of have
a sinking feeling like how many of us are actually going that far, right? I mean, how many people are
like living their projected version of what a good future could look like in such regularity
as someone like that, like putting in the work, organizing the other, you know, the LARPers around
him. So I think that that convergence is really, it's happening in ways that just sending off so
many sparks right now between sort of like wild speculative fantasies, often irrigated by science
fiction, gaming, all kinds of non-embodied interaction, intersection of that with the kind
of mainline policy ideas of what it means to be a good and responsible state, right? It's not for
nothing that the UK after Brexit was basically looking at Dubai and saying like, how can we do
the Emirates here in the UK? Yeah.
Well, we can create little pockets of territory that strip out the regulations and laws, but you're
never going to compete with Dubai, right? I mean, the fact of globalization is that you actually
just end up debasing and degrading your own already, you know, moribund social democracy rather
than coming anywhere close to that level of being plugged into the circuitry or switchboard of global
capitalism. I want to talk about exit and the zone and kind of this competition with social democracy,
which I think is immensely important for the story. But very quickly to comment on the kind of
LARPing component here. Patry Friedman, also a grandson of Milton Friedman, son of David Friedman,
there's kind of a lineage here and a progression of this thought that grows increasingly radical,
one might say. I participated in a role play based in the discord of the Seasteading Institute,
of which Patry Friedman was a co-founder. Yeah.
And there are just so many overlaps between this like cosplay, LARP, suspension of disbelief,
expansion of the political imagination. It's a pretty powerful tool. And these people are
meaningfully shaping policy decisions, creating special economic zones, living out this fantasy.
And I wonder if this gives us some important context for how to understand the crazy
shit that people post on the internet nowadays, right? Because very often I will have conversations
with people and they'll say like, ah, these guys are just LARPers. They're just pretending,
they're doing whatever. And it's like, I don't know, like there's billions of dollars. I mean,
well, literally trillions of dollars, I think $8.7 trillion held in offshore tax havens. These
special economic zones are shaping our political reality. And they're being designed by people who
literally dress up as medieval characters. Like maybe LARPing is kind of important and we should
pay attention to what these people are saying online. Yeah.
Um, how do you, how do you look at these people online who make these radical posts that sometimes
seem a bit like sensational or outrageous? Like when do we think about taking them seriously?
Yeah, no, I mean, so I think the development of special economic zones, you know, which is
basically China imitating Hong Kong and turning Shenzhen into what it is. And then other countries
looking at and saying, how can we have our own Shenzhen? And creating these little pockets of
deregulation and, you know, friendliness to foreign investors. I mean, those have been
in reality mostly kind of used by states as forms of like, you know, incentivizing investment.
But some anarcho-capitalist and libertarians have also certainly looked at those and said,
hmm, what if we can design those a little bit differently? Even Paul Romer, who's no actual
wild-eyed libertarian, Nobel Prize winning economist, was like, what if special economic zone could be
something that he called a charter city that would basically be like a new colony whereby a rich country
would sort of take over part of, his suggestion was turning Guantanamo Bay into a Canadian-governed
SEZ. And then that could blossom in a new kind of Hong Kong.
Okay.
Yeah, he tried, he literally went up to Canada and tried to push them up there.
Crazier things have been proposed, I guess.
He said we could even have Mounties in the Caribbean.
It'd be a little hot, I think, with the hats and everything.
Yeah, no, the outfit is not, it's not well adapted. But so, so there's that side of thing,
just sort of observing developments and sort of extrapolating from them. But then I think
my approach kind of as an intellectual historian isn't necessarily to focus too much on the people,
but to say sort of like, what world made those people possible? Do you know what I mean? Like,
to focus on everything that Elon Musk says, for example, is one approach. But the other approach is
to say like, what were the set of conditions that made him seem credible? Sure.
And not only that, but also the world's richest man. And there, I think, I mean,
the best example that people like Balaji Srinivasan use certainly is cryptocurrency.
Balaji Srinivasan is the author of The Network State.
The Network State. And he says outright, you know, we LARPed a currency into existence.
Yeah.
So why can't we LARP a state into existence? And that only seems far-fetched until you think about
the fact that, you know, in 2016, when Trump was elected the first time, $700 was the cost of a
Bitcoin. And now it's $100,000. So there's good kind of tangible reasons why you could say, hey, this
thing that in their mind is functioning like money, that is a kind of a fundamental part of statecraft
has been kind of radically rethought and remade by us. And we're still profiting massively on the gains.
Why can't we bring that approach and replicate it in fields of statecraft beyond just payment
systems? So, you know, the world, it's not just that they are looking at the world and saying,
what if? Like, the world has told them, like, you're right.
Yeah.
Like, the environment of, like, infinite quantitative easing, the environment of, you know, incredibly
frothy tech market in which a few huge stocks, like, drive the whole apparatus is not the
fabulations of a couple of dudes in Silicon Valley. I mean, that's pension funds, that's,
you know, that's people's moms and dads and aunts and uncles who are, you know, trying to protect
their retirement by investing in things that are having good gains. So, the phenomenon I think of
of this radicalization of neoliberalism into a kind of exitarianism is a product of, you know,
the world that we have all kind of collectively helped create over the last 20 years. And they're
not so much kind of LARPing as just kind of realizing a potential within it.
Mm-hmm.
And trying to find the moments where the friction appears when they seek to take the next step,
and it hits some kind of obstacle is kind of the approach of crack-up capitalism. I mean, here,
it might be worth mentioning the example from Honduras where, which many people might have heard
of, but in the, around the same time that Teal was saying, we need to create thousands of new states,
and Paul Romer was saying, we need to create charter cities, kind of neo-colonies.
There was a coup in Honduras, and a very right-wing government came into power that was advised,
as they often are, by a bunch of Hondurans who went to business school in the United States.
And they were, you know—
Never heard this one before.
They were, you know, checking out Romer's ideas online,
and they were like, we should do this. Let's sell off parts of
Honduras's territory, and turn them into these blank slate platforms for whatever the investors
want. They'd been doing this for ages, right? There were tons of SCZs and export processing zones,
where Canadian underwear manufacturers could come in and basically dictate the term. So it wasn't that
different than what already existed. But they said, let's go a bit further. Let's give people
the right to make their own laws, have their own police, their own courts. And in the first version
that was passed, enter into treaties with other nations as if they are nations.
So that was—
That's new.
Yeah, that was the original proposal that had never been done before. It was the closest to,
like, a new private state that we had seen. That got slightly watered down. But in the meantime,
Joe Lonsdale, Patry Friedman, a bunch of other associate people got in. Michael Strong,
who was close with John Mackey, the founder of Whole Foods, came in and started to invest and proposed
that this place called Prospera, which is a small part of an island called Roatan off the north coast
of Honduras in the Caribbean, would become a place where people could do a bunch of things they weren't
allowed to do in the United States. Unlicensed medical testing, sort of offshore crypto stuff, obviously.
Tourism is the standard approach. Other things sort of undisclosed. And very high profile.
Scott Alexander endorsed this, said it was a great idea, which I think also started to unlock more.
VC investment, Pronomos Capital, Patry Friedman's Charter City Startup Society,
Venture Capital Fund was directly involved. Everything seemed to be going swimmingly from
the point of view of the right-wing libertarians. But then there was an election. And the woman who
came into power was the wife of the person who had been deposed in the previous coup. And she kind
of basically ran on, like, throw the gringos out. Like, this is a step too far. Our sovereignty is not
for sale. This is just repellent to the basic principles of, like, national self-defense.
If I remember, there was a unanimous agreement among all of the parliament in Honduras. Like,
could you imagine any government anywhere where everyone agrees on something that they want to
get these people out? Right. But here's the problem is,
here's where encasement comes in. Because this had already been made part of the constitution. So yes,
it could be pulled out, but there were some hurdles. But more importantly, and this is what had actually
made people feel confident about, you know, investing their money here. Honduras was the
signee to a Central American Free Trade Agreement, which did exactly what we're talking about, which is
give investors the right to sue states that break the terms of the original investment contract.
So suddenly now, you know, some of people who are some of the wealthiest people in the world
are suing one of the poorest countries in the world to the tune of $11 billion. So this is a situation
where, you know, the ideas and the institutions start to come together, right? This is why I take
an approach that isn't just, like, parsing the texts, but it also isn't just, like, following the,
frankly, often really dry history of, like, international economic law, but the moments they intersect.
So, like, these far-flung fantasies had now come down to earth and they started to bear fruit.
Patry Friedman went down and had his, like, Tesla key, you know, implanted in his hand so he could
open his car with a sweep of his palm. But now, facing reality, they immediately go crying,
bad libertarians that they are, or honest libertarians that they are, straight to the institutions of
state international law that they supposedly were out there to exit from.
Right, right.
So that's the scale shift I think is really important to bear in mind is, like, we're not
just in a world of nation states on a kind of a checkerboard. We're in a world where nations have
inside of them jurisdictions with different qualities, different terms, literally different laws.
And then above that, there are international economic institutions that, you know, usually are
there to protect more of the rights of capital and investors than they are of average citizens and
states. And in moments like this, you see, aha, here's a short circuit between the kind of zone
of exit and the highest level of international economic law. And the two are kind of both holding
nation states in a kind of a vice grip. Right.
Right.
And saying, certain things are possible, the moment you try to do that, no, democracy isn't
operative anymore.
Right, right. The states are kind of held hostage by capital, which is that if you don't meet our
demands from within, we will exit and we built the infrastructure to do it.
Yeah.
One of the, one of the things that I want to explore a little bit further here, we-
Actually, and if I, sorry, if I can just add something to that, because I think you put it
very well that states are kind of held hostage by international economic law and global financial
markets. Yeah.
Because the fates of a poorer country rise and fall on its credit worthiness and its credit
ranking and its sort of, you know, how its credit is seen, its debt is seen in global
bond markets. And that's such a serious power that nations sort of agree in advance, or they
obey in advance, to use the kind of Timothy Snyder language about, you know, what we shouldn't do
under fascist governments. So someone wrote in a really interesting book called Why Not Default?
He was saying, you know, there's all these situations where-
Default on your loans?
Yeah. Why don't nations, which are sovereign lenders, are sovereign borrowers, at some point
just say like, sorry, we're not paying you back.
Yeah.
Because you see in the few instances where that happened, those countries, like Argentina
is one example, were so severely punished, both by international economic institutions like the IMF
and by just private lenders, that it serves as like an example of what not to do. So countries will
preemptively cut their own costs, you know, make painful reductions just to avoid the prospective
punishment that might come from the global financial space.
President of Argentina right now, literally an anarcho-capitalist as well.
Yeah. Yeah. No, I mean, the appearance of Javier Malay on the landscape is really one of those
validating moments for people who spend all their time-
It does mean something.
Yeah. For people who are like always parsing these doctrines, because half the time I'm like,
why am I even taking these people seriously? And then suddenly now, you know, like the head of
state of one of the largest countries in Latin America is like, well, I see myself as more of
a minarchist than an anarchist, but I do follow the work of Rothbard in combination with the insights
of Muses. I'm like, oh my God.
It's not a 14-year-old teenager on Reddit.
No.
Yeah. This is an adult man who's in charge of the country.
You should do like a My Political Journey with me if possible.
I would love to, yeah.
It's a wild and woolly ride. And it's about navigating between the kind of like
extreme market radicalism of Hans-Hermann Hoppe and people like that on the one hand,
and then the realities of international institutions on the other, right? So
he is a master at playing both sides. I mean, he goes to the World Economic Forum,
perfect example of the way that neoliberal rhetoric works. He stands up at the World Economic Forum in
Davos and says, Social Democrats, Christian Democrats, feminists, climate activists, populists,
they're all the same. They're all our enemies. They're all collectivists. And it's you in this
room. You're the value creators. You're the ones who are actually coming up with ideas in the world.
So we need to, you know, I want to applaud you all. You're the ones who make wealth. And we need
to like, you know, build a greater wall and bulwark against these barbarians.
They're the ones who make it.
Yeah. And he got a round of applause. Neil Ferguson, you know, respected historian of
the world economy, wrote a rave review of the speech. So that idea of battle lines that shift,
but also sort of maintain a certain consistency over time is, you know, well represented by someone
like him, I think. I want to try and thread a few things together here. We talked about network states.
We brought up Hoppe. We've covered a little bit of the Habsburg Empire.
Um, this period in, let's say, post-war, where neoliberalism sets its sights on social
democracy, especially in Europe, there is a lot of theorizing about creating these zones,
as you talk about a lot in Crack of Capitalism. And this begins what I would describe as an explicit
project to create a patchwork of different tax havens that can slowly drain the resources from
social democratic countries, bankrupt their welfare states. And by doing so, they will be
forced to meet the demands of these international institutions, link everything into the global
market, achieve neoliberal utopia, and so on. There's something now that has emerged in the
American political discourse that is, I think, very influential and significant,
called the New Right, which contains a lot of different ideological elements. Among them are people
who will talk about creating an economic patchwork governed by benevolent CEO, dictators, and what
we should have is a monarch who's in charge of everything while we liquidate the rest of the
world into competitive markets. That sounds a lot like neoliberalism too. Are those things different
in any meaningful way? Is this just the completion of this project to create this patchwork of different
zones? Because it would sound like the continuity of the last like 50 years is to do exactly that.
Yeah. No, it's a great question. I mean, I think that it's helpful to see the kind of slow demise of
social democracy and the welfare state as like partially being done the way you describe, I think, by like,
you know, the production of race to the bottom, offshoring and outsourcing sites of competition and tax
avoidance and so on that, as you say, kind of drain or extract surplus from the fiscal coffers of the
potential welfare state because of domiciling practices of corporations just pretending they're in
Cayman Islands when they're actually in the United States and whatever. I think, though, there's another
project, which is the European Union, which I think in some ways is more consistent with what I describe in
globalists. In other words, it's not a project of exit, but it's or the construction of a galaxy of tax
havens or offshore, you know, low wage manufacturing sites. But it's a further layering of kind of encasing
institutions over national sovereignties. So I think the EU is fascinating because it's very much
a contested terrain. So you had people in the neoliberal camp who were like, the EU is great.
We're doing like what one of them called the Ferrari model of integration.
The what?
The Ferrari model of integration.
Okay.
We are like, you know, lifting barriers to competition between states so countries can't
protect their own markets. We're setting up, this is really important, the European Court of Justice,
which is like a judicial authority that sits with above the nation states that can force nations to do
things. Like you can't fund any more through state aid, this or that part of your manufacturing base
that you find socially or politically important. You need to allow competition. So there was kind of a
machinery of enforcing neoliberalism that was part of the European project. But at the same time, there were
people inside the European project were like, let's do something different with that. We've seen that more in the last couple of
years, right? Like what if we have a more egalitarian EU in which there's transfers to poorer countries,
in which you like regularize working conditions, especially for women, in which you can do big
investments into like breakthrough technologies for green transition and things like that. So the EU isn't
just a neoliberal entity, but it contains one facet that I think is sort of like the globalist
institution building version of neoliberalism in miniature, which is like, you don't get out of
states, you put something, an encasement over top of them. And maybe important to mention that the
money supply for all of the member states of the EU is locked into Brussels, in which there is no form
for democratic input. Yeah. Into Frankfurt, the site of the European Central Bank. Yeah. So you kind of,
you hive off certain core state capacities to supranational authorities that you actually
can't really hold accountable often. Um, and you kind of defer governance to elsewhere. So that's,
you know, if you look at what someone like Tony Blair was saying in the 1990s or Gerhard Schroeder,
these are social Democrats. These are socialists, but they were the ones saying like, listen, states,
we're weak now. We're impotent. We can't stand in the face of the storms of globalization.
Um, globalization is like the weather. If that means that, you know, we're going to lose all of our
manufacturing jobs, then let's just prepare for that outcome rather than try to push back against
it. So that, you know, I think is the version of neoliberalism that we, um, have most ready to mind.
And when I think someone like Curtis Yarvin or something says neoliberalism is cringe, it's probably
what he's thinking of is like, you know, this, this era where states kind of declared their own
impotence and supineness and sort of rolled over and said, you know, let global competition do with
us what it wants to. And all politics is, is like a selection of consumer preferences, right? The kind
of like coca colonization model of what globalization and neoliberalism look like. And so the more activist
version that you're describing this now coming to the new right is kind of like, no, we want to,
in a way, take back control from globalization in the sense that we want to sort of determine through
the design of our own enclaves, um, and parts of the patchwork where we want to plug in. Do we want
to be a financial service provider? Do we want to be a place that does, you know, medical research? Do we
want to be a place that focuses on certain kinds of, you know, cultural production or news production? Um,
and in the process, you then have to rethink the principle upon which that space would be governed.
Now that you've, if you've broken free from the kind of straitjacket of the existing nation state
system, why should you still be beholden to ideas of one person, one vote democracy as the kind of
default or kind of one ethnicity, one language group as a default? Those seem like very old Wilsonian
traditions by now. Um, so then you say, well, what's, what creates efficiency? Well,
CEOs create efficiency. They have, um, the concentration of power in their hands. They're
accountable to a board of shareholders and then people either take up their product or they don't.
And if they are wealthy enough, then they buy themselves into a position where they're large
enough holder of stock that they can influence the decision-making of the CEO. But there's a
separation of kind of, um, the allocation of resources and kind of the direction of travel
for the polity and the kind of everyday life of people who otherwise just kind of live with the
consequences. And that is a Singaporean model that again is like a Dubai model. And those places,
especially Dubai, combine interestingly, like a CEO model in which the person can be dismissed by
the board at will with a kind of a continuity principle of like bloodline.
And in the case of, uh, Dubai where the sheikhs come from the Al-Makshum dynasty and you can't
get a sheikh from outside of that. It needs to be from within that. And from the point of view of
Jarvin and Hans-Hermann Hoppe, that's good because the time horizons of a monarch supposedly are longer
than the time horizons of a CEO, let alone a four-year elected congressperson who's more concentrated
on short-term maximization of their own, you know, gains from that time in office. Whereas, uh, a king
in their understanding is like interested in the kind of the progeny and the kind of like the long-term
outlook for caretaking the resources under their control. So I agree with you that that is a kind of
new variation on the old neoliberal idea, which says that, you know, governance is about stability,
capital security, and economic freedom over political freedom. Instead of trying to figure
out how you can monkey with institutions to make that idea square with the idea of democracy, which
is not necessarily the same, which has been the problem for the 20th century, the 21st century thing
is just like, oh, just get rid of that left-hand part, and just focus on the efficiency, economic
freedom part, and take people with you who are into it, and then open the door under conditions for
people who might be interested as well. But don't offer any birthright sort of, you know, ability to
enter without admission fees or something.
I want to spend a moment on this topic of monarchy, because I feel like this is one of the
hairpin turns in this story that takes people by surprise, because we're used to talking about,
you know, individualists, libertarians, whatever. They're very anti-dictator, anti-state,
and the idea that they would maybe prefer to live under an absolute monarch is a little bit of a
strange idea. They generally describe this as a CEO dictator. We spend a lot of time on this show talking
about speculative models of governance in the 21st century, and it seems to be, you gave the example of,
of Dubai. We've talked about China a little bit. But both of these environments, while they're very
different, have an extreme concentration of wealth among their capitalist class. They have an enormous
amount of power invested in one individual. And then they have this kind of competitive patchwork
of different regulatory zones, in which there's financial services, and there's manufacturing,
and things like this. And you kind of recreate that Habsburg empire, which has inspired so many of
these people. So, can we maybe explore a little bit of Hoppe's work and how he makes that argument
that persuades people who are of this libertarian mindset to embrace the idea of having a king?
That's a very bizarre political evolution. It is in the 21st century, arguably, but
even across the 20th, it wouldn't have been seen as that weird, right? So, look at the Habsburg empire.
I mean, it was an empire, meaning there was an emperor.
Literally.
There was literally an emperor. And there's really interesting work by intellectual historians
who say it was actually precisely these kind of liberal, often Jewish, for important reasons I'll
get to, intellectuals who were actually very supportive of the empire as such. So, they're
supportive of this combination of dynastic political rule on the one hand, and then relatively
liberal economic policies on the other. Why? Because they felt like the Emperor Franz Josef II in this
case was able to actually protect the rights of extreme minorities in ways that a democratically
elected leader might not be able to. So, if, as in post-First World War Hungary or Czechoslovakia,
if you need to prove your Slavic ancestry or Magyar ancestry, then what happens to people who don't
fit specifically Jews. So, it made sense for people from a very small community to kind of take flight
in a relatively neutral, pragmatic, universalist position of someone like, no, no, all of the
peoples are my children or whatever. So, that was actually not paradoxical. People like, I mean,
Hayek added the Vaughn to his name as part of this ennoblement process that his parents and others
had gone through because they saw their interests reflected in a kind of combination of, you know,
imperial liberalism. After the Second World War is another good example. So, you think about who
were the kind of success stories of post-1945. One of the first one that comes to mind is Japan. But why
then did the United States, you know, let the Emperor persist as the head of state nominally in Japan,
even though, wasn't he the one that everyone was like committing kamikaze acts in the name of and so
on? Right, right.
Because they also, even American post-war planners were like, a certain level of social stability is
provided by this symbolic figurehead, which can serve a kind of cohesion function, can buy legitimacy
and consent, and that can allow a more disruptive process of economic modernization to happen at the
same time. This is a whole category of discussions in development economics in the 1960s is about
developmental dictatorships. Saudi Arabia, another great example. Iran under the Shah, same thing.
Globalizing, plugging into world oil markets under the leadership of a dynastic figurehead who was
preferable than the democratically elected Mohammed Mossadegh, who the Americans helped, you know,
coup to get the Shah in power. So I think that that, you know, there is a tradition and a history for
that. And I think it helps to sort of make us see what the kind of balance is that many of these,
especially anarcho-libertarians, want to strike between unleashed economic competition or
institutionalized economic competition and authoritarian rule that makes the latter possible,
the former possible. So for good reason, there's been a lot of attention to the kind of stuff that
Murray Rothbart was saying in the 1990s. And John Ganz has written about this. I've been writing about
it for years as well. His kind of plan for the day after, so to speak, watching the Soviet Union in a
period of shock therapy was very inspirational for people like Murray Rothbart and Lou Rockwell,
who helped start the Mises Institute. They're like, okay, what do we need to do? Free prices,
smash the unions, unleash the cops is one of the first things he mentions, you know,
get rid of the bums and the vagrants. So there will be a kind of a very disruptive transitional period
in the move from a kind of mixed economy model to what they hoped would be a totally anarcho-capitalist,
like pay-for-use style model. So you can see that two ways, I think, and I think this is true of Hoppe
and Millet too, of Yarvin as well, which is that, okay, maybe this is just a functional kind of
bloodless, but practical attitude towards restoring order and stability. Or you can see that there is a
kind of a libidinal sadistic desire laying, not really under the surface, at the surface, that's part
of that. So it's not just, you know, unfortunately we have to like smash the union so that we can,
and the protesters and the gender activists so that we can, you know, become more credit worthy
in global markets in Argentina. But no, we actually want to smash the protesters and the activists,
like that will be pleasurable for us. And part of what we're in this for is that act, that cathartic act,
of like the unleashing of violence. So I think that's, you know, that's more like where the
similarities between fascism and extreme anarcho-libertarian capitalism starts to resemble
one another too. Because if neoliberalism has always understood itself in opposition to some kind
of opponent, I mean, so did fascism. I mean, fascism's primary opponent was communism, much, you know,
to the opposition of what the head for the AFD said on Musk's stream the other day. But so fascism
was defined as the desire to, you know, reassert masculine power or crack the heads of these reds
and, you know, bring order back. And I think a lot of anarcho-capitalist sort of fervor and glee
often comes to from that kind of, that idea of helicopter drops and kind of-
Pinochet maybe is the preeminent example of this.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Who isn't a very good model, once again, if you're actually an anarcho-capitalist,
because he did all kinds of like state intervention, especially in the short term.
Right.
But he did get the murder of socialists right. And I think that's, you know, worth a lot.
That's what really matters.
I would say I think that's worth a lot.
As long as we're getting that, we can do a little bit of state spending on the side.
Yeah. I mean, Yarvin, I, Yarvin is an interesting one,
right? Because there has been a fair amount of writing about him in which things that
he pretty clearly meant satirically or meant in the spirit of exaggeration have been taken as,
you know, his outright belief.
So the idea-
But that's what makes this territory so interesting is that the guys who are making the laws for the
new society are also doing the role plays. And it's hard to tell what is real and, you know,
what are they going to enact and what was meant as exaggeration or satire?
Yeah. Like where does shitposting become policy?
It's the same problem as memes. Yeah.
It's like, when does shitposting end and policy begin?
Right.
Right.
And Musk is obviously presenting us that problem a little more directly.
I think he's intentionally muddying the waters, actually.
Right.
He's like, he's trying to keep us on our toes and guessing.
I mean, I think, you know, if you see Musk as like a king-like figure inside of this,
and he's clearly doing his best to produce like a progeny that could be his dynasty.
Not for nothing, I have this side theory about the fact that most of his children have been born
by IVF, which means that you can do sex selection of the embryos that you implant,
which makes it a bit more understandable why 12 of the children born to his partners have been male at birth.
He needs a male heir to assume the crown.
Yeah. So, so you, so here's the thing, right?
It's like not only distinguishing the line between shitposting and policy, that's one challenge,
but the timeframe under which these people operate.
So it's part of Musk's sort of stock and trade to describe himself as like a long-termist, right?
Yeah.
Everything he does is for the safety and the well-being of human civilization,
whether it's voting for Trump, buying Twitter, having a bunch of kids. And that often again gets
repeated as if it's a truism that we can take him at his word. He's actually trying to create a
multi-planetary civilization, as fanciful as that might sound. And yet, you know, he is a creature
of short-termism in fact, right? Like he is someone who has come to the position of power and wealth that
he's in because of a sense of, you know, the, the pump cycles inside of hype stocks and the ability
to sort of like produce momentum that becomes undeniable for people who are just being prudent
kind of money managers. And it's not at all about a thousand years hence and let alone colonizing Mars.
But it's just about like holding until the price is right and dumping. So, you know, he is actually
like the consummate short-termist. And I think that's true of a lot of the tech right guys,
right? I mean, I take with an enormous grain of salt, the idea that they're actually interested
in safeguarding the history, the future of humanity. I mean, they're extending their own
lives as much as possible because that's really the only thing that matters is their own life on
this earth. Yeah. The transhumanism stuff is a, that's a whole other podcast, but this is actually
very influential. This life preservation overlaps with a lot of the tech circles. But on this topic of
tech, Patry Freeman is probably the biggest proponent of this, but discussing terms of
service and voluntarily joining something that is run by a CEO dictator sounds a lot like the social
media platforms that we use today. Elon Musk is, he's talked extensively about integrating payments.
These platforms may have their own forms of currency. Soon they have forms of identification. They
assume more and more the traditional responsibilities and roles of the state as those structures wither.
And we see this kind of sprouting or flourishing of non-contiguous economic zones.
Should we take these ideas of network states opting into governance that's maybe on blockchain or in
the cloud? Should we take those things as serious proposals? Well, I think, you know, part of it rests on this
verb you use of wither, like the states are withering. I would say that they are, you know,
they are contracting these private service providers to provide the things that states used to offer.
Right. So that's actually what's happening is I think it's much more likely that private actors will
continue to take on more and more state functions until it's difficult to find the difference between
the U.S. state and private Silicon Valley firms. It's great when the money printer works for you.
Absolutely. And it doesn't go to anybody else and they just pay you. That's great.
Yeah. And we have a prototype for that, right? I mean, that is Alipay and WeChat and WePay in China.
So that's a model of state capitalism, which is not only exists, but has proven to be, you know,
not the problem with the economic model of China, right? That's about the frontiers of real estate
speculation. But I think the core here is something you mentioned earlier, which is like,
one thing that this flight to special economic zones does, it isn't necessarily directly drain
the coffers in a kind of a mechanical sense such that the welfare state automatically kind of collapses.
It produces a competitive pressure on those home states to adjust their own policies, again,
preemptively because the goalposts have been moved about what it means to tax a corporation,
for example. I mean, I remember at some point during the Trump administration,
the Heritage Foundation or ALEC circulating this bar graph that showed corporate tax rates.
And it was like, here's the U.S., I think it was 35 or something at that point.
And here's Mauritius, that was like 8% or something. I'm like, how can this be true? How can this
third world country have a lower corporate tax rate? Which is just like a mind bending leap of
logic, right? Like the idea that the biggest economy in the world should somehow be compelled
to follow lockstep with like an obviously engineered tax haven is doing to draw profits away. And yet that
was being presented as common sense. So the idea of, you know, using the threat of exit to discipline
the kind of incumbent, I think is more what's happening here.
There's a retreat from globalization. There's a interventionist hand in the economy,
Inflation Reduction Act, CHIPS Act, a number of pieces of legislation from the Biden administration
that just look very uncharacteristic of the neoliberal period. I have limited faith that Trump
is going to do anything like that. But are we at some new chapter of this development?
Is neoliberalism over? Is it in a new iteration now? Or how do we understand these recent developments?
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, that was a question I was being asked a lot in the first year or so of the
Biden administration for good reason, right? I mean, the containment efforts of COVID for COVID-19,
you know, did things policy wise that definitely nobody thought could be done.
You know, as far as shutting down the global economy and yet preventing it from collapsing
through, you know, furlough schemes and cash transfers and sort of tax relief for affected
companies. The effects of that were also quite interesting in terms of political experimentation.
I wrote at the time about the kind of cracking up of even the territorial lower 48 US into like
state compacts, right? Like there was like the New England compact was like a cluster of states
that had a certain arrangement among themselves for distributing PPE, for stopping people who were
crossing. You know, I knew someone who was living in New Rochelle early in the pandemic and
she couldn't leave town and people couldn't enter. So it turns out that the imperium to go back to the
category we're talking about, like the power of the state actually, you know, was much stronger,
maybe like this idea of like a surrender to globalization and the market, you know,
what are governments anymore? They're just, you know, supine actors. Turns out like, oh no,
like in extremists states will show up and they can do things that nobody thought that they could do.
Surprise, surprise. It's been that way the whole time. Yeah, exactly. Yeah. And so that
lots of light bulbs were going off in the heads of people of all points on the political spectrum,
right? I mean, people like Srinivasan were like, amazing. Sovereignty is provisional.
Like it can be fragmented, like at a top of a hat in the right conditions. People like Andreas Malm,
the climate Marxist was like, this is great. This is like war communism, just the same way that the
Soviet Union came into existence in the course of the first world war, unexpected, unprecedented
shock from outside that then changed the terms for people in terms of their relationship with
the government. Let's do that. Like, let's roll out like shock communism, like right now.
Um, the very much in between the two moderate version that came out after Biden's election
was the Green New Deal proposition, Build Back Better, which was then further watered down after
opposition, of course, from Manchin and Sinema and so on to the Investment Reduction Act, which was still
a massive spending package designed to transform the American economy, re-industrialize parts of it,
push it on a trajectory towards energy transition and decarbonization. Um, so to talk about post
neoliberalism in 2021 was, I think, not that far-fetched. Like at a rhetorical level, we were there.
Yeah. I mean, the Biden cabinet and its economic advisors, none of those kind of, uh, shibboleths about
the need to bow down to the natural qualities of global competition were there. It was the option,
right? Catherine Tai, the US trade representative was one of the more overt in her, um, belief that
states had made globalization and now they can remake it in a way that's more equitable.
What that actually ended up meaning though, is that in the attempt to realize that post neoliberal
transition, we ended up seeing many of the built-in aspects of neoliberalism as kind of state legal
hardware that made such a transition impossible or hard to do. So how did the IRA get rolled out?
It was basically through, um, large asset managers like BlackRock, you know, stepping in as the kind of
backers for now what are seen as more, um, safe investments in things like green energy through,
you know, corporate, uh, state handovers to corporate investors in different parts of the
United States for solar farms, wind farms, whatever. So it still kind of looked like public private
partnerships, socializing risk, privatizing profit for all of the ways that it seemed to transcend
neoliberalism. It still had to exist inside of the like matrix of neoliberalism that had been built over
decades. So when people started to question it, um, and feel skeptical about the arrival of a new era,
you know, they had reason to. And now with the new Trump administration, we'll see how
easily it is to just roll back all of those things and to, you know, max out only sort of LNG and, and
fracking projects, scrap solar, scrap wind, um, and, you know, get back to kind of growthism for its
own sake. So I think that if you think about neoliberalism first as fending off opponents of
an economic freedom first competition focused, inequality dependent model of organizing capitalism,
then it's alive and well, the way it's organizing global trade policy in particular throws some
things into question, but not all. I think, I think it's not right to see any moves towards
protectionism or tariffs as the opposite of neoliberalism. Right. Um, Reagan used tariffs and
voluntary export restraints and all kinds of quotas to bully Japan into opening their market for American
semiconductors. It's called competitive liberalization. The way that Trump talks about
using tariffs now is like you crack open Europe to American weapon systems, American LNG. This is not
anti-neoliberal, right? It's, it's showing more kind of the, the strong hand of the state in pressuring
countries into being exposed to market competition. But the outcome in the end is still, I think, you know,
a kind of a zero sum, um, accrual of profits to some countries and some elites and, and not others.
So it's a transformation or a mutation, I think, rather than a reversal or a death.
Quinn, thank you so much for talking with us today. Your work is an inspiration. Your research is so
immensely valuable. These are quite literally the most important conversations and topics to talk about.
So I'm so glad to chat with you today. Globalists, crack of capitalism, immense fan of your writing.
Thank you so much for joining us. Thank you. It was my pleasure.
