SIOP operations historically can be very simple, you know, throwing leaflets out of the back of
an airplane or incredibly elaborate and targeted like at one specific person and literally trying
to create a world for them in order to get them to believe something that you want them to believe.
That sounds a lot like social media right now.
Bingo. The mind is something that can be programmed like a computer that you can write memory to,
that you can delete memory from. If the mind functions like a computer, then you should be
able to control it like a computer. In the CIA, the magician on staff was a guy named John Mulholland.
The other thing that Mulholland did for the CIA was to investigate UFOs, right?
Oh, okay. I wasn't expecting that.
Welcome to Doomscroll. I'm your host, Joshua Sitarella. My guest is artist and geographer,
Trevor Paglin. He joins me to discuss psychological operations, the memetic power of UFOs, and the
role of magic in shaping our perceptions of the world. You have the Korean War happening and the
North Koreans are taking prisoners. The pilots are shot down. People are captured on the battlefield.
And you see the emergence of a new form of media, which is like the hostage video or like the
confessional letter, that sort of thing. So you start to get this genre of films coming out of POWs
denouncing their war crimes. And the question for intelligence agencies in particular and the kind
of policy makers in general is like, why is this happening? What they posit as an answer to that is
these prisoners must be being brainwashed by kind of secret Chinese forces. They start to imagine that
the, you know, communists or whatever have some kind of mind control program, brainwashing program.
So the CIA initiates like a program for many of your listeners have heard of called MK Ultra,
which is to try to figure out how do you manipulate people's minds? How do you interrogate people
effectively? How do you resist interrogation effectively, et cetera? But it's a very wide ranging
program. Research into the use of hallucinogenic drugs has research into things like hypnosis,
parapsychology. Um, they had a magician on staff. They were funding early work.
Like a rabbit in the hat. Like, yeah, this is a whole, yeah, yeah. So this is a rabbit hole we should
go down because like weirdly magic is a huge part of this story as well. That's a side quest.
I'm listening. Yeah, yeah. Okay. So, um, yeah, they're doing magic, early work on AI. They're doing
work on brain computer interfaces. So they're, you know, funding people to, you know, put electrodes
in the minds of like animals and see whether you can control them. You know, a lot of work on
interrogations, that sort of thing. Kind of loosely based on the kind of AI conception of the mind,
where like the AI is something that can be programmed, the mind is something that can be
programmed like a computer that you can write memory to, that you can delete memory from,
et cetera. And if the mind functions like a computer, then you should be able to control it
like a computer. Mind hacking, I guess, for lack of a better word. Yeah, mind hacking is this kind of
connective link that it's a philosophical approach to, uh, we use the word reprogramming,
for example, right? It's from the philosophy of computers, of computation. And then we extend
that to the mind and then look to program people to carry out objectives and so on like they were
an app, essentially. Exactly. Exactly. And so there's a theory of media here as well. Like there's
a theory of mind, but there's a theory of media and it's really different than the theory of media
that you would have learned if you did a PhD in media studies, for example, right? It's really different
than semiotics. It's really different than complit or, you know, deconstruction or these kind of basic
tools that you use in the academy. The one thing I think is important to mention also here is that
for people who are not familiar with programs like MKUltra, you brought us through a lot of history in
pretty expansive fields, right? We're talking about computers, we're talking about magicians,
we're talking about drugs. We know all of that from a minority of the documents that were made public
because the majority of them were actually burned at the end of the program. So as
fucking crazy as that sounds, it's got to be so much worse. If that's the stuff we know,
if that's the stuff we know, yeah, it's a fascinating rabbit hole to go down that
in many cases could actually ruin your life if you do it too far.
There's a trail of bodies behind that research. Literally. Yeah, literally. And there, you know,
the other thing to kind of keep in mind here though, like, you know, the golden age or whatever
of MKUltra is the 50s and 60s. Yeah. And what the CIA meant then is very different than what it means
now, right? So this is pre-Watergate, this is pre, you know, the church hearings and that sort of thing.
The CIA was an organization that really came out of like Ivy League schools, right? These are not
cretins. These are people that are interested in modernist literature and poetry and that sort of
stuff. So it didn't have the same kind of cultural signifiers associated with it that it does now.
And so when you look at something like MKUltra and you look at who's funded by it,
it's every neuroscientist, it's every psychologist, you know, who is happily kind of contributing.
You know, I'm a big proponent for public funding of the arts, but if it comes from the CIA,
I might have to think, I might have to think twice.
What kind of resume does one have to put together to become the on-staff MKUltra magician? Is it like,
well, I do a 12 year old birthday parties. I do, I do corporate events and yeah, I could probably do
some mind control for you guys also. How does, what, what involvement does MKUltra have with literal
rabbit in the hat card trick magicians? It's actually super interesting, right? So when you
look at this mind hacking, for lack of a better word, as a form of media, and you look at who's
really nailed that, it's magicians, right? And then when you look at the history of magic and the craft
of magic and the media of magic, what it's all about is understanding how somebody else's perception
works and what the kind of features and foibles and quirks of that perception are in order to deploy
an attack or to stage something that is taking advantage of the deficiencies or quirks of somebody's
perception system, right? So magicians talk about, you know, attention is a huge part of it. You know,
if you're, you know, we've all seen the video of the basketball players, you know, passing the
basketball around and the, the monkey appears in the middle of the basket court, ball court,
and you don't see it because you're busy watching the basketball being passed around.
So that's an example of, of something that magicians have known for thousands of years,
right? It's like, how do you use the gaps in somebody's attention or perception in order to
insert, you know, what, what I think of as a kind of injection attack into somebody's perceptual
system, right? And so it is a kind of prototype of this, you know, cognitive warfare or cognitive
media or what have you, that's not assuming signification. It's assuming an understanding of
how somebody's brain is going to react to different kinds of stimuli and taking advantage of that.
Right. In the CIA, the magician on staff was a guy named John Mulholland, who was a very prominent
magician in the early 20th century. He was like friends with Houdini. He wrote several books about
magic. He was the editor of the main, you know, journal for, for the magicians and it was called the
Sphinx. And he was friends with a series of psychologists living in New York City who recruited
him to work for the CIA. And he sort of made a public showing of like, oh, I'm getting old,
I'm going to retire. So he kind of shut down a lot of his public operations and took on this kind of
covert role at CIA. And at CIA, he did a couple of things. He wrote for them a manual about how to
use techniques from magic tricks in order to conduct covert operations. So, you know,
in magic, you have things like, you know, how do you make the assistant disappear in the box or,
you know, how do you, you know, hide the flowers in a hat or whatever it is. And so he was trying to
adopt a lot of those techniques to covert operations. The second thing he did was, you know,
related to that designing weapons for the CIA that looked like other things. So one of the,
his most famous inventions was a coin, a silver dollar that had a spike of really deadly poison
in it. And the, the, the theory of media there is that you make something innocuous, like a coin.
If I see a coin in my field of vision, I'm not going to pay attention to it. My mind is going to
throw that out instantly. It's like, I know what that is. It goes away. It's not, there's nothing,
nothing interesting here. Interestingly enough, in 1960, a U-2 pilot, a spy plane pilot named Gary Powers,
is shot down over the Soviet Union and captured. And in his pocket, he has one of these John Mulholland's
poison spike coins, which was not found by his captors precisely because it didn't look like a
gun or anything like that. Like if he later had to show it to them and say, hey, look, this coin's
actually a weapon. Don't touch it. You know? So there's these kinds of histories there. The other
thing that Mulholland did for the CIA was to investigate UFOs, right? Oh, okay. I wasn't
expecting that. No, no, here. So this is where these histories sound like conspiracy theories,
because they're, they're that weird, right? And so, I mean, this is why this is such, to me,
this feels like such a... He investigated UFOs for them. Were the UFOs in this case,
aliens? Or was it the Soviets? Or was it they didn't know what it was?
They didn't know what it was. And so what happened in the early 1950s is that there was
a series of UFO sightings over Washington, D.C., something comes called the Washington, D.C. sightings.
Right. And a series of sightings, I think pilots saw things flying over the Capitol, they were seen on
radar, this kind of thing. And so that sort of spooked the CIA. And they kind of put a panel
together to investigate, to figure out whether there was a threat there. Yeah.
And it was called the Robertson panel. What they concluded was that there was not a military threat,
but there was a psychological threat. In other words, like that the UFO had enough power as a meme
that it could be deployed in broader context of warfare to stage some kind of disinformation
operation or some kind of false flag operation, what have you. And also the inverse of that,
where they concluded that this was potentially a very good tool for doing psyops as well.
Right. So with Mulholland, because he had a background understanding how things like magic work,
and he'd also written a book where he debunked different parapsychological phenomena, like mediums
and seances and this kind of stuff. And so they kind of trusted him as a kind of
bullshit filter, for lack of a better word, for this kind of thing. And I think that that's why
they had him go and, you know, investigate these UFOs. Most famously, he investigated one in
Kentucky, I think, where a family was holed up in a farmhouse and they said a flying saucer landed
and like goblin creatures came out and attacked them. It's the origin of the phrase, little green
men, you know, comes from this incident in Kentucky that Mulholland investigated. But he investigated
other parapsychological phenomena for the CIA as well, kind of, you know, they were interested in ESP
and, you know, telekinesis and this kind of stuff. And he investigated some of that stuff as well.
I'm just going to grab a hole on magic.
Yeah, go ahead. Yeah, yeah. I love it. I love it.
Well, so in magic, again, I'm not, I'm not a historian of this. I'm not, I don't know much
about it, but my kind of pedestrian understanding of it is that there's kind of two camps. One is,
we might broadly call it stage magic, you know, people doing tricks and, you know, kind of creating
the performance of impossible things. And then there's another strand that most associated probably
with a Lester Crowley with magic with a CK. Yeah. Right. And there's a philosophical divide
between the two that I think is really interesting and maybe way too much of a rabbit hole for,
for this, but let's go there anyway.
Yeah. So the stage magic is the, is the tradition that Mulholland came out of. And the,
the kind of paradigm of it is that you're trying to figure out the quirks of people's perceptions
in order to make impossible things appear to happen. And, and they, they really do use this
language of truth and false. And they, they talk very explicitly, like, we are going to deceive
your perceptual apparatus to make you perceive something that is not true. Right. So there
still is this binary between, you know, reality and the unreality that they create.
The Lester Crowley tradition has a different kind of metaphysical underpinning, which is that
the assumption is we cannot know reality other than through our perceptions of it. Like,
whatever reality is, we don't know what it is. We can get it only mediated through,
you know, our senses or through our logic or intellect or instruments that we develop,
et cetera. So reality is effectively equivalent to our perceptions of reality. Right. In a, in a practical
matter. Therefore, if we are able to alter our perceptions of reality, we are in effect,
altering reality itself. Right. And so that's, it's a much stronger claim. And there is no dichotomy
between what's true and what's false in that claim. And that to me is an interesting claim vis-a-vis this
insane world of AI and social media and, and that, that sort of thing that, that I know you're really
interested in. The breakdown of consensus reality is entirely sympathetic with what you just described.
Yeah. Where, yes, individual people are manifesting, they're extending their will out into the world,
they're shaping reality. All of which is totally antithetical to any historical materialist
interpretation of the world. And never the tween shall meet. The title of your recent exhibition
at Pace Gallery was, you've just been f***ed by psyops. Is that a real thing or a meme?
That's a really good question. I got interested in that phrase like many years ago when I found a
challenge coin, purportedly from like what was then called MISO, like the military information
support operations, which was a rebranding of psyop that kind of went back. Anyway, I've collected
challenge coins and patches and kind of the insignia and visual culture of weird military units for a
very long time. And this is a challenge coin that just had a skull on it and it had like the swirly
kind of brainwash eyes and weird, you know, vapors or lightning bolts emanating from the skull. And then
the slogan around the coin said, you've just been f***ed by psyops because physical wounds heal.
And I'm used to seeing this as a meme with an anime character and a bullet through the brain.
Yeah.
That's okay. I've seen that, but I want to say your history with this goes back way further. I
started seeing that, I don't know, in like 2022, it was really popular or something. It seems like
it's actually relatively recent in the meme-osphere.
Yeah. It's recent in the meme-osphere. It's older in the military.
But how, so how far back would MISO be using a phrase like this?
So in that history, you know, traditionally psychological operations were called psyop.
They changed the name to MISO, I think the late 2010s, because psyop sounded too nefarious. Some
generals, they do this from time to time, some generals thought it was like, oh, this feels like
demonic and we're like manipulating people's minds. So they changed the name to MISO. And then all the
troops kind of rebelled, you know, and they said, we don't want to be named after like the soup.
And so they sort of forced the leadership to change the name back to psyop.
This coin came up out of that moment when it had been rebranded as MISO. And maybe the
aggressiveness of that logo came as a reaction to having been rebranded MISO by the leadership.
It is a tremendously fearsome logo. I was at the exhibition in New York. I also got to see it
in Berlin. And it is a terrifying skull. Tell us, what is what is the show about? You've just been
fucked by psyops.
Okay, there's a long answer. And we like long. I often get criticized as an artist because there's
a lot of information around the work and a lot of thought around it. And it's not always obvious,
like when you go and you're looking at something, what it is that you're seeing, which for me is the
point. But it can be difficult. So the show came out of me trying to think about where
media is going, like looking at emerging forms of media, you know, whether that's AI or recommendation
algorithms or kind of looking at a cultural environment that we're living in, where increasingly
the media that we consume has been either crafted or modulated or optimized to induce some kind of
response that's specific to each person who's using it and that is using some kind of feedback from
that user, whether that's a like button or some kind of biometric feedback to like further optimize
engagement or extraction or whatever it is that you're wanting to optimize in that relation.
How do we find an analog, historical analog to what that kind of a media environment is? Like,
what is it doing? And, you know, and I was thinking about psyop, you know, psyop operations historically can be
very simple, you know, throwing leaflets out of the back of an airplane or incredibly elaborate and
targeted like at one specific person and literally trying to create a world for them in order to get
them to believe something that you want them to believe.
That sounds a lot like social media right now.
Bingo.
Yeah.
Right. So that's, that's, that's what I was thinking about. So the, the kind of centerpiece
of the exhibition is a film that's called Doty and it's just a very simply shot, you know, video
installation. It's about an hour long and it's just the guy talking. It's just him in black and
white. There's no B roll. It doesn't cut to anything. It's a kind of a feature of a guy named
Richard Doty. And this is a guy who worked for Air Force Office of Special Investigations
in the 1970s and 1980s, kind of psyop adjacent. What he did, he worked at a Air Force base in New
Mexico called Kirtland Air Force Base. This is a base where they're doing all kinds of weird
experiments with lasers and stealth technology. And, you know, there's a big nuclear weapons
research lab there. So do weird stuff. As a part of that, people would see UFOs in the skies above
the space. People would hear strange radio signals emanating from it. When you say UFO,
you mean literally just something that's unidentified. Yeah. People would see lights in the sky
doing stuff that shouldn't be doing or what have you. And so this, um, Air Force Base kind of got on
the radar of UFO organizations, people like MUFON or, you know, the Mutual UFO Investigative. Basically,
the amateur groups of people study UFOs. So then what Rick started doing was running disinformation
operations against UFO groups. So he would like recruit sources inside the UFO community and then
give them fake documents that purported to explain the historical relationship that the US government
had with like aliens and UFOs and that sort of thing. And these are very well-made documents,
you know, top secret stamps and dah, dah, dah. So these UFO researchers, then you got the idea like,
oh, I have a source in the government who's like feeding me the truth about UFOs. And like, it's crazy.
A lot of that kind of junk that he disseminated into that community became then part of the UFO lore
at that time and became, you know, really the outline of the plot of things like the X-Files.
You know, like that X-Files really does come from these disinformation documents that like
Rick Doty had disseminated into that world. So that's his background. So in the film,
he's talking about, first of all, how do you conduct these kinds of psyops? Like what works,
what doesn't, what is the craft of it, right? What's the training that goes into it?
Second, you know, how he did it. Like, this is how you do it. This is how to make it convincing.
This is, you know, he's talking about what he did. Then there's a flip. And he says,
okay, so my job was to create disinformation about UFOs. But in parallel to that,
I was read into the real UFO program. And so he goes on this like...
Everything I said is a lie, but this is the truth.
Yeah, no, it's like really like the, you know, a kind of embodiment of the all Cretans are liars,
you know, I'm a Cretan, you know, this sentence is a lie, you know, these kind of old paradoxes,
right? So then the film sort of is like going back and forth between the craft of psyop, the,
you know, the, his history of doing them. And then like him telling you these UFO stories and you,
it's really difficult to calibrate yourself, like in that conversation with somebody by him. And he can
even explain to you why it's difficult to calibrate yourself in that conversation. So he's a really
interesting guy to talk to in that way. And so the reason that I was interested in him in particular,
and this psyop in general, is that it just felt a lot like chat GPT. It felt a lot like AI,
and it feels like, I felt like, like Rick Doty feels like a, a seed of, of the future of media.
He is, well, yeah, I mean, as you're describing it, I immediately call to mind people who are posting
disinformation on, you know, a Facebook message group or a forum or whatever. And there's a craft
to it. He even explains this craft in the film, where it's good to begin with a fact, and to end
with a fact, but to make a whole bunch of stuff up in the, in the middle. So just to, to back up for
a second, to be clear about what Doty's role was, is that there would be private citizens organized in
groups that are looking into UFOs. They would see something in the sky, lights, unusual patterns,
and so on. And they would think to themselves, this is the presence of aliens. I have something
on camera. I've detected something. We can't explain these radio signals, something like this.
And then Doty's job was to infiltrate those groups and tell them that, no, what you saw is definitely
not military tech that's under development. It was aliens. It really was. And here's the proof.
Here's a fraudulent document that I created that is the stamp of the US government. But he's actually
just misdirecting these groups from identifying what is actually, ostensibly, military technology
that's in development. Something like that. Yeah. So that, that's, that's, yeah, that's,
that's layer one. That's layer one. But layer two, layer two is, and this is, gets to the weird
stuff. He says, like, well, sometimes they saw a real UFO and we got some pilot to find them and
tell them that, no, it was a secret airplane that we were testing. Yeah.
Yeah. So this is where you get into this hall of mirrors when you, when you talk to him.
And, uh, he just, he's not posting on social media at this time. Is he using, uh, cognitive
warfare? Is he using memetics? Is he posting disinformation in forums or is he doing like old
school, you know, facts, mailing documents and things like this?
So at that time it's old school. Like he'd literally, you know, have people come into his
office at the air force base, say, I'm going to show you some documents. Like you can take notes,
but you can't take pictures and, you know, have like, for example, journalists read the documents
or he would like give them to UFO researchers. And so it was very analog. Um, once the internet starts
coming along in the 1990s, he's done this career shift to being like a UFO whistleblower, I guess,
for lack of a better word. And then he does start, you know, posting in comments and forums and that
sort of thing. Starts accusing people of working for intelligence agencies and being, you know,
running false flag operations. Like really like the prototypes for the, this other, you know, kind of
of internet cultural warfare that you see. Right. So prevalent these days.
Yeah. Uh, just the other day, uh, just the other day we were talking about, there was a
Pentagon organized anti-vax meme campaign deployed in the Philippines. And one would be curious
why the United States would particularly care whether Filipinos got vaccinated. Um, it just so happens that,
you know, China was giving them the vaccine, something called Sinovac, uh, the Pentagon
underwent a disinformation campaign, trying to convince people that there was pork gelatin
in the vaccines, such that the Muslim population would not want to get injected because that would
be Haram made all of these, you know, I've seen some of these military budgets are quite comprehensive.
They need to hire a few graphic designers. These are, these are not the best posts. Um, but what is,
what is especially interesting about that is that the higher ups bureaucracy told them to stop doing
it. They did this against the wishes of their higher ups. Would you say that that's a common,
that's a common aspect of a lot of these stories that now Doty is acting against what I imagine his
superiors had told him that people are kind of constantly pushing and pulling against the rules.
And one is even tempted to imagine that, uh, to reveal this information afterwards could be an
extended part of the program. Perhaps it is to muddy the waters even further to cast doubt on something
that was indeed accidentally leaked, shouldn't be publicly known. And so now he discredits himself and
it's kind of, it's impossible to tell, you know, where, what is the objective of this? Where is this
influence coming from? You know, it depends on who you talk to. Um, Doty's antics
had very bad consequences. One of the targets of his influence operations, like committed suicide,
partly as a result of, you know, the stress that he'd been put under. Doty did a very targeted operation
against a guy in particular who was a military contractor where he was doing stuff like setting
up radios in his house and kind of looking like aliens had broken into the guy's house. And
this very elaborate, high budget operations, the guy ended up kind of going insane, committing suicide.
There's a few other people like, you know, journalists, you know, in particular that
kind of cracked, you know, under that, um, in that environment that he had sort of facilitated where
it was really impossible to know what was true and what was false. And so I think
at the end of the day, the, a lot of the work that Doty had done became a little bit of a case study of
like what not to do when you're doing, you know, those kind of psyops. However,
at the time, to what degree this was sanctioned, I don't really know.
It may be, it may be impossible to know in some cases.
I think it's impossible to know. I think it's impossible to know.
Do you have a sense of the world that that's going to lead us into?
Do you, my sense is very dark, right? Um, for the reasons that you're, you know, suggesting,
which is, I don't know what theory of democracy you have without some kind of consensus reality,
even if we all acknowledge that that consensus reality is, and always has been, you know, synthetic
to one degree or another. But it does seem to me that the theory of democracy does rely on a faith
in reason and rationality and faith in the idea of facts as a way to organize, you know, as the stuff
that you organize with reason. Um, when both of those things are thrown out, I don't know what
you end up with, but I don't think it's liberatory. Having said that, I do try to kind of eke out a bit of
optimism. Um, the bit of if, but again, I even hesitate to say this because I don't want to seem
like a, you know, a booster of, you know, technology of that sort of stuff. And I definitely,
in the kind of economic environment that technology is embedded with into, I don't think that you can
see radical forms of, you know, world building, you know, um, becoming possible. Like what we were
talking about with the zero point energy, you know? Yeah. Yeah. Like, I don't know that you can have
post-scarcity within, you know, a, you know, capitalist mode of production, like they're antithetical to
each other. Um, however, we, one must acknowledge that struggles for liberation in the past have always
had a component of imaginative world building to them. Like, in other words, you know, civil rights,
you say like, we are people, you know? So you're, you're expanding the definition of what a, what the
human is to include women, colonized people, you know, people of color, et cetera, that sort of thing.
And so there is a kind of imaginative reframing of reality that has, um, that has always been part of
political struggles. It has not been, you know, the only part of those struggles, right? There was
obviously nonviolent resistance and, you know, sometimes people taking up guns or having,
you know, all kinds of, you know, acts of physical resistance. However, like that, that
imagination of an imagination and imagining into different, you know, kinds of worlds has, has always
been important there as well. So I don't want to discount the fact that it is possible for like the
imaginary or, um, the creation of imaginary worlds to bring about real change. You know, I don't want
to discount that, but, um, but I not, that's not where I see this going. I would say that it's, uh,
it's too easy of a trap for people to just fall into everything AI related is terrible. Everything
technology related is terrible, you know, and I was, I was brought up in a tradition of criticizing
technology, criticizing capitalism. And, you know, it's very easy to get by and say, just like, oh,
everything that's happening is terrible and, uh, it's bad. And I will just not propose any solution
or alternative and, um, you know, get a fancy teaching degree or, or whatever else you get, you
actually get rewarded for having criticisms and not solutions in many cases. So, I mean,
I think it's important to remember, to, to remind people from the left that the experiments, the
very lineage that they come from, think of things like Cyberson in Chile, that the necessary component
for planning economies to remove markets and price systems and the, the fundamental mechanisms of
capitalism, our shortcoming has always been compute, right? Like the Soviets literally, uh,
took pencil and paper and tried to calculate shadow prices to allocate, you know, lumber to the east
and steel to the west and all of this stuff. And it was just, they were unable to solve Hayek's
knowledge problem. Markets were actually more sophisticated, more complicated forms of crunching
information, and they could derive price, which allocated resources to where they were needed most,
literally because it was a human calculator doing it with pen and pencil.
Yeah. And so the utopian dream of the left and socialists and critics of capitalism was always to
be able to offload that problem onto computers that had more, you know, more computational capacity than
a human individual. So, you know, I just see a direct line from Cyberson to the great irony of today,
which is that the venture capitalists of Silicon Valley are pouring boatloads of money into the tool that
will create economic planning. It is, it's a real reality. Um, I'm used to making the technical
argument for that. I'm used to saying that it was like, well, we just need, you know, Cyberson was
the equivalent of a Game Boy. It wasn't a really serious experiment, you know, the 1970s, whatever.
We didn't have the same computation we have today, but there is also this kind of imaginative component
in that, um, you need things to inspire people. You need something for people to believe in. They have to
be able to envision a future that's better than, than today. And that is, you know, especially
important for mobilizing the political imagination. This is, you know, what Mark Fisher wrote in
Capitalist Realism is that it is our inability to imagine an alternative. And that has been the
thing that has constrained the political left for, for years and years at this point. Um, but, but
speaking of, speaking of capitalism, you've been talking about psyops capitalism in some of your, uh,
public lectures at conferences and at museums. What do we mean by psyops capitalism? How does that
anticipate the trend line that some of these tools are sending us in? So the way that I think about
psyops capitalism is the,
it is about what happens when you take this cognitive tradition in media that we were kind of alluding
to with MK ultra and UFOs or whatever, whatever it is, you know, when you're, when you're taking a theory
of media that assumes that the mind is the target, right? And you
add the value, the logic of extraction to that, right? So I'm going to manipulate your mind and my
goal is to extract value from you, right? So, you know, we have these older theories like the society
of the spectacle is a theory of media and the surveillance. I'm going to pull information off of
you and I'm going to package that and sell that. And that's my business model. Well, what if,
what happens in a media environment where I'm going to create media for you? I'm going to modulate
that media to optimize whatever kind of response that I want you to have. And that's going to be
a mechanism by which I'm going to extract value. Right. Right. And so it's not surveillance actually.
Right. Right. Because I'm not about collecting the information from you. Like surveillance is a
necessary component of it because I need that feedback from you in order to make my optimization
better. Right. But I want to extract value from you. So we can think of these very simple examples
where you would have like a digital avatar that's like your friend, you know, and they,
you're talking to them every day. So they're developing a cognitive profile of you. Maybe there's
a camera in there that's like tracking your facial movements and, you know, expressions,
that sort of thing. So you're, you're, you're, you're, you have a profile and then how is it
going to extract value from you? Well, it could be as simple as saying, oh, Josh, you know, your,
your shoes look kind of shabby, but you know, there's, I know your style is a great pair of,
I found for you on Amazon and you look really great in that. Or, or Josh, you've, you're,
you're really sluggish today. I'm not really having fun talking to you. We, once you have a monster
energy drink and we'll kind of take this conversation from there. I mean,
those are super simple examples of that, but you can imagine this expanding much wider.
So my AI girlfriend is going to be pushing Amazon Prime purchases on me.
For example, I mean, that's the, the, the, the, the, the most mid example I can kind of think of this,
but I think it could be far more, you know, insidious than that and, and far more subtle,
you know, and, um, it does, when you do have like generative media kind of combined with,
you know, the, you know, affective computing or whatever, for, for lack of a better word,
you, there's a vision of a particular version of what we might call, you know,
psyops capitalism or psyops media there. Um, but I think it could happen across all kinds of different
domains, right? You can insurance, real estate, you know, uh, what, what have you.
And sure. Yeah. You insurance, you instill the fear in somebody they'll pay for. That's it. That's
an invisible threat. Yeah, exactly. That's an invisible threat. You just need to convince
someone that the risk exists and it actually never needs to happen. Yeah. And you combine that with where
the insurance industry is going, where you, you know, in the past you'd pay, you know, 200 bucks a month
or whatever for your insurance, the way that they very explicitly talk about wanting to go with that
is that, you know, you, with the sensors in your car, with your phone, what have you, your insurance
is just being modulated minute by minute based on what kinds of decisions that you make. So you get
into your car, you say, I want to go to the grocery store and says, okay, here's the route that you
should take. And you say, oh, well, I don't really want to go in that route. And they're like, okay,
cool. But that's going to cost you like five cents more, you know, in the, in this, you know,
insurance premium. So you add that with this kind of, you know, manipulative media,
you know, there's a whole party there. Right. And you can see this across many,
many different domains. And so you've got a kind of risk profile of the Philip K. Dick
coin operated everything where it's like, well, I'm going to walk on this street because my
premiums are going to go up. If I go on the one that has more traffic, someone got hit there a while
ago. And it's just, yeah, you become completely financially incentivized to like avoid risk.
And, uh, maybe the most profitable way to exist under this kind of rentier model of psyops
capitalism is probably just to eat the bugs and live in the pod and have your headset on at all
times. And that's like, that's, yeah, going outside is very expensive. Exactly. And all my friends are
in here. They're all on the computer. Exactly. They're telling me to, you know,
buy shoes on Amazon and drink monster energy drinks to keep up.
A little bit off topic here, but maybe we've touched on this just in enough places that we
kind of have to address it. Is it at all a coincidence that both UFOs and AI are in the news
at the exact same time with a lot of language around, you know, in the, you know, legal language
as well of like non-human intelligence and things like this. Because when you describe UFOs as a meme,
I take this to mean, you know, a symbol that is contested between multiple people.
It's highly transmittable because it means so many things to so many different groups
that makes it a great vehicle for someone who has a specific intent to implant those things
on top of it. So is this, you know, coincidental that there's all of these, you know, declassified
UFO conversations happening during the advent of AI and the boom of all of these tools like
chat GPT and stable diffusion and mid journey and all of the, you know, fun stuff that we're seeing
online. Um, are those things related in some way?
They feel very resonant with each other. And, you know, to me, you know, like looking at a thing that you have
evidence of, whether that's with your eyes or with images that are made, does it exist?
Who knows? What, what does it signify? Who knows? You know, um, but is there,
is there something different going on here? Does it suggest something different about technology
or about perception or about the fabric of reality itself than our everyday experiences seem to
indicate? And so I think both AI and UFOs kind of pose those questions and pose those challenges
to our, you know, kind of everyday experience. There's some kind of commonality of an intelligence,
uh, greater than humanity, right? Greater than the sum total of humanity's technological achievements,
which can either be in the kind of AI version, this like singularity that is just an intelligence
explosion. It's the smartest thing that is, um, you know, more capable than any human, even all the
combined human populations that invents all of these things. Similarly, if we observe these UFOs and aliens
do indeed exist, they must have so, such incredibly advanced technology, we can't even comprehend it.
There's this realization, almost a revelation where there's something greater than the human in either
case, right? So there's a lot of parallels to, to God. And in fact, in some of these, what they call
shared hallucinations, which is a very difficult term where people claim to see UFOs, other people claim
to see the Virgin Mary, right? There's some kind of, you know, crowds of thousands of people in some of
these historical instances that are all claiming to see something, but something different based on
the, uh, the different groups. Yeah. And this is, um, you know, mankind's kind of inarticulate way of
grasping at the idea that there, there is something greater than them. And we use these different
narratives to kind of describe that phenomena to understand how it feels, you know, to be, uh, to be small
again. Absolutely. And are those objects here to save us or to destroy us?
And the, I mean, I have to, I have to comment that the, um, for divinity, for the revelation side of it,
heaven is a post-scarcity environment. Uh, the UFOs have free energy, free, boundless energy. They can,
you know, star Trek replicators, utopia, none of that is communism, right? None of that is communism,
but the AI thing is kind of similar that like, okay, this thing's going to get so smart. It's going
to solve all of our problems. It's just, it's a runaway intelligence curve. Once it goes, it just
keeps getting better. And so you can kind of like cast aside all of the, the worries, the material
scarcity, the stresses of today, by kind of offloading it onto this, you know, hope for a kind
of utopian post-scarcity society that is, is basically trying to like indirectly solve the
crises of capitalism, right? They're trying to eliminate scarcity without having a class project
or any kind of like revolutionary notion or any semblance of a bourgeoisie and a proletariat or
whatever. And it's like, oh, well just like eliminate scarcity and then it's done. Right, exactly.
Yeah. So with, with, with also ignoring the fact that even if post-scarcity technology was,
even if post-scarcity technology was invented in the context of capitalism, that it would not be,
you know, it would be. Right, right. So yeah, we just have artificial scarcity. Yeah, exactly.
We just have rentism, rentism forever. Yeah, yeah. I can't think of any scenarios that resemble
that now whatsoever. That's funny you mentioned that. How's your Adobe subscription going?
Exactly. Exactly. Yeah. I actually, um,
I shouldn't say this on the podcast. I pirated the software, so I canceled it actually. Yeah.
What do we extrapolate out these tools to lead to? You've been talking about this in some of your
lectures at different museums and conferences, and you've used the term psyops capitalism.
So I think like the artist, Brandon Bandy, um, Jack Ricker, um, Gunzeli Yalcinkaya from Dazed,
they've all kind of used this phrase, psyops realism to try to, you know, say something or try to describe
the aesthetic experience of, of living in a online world, which is so fraught with, you know, manipulation,
suspicion, the kind of breakdown of a consensus reality. And what is the, what is the aesthetic
of that, I guess, is what they're all sort of trying to get at.
Hmm. A kind of a schizophrenic news feed where you feel like you're being emotionally pulled
in a million directions at once. Uh, and someone is extracting something from you.
But you're not sure. Exactly. And somebody's accusing you of running a false flag operation.
Right. Right. Right. Where do you get your information from? You have an incredible archive
library of, of books. Who are some notable people, resources to look into if people want to learn more
on their own? You know, if you try to look at this stuff on the internet, you're going to find very
noisy space that has a lot of nonsense and conspiracy bullshit and whatever. So who are some of the writers
that have, uh, inspired and informed your views onto these topics?
So I got really interested in like UFOs via a guy named Mark Pilkington, who wrote a book called
Mirage Men, which, um, is a history of UFOs and disinformation. Um, he has a section about
Doty as well. He, he did some work with Doty, um, a while ago. And the argument that he makes
is that from the get go, you, the intelligence agencies have used UFOs as a means through which
to conduct disinformation and psychological operations. So he's been a little bit of like a,
a guide and a mentor to me in terms of thinking about that kind of thing. Um, my friend, Aaron
Gatch in the Bay area runs a thing called the center for tactical magic. And he's been a real guide
in terms of thinking through these questions about magic and what, how do you think about magic as
a medium? How do you think about it as a, as a kind of operational media for lack of a better word.
And so he's been a tremendous resource as well, in terms of thinking about that piece of it.
I can't help, but ask this. And I have, um, people I really admire, you know, Jack Wagner,
Daniel Keller, people who I consider to be experts on UFOs and all sorts of, you know, internet culture
in general. What the hell are they trying to distract us from with all of the UFO stories that
are coming out? Like, I just, I have not been able to solve that. No, but I think that's the,
that's the thing that, that is the problem is that like when, when you articulate it as a,
like a question of distraction, you know, from something else you're, that's a mirror to this
conversation of like, what is real versus what is not. And what if like the distraction itself is the
point, right? It's like, okay, the instinct, it's tempting to say that democracy, liberal democracy is
falling apart. Yeah. And so the government has, uh, orchestrated this psychological operation in
which now we all need to be talking about UFOs and there's all these leaks and whatever news stories
to distract us from the fact that liberal democracy is falling apart. But everybody knows it. It's like,
you can't hide it. It's just like, it's all around us all the time. It's like, I don't feel distracted.
I was like, oh, liberal democracy is falling apart and there's UFOs. Okay. That's, that's it. So
these feel like two sides of the same thing, not like a distraction from one to the other.
Right. Exactly. Exactly. No, I mean, I think that's where like the, you know, a lot of,
I was getting nervous when people bring like the CIA into it, or like even PSYOPs as a military concept
into it because it does assume this opposition between like the government and the people or like,
or truth and falsity. And I don't, you know, in this Trump era, like the chaos is the point.
Right. And the chaos is the possibility of, of imagination at the same time. Um, and so I
I think that those kind of binaristic ways of conceiving of the, the metaphysics of this stuff
aren't, aren't, don't really work. There's something weirder going on.
We've been talking about where, where all these things go, um, and kind of speculating out into
the future, which, you know, for, for me as a young man, as an intellectual, as a creative,
what I valued most about the art world was being able to have conversations like this,
right? Where if you talk to someone who's in any specific discipline, like if they're an AI
researcher where I've talked to people who are AI researchers, uh, if you talk to someone who's from,
you know, a specific field, like they're a, um, a disinformation researcher, they can kind of go so
far, but like art is this one field that doesn't abide by the specific discipline of anything else.
You can have these like really large conversations, you know, and you can leverage aesthetics and tech
and politics and all this stuff. And it's very generative for creating images of the, of the
future, you know, and that was always, that was what drew me to it. I just found it was like the most
interesting place to be. And, uh, it was, yeah, those ideas have shaped my, my life and all of my
decisions, uh, uh, ever after. If we look back a little bit, we look back for, um, the last few
years, there does seem like there's a few things that are not just speculative, but were kind of
decisive moments in which consensus reality started to disintegrate, fall apart, um, rapidly or slowly,
you might be able to interpret that, but do you have a sense of certain milestones that were,
you know, important, important points in the timeline leading up to where we are now? Can
you pinpoint a certain time when reality started to fracture?
The exodus?
It's a long, it's a long process.
Right, right, exactly.
Well, that's a, that's a question. You know, that's a question. It's like, are these things,
you know, I, I ask people sometimes, it's like, what, does this go back to the 1980s? Does it go
to the 1970s? Does it start in 2016? Was it like this under feudalism? Was it, was, is this not even
related to capitalism at all? And this is just a kind of phenomena of human society and culture,
and maybe it's not political economy. You know, let's say we're living in utopia, 2040. We got,
uh, socialism. We're living in communism, just a post-scarcity. We actually achieved it. Utopia
arrives. We're still going to have problems like people having heartbreak and tummy aches and all
sorts of other things. Like, is this a core human problem of consensus reality? Or is this something
that has been exacerbated by the media environment and the political economic circumstances?
You know, this idea of consensus reality has always been synthetic, right? Um, it's, it's always been
manufactured to quote, you know, Chomsky's kind of, you know, important text on this. I guess I would
want to ask the question differently and I don't have an answer for it, but maybe the way that I would
frame the question would be more about when did the, uh, creation of and appeal to affects or, you know,
kind of cognitive responses, what is the history of that sort of eclipsing appeals to reason, right? In, um,
um, in, you know, in cultural discourse at a broad level. And maybe that has never happened. Maybe it,
it, maybe it's always been appeals to emotion and appeals to, you know, cognitive manipulation and
thinking of something like, you know, Nixon Southern strategy is, you know, these kind of over appeals to
racism, for example, historically, which has always been a part of American politics. What I take from
your question is that it feels different now. And like, it feels different to me now too, you know?
I heard it put to me once by a friend that social media was primed to explode. There was going to be
a political explosion, no matter who won and what happened purely because the adoption curve of the
growth of the platforms had saturated to everybody, everybody, everybody was on it. So something was
going to happen. Um, I look at 2012 where we started to personalize, uh, algorithmic news feeds. And I
believe 2011 is when Google started to personalize search results. So, uh, there's been this incremental
shift away. Um, and you know, it's important that fake news didn't start in 2016. Um, but in some ways
we are still living in that, in that period. Um, I think what is particularly interesting now,
I'm trying to wrap a few things together, but there is this kind of political economic subtext
to all of this stuff. I think it's easier to be rational in a social democratic society. I think
it's easy to make a rational decision to go to work every day, to be on the assembly line when you
reliably know that you can bring home money and food and, um, you know, provide a house for your family to,
uh, not have the factory disappear overnight, right? There's like reasonable decisions, but the
environment that we exist in now, the way to get rich or the way to not even get rich, just have upward
mobility is to irrationally gamble on a shit coin in crypto. Yeah. Right. Yeah. And so it's very difficult
to be rational now. Right. Because we live in the society of, you know, finance capitalism to use the
word where enormous amounts of money, life-changing amounts of money move every day based on
whims in very unpredictable fashions, right? This is also where magic starts to come into it again.
Magic becomes a very compelling belief system because if you had the long decimal point that
perfectly predicts everything and you have all these nano trading algorithms, the thing that actually
now decisively moves the value is the very unpredictable nature of it, meaning it's those
random whims that often one very powerful person makes based on how they're feeling that day.
Right. So, um, one might make the argument a little bit, uh, a little bit silly to say,
but it may be the rational thing now to behave irrationally for your own survival. Yeah. Because
if you go and enlist in the workforce, you're going to be in poverty. Yeah. You're going to be in the
Amazon fulfillment center. Yeah. There's not those middle-class jobs that sustained people
during the times where we had a relatively more constrained idea of what consensus reality was,
that, you know, there were people, you know, in my own family, like one parent is a Republican,
one parent is a Democrat, and they agreed on enough stuff that it didn't cause them to become
divorced or break down reality. And now people like, I kicked my uncle out of Thanksgiving dinner,
I don't talk to him anymore because they just have completely irreconcilable worldviews. Yeah. So,
within the framework of finance capitalism, very difficult to be a rational person again.
And these magical belief systems, things like hyperstition, things like generating hype,
um, are actually rewarded through serious amounts of value, serious amounts of value. People believe
a thing is valuable. The power of that belief is transmittable as a meme, and thus it does indeed
have value. Yeah. And you can get real stuff with it. Yeah. Like you take that money out of the,
out of crypto, like it's real money. Yeah. The stock is real money. It doesn't have to be crypto.
The stock that you're holding is real money. Yeah. And you get your, you know, food, clothing,
shelter, all the necessary goods for survival. And if you took that rational approach,
you're peeing in a bucket in Amazon, there's no upward mobility, things are actually getting worse for you.
Um, and so it's just, it's very, it's very difficult and imagining to summarize all of this. Yeah.
Imagining a future in which you can have democracy without anyone in society being rational
is extremely, extremely difficult. Yeah. And all of these trend lines just point towards further and
further hyperbole, irrationality, more siloed worldviews, less consensus reality. Not to mention
that some of the people who are designing these tools, um, may be ideologically opposed to
democracy. Yeah. And they may be attempting to build technical infrastructure. Yeah. Which would
prevent democracy from happening at all. Yeah. Such that we elect an AI dictator, which people will
literally say. Yeah. They will literally fucking say that. Yeah. And it's like, well, democracy has just
been such a problem that we really need to do away with this human decision making. And we'll just have
like a God that determines, you know, where the shortages are. And I hope to God that I'm not the,
you know, the expendable externality in like, who gets to starve this month? You know, I'd really like
to have a democratic input onto that process. But, um, yeah, it's just, it's a very, it's a very ironic
moment where the, um, in the strident techno-libertarianism of a lot of the people building
these tools is to create a more brutal dictator than Stalin could ever hope to be.
So that is the great irony at the end of the end of history with no political model and seemingly
no rationality or hope for democracy left in society. It's a rather dire, dire circumstances.
Yeah. So I love, I love this framing of psyops capitalism. Um, I have just such deep admiration for
your work. You are one of my favorite artists from when I was a student. And even now you're one of my
favorite artists. You've inspired a lot of my stuff. I would not be able to do what I do unless you had
done what you did and my students and do not research. They wouldn't be doing what they're doing
unless you had done it first. Well, the feeling is, is very mutual and I'm like super inspired by the
work that you do, super inspired by the community that you've built, the conversations that you've
been able to facilitate. I wish that that existed when I was younger because I think, you know, you're,
you're doing so much to cultivate a space and, you know, really conduct conversations that honestly,
I see happening less and less in the kind of traditional art world as it becomes subject to these
same kinds of precarity that, that, that you've been outlining in other sectors as well.
Yeah. Yeah. We didn't even really talk, uh, so much about art, which is, you know, how we know each other
and what we share the most. But, uh, we also love to talk about this stuff too, but I would, I would just
absolutely share that sentiment that I guess the things that got me interested in the art world,
um, you know, the art world itself is a moving target and those things have remained constant,
but the art world has kind of shifted to be somewhere else. So, uh, we find ourselves doing
this kind of conversation and I couldn't think of a better person to be in conversation with. So,
Trevor, thank you so much for coming on the podcast. It's just a wonderful experience.
Thank you so much, Josh. Really awesome to talk to you as always.
