Welcome, everyone, to Voices with Raveke.
I'm joined by and with my good friend, Jonathan Pajot, whose work on the symbolic world deeply
resonates with a lot of what I've been doing work on, and as many of you know don't know,
and I find Jonathan brilliantly insightful, and his reflections on the symbolic aspects
of existence and his ability to reshine and refurbish these stories so that they can shine
for us again is often, you know, it sort of catches you, it's deeply impressive.
So thank you, Jonathan, for coming.
Oh, it's my pleasure.
I always enjoy talking with you, you know, ever since I discovered your work and kind
of discovered the language which you're developing also to talk about these subjects.
It's been really helpful to me.
I find myself thinking in the categories that you are bringing forth and especially speaking
to kind of a secular audience or also convincing Christians that the words they use have meaning,
you know, because sometimes we have this kind of internal language and it stops to actually
be meaningful in the world and it just becomes like a kind of magical language.
So I've been using your expressions on attention, the idea of relevant realization, all of these
expressions have been good to help people re-see things in a different frame so that
they understand them.
So I really appreciate our discussions for sure.
Well, thank you for saying that, Jonathan.
I aspire to this being true, that above and beyond trying to, you know, convince or persuade
people about my specific claims, truth claims, theoretical claims, proposals, practical endeavors,
etc.
I aspire that I do afford, you know, a vocabulary and a grammar for people that helps them to
clarify and develop their thinking.
I mean, that's the art, that for me, that's the way in which I try to enact the Socratic
ideal of being the midwife, right, the midwife for other people.
So thank you for saying that, that means a lot to me.
So what I wanted to start off specifically talking about, you released two excellent
videos, and I'll put the links to them in the description of this video.
One was on, I won't get the actual verbatim name, one was on sort of the religious nature
of a lot of the demonstrations that are happening around that were sort of galvanized into existence
by the death of George Floyd.
And then you did a follow-up, they were sort of like part one and part two, one on the
iconoclasm, the destruction of images, the pulling down of statues.
And one of the things you did was you put your finger on a huge important aspect of this
that is being completely ignored in the mainstream media, but I think is of vital importance.
As has happened in the past between you and I, I, very convergent, I was coming to very
similar concerns and reflections.
And I'd said some things early on about how COVID was going to accelerate the meaning
crisis and cause just a mental health tsunami, and you'd see a proliferation of conspiracy
theory thinking, you'd see purity code behavior, human beings are going to respond in a fashion
to this invisible ubiquitous threat that's causing them to isolate.
And as you, I liked your invocation of the symbolic idea of fasting for most of their
connections.
And then I saw all of that.
And then when the protests began, I had, so I had a reaction that made me sort of refuse
myself from committing, commenting on that publicly.
Part of it was a concern that what you said in your first video of just, you know, saying
something that would be premature polarizing, it was difficult to say anything that was
going to be heard with, that had any kind of nuance or reflection to it.
So part of it was just that kind of caution.
But there was a deeper issue for me.
I was very concerned, and I, I talked to my close friend about this, that I would fall
into a kind of self deceptive bias when I tried to talk about any of this.
So give me a moment, please, I don't mean to trespass on your patients, but I wanted,
in order to try and articulate this, and this has helped me upon reflection, I wanted to
invoke Weber's distinction between the manifest and the latent function.
So to give you a classic example, you know, Weber talked about the manifest, the manifest
function of the bureaucracy is to facilitate, you know, information traveling upward and
decision and struggling downward, and that's its manifest function, but it has all kinds
of latent functions.
It has the latent function of allowing people to diffuse responsibility and shift blame
on to others.
And Kafka, of course, brought this into high art.
He showed us how the latent function can, you know, put us into a tragic situation because
our commitment to the manifest function binds us in a tragic fashion to the latent function.
That can be antithetical to it in, in, in kind of a profound way.
And so I was, I was, I'm watching this and, and I, and I'm saying, well, yeah, that, that's
horrible and racism is a horrible thing and what we're seeing happening here.
And there's definitely, I know this because, you know, what's happened since, you know,
9-11 in the Patriot Act, there's been the militarization of the police.
And that has been a very dangerous thing, right?
And I know there's, there's, there's nasty tricks happening.
There's voter suppression happening and all kinds of bad things.
And people are feeling, I think legitimately manipulated and disenfranchised in powerful
ways.
And this, and this is meshing in ways that we're all finding it hard to understand with
a history that has disadvantaged certain groups of people.
And all of this is going on and I'm saying, yes, these are issues that all get addressed.
So my, I don't mean to sound Freudian here, but my sort of conscious explicit awareness
is going, yes, yes, yes.
But I'm having this negative visceral reaction to all of this and I'm trying to go, what's
going on?
And at first I'm, oh, you know, I'm making all these things and I, and I, and I can
feel it.
I'm in the grip of something.
And so I'm talking about this with my friends and I'm reflecting on it and, you know, journaling
about it and everything.
And I'm coming to realize, oh, oh, and Jonathan, you know that I respect your allegiance to
Christianity.
I'm talking about me here.
Okay.
So I said, oh, this reminds, I'm back in my fundamentalist church and I'm the 10 year
old again.
And I'm being traumatized by a puritanical form of Protestantism.
I'm being told that I have an original sin that I, not because of any act that I committed,
but that is just because of how I was born.
And that there's an aspect of this that is unforgivable, no matter what I do.
And everything I try to do to overcome this just makes it that much worse.
And that I need, I need to be absolutely contrite and guilty until some external obscure authority
will finally pronounce me, you know, you know, saved or whatever.
And that, and then what this, what this brings with it, you know, is bonfires.
And I mean, I'm not, I'm not being hyperbolic, Jonathan.
I'm talking about gathering behind the church and putting the rock and roll albums and the
books into a thing and lighting it on fire.
Like can you imagine?
Oh yeah.
I've been through that too.
I grew up with that kind of stuff as well.
Okay.
And so, and, and, and so I'm realizing that the latent functionality of this is so reminiscent
of kind, of a kind of puritanical fundamentalist Protestantism, and again, I was noticing the
same things you're noticing, you know, the acts of contrition, the throwing down of the
stones in the high places, like from the Old Testament, right, where the prophets are always
doing that, right, the kneeling and the confessions and the statement that there's nothing I can
do about it other than feel guilty.
I was noticing how this is, was tremendously religious.
And that, that, as I said to others, that upbringing, like that upbringing traumatized
me.
I mean, I remember, I remember going to the minister and the church with my mother when
I, because I read the Bible regularly, daily, and, and I came across the passage in the
New Testament about the unforgivable sin.
Oh yeah.
Oh, and this just, I fell into, I mean, Cartesian skepticism was nothing compared to the well
I fell into about, well, how do I know what it is?
And how do, and how, like, did I just do it?
And if it's unforgivable, I'm now doomed.
I'm doomed, right?
And that feeling of being doomed and trapped and, and, and, you know, and I went to him
and I want, what I wanted was a clear definition of what it was.
And, and, and I got, I just got, you know, the usual, you need to have faith and, and
it was very unhealthy.
And so I, and so I was realizing, oh, John, you better keep your mouth closed about, because
even if you want to speak about this, this is just going to come flowing through you
because, and it's, and you're going to, it's a, because you have an incredible bias.
It's very hard for you to see this in a positive light, even though sort of intellectually
you can understand these important things that we've already mentioned, you know, the
rate, the, the, the racist history, you know, the, the, the, the subversive disenfranchisement
of people, right, the militarization of the police, all of these things are real and they
need to be addressed.
But, but I realized if I try to say anything about this, my chances of speaking in a way
that I think is clear, we're like going to be seriously undermined.
So I just sort of held back, but then I saw your videos.
And I thought, well, maybe I, maybe with Jonathan's help, I can talk about this.
Sorry, I don't intend this to be a therapy session.
That's not what's going on here.
I want to be really, I want to be really open with you about where I'm coming from.
And I think your video actually points out that this tension, well, let me, I might be
too bold. It suggested to me that this tension that I'm finding in myself is not exclusive
to me, that I, I sensed in you, not to the degree I'm talking about, but also a tension
between, you know, what this might be sort of at a manifest level, and then this unacknowledged
latent function of religiousness, and then you have some criticisms, at least implicit
of this, you had towards the end, you, you warned of danger in the, in the first video,
because the, the, the religion that does not know that it's a religion is not oriented
towards the ultimate. And so there's like a, like a critique coming like via, like, or
similar to what Tillich would meant. You're, it's, it's ultimately, it's an idolatrous for
all of its bringing down of images. It's ultimately an idolatrous religion. And then I was thinking
about this, I was thinking about how, you know, that politics is, is, has in many ways taken
over the domain of religion. I don't think well, it's drenched the 20th century in blood.
But I know that, well, there's sort of two, because religions are supposed to have, like
you said, there's supposed to be moments of communitas and transformation. And I'm trying
to think, well, what are, what are the only rituals left to politics? Well, there seem
to be two. And I was noted how they seem to split between the right and the left. There's
the demonstration of the protest or the rally. And the right likes the rally and the left
likes the demonstration protest. And then I'm thinking, and both of these, we have good
historical evidence, don't bring about the new man, the new person, the transformation
of human beings. And, you know, and all of the revolutions left then, right, the French
Revolution, et cetera, onward, show that it doesn't bring about that, although there
is often religious goal within the French Revolution, and, you know, they worshiping
the goddess of reason and all that stuff, right? It doesn't actually bring about the
promised transformation that it is groping towards. And so I was thinking that, is it
possible to talk about this sort of in terms that are kind of metapolitical about the latent
functionality of the religion, and at that level, legitimately criticize it without thereby
implying that we think, well, I'll speak on my behalf, not yours, without thereby implying
that I think that we shouldn't do something about militarization of the police, the subversive
suppression of voting and disenfranchisement of people, and then how that has often allied
itself with historical factors that are ongoing of racism, et cetera. That's what I'm proposing
to. Is it possible? And I'd like to try and explore that with you. But that's sort of
the frame I want to set up.
Yeah, I think for sure there's, I think there are a lot of things to deal with, and what you said, a
lot of things to kind of unpack at different levels. I think that maybe we can kind of separate
them in the in different parts so that we don't get completely jumbled. One is to look at the
possible reinterpretation of your experience, I'd say, or the notion of the original sin, then
the idea of Adam or the fall of Adam, what that can mean, and how we can reinterpret that in a
manner which is more useful than your traumatized youth. And I understand because I went through all
the stuff you dealt with, I went through the same. And even the description of like the idea of
blaspheming the Holy Spirit and everybody wondering, like, did I blaspheme the Holy Spirit? You
know, all of that, I understand. But I think there are ways to reappropriate the stories, those
stories. And I think we appropriate is I also believe one of the reasons why I went towards
orthodoxy is because they have a different vision of the fall of Adam, one which I think it has a
healthier balance. So that's one. And then the other is then looking also at the way in which these
protests or COVID and the protests together kind of just exploded into a kind of weird catharsis. And
what that means and what it's kind of looking towards. And so sadly, the third part, which would
be like how to get out of this kind of this bind that we're in is the one which I don't know.
Like I really, a lot of people ask me, so what should we do? And I'm looking around. And I think I
don't know what to do, except I don't know what to do socially. Like I think I know what to do
personally. But I don't think I know what the societal solution is. So maybe that one will be
harder. Well, but I do want to talk about that because I've been talking about that with other
people as well. So, but I'm happy with your proposal. But like I said, I'd like to put it, like
I said, into the way in which what's happening, it has, you know, at the level of the latent
functions, there's, well, you said it, I want to use your words, there's something dangerous
happening in this as well. And I want to explicate and draw that out. I'm happy to hear your
revisions. And so I don't know what to call it. Let's say revisioning rather than revision. Yeah,
of these, of these stories. And then, but if you could put that into dialogue with, because, okay,
let me, let me instead of making a statement, let me make, ask a question that's kind of a
request. I see in, you know, I see an analog to a strong analog in this movement to that version
of original sin that I was brought up with. And let's remember that the word Protestant means
those who protest. I mean, right there. And I was brought up in a church where, you know, protesting
and constantly declaring what was evil, and what should be burnt or, you know, and that that was
that was daily, the kind of practice. So do you think that I'm incorrect in saying that the version
of original sin, whether or not it's the right version, I'm going to give you space to talk about
that. But do you think that that that, you know, maybe overly Augustinian version of original
sin is what's at play in this movement right now? Am I incorrect about that?
No, I think you're definitely right. I think you're definitely right. One of the, and I think
it's something that we've seen before, in the sense that maybe an inverted version of what we've
seen before in terms of like racialized vision of the world in the past, which is that we've taken
the notion of original sin, and we've brought it down into biology, which is the scariest thing
that can happen because it actually is inevitable. Like it actually does become inevitable because
it's related. It's linked in a, not in a really scientific way at all, but in a mythological
way, it's still brought into a term which is using language of kind of biological identity or
categories, which are material categories. And so the idea of this racialized guilt, or, you know,
was there in kind of 17th century racism, like kind of neo Darwinism, kind of social Darwinist
racism, this idea that, that certain races were inferior by their own biology and therefore were
made to be slaves or were made to be the lower. And now we're seeing a kind of weird reversal of
that, where we're saying to be a certain race is in itself to be the oppressor, like to be, to be
white, is to be guilty of the, the sin of the revolutionary thinking. Like, it's kind of like,
it's, it's not completely original sin. It's, it's like the end of the revolutionary trend in, in
thinking, right, the French revolution, the Marxist revolutions. And now we've come to kind of the
end of it, where we're actually bringing it into almost a biological reality, where the guilt of the
oppressor is a racial guilt. And it's, and that's, that's, so that, so like you said, it does relate
to original sin, because it means that as someone who has that identity, whether it's actually
legitimate, scientifically or not, it doesn't matter, they're still framed in those categories. As
someone who has that identity, I have no way out. Like I have no way out, except for two things,
which are people are doing, which is to self-flagellate and to scapegoat. That is to put myself
on the, to put myself on the side of find someone guiltier than me and yell at him and tell him that
he has to be canceled and he has to be excluded from society. The only, the only two solutions.
Yeah. And that, like I said, I went through periods where the church I was in would be
driven to bits by exactly that process repeatedly in cycles again and again and again. And when I
sort of, when I sort of woke up to that, I was like, Whoa, this is like, like, when I started
reading some literature and I realized that the literature like showed me what human beings
could be other than this, that was like, so.
But you're right. In the Protestant sense, like if you think of Protestant sex and you notice both
the Puritanist kind of self-flagellation of complete depravity, and then the systematic notion
that all of a sudden, the group I'm in is not pure enough. They're not close enough to the truth. They're
not, and then removing myself with a little, a smaller group, and then condemning those on the
outside as being, as it's like an acceleration. It's always been there. It's there in every, every
structure. Like we can talk about that, but there's an acceleration of it in the kind of
fragmentation of Protestantism. And we see it in intersectionality to an extent which becomes
completely absurd where, you know, at some point it's so obscure that most like regular people don't
even know what you're talking about when trans exclusive this and then trans inclusive. And we
don't, most people are like, I don't understand. And then it's, there's smaller and smaller
identities which are excommunicating other identities and you don't know what's going on.
Yeah. So I mean, that, to my mind, that is the meaning crisis on steroids or methamphetamine or
something. So what, and I think given the deeply deleterious effects which we're seeing, you and
I were talking just before we hit the record about, you know, we're seeing, you know,
you know, people are like, they're people that we're normally sort of very sane, like in our
personal relationships are moving more towards the fringe and they're filled with anxiety and
they're describing their experiences surreal. I think, you know, the deleterious facts of the
meeting crisis are being exacerbated by COVID and then perhaps by certain latent aspects of this.
But I wanted to give you the opportunity to make good on your promise that there's an alternative
way, there's an alternative way. And I mean, I'm interested in this both philosophically
and personally. I typically try not to get too personal in these conversations, but this one
has to be different for the reasons I've already articulated. And I'm putting my trust in you
about this. So that there's an alternative way of conceiving of the myth of original sin. And you
know, I use that word in not in a pejorative fashion. But and so what do you, what is that
alternative understanding to your mind? So the way to understand it is to clearly differentiate
between sin and death. They're related, but they're they're different. And so in scripture,
it says the wages of sin is death, right? And there's an idea that even in the in the scripture,
it never says that we inherit the sin of Adam, it says that that we, because of Adam's sin, we are,
we are in death, like we are in the, in the, in the, in, we are living in a world of death.
And that's really the best way to, to understand it, which is that sin causes death. So you,
you have a purpose, you miss the mark. And that's, that's what death is. And so there's a,
there's a brokenness that you break the system breaks down as you miss the mark. And this is
happens at every level of reality, whether it's in your own life or in society or, or entirety of
the world. When, when something misses the mark, then there's a breakdown, which happens. Now we,
we inherit the breakdown of that, which is before us, right? We inherit death. So we are born in
families that have missed the mark. We are born of parents that have missed the mark. We are born
of systems that have missed the mark. And so because of that, we, we live in a world which
has an aspect of it, which is broken. We still have the aspiration of hitting the mark. And that's,
that's what kind of guides us and makes us want to live, but we have to live with the consequences
of that, of that, of that miss. And the difficulty is that when you're in a world of death, that is,
when you inherit the consequence of sin, so when your parents miss the mark, and they will, and we
know they do, you inherit that. And it makes it more difficult for you to hit the mark because you
have all the baggage which comes and you have inherited the, the, the patterns of being that
will make that worse, right? Which will, which will increase the brokenness, which will tend to
fragment. Okay. And so that's the manner in which we need to understand original sin. That's what
it is. It's the inheritance of brokenness. So, so that, and I hope, I hope you take this as a helpful
thing. That to me reminds me of, you know, certain interpretations of the Buddhist notion of karma,
that there are these patterns at work, and, and we, and we inherit them, and they affect our
behavior, and they cause suffering. And the way I sort of understood this, at least psychologically
and existentially is, as you said, you know, we, we pick up from others, our parents, our friends,
and our culture, we pick up, and that, you know, here's where historical racism does matter, right?
We pick up patterns that are shaping us and moving us in ways that are detrimental to our
aspirations. Is that, is that a fair? Yeah, exactly. Yeah. But the idea is, the idea is,
of course, the very desire, the very aspiration that is the very possibility we have of conceiving
the good, and of seeing the point that we're aiming at, right, of, of seeing it in our view and,
and moving towards it, right, is, is the very, how can I say this, is the reminder that we are not,
that we don't fit in this broken world, that we are, that we are, we find dissatisfaction in the
brokenness. And so that's what causes our suffering. But it's also what, what can ultimately cause our
hope, because we see, we can see that we're not made, like there's something in us which
wants more than this brokenness and this, this world of death. There's something in us which is,
which can see that which we can aim towards, and which is the good, of course. And so that is really
the, and so what, let's say what Christianity shows us, and like what Christ shows us, is that
the manner to reach the, the manner to reach the, the, the aim in the brokenness is to a certain
extent embrace death. And that's really the, that's the hardest thing is to embrace death consciously,
embrace the, the brokenness consciously. And therefore we're, we don't become slaves of that
brokenness, right, is to see your sins, to see the place where you miss the mark, instead of just
blaming your parents, because that's what you will want to do, right? You want to blame your parents,
you want to blame the system, and you're right to, because the system is broken. Your parents are
broken. Everything, there's an aspect of everything that's given to you, which is broken, not fully,
but there is an aspect of it, which is broken. And the solution is to, is to actually rather see
your own death, the places in you that you're, that you're dead and recapture the, the vision,
right, recapture the, the aim. So this, this brings me to a central question that I have
about this. Thank you for that. I think that was very helpful. So let's shift the discussion
onto mortality then. And the interesting thing, of course, and you're aware of this, I know,
in the Greek world is mortality has a, and Heidegger developed this a lot, it has a much more
encompassing notion to it. And then that'll help lead me to my question to you. You know, because
one of the great sins, and I think this is the right word in the Greek world is hubris, right,
which is to, in some sense, forget your mortality, right, and to think that you can, that, that you
can be a God. And, you know, and this is captured in great literature, you know, Conrad's Heart of
Darkness, which of course is now a contentious work, but nevertheless, Kurtz's big sin is hubris,
right? He forgets. And Marlowe's, Marlowe's heroism is he commits himself to his humanity,
that he will preserve his mortality. And I've been talking to my son about this, because,
you know, he lives with me now, partially because of COVID. And, you know, I've been exposing him to
certain ideas, and he's going, but, you know, but I want certainty. And I'm saying, well,
you, yeah, but you can't, part of what being, you know, be embracing your mortality is to
realize that no matter how good your idea might be, you're ultimately a fallible human being,
you're finite. And he was like, but I don't like this. And I said, but your mortality isn't just,
right? And you'll see how this connects to what you said in a second. Your mortality isn't the fact,
you know, like in Tolstoy's Ivan Illich. Ivan Illich knew he was going to die, right? It's not,
it's not that. Your mortality is that, like you said, in some fundamental way, you know, we are
finite, we are broken, we are not gods. So, and I'm seeing this in my discussion with him, how do
you, how do you, because I'm trying to work this with him as a father, getting people to embrace
their mortality is good, because it prevents inflation, it prevents hubris, it prevents, I
suppose it would prevent blasphemy too, from a Christian perspective. And as you said, it helps
people to not, not to fall into the error of, by criticizing others, I implicitly remove myself
from that criticism, right? I see all of that. How do we do that without the, without traumatizing them?
I'm sorry, I'm sorry, that was a bit of a garden path. No, no, I, I think there, I think there has
to be, look, I'm sorry that I'm going to say this, but I think that trauma is part of the
experience, like I think that death is, we don't want to be cruel, but we don't want to be cruel,
is what I'm saying. No, no, right. No, I understand, but death is, death is, is traumatic, like there
is a trauma in death. And so we need, like the, the church fathers and the, the ascetics,
they always say two things, they say, remember God and remember death. Like those are the two
things you need to remember. I always kind of joke around and say, you know, that's the, the
Christian version of, of like mindfulness, you know, it's like remember God, remember death, right?
And so the idea is that if you, if you are, if you kind of remain in your death,
that like you said, you avoid all the problems that you talked about. And the, the strange paradox
in Christianity is that by doing that, you actually do become God.
Yes. Like you, you, you actually do become deified ultimately if you do those two things, right?
But, but it's a non-inflationary. Exactly. And that's the kind of the paradox of,
it's the, the paradox of, of, of creation and the paradox of, of the Garden of Eden, which is that
if Adam had submitted to the will of God and not eaten of the fruit of the tree,
then God would have given him the fruit of the tree. That's the, that's the tradition, right?
That's what many saints have said. And not only that, but that, that would have been his access
to the tree of life, which would have been perfect communion with the divine. And so
it is in humility that we actually reach the highest.
Yes. It's interesting. I just read this morning, when I was doing my lecture,
Divina, a Rilke's passage where he talks about, we throw a ball into the infinite,
and then it returns to us differently. It returns to us heavier. And it's only in that,
in, in, in having done that, that we actually get to feel the true weight of things.
And it sounds like you're saying something very analogous to that.
So how do we avoid the trauma? All I can say is the idea is obviously to place the trauma
ultimately to place it in Christ. Like the ultimate trauma, right, is, is communion. Like
that's the ultimate trauma. If you really take communion seriously, you are engaging in a
traumatic experience. You are eating the flesh and blood of the God man. Like you are, you are
at the foot of horror. Like, you know, you talk about horror a lot in your, in your, in your,
in your lectures. And I, one of the things I do want to bring up to you is that that is why
communion, one of the aspects of communion is to bring you into that horror in a manner which
will, which will save you and not destroy you, right? In a manner in which you can integrate it
in, that it's both a participation in horror and a communion of love at the same time in a
paradoxal way. Yeah. I mean, well, maybe we can talk about this at some point. I mean, I do think
the other sacred brings in simultaneously the symbol on, right? The horrific, the horrifying
function and the homing function in a profound way. And that, that goes back to, so, I mean,
there's two things I want to say. One is like, I'm trying to, but there's a, there's a notion of
mortality and isn't it in the symbolism of carrying your cross that's analogous to the
Buddhist notion that mortality isn't just death, but that the idea that moment by moment, I'm dying.
There's, there's little deaths all the time. And that if I try to avoid that, if I try to
get some kind of permanent hold on things, I'm, I'm, I'm just going to, I'm going to cut myself
on that. And then I'm going to cut other people. It's, again, is that, is that a, is that a
correct analogy? Yeah, of course. Yeah. Like if you look at, if you look at the prayer of Jesus,
the, the basic mystical prayer of the church, it has two, it has two parts, right? It says,
it has an invocation. It says, Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God, have mercy on me as center. And so
it's like, there's this invocation and this remembrance of my own brokenness, remembrance
of my own incapacity. And so those two movements simultaneously, they're the ones that will,
and it's, and it's, it's also, and because I think one of the problems of the, of the trauma
of the Protestant is to a certain extent, the idea that it's weird, like the idea that you
should be pure, right? That you should be, but you can't. And so it's like, what, then what,
what do you do, right? You just remain in this strange broken, broken self. But if you rather
see it as this, this necessary part of being a human person and moving towards the good, then
it, then it's not as traumatic because you, you will then see that even the saints lived in,
you know, in the most difficult temptations that the saints were struggling with their passions,
you know, and those who reached the highest had the same frustrations you did. Like they, no one
pretends to be, if you, there isn't like the holier, the person that's holier than now. And
that kind of just, if you read the lives of the saints, you see the story of broken people who
their whole life struggle with thoughts and with temptations, you know, and are delivered by God.
But it's like, okay, if they struggled, so for 30 years, you know, you read, you read crazy stories
of the saints where it's like, for 40 years, he struggled with the thought of, of fornication.
And it's like, would he struggle with that for 40 years? He actually struggled actively with that
for 40 years. Okay, so I need to stop complaining because seriously, I'm, there's no way that I'm
doing that. So, Johan talks about this in connection with Plato and Socrates, he talks about it in
terms of, he has a book called, Finite Transcendence, where he said that, but Theta was always
trying to keep this tension alive between the relationship to transcendence and the acceptance
of our finitude, of our mortality. And so I'm wondering then, if there is something like
a feature of wisdom, I know you have your particular Christian commitments, and I'm not
trying to trespass on those, but you're also not, you're not, you're not being offended,
which I thank you for when I make these connections to other, other things, you find them, I think,
valuable, at least in discussion, but make, there seems to be a feature of wisdom, which is this
kind of tonus between, right, the aspiration in transcendence, and then the deep acceptance
of our humanity and our mortality, and keeping them always together is, and there's a finesse to
that, there's a dynamic shift, I can't give you a rule or a recipe for doing that, it's an ongoing,
ever-evolving capacity, would you, would you, would you think that? Yeah, it's a motive, it's a motive
being, it's a way of being, which is what will kind of hold those two things together, and I think
your image of wisdom is particularly good in the sense that wisdom, at least in Scripture, at
in the Bible, the way that wisdom is described, seems to really be the capacity for those,
for, let's say, the, the, the principles or the ideals to be united with the particular,
like that seems to be, you know, it's like, the wisdom always comes as like advice on how to,
you know, how to find the good woman, or how to, how to live your life, how to deal with money,
like that's how wisdom comes, but what it's, it's patterning something which is, which is above,
you know. Yeah, Aristotle has that with Sophia and fromesis being brought together, right? Sophia is
your grasping of these universal and profound principles, and then fromesis is how do you
make them contextually relevant in a contextually sensitive manner. So this now brings me back around
then. It sounds like this, this deeper reflection on, well, let's use the word sin for now, this
deeper reflection on sin, you know, affords us what might be missing in what we're seeing
in the demonstration, that, that, and this, this is part of my concern, that you talk about the,
the, you know, inclusion as the sole value. I talked about something similar in that,
that justice is the sole virtue and a very truncated sense of justice. The Greek sense of
justice was always simultaneously external with others and internal with oneself. That's really
clear. And what we have is a completely, we get none, we get a reduction of all the virtues to
justice and then just the, the social aspect of justice, hence the name, social justice.
Yeah, we're not sure exactly what, what that justice entails in terms of its particular,
like how it's going to manifest. Well, and that goes to the point I want to make, because
I, I, I, I have a concern that we are losing the other virtues. I mean, the Greeks had at
least the cardinal four, and then the Christians had the next, the sacred three. And so we at
least had, we at least have seven, we should be talking about, right? We at least have seven,
we should be talking about. And we were just talking about one, one of the ones that's considered
something like a meta virtue, which is wisdom. You know, I shared the, what I think one interpretation
of Socrates, that Socrates saw that each virtue was a way of being wise in a particular situation.
The virtues aren't separate things, particular ways of enacting. And so to me, if that argument is
good, and I think it's a good argument, talking about justice without having concern for wisdom
seems to me to be like really, really almost oxymoronic. It seems to be
self-contradictory, self-undermining. And that's a very dangerous kind of thing to be for human
beings to be embracing, embracing, committing yourself deeply to something that is self-undermining
in its foundations is a very problematic thing to do. What do you think about that?
No, I totally agree. And that's why it's one of the reasons, because the idea of the idea of justice,
it seems to have something to do with equality, although it's ill-defined as well. Like,
what exactly do we mean by equality and what, because obviously equality is a strange term,
because you need a, you need a category to declare equality, because you can't have equality in
everything, because then everything would just be the same. So equality is a complicated term,
and so it seems like, you know, it's like, what is it, the intersectional, it's like the diversity,
equity, inclusion, right? That's the, those are the three kind of values that kind of mesh together
in this idea of justice. And so the difficulty is, of course, that the, like the revolutionary
aspect of it is what you also talk about in the sense of it undermining itself,
it ends up eating itself, and it ends up eating itself by its very mechanism, which is that
I hate to say it this way, but it's, it's, it's inevitable to come to the fact that there is no
such thing as equality, right? In terms of actual, totally equality, right? Because it does, what,
what does it mean? Like, everybody's smarter, stupider than others, some are taller, some are
shorter, you know, and, and, and it, it's individually true, and it's true in different
categories and different cities, and it's like, there's difference, you know, you can't have
equality. And so this like weird desire for equality ends up being, ends up being a kind of
power play, it seems, not, not really a desire for equality, but a desire for power.
So, so I wonder if there's something going on here, kind of displacement, because,
and this, this is going to be really, you have to move very carefully here.
So, so I think what people want to do, sorry, that sounds pompous, but it's hard to talk.
It seems, it seems plausible to me to propose that what people want to do is reduce
the suffering of pain and distress. And then they, and then they, they have, they're making a claim
that most suffering or distress, or maybe all, right, is caused by inequality. And of course,
there is truth to that. Yeah. What we, you know, when resources are not being distributed as fairly
as they can, and fairness is not the same thing as equality, this is part of the problem, right,
because justice is also supposed to be about fairness, not just about equality.
And so when we do cause, we cause unnecessary suffering. So, so, so let me try and give you
a bit of a sprite riff on this. I see the left as really sensitive to the fact that human beings
are, I'll use a Greek term here, but you'll find a Christian analog, I'm sure, that human beings
are really subject to fate, that there is just shitty things that happen to human beings because
they're finite and they're limited, and the world is an overwhelming machine and there's
historical forces and material forces, you know, you might even say powers and principalities that
work, right? And people are just subject, right? And that we have to do, and that people therefore
deserve our aid, even if they haven't earned it. Because if we don't do that, we are, and this is
like the aspect of sin again, we're ignoring the fact that we are finite and we are subject to
forces beyond our control. The left gets that, and I think the right tends to forget that,
and that's why the right often comes off as cruel. But what the left forgets is what the right is,
no matter how, you know, how haphazardly they do it and stupidly they do it, is the right tries to
remind people that even though we are subject to fate and people should be aided beyond what
they deserve or have earned, right? Human beings are nevertheless also responsible. They need to
cultivate virtue, because every human being is beset by self-deception. And the only person that
can get out of self-deception, I can't get you out of your own self-deception. I can give you
guides, but you have to go through it. Like you have to go through it. I can't do that for you,
right? So to put it in a slogan, you know, the left remembers fate and forgets virtue and the
right remembers virtue and forgets fate. And so what I'm trying to get at is how could we change
this discussion about justice so that we could put it back into what it was supposed to be paired with,
which was suffraging, right? We pursued the external justice of trying to reduce the suffering of
others that are caused by history and fate has to always be counterbalanced by Sopherson,
the cultivation of the inner justice of virtue. And for the Greeks, it was axiomatic
that you had to talk about those two things together. Somehow we have gotten to the point
where we only talk about one side of this. And I find that also a very lopsided thing. Sorry,
that was a long thing to say, but you're a deep thinker. I want to give you a lot to wrestle with.
Yeah. Well, it seems like the way that at least when I look at the way that things happen in the
Bible and kind of the way that emphasis that Christianity has put on it is obviously, Christianity
is obviously very, very preoccupied with the poor, preoccupied with the poor in the broadest way you
can interpret that. And those that have less, those that have little, whether it's, you know,
whether it's the poor in terms of their own, let's say spiritual poor, or it's poor even
physically in terms of their material poor, or it's the sick, or it's those that have no recourse,
like the widow and the orphan. This is something that Christianity is extremely concerned about.
But the way that Christianity seems to have concerned itself about it mostly is to ask
those who have to give, to put responsibility on those who have to care for those
who need to be cared for, rather than tell those who are lacking to go get theirs,
right? To take it from those who have it. And that's really the difference between
the revolutionary mindset and the Christian mindset. And some people might say, well, why
why can't it happen? Like why can't those that have less just take, right? Take it back.
And the reason is because, the reason is very practical reason. It's because it's a
self-defeating pattern. The pattern which will, which will destroy itself because there's always
someone who has less than you. And there's always someone who will be there to take from you, even
though you think you are the one, you're the one who has less. And so you take from that one above
you, but there's always someone below you who has less than you and will take from you. And
as soon as you take from that one above you, the power especially, then you become the one who is
now in the, you know, who's going to be shot. Like the story of Robespierre is obviously the
most classic example of that happening. And so that seems to be the way that Christianity deals
with it. And there are consequences if you don't. And the consequences need to be kind of put in
the right position. The way I kind of say it is, I don't excuse the peasants for killing the king,
right? But I still think it's partly the king's fault, right? It's still, it's still because
the king didn't care for the peasants that the peasants ended up killing him. And I'm not justifying
the peasants actions, but I am saying that if you don't care for the poor, at some point,
it's going to happen. Like the, the, the people will come and take theirs if you don't care for
them, but it's not morally justified that they do. I don't know if that makes sense.
No, it does. I get what you're saying. But what I was, what I was trying to, well, maybe this
is the way of bringing it back. Like, I'm trying to get to this notion that isn't just about equality
or even equity. I'm trying, like, yeah, you know, you're right. Jesus does,
both, you see Jesus and the Buddha, both. And they, what's interesting is they both do this.
They both criticize equally something like cruelty and something like hypocrisy, right? And so
what I'm saying is the, the, what we're trying to bring in here as we're trying to encompass
the nature of human beings is that the notion of social justice, especially if it becomes
just the pursuit of equality, does not have the machinery to deal with it. Jesus and the Buddha
are neither left nor right. Like, it doesn't make sense to talk, right? Yeah, exactly.
It doesn't make sense at all. Exactly. Right. And so the point is, in a very profound way,
it's not that they're non-political, but they're, if you'll allow me, they're metapolitical. Oh,
yeah. Right. They're trying to get at what, what are the values or the virtues people should be
aspiring to that are the most responsible, and I mean both senses of the word responsible,
to human nature, right? That's what I see them doing. And that's what I'm not seeing in this
movement. I'm not seeing the wisdom of, you know, like we said, of trying to balance these
things together of getting a deep understanding of human nature. I'm, I'm hearing a very, very
superficial theory about human nature and human history and human culture. And, and, and I don't
think that the version of justice, justice is, what really concerns me is this version of justice,
it sounds so easy. And, and that means, that to me means it's got to be wrong, because I mean,
what I get from all the great philosophers is justice, real justice. I mean, John Rawls writes
this huge book, right? Like real justice is hard. It's really hard because human beings
are so incredibly complex. And they have, as we've been talking about here, these, you know,
these opposing forces and polls at work in them. That was a point I was trying to make, sorry.
You're totally right. And I think that, like, if you look at this, if you look at how Christ deals
with it, it's interesting, because, you know, we talked about responsibility. And you can see that
in, you can see the way that Christ talks about, like he talks to the Pharisees, and he says you're
a bunch of hypocrites. And he, he talks to woe to the rich, if you don't care for the poor,
and woe to, you know, and blessed are those who are poor for they will receive and all of this,
like there's all this and this, but he also has several parables where he talks about the poor,
who don't care for what they have, and the consequences of that. Like he also has that he
also has the parable of the talents where he talks about the servant who receives something and doesn't
make it fruitful and therefore has to face the consequences of not making fruitful that's what
she has. And so Christ talks of talks at all levels at the same time. You know, I always say, like
you said, he's metapolitical. He's a judge and a victim. He's the king and the servant. He's all
these things at the same time, in a very paradoxal way. And so he kind of transcends politics. And
it's interesting to watch politicians, the politically minded, because they see in Christ
a kind of weird mirror of themselves. So the people on the left see Christ as a kind of revolutionary
figure. And the people on the right see Christ as a get your act together type figure. And it's like,
well, you know what, there's neither of those really. Yeah, I think that was very well said,
Jonathan. So what to do with this, what to do with this, this weird, the way that I think the way
to understand it, and you know, you talked a little bit in our before our conversation started
about the inevitability of religio. And I think that's really the way that's exactly where I
wanted to go. This whole discussion seems to be pointing, right? It's making a very, I think,
plausible argument about the inevitability of religio, the unavoidability of religio in
human endeavor. And you made, and human existence, and you made this point, and I wanted to give
you the opportunity to expand on it. You made a point of criticizing the new atheists, you know,
in how they were sort of saying, if we could just get rid of religion, you know, and what they did
is, you know, they identified religion with a, you know, belief in the supernatural, etc, etc.
And if we just got rid of those false beliefs, then that would be it. And then your point is, well,
the people that are in these marches, they're not advocating anything necessarily supernatural,
something perhaps transcendent, but not supernatural, etc. They're not doing all,
but nevertheless, look at the religious behavior, look at how comprehensive and powerful it is,
and look at how much it's a response to the way the COVID crisis accelerated the meaning crisis.
And you made that, and it was sort of a very brief thing. It was about two or three minutes in the
video, but I wanted to give you, and I think this is a good context, you and I, in discussion,
I wanted to give you the opportunity to expand on that. Yeah. Well, my criticism of the new
atheists, you know, and I would use Stephen Pinker as the, as the main example, just because of
the kinds of books he've written and the kind of statements he's made about
enlightenment and this kind of progress and everything, is that,
and I think that what you're doing is, is a much better, like the COGSI approach and the
cognitive science approach is a much better approach to this, because there is, there is
an understanding of what a human being is in a, in a deeper way. And, and there's an understanding
of the reasons why we have certain patterns and the reason why certain things exist within us.
And what, what the new atheist team to want to do is to see the advantage of reason,
and then want to kind of box the human being in reason, and see everything which is outside of
reason as the thing to get rid of, as the bad thing to get rid of. There's our original sin,
is everything that's outside of reason needs to be eliminated. But the problem is that you
can't eliminate it. You know, and, and there's a kind of weird utopian vision, and the example I
always use is the example of sleep. You could say, and reason and, and, and awakenness, you know,
and the idea of kind of this more, this other aspect of us in sleep, it's a good way to understand
it. It's as if I told you, you could be way more productive, if you didn't sleep. Like you just
have to not sleep, and then you could be awake all the time. And wouldn't that be amazing? Like
then you would imagine how much progress you would make, like imagine how far you would go,
if you would just stay awake all the time. But the reality is that you can't. That's not just,
not part of being a human being. And so these other patterns that we have are there. And so,
and they're extremely important. And if you try to get rid of them, what they do is they kind of,
they go down for a little while, and then they come back like a monster, and then we'll swallow
you. And that's what we're, those are the kinds of things we saw in the, in the French Revolution,
in the Russian Revolution, all the kind of end of atheist cycle where all of a sudden the patterns
come back like a big monster to devour you. And now we're seeing very similar things as well.
We're seeing a secular religious manifestation. And it's akin to the one we saw in the French
Revolution. And it's akin to the one we saw in the Russian Revolution. And so, and I always want
to say, it's like the people who kind of made fun of Jordan Peterson talking about this, it's like,
it's happening right now. It's happening right now. Look at what's going on. And you can just
poo poo it. You can toss it to the side, but it's the same pattern happening again. And the reason
for the pattern is the same, like the denial of, sorry, I get excited and I throw myself.
Me too, me too. The denial of certain aspects of the human person is going to come back.
And so the idea is what do you do? Like how do you deal with it? And to me, that's why I think that
that's why I think that having a conscious religious aspect to you, that's why ritual,
conscious ritual is important because ritual will be there. You can't avoid it. Now the question is
whether or not it's part of you integrated or whether or not you're a slave to ritualized behavior
and kind of scapegoat and identity forming behavior that is just part of existence.
I think that was very beautifully said. Yeah, I agree. I think on the first point you made,
but the COGSI and all the stuff on relevance realization and those aspects that are
pre-rational and how primordial they are and the importance of ritual. So for those of you,
I mean, you're watching this video, you know this work. And so there's arguments there and
thank you, Jonathan, for gesturing to them. And then as you were building on that,
I thought of this scene and you'll probably be able to riff on this because it's a mythology,
it's from a science fiction classic, you know, Journey to the Center of the Earth.
And especially in the movie version, Count Sacknessen, who's the villain,
you'll see how this connects in just a sec. They come to him and they say, well,
don't you sleep? And he said, I never sleep. I hate those little slices of death. And he
represents exact, no, just, right, so the journey to the center of the earth, which of course has
all kinds of mythic, you know, meanings attached to that, right? But he's the villain. And notice
how he brings together like your analogy and how it connects back to an unwillingness to accept his
humanness, his mortality, the hubris in here. And that cycles us back again to this refusal to accept
our humanity. It's ultimately, it's again the same kind of, it's a puritanical kind of refusal
to accept our humanity in a profound hubristic way. And that, and that I think is what, when I've
talked to people, you know, who have sort of come out of the New Atheist movement,
one of the things that they'll often say that started putting them off was they got a sense of
arrogance attached to these people. And, you know, and I'm not talking about, and part of it is no
doubt personality. There's narcissism and, but I think they might also have been putting out their
finger on this, this sense that, right, there are aspects of our humanity that are not being given
due. And this is what I mean again about justice, soffers and justice. Plato had this sense that
you had to give all of the parts of the human their due. They had to be given their due regard,
their due role, their due place. The attempt to eradicate was a deep mistake, right? And,
and, right. And so this, this, the soffers and the inner justices, we have to give due regard
and due place and due role for all aspects of our humanity. If you look at, if you look at the very
first commandment or the very first place in scripture where it talks about something which is
holy is in the description of creation. And so you have six days, then you have the seventh day,
which is the day of rest. And it's the day which is set aside for God, right? It's the holy day.
And, and right there in Genesis, it says that's why we, we follow the Sabbath. Now that there's a
mystery in that, which is very profound. And the mystery is that it's exactly the mystery that the
New Atheists are impotent and capable of seeing, which is that the way that the world is made and
the way that consciousness is made and the way that reason is made is because it's a patterning
system. It can never encompass everything, right? It, it can be coherent, but it cannot be complete.
And you need to leave a bit out for completeness to manifest itself, like in its, in its mystery.
So you need to leave a bit on the edge that is not closed, that isn't tied up, that isn't
accounted for. There has to be some aspects which are not accounted for. If you try to
account for everything, that's the, you know, that's the, that's the, the most dangerous thing,
right? It's the, and if you also try to see that which is accounted for as totality,
which is the sin of Satan, which is the sin of pride, which is the sin of Adam, that's the hubris.
And then, then you fall because that aspect which you, which you, which you, which is supposed to
be unaccounted for, which you're trying to ignore is still there, right? And, and the, the fascinating
aspect of that margin or the, the, let's say the seventh day is that there are, it has two parts
to it. It has a part which is the, the unfathomable of creation, right? The, the, the completeness of
creation, but it also points to the infinite. There's a secrecy in it, which also points to the
infinite, which is why it's both the day of rest, but also the day set aside for God at the same time.
So it's both death and the source of life at the same time.
That's very interesting. Your invocation of Godel, I mean, I take Godel's theorem that you
can't have a both complete and consistent to be an example of what I meant earlier by mortality.
That's the mortality in the heart of any epistemological project or, you know, Heisenberg's
uncertainty. That's the mortality in the, in the, in the heart of any empirical observation or
investigation and, and more and more of these, right? And the, the, the, the history and philosophy
of the last two centuries have been in philosophy of science, at least the more philosophical aspects
of science have been the, been the discovery of this. I'd like your invocation of it because
it brings me back around and, you know, and you, I, you, you may, I don't know if you're doing
it deliver it a little off, but you're invoking, I heard Levinas when you were comparing totality
to infinity because he has a book around that, right? And how infinity is not the same thing as
totality. Because totality is the pretense that you have both consistency and completeness.
That's my way of understanding it. And, and therefore it, like, if you take the Goli, Goli,
Goli's argument seriously, and you should, right, that is always a dangerous pretense.
And that the problem with any, any system that claims to be complete and consistent is that it
is actually a deep form of self deception. Oh yeah. That's for sure. So I mean, and this is what,
you know, this was, this is the great for all of the criticisms I have of them. This is the great
thing that comes out of the whole pragmatism movement of James and Pierce and Dewey and more
recent people, you know, like Quine and Davidson. And they've had a deep influence on me. I haven't
had a chance to talk about them very much. I will in another series. But the point I'm trying to get
to here is, like, there's a, there's a shadow side of the utilitarianism. There's a negative version
of it, which is strategies of eradication, because eradication is an attempt to be completely
consistent and complete. So there's an argument, and I'm not advocating for all of his ideas,
but I just want to give due credit. Coleman Hughes makes this argument about, look,
we all agree that murder is a deeply immoral act. And I'm not playing around with terms. Well,
sometimes you kill, but when we say killing that's not immoral, we don't call it murder. Murder is
the name for the killing we regard as immoral. So let's not play that game. So we guard murder as
immoral, but we don't pursue an eradication strategy in our society. Because if we were to
eradicate, try to eradicate murder, we would so, we would so subject ourselves to a radically
dehumanizing totalitarian state that, and that's why no culture anyway doesn't, right? Every culture
has prohibitions against murder. There's variations on it, of course, but you don't see them saying,
and what we're going to do is we're going to set things up so that murder is impossible.
You know, Philip, that's a Philip K. Dick kind of situation.
Oh yeah, it's a scary thing. No, and you're right about the strategies of eradication.
These are extremely frightening because they tend towards exactly what you're talking about.
And I'm afraid that I see the same, you know, and I'm afraid that I'm seeing that right now
with COVID. I'm seeing exactly a falling into a strategy of eradication where we think that we
cannot continue to live until this virus ceases to exist. This is not how it works. This is a
dangerous because the method you will use to eradicate the virus, the totalitarian method
you will use will be extremely harmful. They will be very, very harmful to our health,
to our community, all of these things. And it's like the difficulty that you understand
the desire to eradicate because it's a bad thing, right? This virus is a bad thing. You want it to
go away, but once you enter into that strategy of eradication, especially with techno states,
where you are develop the power to push that capacity of eradication to limit that we're
not seen before, it's a very, very frightening situation. A clear example of that is the proposal
that we start tracking everybody's movement, every movement. I say people, do you really want the
state to have that power? Do you really want the state to have that power? Do you really want the
corporations to have that power? They already have that power to some degree and they use it to
manipulate you. Look, I can't believe it. I saw a BBC article just a few days ago and it was just
like a regular article where they're talking about what the future of travel will look like.
And in their description of the future of travel, they talked about vaccines with identification
in the vaccine that they can scan your body so that you, and this was a BBC article. It wasn't
a conspiracy article. It wasn't like someone, it was like, this is what travel is going to look
like. They'll scan your body to know whether or not you have the vaccine and they'll let you
participate in social things depending on whether or not they can track you. It's like, my goodness,
don't you watch science fiction movies? I don't know. Am I the only one who watch
science fiction movies? Well, I watch them too. So, I mean, and we have to be careful here. So,
COVID is very bad. Oh, yeah. No, no, no, I want to make an analogy here. COVID is very bad and you
should try as much as we can ameliorate it, but with wisdom, toggling against over empowering the
state and taking a dehumanized view or a simplistic view of human nature in order to
achieve it. So, we don't push for eradication. We push for amelioration that doesn't cost us too
much our humanity. Isn't that the same attitude we should take for how to deal with the very
real evil of racism that we should try which, and we should continue to try to ameliorate it?
But we shouldn't, you know, I talk a lot about how you frame the problem. It is way more important
the method about actually solving it. Should we be adopting a mindset that is a totalitarian
kind of eradication about something like racism? It strikes me that argument by analogy means
there is a sense in which we can go too far on this. And that doesn't, I hope, that doesn't make
me a racist. And what I've seen is I saw the interview with Don Lemon and I forget the name
of the actor and he was trying to say, he's a black guy. And he's trying to say, I'm just saying
that some of the leaders of the movement are going too far to extreme. That's all he was proposing
and he was treated with smugness and dismiss and then this horrible argument by Lemon.
Well, people accuse Martin Luther King of being too extreme as if, well, are you saying that
because sometimes people have misused that word that every time they use it, they're misusing it?
That's a really stupid argument. Can we have a better argument, please? And it's like, if we
can't even bring up the question that we might be framing the attempt to achieve a goal, a lot of
a goal that I fully support, then I think we're in a very, very bad place. I think we're getting
into a very bad place. Yeah. And you're right. Because one of the things COVID did was awaken
in us this pattern of infection. And it awakened in us the pattern of infection and the desire
to exclude and eradicate. And now it's being politicized. Not the COVID. It's weird because
you can see that there's no narrative connection between COVID and Floyd, but there is a pattern
connection. And you can see that it's awakened the pattern and now it's playing out in the political
sphere. Well, I mean, isn't that a case? Again, I'm talking at the latent level, not at the
manifest label, but that seems like a case, a clear case of what a psychodynamic person would
call displacement. COVID puts you like you're suddenly in the Old Testament. I don't mean
that pejoratively. But you have this ubiquitous, threatening things out there in the world,
and you have to adopt this very insular purity code. And then you don't know when it's going
to strike you. And then it might be infected. But now what we can do is we couldn't do anything
about the COVID, but I think what your suggestion is, but I can do something about this over here.
Can do something about, yeah. And the danger of the racist thing is the limit of it, because the
limit is the problem with racism is that it's this invisible thing in the sense that it ends up being
thoughts and feelings in people. And the idea that you can reprogram someone and that you can
move towards the eradication of thoughts and feelings. I mean, we know where that leads,
like we know where that goes. And because it can't happen, then like we said, like I said before,
but it's going to end up looking like a scapegoating, where we're going to choose some,
we're going to find examples that we can drag out in public and, you know, and have struggle
sessions, watch struggle sessions and have them be humiliated in public so that we can deal with
the problem of eradicating something which is, which is unconscious bias. Like it's unconscious.
So you can't, how can you eradicate it? Well, I think trying to eradicate that is,
I mean, given what we've argued, isn't that the same? It's ultimately committing you at some
level to eradicating the machinery of humanity. That's right. Right. And so,
let's say that this is, I've been more and more attracted to Ren Girard in the past year, I
would say, you know, just because of everything that's happened. And I've been seeing that his
analysis of the situation is really one of the wisest in terms of the way that he interpreted
what's happening and intersectionality. I mean, he passed away, I think around 2010 or maybe a bit
later. You know, he talked about, I saw a quote of his in 2007 where he talked about the machine of
Antichrist, which is ramping up. And he saw exactly what we're seeing. He said, it'll be infinite
victimhood looking for infinite scapegoat. And so it's like this perpetual wheel of victimhood,
which is looking perpetually for more and more scapegoats, like almost like a self-devouring
machine. And so we're seeing it. The solution is, like I hate to, I know you dislike when I
push it too far, but the solution is the image of the scapegoat being the murderer and this,
and the victim at the same time, right? Identifying with Christ and identifying with those that killed
him. Identifying with the capacity to exclude and the reality of also being excluded to a certain
extent. Like those two things together, if you can kind of, you can integrate them properly and not
in a weird disorderly manner, can help you have compassion for those who are excluded, but can
help you also understand that you are one of those who do that all the time. You're always doing it.
But this is what I meant. I think there's power under argument. I've only read the one book and
I'm not completely at the one I saw on Satan Fall like lightning. But the idea that you can
explode, if you'll allow me to use some of my terms, you can explode the cultural cognitive grammar
of scapegoating and that the Christian mythos does that. I thought that was one of the most
powerful arguments. And it's a new argument, as far as I know, one of the most powerful
apologetic arguments for Christianity that I had heard in quite some time. So I think that
is a good point that you brought up. But I think it's situated within this larger past again,
which we can keep coming back to, of trying to get to a place where we can simultaneously accept
faith and virtue. Because one of the ways in which you can address people's thoughts and feelings
is by inspiring them to aspire to virtue. Rather than trying to eradicate, you can try to inspire
the aspiration to virtue. And this has been, to my mind, a very, very successful strategy,
where I've been talking a lot recently, and Akira the Don did the meaning wave about it,
about stealing the culture. And I actually use Christianity as a primary example of that,
that Christianity doesn't try and overthrow the political structure. What it does is it steals
the culture. It creates an entirely different culture from the bottom up. And then, because
the problem, to my mind, what the French Revolution shows is you can radically transform the state,
but if you don't transform the underlying cultural, cognitive, grammar, and normativity,
nothing is fundamentally going to change. Yeah, you just changed the ones who are holding the
reins. You circulate the elites. Exactly. Whereas what Christianity does is it builds a new
civilization. Buddhism does the same thing. It builds a new civilization. Islam does the same
thing. It builds a new civilization. And so that brings us, and we don't have much time, I suppose,
but that brings me towards the third point. You said, you sort of despair of knowing what to do.
And I'm wondering if you, I'm sorry, I realized I might be daring the pro-Hasturist thing with
proposing some sort of a Christian thing to a Christian, which is a ridiculous thing.
But I gave you all of those examples. And to my mind of the idea of, well, isn't the response to
do as much as we can to engage in building the next culture? And that sounds preposterous,
but a commitment to that kind of thing seems to me to be the most responsible response
to the depth of the situation we are in right now. Yeah. No, I think so. I would say on a
personal level, love God, love your neighbor is a pretty good thing to live by in the immediate
reality and not abstract categories to deal, you know, to love the people that you encounter with,
to see in them the face of God is something that will transform at least your life. It's harder
in terms of like a social responsibility. For sure, myself, the way that I frame it,
that's why I'm doing what I'm doing. What you said is that I'm trying to help people see the
grammar of culture or see the pattern. And of course, one of the things I've been emphasizing
the most is the importance of the margin and talking about the margin in a balanced way so
that you neither have the desire to, because both sides want to eliminate the margin. Everybody
wants to eliminate it. They want to eliminate the margin either by making it the same as the center,
by integrating all the marginal aspects and making them equal to everything else,
or by eradication or by cutting it off. And that's the real problem with the,
it's the question we had during the first wave of violence of the 20th century. You had two sides.
You had one side which wanted to create an equal utopia and one which wanted to create
a hierarchical utopia that cut off the margin, that burned it off. And we're facing the same,
it's like we didn't deal with it. We're facing the same problem now. And we're seeing the one side
now, we're seeing the side that wants everything to be equal. But I always tell people that
when the Nazis came to Germany, they were on the verge of a communist revolution. The pendulum
doesn't move in one direction. The pendulum swings and it's a scary thing to watch.
But this is part of the way in which again, the way in which this lack of, the lack of
of a dynamical nuance in thinking. So, you know, Leo Ferraro and I talk about this idea that
in living systems and right, you see opponent processing. And I've argued, right, and that
what an opponent processing means, this is the way you deal with trade-offs. And we've been talking
about trade-offs all the way through, right? You have opponent processing, you like your
parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous system. Like the sympathetic nervous system is biased.
It tries to interpret everything as a threat or an opportunity and it arouses you. And the
parasympathetic system is biased and it tries to interpret everything as a signal that you should
relax and calm down. And they're working, their biases work in opposite direction, but they're
functionally integrated together because that's how you get the most self-corrective system.
And what we're supposed to have, and you can see this in Dewey, right? Because we're supposed
to have a point processing, but what it's devolved into is adversarial processing.
And this is the eradication idea. Now it's a zero-sum game. I've given up the idea of
self-correction. I've given up the idea of commitment to a process that you and I, even
though we disagree, we can commit to. Like you and I do in dialogue. We have disagreements,
but we see the potential that we can correct each other in valuable ways that we mutually
appreciate. There was that commitment and that commitment to that process has been lost.
Like the fact that most Americans are more distrusting of the opposite party than they are
a foreign threat. Like what the heck does that mean? What does that mean to you?
And so the adversarial eradicate the other, destroy the other, zero-sum game mentality,
I think has made the process, I think, is broken. I think the process is broken.
And so I don't know. I don't see how, I mean, and Layman Pascal and others,
they disagree with me on this. I don't know how to work within that in a way.
And so that's what I mean by steal the culture, that I don't know if working within that machinery
is a viable strategy. I think no strategy has to be, you know, Jonathan, I was at a conference
two weeks ago called the Movement Summit. And there's all these communities of practice
springing up everywhere or trying to integrate mindfulness and movement practices and discourse
practices and so many of them. And, you know, these people, and they all want to talk to each
other and they want to network. And it felt very different. This is, it felt very, it was neither,
you know, the revolution of the left or the law and order of the right. It was orthogonal to that.
It was these people trying to seriously time and talent and money and energy and commitment
to the cultivation of wisdom and a deeply alternative way of being. And to my mind, that's
where, and I know you think it should be given a particular Christian splint, but I also think
you're charitable enough to include other people of good faith who are willing to work with you.
I think that's where the answer to the more difficult problem lies. I think there is stuff
actually happening right here, right now, culturally, symbolically, existentially,
that is where the difference that is needed is starting to be generated.
Oh, but I, for sure, agree. I think that the seeds of the, like a way to see it is like that
this is horrible because it has bad implications, but like the seeds of the next world will appear
in the current one, right? They're just hard to see, you know, the little sprouts are hard to see
because everything else is burning in the forest, right? So it's difficult to see the seeds as this
is kind of breaking apart. And I mean, I'm curious to see how all of this will be integrated. I do,
I do, again, like, you know, we've talked about this before. So we're not going to come to a
conclusion, but I do think that there is a need for a narrative cohesion. And I do think that until
until something happens in the West, it's still, it's still the Christian narrative. So I don't,
I don't see a way out of it for at least, you know, I don't see a way out of it. So, but I,
I appreciate, I do think that the questions that people are asking and that the desire for wisdom
and the desire for transformation is one which will bear fruit. It won't, it has to, if it's done
with sincerity and done, you know, in a desire for transformation, it will bear fruit.
Yeah. And the point I'm trying to make is thank you for saying that. And you know, from my part,
I don't, I don't ever claim to have a foreclosure argument against Christianity. I always say that
I do not have such a fit. But what I was trying to emphasize is there's not only sincerity,
there's depth in like what's going on here. It has the appreciation for humanity and complexity.
That's what I'm seeing in these people in this movement. Of course, we're all flawed human
beings. I'm not, I'm not painting some utopic vision, but I'm talking about, you know,
a real, a real possibility and the acknowledgement that I think it's, it's, it's, it's in existence.
I like your metaphor for all the ways it's fraught, but I do like your metaphor of the seeds. I do
like putting the two together, that the burning of the forest actually fertilizes the seeds in the
way they need to be fertilized. And perhaps you were alluding to that and your right smile.
Yeah, but it's not, it's not a fun. It's not fun. Like it's not pleasurable.
No, there's, and it means, it means death and suffering. Yep. And I have kids and I don't want
this, but I want and what needs to happen are not always the same thing. Yeah. Jonathan, I think
maybe this would be a good place to bring it to a close. So I proposed to you privately and you
already agreed. So I'm going to do it publicly. I think that you and I and Paul should have a,
have a discussion like this, the logos, as I would call it, at length for the three of us.
And I'd like to invite you and then I've also invited Paul and let's, let's try and work to
make it happen because I think it would be very beneficial for all of our respective listeners.
Yeah, that would be great. I would, I would love that. We, let's set it up.
Okay. So I'll reach out to Paul and I'll try and make it happen. So I found, well, you could see,
I got passionate, which means this was definitely, this is definitely the logos for me. I always say
that the difference between the logos and monologue is both people find themselves adduced. They find
themselves drawn to a place they couldn't get to individually on the road. And there's a kind
of education and then that that's very different from just sort of thinking in your own head.
And so I always find that the case when I get into such a dialogue with you,
and I wanted to thank you for it. You had so many, so many insightful, brilliant ways,
so many insights and brilliant things you said. And not only what you said, the manner in which
you said the imagery that you use was itself often deeply helpful. So thank you very much.
Thank you very, very much. Well, you know, I really, I always enjoy talking to you and I,
and I really appreciate the insight you're bringing to the conversation. And I'm
looking forward to seeing where this is going and kind of how, how this is slowly going to,
let's say play dance together is the best way to maybe to say it.
Yeah. Yeah. I agree. I agree. Okay. So thank you very much.
All right, John. It was good to talk to you.
Good talk to you. All right. Bye-bye.
Bye-bye.
