Bold: How to go big Create Wealth, and Impact the World

By Peter H. Diamandis and Steven Kotler

Introduction
PART ONE:BOLD TECHNOLOGY
Chapter One:Good-bye, Linear Thinking  .  .  . Hello, Exponential
Chapter Two:Exponential Technology: The Democratization of the Power to Change the World
Chapter Three:Five to Change the World
PART TWO:BOLD MINDSET
Chapter Four:Climbing Mount Bold
Chapter Five:The Secrets of Going Big
Chapter Six:Billionaire Wisdom: Thinking at Scale
PART THREE:THE BOLD CROWD
Chapter Seven:Crowdsourcing: Marketplace of the Rising Billion
Chapter Eight:Crowdfunding: No Bucks, No Buck Rogers
Chapter Nine:Building Communities
Chapter Ten:Incentive Competitions: Getting the Best and Brightest to Help Solve Your Challenges
Afterword:Next Steps—How to Take Action

Acknowledgments

About Peter H. Diamandis and Steven Kotler

PETER’S DEDICATION
I dedicate this book to my parents, Harry P. Diamandis, MD and Tula Diamandis, whose bold journey from the Greek island of Lesvos to the United States, and their success in medicine and family inspired me to go big, create wealth, and impact the world.


STEVEN’S DEDICATION
This one is for Jamie Wheal, my great friend and partner in the Flow Genome Project, without whom this journey would be a lot less interesting and make a lot less sense.

INTRODUCTION Birth of the Exponential Entrepreneur
Go back some 66 million years, and life on Earth was a little different. These were the waning days of the Cretaceous Period, hot and humid, when much of the world’s current land mass was still submerged under massive oceans. Back then, angiosperms, our technical name for flowering plants, were the latest innovation in the world of flora. Similarly, our first maples, oaks, and beeches were just starting to emerge. On the fauna side, the Earth was still dinosaur dominated, but this is not surprising. When it comes to staying power, the 100 million years that these megareptiles lorded over our planet’s terra firma is the longest such stretch in history—the ultimate example of terrestrial dominance.1
But their reign was not to last.

The Cretaceous Period ended with a very big bang.2An asteroid some ten kilometers in diameter—or slightly smaller than San Francisco—smashed into the Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico. The collision literally rocked the world, releasing 420 zettajoules of energy, or two million times more muscle than the largest nuclear bomb ever exploded. The resulting crater was 110 miles wide. The resulting impact was, as the saying goes, “a planetary killer.”
Megatsunamis, massive earthquakes, global firestorms, and a deadly cascade of volcanic eruptions swallowed the Earth. The sun disappeared behind a huge dust cloud—and didn’t emerge for a decade. The changes to the global environment were so rapid and so extreme that the dinosaurs—the uberdominant form of life at the time—were unable to adapt. Instead, they went extinct.

For our species, this was very good news. While the dinosaurs were large, lumbering, and inflexible, those early small, furry mammals—our ancestors—were far more nimble and resilient. They took opportunistic advantage of the radical changes sweeping the globe, adapted to their new environment, and never looked back. Within an evolutionary eye blink, the dinosaurs were gone and mammals became kings of the world. And one thing is most certain—history has a funny way of repeating itself.

In fact, this tale of colossal impact, radical transformation, and spectacular rebirth has exceptional relevance today—especially for business. Right now, there is another asteroid striking our world, already extinguishing the large and lumbering, already clearing a giant path for the quick and nimble. Our name for this asteroid is “exponential technology,” and even if this name is unfamiliar, its impact is not.

We’ll get into far greater detail later, but what’s important here is that exponential technology refers to any technology accelerating on an exponential growth curve—that is, doubling in power on a regular basis (semiannually, annually, etc.)—with computing being the most familiar example. When a woman in Outer Mongolia answers her smartphone, she’s using a device a million times cheaper and a thousand times more powerful than a supercomputer from the 1970s.3That’s what exponential change looks like in the real world.

And today, this kind of change is everywhere we look. Exponential progress is now showing up in dozens of arenas: networks, sensors, robotics, artificial intelligence, synthetic biology, genomics, digital medicine, nanotechnology—to name only a few.4And like our ten-kilometer asteroid, the awesome power of these technologies is reshaping life on Earth. But this same power is threatening a different breed of dinosaur—those large and innovation-resistant companies that have done it the same way for decades, and will continue to do it the same way, until, well, they are out of business.

Yet, in stark contrast, there is a new breed of small, furry mammal starting to emerge. These mammals are today’s entrepreneurs—the ones using radically accelerating technology to transform products, services, and industries. These nimble and resilient innovators are learning how to wield exponential technologies; they are becoming exponential entrepreneurs. And these exponential entrepreneurs are paving the way for a new world of abundance.

The Follow-on to Abundance
In 2012, I joined with Steven Kotler to write Abundance: The Future Is Better Than You Think.My inspiration for this book came from my work with both the XPRIZE Foundation and Singularity University. What I witnessed from the helm of those organizations was a world where the basic necessities of life were becoming cheaper and globally accessible. Steven brought to Abundancehis considerable expertise mapping the intersection of ultimate human performance and exponential technology. Both of us had come to believe the world was radically changing and that, for the first time in history, humanity had the potential to significantly and permanently raise global standards of living.
