
In Abundance, Steven and I explored how four potent emerging forces—exponential technologies, the DIY innovator, technophilanthropists, and the rising billion—give us the ability to solve many of the world’s grandest challenges over the next two to three decades. That is, we will soon have the power to meet and exceed the basic needs of every man, woman, and child on the planet.

When the book was released in February 2012, we had little idea how it would be received. I was lucky enough to open the TED conference with a talk on Abundance—and even luckier to get a standing ovation. The book rocketed onto the charts, spent almost three months on the New York Timesbestseller list, won several “Best Book of 2012” awards,5and has been translated into more than twenty languages. For all of this, we are both incredibly grateful.

What’s also been deeply gratifying is that concrete, well-documented evidence for abundance continues to mount. As a result, in the 2014 paperback edition of Abundance, we proudly presented a new reference section that contains some sixty additional charts, in areas such as reduction of violence and increases in learning, health, and wealth. Taken together, the implications of this data are truly mind-blowing.

But we have also come to feel that painting a picture of our vibrant future is insufficient. While we truly believe that creating a world of abundance is possible, it is by no means guaranteed. And it is for that reason we wrote Bold
The World’s Biggest Problems = Biggest Business Opportunities
Thousands of years ago, it was only kings, pharaohs, and emperors who had the ability to solve large-scale problems. Hundreds of years ago, this power expanded to the industrialists who built our transportation systems and financial institutions. But today, the ability to solve such problems has been thoroughly democratized. Right now, and for the first time ever, a passionate and committed individual has access to the technology, minds, and capital required to take on any challenge. Even better, that individual has good reason to take on such challenges. As we will soon see, the world’s biggest problems are now the world’s biggest business opportunities. This means, for exponential entrepreneurs, finding a significant challenge is a meaningful road to wealth. Ultimately, as I teach at Singularity University (much more on this later), the best way to become a billionaire is to solve a billion-person problem.

In Bold, Steven and I offer a highly practical playbook for doing just that. This book arms today’s entrepreneurs, activists, and leaders with the tools needed to positively impact the world while simultaneously making their biggest dreams come true. To make good on that promise, Boldunfolds in three parts: Part One focuses on the exponential technologies which are disrupting today’s Fortune 500 and enabling upstart entrepreneurs to go from “I’ve got a new idea” to “I run a billion-dollar company” far faster than ever before. Part Two of the book focuses on the psychology of Bold—the mental tool kit that allows the world’s top innovators to raise their game by thinking at scale—and includes detailed advice and lessons from technology gurus such as Larry Page, Elon Musk, Richard Branson, and Jeff Bezos. Also in Part Two, Steven reveals the keys to ultimate human performance garnered from fifteen years of research with the Flow Genome Project, and I reveal my entrepreneurial secrets garnered from starting seventeen companies. Finally, Part Three closes the book with a look at the incredible power and essential best practices that allow anyone to leverage today’s hyperconnected crowd like never before. Here you’ll learn how to harness crowdsourcing solutions to massively increase the speed of your business, to design and use incentive competitions to find breakthrough solutions, to launch million-dollar crowdfunding campaigns to tap into tens of billions of dollars of available capital, and finally, to build exponential communities—armies of exponentially enabled individuals willing and able to help today’s entrepreneurs make their boldest dreams come true.

Who Should Read This Book?
This book was written as both a manifesto and a manual for today’s exponential entrepreneur, anyone interested in going big, creating wealth, and impacting the world. It is a go-to resource on accelerating technologies, thinking at scale, and utilizing crowd-powered tools. If you are an entrepreneur, in spirit or by experience, whether you live in Silicon Valley or Shanghai, whether you are in college or an employee of a multinational corporation, this book is for you. It’s about seriously leveling up your abilities and your ambition. It is about moonshot thinking and global impact.

If, on the other hand, you are a manager, executive, or owner of the large and lumbering, your competition is no longer some multinational from overseas—it’s now the explosion of exponential entrepreneurs working out of their garages. Reading this book will give you insight into where this new competition is coming from and how they think and operate. Moreover, the same exponential opportunities—meaning both the technologies themselves and the strategies for maximizing these technologies (both psychological and organizational)—exist for solo entrepreneurs and big companies. Finally, if you’re an organizational leader and are interested in going even deeper into this subject, then I recommend reading Singularity University’s first publication: Exponential Organizations (ExO), written by Salim Ismail, SU’s first executive director and current global ambassador. ExOis written for the leadership of those companies that prefer to sidestep extinction and join the exponential revolution.

Last, and perhaps most importantly, Boldis a playbook. Our deepest hope is that it inspires you to get off the couch and change the world. Said differently, because of the amazing opportunities created by exponentially growing communications technology, many of today’s best and brightest have been lured in by an app-tilted playing field, which has both entrepreneurs and venture capitalists believing that three years to profitability and exit should be the norm. Of course, if your true passion is building apps, then build away. But let’s be clear: when Steve Jobs said that the goal of every entrepreneur should be to “put a dent in the universe”—he wasn’t talking about inventing the next Angry Birds. This book is for those who want to make the Giant Dent. It’s about the fact that, because of exponential empowerment, anyone can make that Giant Dent. Seriously, what are you waiting for?
A Collaboration of Two Minds
Peter and Steven first met in 1997, when Steven wrote a feature about the XPRIZE. In the late 2000s, they came together to write Abundance: The Future Is Better Than You Think. Upon its success, Peter approached Steven with the concept for Bold, and asked him to team up once again and write a book focused on inspiring and enabling entrepreneurs to create this world of abundance. Once again, both Peter and Steven brought their unique perspective and expertise to the table. So, while this book is told in Peter’s voice and through his stories, this work is a true partnership, as the ideas and the writing in Boldwere shared equally between Peter and Steven.

—Peter H. Diamandis
Santa Monica, California

—Steven Kotler
Chimayo, New Mexico

PART ONEBOLD TECHNOLOGYCHAPTER ONEGood-bye, Linear Thinking  .  .  . Hello, ExponentialBirth of a Behemoth
The year was 1878. George Eastman was a twenty-four-year-old junior clerk at the Rochester Savings Bank in need of a vacation. He chose to go to Santo Domingo, in the Dominican Republic. At the suggestion of a coworker, Eastman bought all the requisite photographic equipment to make a record of the trip. It was a lot of equipment: a camera as big as a Rottweiler, a massive tripod, a jug of water, a heavy plateholder, the plates themselves, glass tanks, an assortment of chemicals, and, of course, a large tent—this last item providing a dark place in which to spread emulsion on the plates before exposure and a dark place to develop them afterwards. Eastman never did go on that vacation.1
Instead, he got obsessed with chemistry. Back then photography was a “wet” art, but Eastman, who craved a more portable process, read about gelatin emulsions capable of remaining light-sensitive after drying. Working at night, in his mother’s kitchen, he began to experiment with his own varieties. A natural-born tinkerer, Eastman took less than two years to invent both a dry plate formula and a machine that fabricated dry plates. The Eastman Dry Plate Company was born.

More tinkering followed. In 1884, Eastman invented roll film; four years later he came up with a camera capable of taking advantage of that roll. In 1888, that camera became commercially available, later marketed under the slogan “You press the button, we do the rest.”2The Eastman Dry Plate Company had become the Eastman Company, but that name wasn’t quite catchy enough. Eastman wanted something stickier, something that people would remember and talk about. One of his favorite letters was K. In 1892, the Eastman Kodak Company was born.

In those early years, if you would have asked George Eastman about Kodak’s business model, he would have said the company was somewhere between a chemical supply house and a dry goods purveyor (if dry plates can be considered dry goods). But that changed quickly. “The idea gradually dawned on me,” Eastman said, “that what we were doing was not merely making dry plates, but that we started out to make photography an everyday affair.”3Or, as Eastman later rephrased it, he wanted to make photography “as convenient as a pencil.”
And for the next hundred years, Eastman Kodak did just that.

The Memory Business
Steven Sasson is a tall man with a lantern jaw. In 1973, he was a freshly minted graduate of the Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. His degree in electrical engineering led to a job with Kodak’s Apparatus Division research lab, where, a few months into his employment, Sasson’s supervisor, Gareth Lloyd, approached him with a “small” request. Fairchild Semiconductor had just invented the first “charge-coupled device” (or CCD)—an easy way to move an electronic charge around a transistor—and Kodak needed to know if these devices could be used for imaging.4Could they ever.

By 1975, working with a small team of talented technicians, Sasson used CCDs to create the world’s first digital still camera and digital recording device. Looking, as Fast Companyonce explained, “like a ’70s Polaroid crossed with a Speak-and-Spell,”5the camera was the size of a toaster, weighed in at 8.5 pounds, had a resolution of 0.01 megapixel, and took up to thirty black-and-white digital images—a number chosen because it fell between twenty-four and thirty-six and was thus in alignment with the exposures available in Kodak’s roll film. It also stored shots on the only permanent storage device available back then—a cassette tape. Still, it was an astounding achievement and an incredible learning experience.

Portrait of Steven Sasson with first digital camera, 2009
Source: Harvey Wang, From Darkroom to Daylight
“When you demonstrate such a system,” Sasson later said, “that is, taking pictures without film and showing them on an electronic screen without printing them on paper, inside a company like Kodak in 1976, you have to get ready for a lot of questions. I thought people would ask me questions about the technology: How’d you do this? How’d you make that work? I didn’t get any of that. They asked me when it was going to be ready for prime time? When is it going to be realistic to use this? Why would anybody want to look at their pictures on an electronic screen?”6
In 1996, twenty years after this meeting took place, Kodak had 140,000 employees and a $28 billion market cap. They were effectively a category monopoly. In the United States, they controlled 90 percent of the film market and 85 percent of the camera market.7But they had forgotten their business model. Kodak had started out in the chemistry and paper goods business, for sure, but they came to dominance by being in the convenience business.

Even that doesn’t go far enough. There is still the question of what exactly Kodak was making more convenient. Was it just photography? Not even close. Photography was simply the medium of expression—but what was being expressed? The “Kodak Moment,” of course—our desire to document our lives, to capture the fleeting, to record the ephemeral. Kodak was in the business of recording memories. And what made recording memories more convenient than a digital camera?
But that wasn’t how the Kodak Corporation of the late twentieth century saw it. They thought that the digital camera would undercut their chemical business and photographic paper business, essentially forcing the company into competing against itself. So they buried the technology. Nor did the executives understand how a low-resolution 0.01 megapixel image camera could hop on an exponential growth curve and eventually provide high-resolution images. So they ignored it. Instead of using their weighty position to corner the market, they were instead cornered by the market.

