
On the connection front, ten years ago, the world had 500 million devices hooked up to the Internet. Today that number is up to 12 billion. “In 2013,” says Padma Warrior,11the chief technology and strategy officer of Cisco, “eighty new things were being connected to the Internet every second. That’s nearly 7 million per day, 2.5 billion per year. In 2014, the number reached almost 100 per second. By 2020, it’ll grow to more than 250 per second, or 7.8 billion per year. Add all of these numbers up and that’s more than 50 billion things connected to the Internet by 2020.” And it’s this explosion of connectivity that is building the Internet-of-Things (IoT).

A recent study by Cisco estimated that between 2013 and 2020, this uber-network will generate $19 trillion in value (net profit).12Think about this for a moment. The U.S. economy hovers around $15 trillion a year. Cisco is saying that over the ten-year period, this new net will have an economic impact greater than America’s GDP. Talk about the land of opportunity.

Global Internet Device Installed Base Forecast
A Trillion Sensor Future
Source: http://www.businessinsider.com/decoding-smartphone-industry-jargon-2013-11
“E” refers to “Estimated”, as in estimated size of the market.

So where does that opportunity lie exactly? Well, most researchers feel that there are two critical categories worth exploring: information and automation. Let’s start with the former.

Our world of networks and sensors generates enormous quantities of information, much of which is extremely valuable. Take traffic data. A decade back, Navteq built a network of in-road sensors across 400,000 kilometers of Europe (through thirty-five major cities and thirteen European countries).13In October 2007, mobile phone giant Nokia (now owned by Microsoft) paid $8.1 billion for that network.14Fast-forward five years to mid-2013, when Google paid $1 billion to acquire Waze, an Israeli-based company that generates maps and traffic information, not via electronic sensors, but instead via crowdsourced user reports—i.e., human sensors, generating maps by using GPS to track the movements of some 50 million users, then generating traffic-flow data as those users voluntarily share information about slowdowns, speed traps, and road closures in real time.15
Behavior tracking is another fast-growing information category.16Insurance companies putting sensors in cars and pricing policies according to real-time driving behavior is one example. Another is Turnstyle Solutions,17a Toronto-based start-up that uses Wi-Fi transmission from smartphones to follow customers around stores, gathering data on where they linger as they shop. Behavior tracking for health care is also growing. AdhereTech18now makes smart pill bottles with sensors embedded in them to better ensure patient compliance, while CoheroHealth has combined sensor-enabled inhalers and mobile apps19so kids with chronic asthma can track and control their symptoms. These medical applications will keep coming. According to William Briggs, Chief Technology Officer for Deloitte Consulting,20“the value of the IoT-related healthcare sector will be a multi-trillion dollar market within the next one to two decades.”
Turning our attention to automation—which is essentially the process of gathering all the data collected by the IoT, turning it into a series of next actions, and then, without human intervention, executing those actions. Already, we’ve seen the first wave of this in the smart assembly lines and supply chains (what’s technically called process optimization) that have enabled things like just-in-time delivery. With the smart grid for energy and the smart grid for water—what’s technically called resource consumption optimization—we’re seeing the second wave. Next up is the automation and control of far more complex autonomous systems—such as self-driving cars.

There are even further opportunities in finding simpler ways to connect decision makers to sensor data in real time. The aforementioned plants that tweet their owners when they need watering were an early (2010) iteration of this sector. A more contemporary example (2013) is the Washington, DC-based start-up SmartThings, a company that CNN called “a digital maestro for every object in the home.”21SmartThings makes an interface that can recognize over a thousand smart household objects, from temperature sensors that control the thermostat to door and windows sensors that tell you if you left something unlocked to ways to have appliances automatically shut off before you go to bed.

Of course, any discussion of networks and sensors leads directly to a discussion about how we’re going to extract value from all this data. The answer is where we’re going next. Welcome to the radical world of infinite computing.

Infinite Computing: The Beauty of Brute Force
In late August 2013, Carl Bass, CEO of the software and design giant Autodesk, gave me a tour of his newly constructed Pier 9 center, located at the tail end of San Francisco’s Embarcadero.22A self-described big kid from Brooklyn (he’s 6 feet 5), Bass is clad in jeans, a T-shirt, and a baseball cap. His facility, meanwhile, is clad in the very latest in 3-D printing equipment, machine shop tools, design stations, laser cutters, and welding machines. It’s a maker’s paradise. These are the tools that turn imagination into reality, and they’re all guided by Autodesk’s design software, which in turn is powered by infinite computing.

Infinite computingis the term Bass uses to describe the ongoing progression of computing from a scarce and expensive resource toward one that is plentiful and free. Just three or four decades ago, if you wanted to access a thousand core processors, you’d need to be the chairman of MIT’s computer science department or the secretary of the US Defense Department. Today the average chip in your cell phone can perform about a billion calculations per second.

Yet today has nothing on tomorrow. “By 2020, a chip with today’s processing power will cost about a penny,” CUNY theoretical physicist Michio Kaku explained in a recent article for Big Think,23“which is the cost of scrap paper.  .  .  . Children are going to look back and wonder how we could have possibly lived in such a meager world, much as when we think about how our own parents lacked the luxuries—cell phone, Internet—that we all seem to take for granted.”
Microprocessor Cost per Transistor Cycle
Microprocessor Cost per Transistor Cycle
Source: www.singularity.com/images/charts/MicroProcessCostPerTrans.jpg
It’s for this reason that Bass feels that much of our thinking about computing is completely backwards. “We’ve been treating computing as this precious resource,” he says, “when really it’s abundant. If you look at all the trends, computing is decreasing in cost, increasingly available, increasingly powerful, and increasingly elastic. Every year we produce more computing power than the sum of all prior years. This overabundance is the beginning of a new era.”
In the old era, the world of human creation, the so-called designed world was the product of “in the box” thinking—thinking limited by computing scarcity. “In that era,” explains Bass, “a problem that used to take one CPU 10,000 seconds to solve would cost about twenty-five cents. But in the new exponential era, powered by near infinite computing, we can now simultaneously apply 10,000 CPUs to the same problem and solve it in one second. Solving the problem 10,000 times faster still costs twenty-five cents, but for the first time in history we’re able to apply infinitely more resources to a problem for no additional cost.”
Companies like Google, Amazon, and Rackspace are facilitating this shift. Each has assembled massive computational facilities, opened them to the public, and called them the cloud. “Before the cloud, starting a tech company was slow and painful,” says Graham Weston,24chairman and cofounder of Rackspace. “First you order servers from a vendor like Dell or HP. They show up weeks later. Then you have to configure them, install them, purchase software, load software, then finally connect everything to the Internet. All this took weeks, if not months, and required staff. Today you can go to a provider like Rackspace and minutes later have access to as many servers as you need. And it’s massively scalable—vertically or horizontally. It’s on-demand capability.”
Yet the goal here isn’t to become Rackspace (or Amazon or Microsoft), it’s to build your big idea atop their infrastructure. Entrepreneurs no longer have to lay out scarce cash for expensive equipment, spend months to install, configure, and program that equipment, worry about what happens when they need to scale up that equipment, or worry about what happens when it breaks or becomes obsolete.

“The cloud is democratizing our ability to leverage computing on a massive scale,” says Weston. “Today the computation speed that someone in the middle of Mumbai has access to outstrips what the entire US government had during the sixties and seventies. We’re entering an epic period of global innovation where high-performance computing is abundant, reliable, and affordable.”
So what does all of this computing power buy you? An entirely new way to approach innovation, for starters. Consider brute force, a term that refers to our newfound ability to use infinite computing to literally surround problems. Imagine you wanted to solve a Sudoku puzzle. You could try and build an elegant mathematical approach—derive an algorithm that calculates the correct missing numbers—or you could simply ask a computer to try every possible number in every possible box and then select the one that works best. The latter approach is brute force.

On my tour of Autodesk’s Pier 9 Design Center, as a way of illustrating brute force further, Bass points out an electric go-kart he’s building with his fifteen-year-old son. “In the old days, when it comes to attaching this electric motor to that go-kart, I would try for an elegant solution—taking an educated guess on the thickness of brackets and best location, then run a few calculations to find out if what I was doing was adequate. Today I can create a computer model and know exactly the stress and strains at every location for my chosen design. But in the near future, with infinite computing, I could ask the cloud to run design simulations, experimenting with every possible location for the motor and a range of different materials and thicknesses, resulting in not just an adequate design, but the best design.”
And what Bass can do, you can do. If your passion is building better go-karts, the technology now allows you to build the best possible go-karts—and in a fraction of the typical time and for a fraction of the typical cost.

And what is true for go-karts is also true for anything else one wants to create. Moreover, we all learn from our mistakes, but until recently, mistakes were too costly for entrepreneurs to make with wanton abandon. This too has changed. Infinite computing demonetizes error-making, thus democratizing experimentation. No longer do we have to immediately dismiss outlandish ideas for the waste of time and resources they invariably incur. Today we can try them all.

Infinite computing has led to a massive increase in design possibilities, though to really unleash this power, you still have to gather the data, feed it into the computer, then code the algorithms to analyze the data. But what if you didn’t? What if you could just talk to your computer and your computer could perfectly understand your desires, gather the data for you, and analyze it in a fashion that would answer your question? Well, in the broadest sense, that’s the capability we’ll explore in our next exponential technology, the exploding field of artificial intelligence.

Artificial Intelligence (AI): Expertise on Demand
“Just what do you think you’re doing, Dave?”
Strange fact: These words—their deadly calm and deep menace—were the absolute height of artificial intelligence for nearly fifty years. The line is spoken by HAL, the sentient computer onboard the spaceship Discovery One, in director Stanley Kubrick’s legendary 2001: A Space Odyssey, which he cowrote with Arthur C. Clarke.25When not fussing about Dave, HAL supports the crew, acting as their interface to the ship, answering questions and helping analyze collected data (the ship is on a scientific mission). HAL’s physical presence is depicted as an ominous red television camera eye located on equipment panels throughout the ship.

But that glowing red eye was so last century.

