Move over, HAL, say hello to JARVIS.26Short for Just Another Rather Very Intelligent System, JARVIS first appeared in Iron Manas Tony Stark’s personal AI. Programmed to speak with a male voice in a British accent, JARVIS handles everything from house security to Iron Man suit fabrication to running Stark’s global multibillion-dollar business conglomerate—an enormous workload for an extraordinary system.

From a technological perspective, what makes JARVIS extraordinary is both its pervasiveness in Stark’s life and its ability to understand natural-language instructions, even when the banter is laden with irony or humor. More technically, JARVIS is a software shell that interfaces between Stark’s every desire and the rest of the world, able both to gather data from billions of sensors and to take action through any system or robotic device connected to the AI. In this way, the Internet of Things serves as JARVIS’s eyes, ears, arms, and legs.

For sure, JARVIS has dethroned HAL, now holding the title for most recognizable AI in the world, but what makes his dominance more spectacular is that unlike the never-actualized HAL, key elements of JARVIS are starting to come into existence in laboratories and companies around the world.

AI expert and Singularity University cofounder/chancellor Ray Kurzweil27explains: “In the 1960s, when Arthur C. Clarke conceived of HAL,” explains Kurzweil, “it was clearly science fiction. Fifty years ago, we knew very little about AI. Today it’s a different story. Many aspects of JARVIS are either already in existence or on the drawing board.”
Kurzweil would know. Bill Gates called him “the best person I know at predicting the future of artificial intelligence.” Larry Page hired him as Google’s director of engineering, where Kurzweil is leading efforts to develop an AI with natural-language understanding, meaning he’s teaching computers to understand the subtle nuances of the spoken and written language, allowing us to ask our machines far more complex questions than “Siri, where can I find a cup of coffee?”
“It’s a shift from computers having only logical intelligence to ones that also have emotional intelligence,” says Kurzweil. “Once that occurs, AIs will be funny, get your jokes, be sexy, be loving, and even be creative.”
Along these lines, in March 2013, I stood on stage at TED, alongside TED curator Chris Anderson, and announced our intent to join forces and design an AI XPRIZE.28“Here’s the concept,” said Anderson. “An XPRIZE for TED to be awarded to the first artificial intelligence to appear on this stage and present a TED talk so compelling that it commands a standing ovation from you the audience.”
This concept demands that a key number of AI’s abilities either equal or surpass human abilities. When this will happen has been a famous and longstanding debate. Kurzweil himself has pegged the date when AIs will do everything better than humans at 2029.29(As explained in Abundance, his predictions are based on exponential growth curves and have an amazing track record for accuracy.) Certainly, for most entrepreneurs, 2029 is a date too far out to serve as a basis for a business. But no need to wait, as AI is yet another technology transitioning from deceptive to disruptive, and about to become ubiquitous in our daily lives. Consider, in fact, our daily lives. Today, in America, 80 percent of jobs revolve around the service industry,30which in turn can be broken down into four fundamental skills: looking, reading, writing, and integrating knowledge. How far has AI progressed? Computers can now perform all four of these skills and in many cases, better than humans.

Let’s take a closer look.

All four of these skills have emerged from a branch of AI known as machine learning—which is literally the science of how machines learn. And one thing for certain, today machines are learning faster than ever.

Looking, the first category, has long been a task better performed by humans than computers. “The first time that a machine learning algorithm was able to ‘see’ at a level of accuracy similar to humans was in 1995,” explains Singularity University’s head of machine learning, Jeremy Howard.31“That year a US Postal Service competition was won by an algorithm called LeNet 5, which was able to recognize numbers in a zip code and help sort the mail.”
LeNet 5 algorithm recognizing a handwritten “2”
Source: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/lenet/
Progress remained steady (but unremarkable) until 2011, when a series of major breakthroughs put the machine-learning world on high alert. In Germany, an annual competition pits humans against machine learning algorithms in an attempt to see, identify, and categorize traffic signs. Fifty thousand different traffic signs are used—signs obscured by long distances, by trees, by the glare of sunlight. In 2011, for the first time, a machine-learning algorithm bested its makers, achieving a 0.5 percent error rate, compared to 1.2 percent for humans.32
Even more impressive were the results of the 2012 ImageNet Competition, which challenged algorithms to look at one million different images—ranging from birds to kitchenware to people on motor scooters—and correctly slot them into a thousand unique categories. Seriously, it’s one thing for a computer to recognize known objects (zip codes, traffic signs), but categorizing thousands of random objects is an ability that is downright human. Only better. For again the algorithms outperformed people.33
Similar progress is showing up in reading. Today, there are AIs that can accurately and consistently decipher everything from high school student essays to complicated tax forms far faster than humans. Take legal documents, a linguistic quagmire if ever there was one. Yet, as John Markoff wrote in a 2011 article for the New York Times:34“Thanks to advances in artificial intelligence, ‘e-discovery’ software can analyze documents in a fraction of the time for a fraction of the cost.  .  .  . Some programs go beyond just finding documents with relevant terms at computer speeds. They can extract relevant concepts—like documents relevant to social protest in the Middle East—even in the absence of specific terms, and deduce patterns of behavior that would have eluded lawyers examining millions of documents.”
In our third human-skill category—writing—a January 2014 Deloitte University Press report35explains that AI is making a dent here too. “Intelligent automation, though still rapidly developing, has matured to the point where it has penetrated nearly every sector of the economy. [In the writing category], Credit Suisse uses a technology from Narrative Science to analyze millions of data points on thousands of companies and automatically write English research reports that assess company expectations, upside, and risk. The reports help analysts, bankers, and investors make long-term investment decisions and has tripled the volume of reports produced while improving their quality and consistency compared with analyst-written reports.”
Integrating knowledge, our fourth skill, represents the much more complex ability to pull together information from many sources and reach accurate conclusions. Here we find arguably the most important breakthrough and the greatest entrepreneurial opportunity. Remember IBM’s Watson, the supercomputer who bested humans on Jeopardy36in February 2011? Well, as of November 2013, IBM has uploaded Watson to the cloud, making it a development platform available to anyone, especially entrepreneurs. As Michael Rhodin,37the senior vice president at IBM in charge of Watson, says, “Putting Watson on the cloud is aimed at spurring innovation and fueling a new ecosystem of entrepreneurial application software providers—ranging from start-ups and emerging venture-capital-backed business to established players. We’ve even established a new $100 million venture fund to back start-ups using Watson.”
One example of a new start-up backed by Watson is Modernizing Medicine. Back in 2011, Modernizing Medicine launched as an iPad-based, specialty-specific electronic medical records platform with a cool crowdsourced twist.38For example, all dermatologists who sign up with Modernizing Medicine have their outcome data—that is, what was wrong with a patient and what treatment they prescribed—de-identified (meaning patients’ names are removed) and aggregated. This information then becomes available to every dermatologist on the network—some 3,000 of them, or 25 percent of all dermatologists in America—thus significantly improving quality of care. But, in 2014, Modernizing took a huge step forward and partnered with Watson. Since winning on Jeopardy, Watson has been sent to medical school—loaded up with millions of journal articles, textbooks, patient outcomes, scientific papers, and the like. By combining their structured patient outcome data with Watson’s unstructured research data, doctors on the Modernizing Medicine network have access to incredible levels of point-of-care information. “It would be impossible for us humans to replicate what Watson does in health care,” says Modernizing Medicine CEO Daniel Cane.39“Not only can it answer questions pulled from millions of individual documents, it can instantly cite the source and confidence level. Beyond empowering physicians with the most powerful Q&A tool ever created, it will fundamentally change the practice of medicine.”
Even better, for entrepreneurs interested in building Watson-backed business, Cane was stunned by how easy it was to work with IBM. “They provided so much support and guidance,” he explains, “that we were able to build our entire Watson-powered prototype in two weeks.”
One of this book’s core goals is to point out those pivotal moments when a technology becomes ready for entrepreneurial prime time. Watson in the cloud, tied to an openly available API, is the beginning of one such moment, the potential for a Mosaic-like interface explosion, opening AI to all sorts of new businesses and heralding its transition from deceptive to disruptive growth. Attention, exponential entrepreneurs: What are you waiting for?
And everything we’ve just covered is here today. “Soon,” says Ray Kurzweil,40“we will give an AI permission to listen to every phone conversation you have. Permission to read your emails and blogs, eavesdrop on your meetings, review your genome scan, watch what you eat and how much you exercise, even tap into your Google Glass feed. And by doing all this, your personal AI will be able to provide you with information even before you know you need it.”
Imagine, for example, a system that recognizes the faces of people in your visual field and provides you with their names. This shouldn’t be too much of a mental stretch, as these capabilities are already coming online. Now imagine that this same AI also has contextual understanding—meaning the system recognizes that your conversation with your friend is heading in the direction of family life—so the AI reminds you of the names of each of your friend’s family members, as well as any upcoming birthdays they might have.

Behind many of the AI successes mentioned in this section is an algorithm called Deep Learning. Developed by University of Toronto’s Geoffrey Hinton for image recognition, Deep Learning has become the dominant approach in the field. And it should come as no surprise that in spring of 2013, Hinton was recruited, like Kurzweil, to join Google41—a development that will most likely lead to even faster progress.

More recently, Google and NASA Ames Research Center—one of NASA’s field centers—jointly acquired a 512 qubit (quantum bit) computer manufactured by D-Wave Systems to study machine learning. With lightning speed, this computer can tackle face and voice recognition, as well as understanding biological behavior and the management of very large systems. “The tougher, more complex the problem,” says Geordie Rose,42D-Wave’s cofounder and CTO, “the better the results. For most problems, it was eleven thousand times faster, but in the ‘more difficult’ category it was thirty-three thousand times faster. In the ‘most difficult’ category, it was fifty thousand times faster.” So when Stark asks JARVIS to look at a massive amount of imagery data and pick out certain faces in the crowd, well, JARVIS is probably using qubits.

Why am I telling you about artificial intelligence aided by quantum computers? Not because I expect you to start developing these machines or using quantum computing (though a new SU start-up called 1Qbit43has created an online user-interface that would allow an entrepreneur to get access to a D-Wave machine via the web). Instead, the point is that AI has been in a deceptive phase for the past fifty years, ever since 1956, when a bunch of top brains came together for the first time at the Dartmouth Summer Research Project44and made a “spectacularly wrong prediction” about their ability to crack AI over a single hot New England summer. But today, couple the successes of Deep Learning and IBM’s Watson to the near-term predictions of technology oracles like Ray Kurzweil, and we find a field reaching the knee of the exponential growth curve—that is, a field ready to run wild in disruption.

So what does this mean to you, the exponential entrepreneur? This is a multibillion-dollar question. But as you try to find answers, remember that JARVIS is essentially the ultimate user interface, democratizing every exponential technology and giving all of us access to Stark-like capabilities.

Robotics: Our New Workforce
Camel racing is a centuries-old tradition in the Middle East, but it’s an activity primarily reserved for large festivals. Yet, in the past half century, the sport has been transformed into both a mainstay of Arab culture—think the Kentucky Derby for sheikhs—and one of the richest sports on Earth. It’s the jockeys who have changed the most. Twenty years ago, camels were ridden by children—the lightest possible riders—but general principle, injury, and death led to a humanitarian outcry. So both the UAE and Qatar banned the practice, instead replacing children with an even lighter saddle occupant—the robot jockey.45
Today, in camel racing, robot jockeys are the norm. Exactly like traditional jockeys, these robo-replacements sit on a saddle, steer with the reins, and prod with a whip. To prevent the camels from being frightened by their cyborg occupants, designers found that humanlike features—a mannequin face, sunglasses, a hat, traditional racing silks, and even the traditional perfumes used by human jockeys—help keep the animals calm. The latest robot jockeys are small, about a foot high, and light, weighing between five and eight pounds, with skinny hinged arms that control the reins and whip. There’s even a speaker on the robot so camel owners can issue commands to their animals via walkie-talkie as they follow along on an outside track (in air-conditioned SUVs).

Of course, our point isn’t that there’s a bevy of entrepreneurial possibility in camel racing. It’s that robotics, another exponential technology long mired in deception, is now heading for disruption. According to a report by the Littler Workplace Policy Institute:46“Robotics is the fastest growing industry in the world, poised to become the largestin the next decade.” Which is to say, robot jockeys are just the beginning.

Consider Baxter,47the brainchild of legendary roboticist Rodney A. Brooks, Panasonic Professor of Robotics (emeritus) at MIT and cofounder of iRobot (creator of the Roomba). With a humanoid design, a nine-foot wingspan, and a tablet computer for a face, Baxter looks like something out of a cartoon. Grab one of his arms, for example, and Baxter will turn his head in your direction, the tablet computer displaying a pair of wide-open eyes to demonstrate interest. But what is most exciting about Baxter is his user interface.

Unlike most industrial robots, Baxter is human-safe. Getting in a room with a typical six-axis car-building robot is a good way to get dead—which explains why most industrial robots are cordoned off from humans. But Baxter doesn’t need a cage. Sensors detect when the robot hits something unexpected and stops the motion immediately, so “he” can’t hurt you.

Moreover, Baxter has an elegant and simple user interface. Instead of a complicated code-based programming, it learns through guided imitation. Simply move the robot’s arms through the motions you want him to replicate, and presto, he’s programmed. And with AI soon coming online, it won’t be long before putting Baxter through his motions will be replaced by simply having a conversation with him. “Hey, Baxter, could you put this tire on that car?”
“Baxter is a big step forward,” says Dr. Dan Barry,48head of robotics at SU. “It’s the first robot that bridges the gap between mindless, repetitive, robust, single-purpose industrial robots and intelligent, widely sensing, situationally aware, computationally complex, delicate research robots.” More important, Baxter is the kind of robot that entrepreneurs can now build businesses around. Case in point: Digital Apparel, a Bay Area clothing start-up, plans to do 3-D scans of their customer’s bodies, then use those scans as a pattern for cutting and stitching denim to make perfect custom-fitting jeans. And what robot will Digital Apparel use to help assemble your jeans? You guessed it, Baxter.
