
Besides user-friendly robotic interfaces, we’re also seeing exponential progress in robotic agility and mobility. Enabled by a new generation of sensors and actuators, and driven by near-infinite computing and artificial intelligence, there’s a Cambrian explosion49in robotics, with species of all sizes, shapes, and modes of mobility crawling out of the muck of the lab and onto the terra firma of the marketplace. Festo, for one example, has created a robot that flies like a bird. Boston Dynamics, for another, now makes robots that can climb, crawl, jump, and hop, and all while carrying heavy loads (some bots can manage over a hundred kilograms of weight). These “Sherpa-bots” can traverse boulder-strewn hillsides, balance on sheets of ice, and even jump from the ground to a rooftop three stories up.

But what has been relatively slow progress—run out of university labs and funded by government grants—took a quantum leap forward in late 2013, when Amazon announced it was going into the drone business50and Google announced the acquisition of eight robotics companies (including Boston Dynamics).51With the big dogs in the game, progress is coming even faster.

And the resulting change will be considerable. Robots don’t unionize, don’t show up late, and don’t take lunch, yet Baxter can work an assembly line for the equivalent of $4 an hour.52A 2013 report from the Oxford Martin School concludes that 45 percent of American jobs are at high risk of being taken by computers (AI and robots) within the next two decades.53Good or bad, this same trend is evident around the world. In China, Foxconn, the Chinese electronics manufacturer that builds Apple’s iPhone, made news in 2013 when the skyrocketing demand for cell phones led to labor disputes, reports of harsh working conditions, even riots and suicides. In the aftermath of these reports, Foxconn’s president, Terry Gou, said he intended to replace one million workers with robots over the next three years.54
Besides replacing our blue-collar workforce, over the next three to five years, robots will invade a much wider assortment of fields. “Already,” says Dan Barry, “we’re seeing telepresence robots transport our eyes, ears, arms, and legs to conferences and meetings. Autonomous cars, which are, after all, just robots, will [start to] chauffeur people around and deliver goods and services. Over the next decade, robots will also move into health care, replacing doctors for routine surgeries and supplementing nurses for eldercare. If I were an exponential entrepreneur looking to create tremendous value, I’d look for those jobs that are least enjoyable for humans to do.  .  .  . Given that the global market for unskilled labor is worth many trillions of dollars, I would say this is a huge opportunity.”
So how does an entrepreneur take advantage of this opportunity? Well, as a June 3, 2013, article in Entrepreneurexplained:55“Startup infrastructure dedicated to robotics is likewise emerging: hacker spaces (Robot Garden), accelerators (Robot Launchpad) and even a dedicated venture capital firm, New York City–based Grishin Robotics, founded last June by Russian internet entrepreneur Dmitry Grishin.” These advances are proof that a field long out of reach for most entrepreneurs is now open for business. “We’re seeing very early indicators that this market is coming into fruition immediately,” says Jon Callaghan, a founding partner in the early-stage tech venture capital firm True Ventures, in that same Entrepreneurarticle. “It’s super early, but it will hit very, very quickly, and we’ll look back on 2013  .  .  . as a year for robotics coming into its own.”
Genomics and Synthetic Biology
Throughout the past few chapters, we’ve been examining exponentials poised to explode over the next three to five years and seeing how these technologies reinforce and empower one another—the rise of cloud computing enables more capable and ubiquitous AI, which in turn allows the average entrepreneur to program robots. To close this chapter, we’re going to examine synthetic biology, a technology that’s a little further out—say, five to ten years—but is still transitioning from deception to disruption.

And it’s going to be a sizable disruption.

Synthetic biology56is built around the idea that DNA is essentially software—nothing more than a four-letter code arranged in a specific order. Much like with computers, the code drives the machine. In biology, the order of the code governs the cell’s manufacturing processes, instructing it to make specific proteins and such. But, as with all software, DNA can be reprogrammed. Nature’s original code can be swapped out for new, human-written code. We can co-opt the machinery of life, telling it to produce—well, whatever we can think of.

In itself, this idea isn’t new. With genetic engineering, we’ve been inserting a gene or two from this organism into that organism—such as taking the DNA that makes jellyfish glow and, as South Korean researchers did in 2007, inserting it into cats to create, you guessed it, glow-in-the-dark cats.57The difference with synthetic biology is that it’s not just individual letters being swapped out—it’s whole genomes.

“Synthetic biology is essentially genetic engineering gone digital,” explains synthetic biologist and Autodesk distinguished researcher and S. U. professor Andrew Hessel.58“Used to be all this stuff was done by hand in the lab, with enormous expense and high error rates. Today we manipulate DNA with computers, using programs that function much like word processors. Mix and match genetic code, spell and error check, shuffle bits around—it’s becoming drag-and-drop easy.”
This increase in simplicity and accessibility has opened the door to a wonderland of possibilities. New fuels, foods, medicines, construction materials, clothing fibers, and even new organisms are all in the offing. Everything we now manufacture industrially, we’ll eventually be able to assemble biologically.

Take your typical day. After you get out of bed in the morning, what’s the first thing you do? Brush your teeth. Right now your toothpaste is mostly chalk and flavoring, but with synthetic biology, it can be specifically designed to fight your breed of bad breath microbes. “That’s not all,” continues Hessel. “It can have tooth-polishing nanoparticles designed to continue cleaning long after you’ve stopped brushing. It can be designed to detect infection or cancer or diabetes, turning different colors in the presence of each, or to release custom-designed probiotics that balance your microbiome. It can do all of these things. And that’s just the first thing you do in the morning.”
To many, synthetic biology still sounds like science fiction, but what is transforming it into science fact is the same force driving all the other exponential technologies—Moore’s law. Because DNA is nothing more than a four-letter code, when genetics went digital, it was transformed into an information science and thus hopped on the exponential expressway. This is why, in 1995, the National Institute of Health estimated it would take fifty years and $15 billion to sequence the first human genome. But in 2001, Dr. J. Craig Venter completed the task in nine months for $100 million. Today, thanks to exponential growth, you can sequence billions of letters of your genome in a few hours for about $1,000.59But here’s the kicker: Biotechnology isn’t just accelerating at the speed of Moore’s law, it’s accelerating at five times the speed of Moore’s law—doubling in power and halving in price every four months!
What all this means is that bioengineering, once an incredibly exclusive field limited to those with PhDs in large government and university labs, is starting to become an entrepreneurial playground. Already, biohacker spaces (where anyone can go and learn to play with synthetic biology) exist in most major cities and all the necessary equipment is available online (at cut-rate costs). For those not inclined toward the science, dozens of contract research and manufacturing services (CRAMS) are willing to do the heavy lifting for a fee. Perhaps the biggest news is that synthetic biology is on the verge of developing the ultimate enabling technology and leveler of the playing field—a set of user-friendly interfaces.

One such tool is under development at Autodesk’s Pier 9 design center, where Carlos Olguin60is working on Project Cyborg, a synthetic biology interface that allows high school students, entrepreneurs, and citizen scientists to program DNA. “We’re working hard to deskill the technology,” says Olguin. “A modeling process that would previously have taken weeks or months to complete and [would] require post-PhD level abilities can now be completed in a few seconds with relative ease. The goal here is to make programming with biological parts as intuitive as Facebook. We want more people designing and contributing, people who don’t have a PhD, people like Jack Andraka—the fourteen-year-old high school student who won the grand prize of the Intel Science and Engineering Fair for creating a fast, accurate, pennies-on-the-dollar test for pancreatic cancer.”
And because this software lives in the cloud, not only can anyone use it to run experiments, anyone can sell the results on Autodesk’s soon-to-be-established Project Cyborg marketplace, meaning synthetic biology is about to get access to that fantastic accelerator of entrepreneurial possibility: its first app store.

Making One Hundred Years Old the New Sixty
While the bulk of this chapter has been concerned with the exploitation of individual technologies for their entrepreneurial possibilities, even more potential can be found at the intersection of multiple fields. In fact, along just these lines, in March of 2013, I joined forces with genetics wizard Dr. J. Craig Venter and stem-cell pioneer Dr. Robert Hariri to found perhaps my boldest venture ever: Human Longevity, Inc. (HLI).61Venter, who serves as CEO, described HLI’s mission as “using the combined power of genomics, infinite computing, machine learning, and stem cell therapies to tackle one of the greatest medical, scientific, and societal challenges—aging and aging-related diseases.” Hariri, who pioneered the use of placental-derived stem cells, goes on to say: “Our goal is to help all of us live a longer and healthier life. By reenergizing our stem cells, the regenerative engine of our bodies, we can maintain our mobility, cognition, and aesthetics long into our later years.” Put simpler, HLI’s goal is to make one hundred years old the new sixty.

We launched HLI with $85 million in seed capital, raised at record speed. Part of the reason for this velocity is that the company sits at the intersection of many of the exponential technologies discussed in this chapter: robotics, which enables lightning-fast sequencing; AI and machine learning, which can make sense of petabytes of raw genomic data; cloud computing and networks for transmitting, handling, and storing that data; and synthetic biology for correcting and rewriting the corrupted genome of our aging stem cells. Couple that with the incredible value proposition of abundant, longer, and healthier lives—there is over $50 trillion locked up in the bank accounts of people over the age of sixty-five—and you understand the potential.

And understanding this potential is critical if you’re going to succeed as an exponential entrepreneur. Consider that, twenty years ago, the idea that a computer algorithm could help companies with funny names (Uber, Airbnb, Quirky) dematerialize twentieth-century businesses would have seemed delusional. Fifteen years ago, if you wanted access to a supercomputer, you still had to buy one (not rent one by the minute on the cloud). Ten years ago, genetic engineering was big government, and big business and 3-D printing meant expensive plastic prototypes. Seven years ago, the only robot most entrepreneurs had access to was a Roomba, and AI meant a talking ATM machine, not a freeway-driving autonomous car. Two years ago, the idea of living past a hundred was a crazy idea. You get the picture.

And it’s a radical picture. Today’s exponential entrepreneurs have at their disposal more than enough power, as Steve Jobs famously said, to put a dent in the universe.62Billion-dollar companies are being built faster than ever, and trillion-dollar industries are on their way. But before you consider taking your swing at the exponential piñata, the first and most important step is to convince yourself that you can take this step—which is why our next three chapters focus on the most critical tools in the kit of an exponential entrepreneur: the psychological techniques needed to go bold.PART TWOBOLD MINDSETCHAPTER FOURClimbing Mount BoldThe Secret of “Skonk”
It started sometime in the 1930s. Our location is deep backwoods, Dogpatch, Kentucky, where tragedy is unfolding. Dozens and dozens of locals are being killed on a yearly basis, felled by the toxic fumes of skonk oil, a compound brewed at the so-called Skonk Works by grinding dead skunks and worn shoes inside a blazing still. Or at least, that’s how Al Capp tells the story.1
Al Capp was the creator of the legendary comic strip Li’l Abner, and the Skonk Works were among his most memorable inventions—though Capp had little to do with the term’s considerable staying power. Instead, we can thank the aerospace giant Lockheed for that.

In 1943, Lockheed’s chief engineer, Clarence “Kelly” Johnson, fielded a call from the US Department of Defense. German jet fighters had just appeared over Europe, and America needed a counterpunch. The mission was unbelievably critical, the deadline impossibly tight. Kelly, though, had an idea. At their Burbank, California, facility, he recruited a small posse of his brightest engineers and mechanics, gave them total design freedom—no idea too weird or too wild—and then walled them off from the rest of Lockheed’s bureaucracy. No one without proper clearance was even told the purpose of this new project. No one with proper clearance ever breathed a word of their mission. Though, as these employees were housed in a rented circus tent (space was at a premium) intentionally located next to an exceptionally stinky plastics factory (to keep nosy people away), breathing itself was a little hard. That was why engineer Irv Culver borrowed Al Capp’s terminology and started calling the place the Skonk Works.

One day, the story goes, the Department of the Navy was trying to reach Lockheed for an update on their new jet (technically the P-80) and got transferred to Culver’s line by mistake. In his then-standard fashion, he answered the phone: “Skonk Works, inside man, Culver.”2
The name stuck. A few years later, at the request of the comic strip copyright holders, the spelling was changed to Skunk Works.

And the Skunk Works worked. The US’s first military jet was delivered to the Pentagon just 143 days later, a staggeringly short time frame that was, more incredibly, seven days ahead of schedule. In a typical military project, contractors can’t even get their paperwork signed in that window, forget about building anything. Yet over the coming decades Lockheed’s Skunk Works would repeat this success, going on to produce some of the world’s most famous aircraft—the U-2, the SR-71, the Nighthawk, the Raptor—with this same methodology. These planes helped the United States win the cold war, of course, but their bigger impact was organizational: for the next half a century, whenever a company wanted to go bold, skunk was often the way innovation got done.

Everyone from Raytheon and DuPont to Walmart and Nordstrom has gotten in on the skunk game. In the early 1980s, to offer another example, Apple cofounder Steve Jobs leased a building behind the Good Earth restaurant in Silicon Valley, stocked it with twenty brilliant designers, and created his own skunk works to build the first Macintosh computer.3The division was set apart from Apple’s normal R&D department and led by Jobs himself. When people asked him why they needed this new facility, Jobs liked to say: “It is better to be a pirate than join the Navy.”
The question is why. When it comes to fostering bold innovation, why is it better to be a pirate? Why does the skunk methodology consistently foster such great results? And most importantly, what does this have to do with today’s entrepreneur and a desire to tackle the bold?
Turns out, plenty.

The Secrets of Skunk: Part One
