Over the past few chapters, we’ve seen how exponentially accelerating technology provides today’s entrepreneurs with an astounding reach, allowing small teams of innovators to tackle the kinds of grand challenges that were once the sole province of corporations or governments. This is huge news. At Singularity University, one of our core tenets is that the world’s grandest challenges contain the world’s biggest business opportunities. And because of exponential technology, for the first time in history, entrepreneurs can actually get in on this game. But there’s a rub: Exponentials alone won’t get this job done.

Climbing Mount Bold is not just technologically difficult, it’s also incredibly psychologically difficult. Every innovator interviewed for this book emphasized the importance of the mental game, arguing that without the right mindset, entrepreneurs have absolutely no chance of success. I couldn’t agree more. Attitude is the ball game. If you think you can or think you can’t—well, you’re right. Thus the goal of part two of this book is to provide you with an attitude upgrade—a series of battle-hardened, time-tested psychological strategies for going big and bold.

Toward this end, we’ll take a three-pronged approach. In this chapter, we’ll peek under the hood of skunk, getting at the core mechanisms that have turned this approach to innovation into one of the most successful in modern history. In the next, we’ll explore the mental tools and techniques that I have personally relied upon in my life and work. Finally, to close part two, we’ll meet a group of exceptional entrepreneurial billionaires—Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, Richard Branson, and Larry Page—who are important not solely because of their financial success, but because that success has given them the ability to think at scale, the very skill needed to tackle grand challenges.

But first, the secrets of skunk.

Traditionally, when exploring these secrets, researchers start by parsing Kelly Johnson’s fourteen rules for going skunk. This is a useful approach, and in the next section, we too shall venture down this path. But before that happens, it’s helpful to address an idea baked into the DNA of this methodology yet often omitted from the discussion—the purpose of the project itself.

Companies do not go skunk for business as usual. These innovation accelerators are always about business as unusual. They are created to tackle the Herculean, purposefully built around what psychologists call “high, hard goals.” And it’s the difficult nature of those goals that is actually the first secret to skunk success.

In the late 1960s, University of Toronto psychologist Gary Latham and University of Maryland psychologist Edwin Locke discovered that goal setting is one of the easiest ways to increase motivation and enhance performance.4Back then this was something of a shocking finding. General thinking was that happy workers were productive workers and putting too much stress on employees—by, say, imposing goals—was considered bad for business. But in dozens and dozens of studies, Latham and Locke found that setting goals increased performance and productivity 11 to 25 percent.5That’s quite a boost. If an eight-hour day is our baseline, that’s like getting two extra hours of work simply by building a mental frame (aka a goal) around the activity.

But not every goal is the same. “We found that if you want the largest increase in motivation and productivity,” says Latham, “then big goals lead to the best outcomes. Big goals significantly outperform small goals, medium-sized goals, and vague goals. It comes down to attention and persistence—which are two of the most important factors in determining performance. Big goals help focus attention, and they make us more persistent. The result is we’re much more effective when we work, and much more willing to get up and try again when we fail.”
This is a critical piece of information for the exponential entrepreneur. Starting any business is hard. Starting a business with the intention of disrupting an industry—now, that’s downright terrifying. But Locke and Latham’s work shows that there’s hidden leverage available. Because the practice focuses attention and increases motivation, by setting big goals, we’re actually helping ourselves achieve those big goals.

Yet for these high, hard goals to really work their magic, Locke and Latham found that certain moderators—the word psychologists use to describe “if-then” conditions—need to be in place. One of the most important is commitment. “You have to believe in what you’re doing,” continues Latham. “Big goals work best when there’s an alignment between an individual’s values and the desired outcome of the goal. When everything lines up, we’re totally committed—meaning we’re paying even more attention, are even more resilient, and are way more productive as a result.”
This is another key point. When Kelly Johnson created the original skunk works, the goal wasn’t to build a new plane in record time—that was just one of many things that happened on the way to the main big goal: saving the world from Nazi peril. This is the kind of big goal everyone can get behind. It’s why the engineers agreed to work horrific hours in a foul-smelling circus tent. And most importantly, because this alignment between core values and desired outcomes jacked up performance and productivity, it became one of the fundamental reasons that plane was delivered in record time.

The Secrets of Skunk: Part Two
At the Lockheed skunk works, Kelly Johnson ran a tight ship. He loved efficiency. He had a motto—“be quick, be quiet, and be on time”—and a set of rules.6And while we are parsing the deep secrets of skunk, it’s to “Kelly’s rules” we must now turn.

Wall the skunk works off from the rest of the corporate bureaucracy—that’s what you learn if you boil Johnson’s rules down to their essence. Out of his fourteen rules, four pertain solely to military projects and can thus be excluded from this discussion. Three are ways to increase rapid iteration (a topic we’ll come back to in a moment), but the remaining seven are all ways to enforce isolation. Rule 3, for example: “The number of people with any connection to the project should be restricted in an almost vicious manner.” Rule 13 is more of the same: “Access by outsiders to the project and its personnel must be strictly controlled by appropriate security measures.” Isolation, then, according to Johnson, is the most important key to success in a skunk works.

The reasoning here is twofold. There’s the obvious need for military secrecy, but more important is the fact that isolation stimulates risk taking, encouraging ideas weird and wild and acting as a counterforce to organizational inertia. Organizational inertia is the notion that once any company achieves success, its desire to develop and champion radical new technologies and directions is often tempered by the much stronger desire not to disrupt existing markets and lose their paychecks. Organizational inertia is fear of failure writ large, the reason Kodak didn’t recognize the brilliance of the digital camera, IBM initially dismissed the personal computer, and America Online (AOL) is, well, barely online.

But what is true for a corporation is also true for the entrepreneur. Just as the successful skunk works isolates the innovation team from the greater organization, successful entrepreneurs need a buffer between themselves and the rest of society. As Burt Rutan, winner of the Ansari XPRIZE, once taught me: “The day before something is truly a breakthrough, it’s a crazy idea.” Trying out crazy ideas means bucking expert opinion and taking big risks. It means not being afraid to fail. Because you will fail. The road to bold is paved with failure, and this means having a strategy in place to handle risk and learn from mistakes is critical.

In a talk given at re:Invent 2012, Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos7explains it like this: “Many people misperceive what good entrepreneurs do. Good entrepreneurs don’t like risk. They seek to reduce risk. Starting a company is already risky  .  .  . [so] you systematically eliminate risk in those early days.”
This is exactly where Kelly Johnson’s final three rules come into play.

All three of these rules are ways to increase rapid iteration—which is one of the best risk-mitigation strategies ever developed. If you’re looking for a quick and dirty definition of the term, try the unofficial motto of Silicon Valley: “Fail early, fail often, fail forward.”8Bold ventures—especially the world-changing type we’re advocating here—require this kind of experimental approach. Yet as most experiments fail, real progress requires trying out tons of ideas, decreasing the lag time between trials, and increasing the knowledge gained from results. This is rapid iteration.

Take software design. The traditional methodology involved creating a product in secret, usually over a number of years, then bomb-dropping it on the public with one massive launch. Unfortunately, in a world of increasingly rapid change, spending a few years separated from one’s customers can mean bankruptcy.

Enter agile design, an ideology that emphasizes fast feedback loops.9Instead of launching a finely polished gem, companies now release a “minimum viable product,” then get immediate feedback from customers, incorporate that feedback into the next iteration, release a slightly upgraded version, and repeat. Instead of design cycles that last years, the agile process takes weeks and produces results directly in line with consumer expectations. This is rapid iteration.

“We saw this with Gmail,” says Salim Ismail.10“Instead of sending designers off to spend years coming up with the best twenty-five features anyone would ever want in an email program, Google released a version with around three features and asked their customers what else they wanted the program to do. It was very fast feedback and completely iterative. That’s why LinkedIn founder Reid Hoffman famously said, ‘If you’re not embarrassed by the first version of your product, you’ve launched too late.’ ”
Motivation 2.0
Up to now, our exploration of skunk has focused on big goals, isolation, and rapid iteration as strategies for tuning psychology and increasing productivity. This section will do more of the same, only instead of examining these strategies in isolation, we’ll blend them together, exploring the additional and significant psychological boost that comes from employing these ideas in aggregate.

To understand this boost requires dipping back into the science of motivation. For most of the last century, that science focused on extrinsic rewards—that is, external motivators, “if-then” conditions of the “do this to get that” variety. With extrinsic rewards, we incentivize the behavior we want more of and punish the behavior we dislike. In business, for example, when we want to drive performance, we offer classic extrinsic rewards: bonuses (money) and promotions (money and prestige).

Unfortunately, an ever-growing pile of research shows that extrinsic rewards do not work like most suppose. Take money. When it comes to increasing motivation, cash is king only under very specific conditions. For very basic tasks that don’t require any cognitive skill, money can effectively influence behavior. If I’m nailing together boards for five dollars an hour, offering me ten will increase the rate at which I nail. But once tasks become slightly more complex—such as shaping those nailed boards into a house—once they require even the slightest bit of conceptual ability, money actually has the exact opposite effect: It lowers motivation, hinders creativity, and decreases performance.11
What’s more, this isn’t the only issue with money as a motivator. Money, it now appears, is only an effective motivator until our basic biological needs are met, with a little left over for discretionary spending. This is why, in America, as the Nobel laureate Daniel Kahneman recently discovered, when you plot happiness and life satisfaction alongside income, they overlap until $70,000—i.e., the point at which money stops being a major issue—then wildly diverge.12Once we pay people enough so that meeting basic needs is no longer a constant cause for concern, extrinsic rewards lose their effectiveness, while intrinsic rewards—meaning internal, emotional satisfactions—become far more critical.

Three in particular stand out: autonomy, mastery, and purpose.

Autonomy is the desire to steer our own ship. Mastery is the desire to steer it well. And purpose is the need for the journey to mean something. These three intrinsic rewards are the very motivators that motivate us most. In his book Drive,13author Daniel Pink explains it like this:
