The science shows that  .  .  . typical twentieth-century carrot-and-stick motivators—things we consider somehow a “natural” part of human enterprise—can sometimes work. But they’re effective in only a surprisingly narrow band of circumstances. The science shows that “if-then” rewards  .  .  . are not only ineffective in many situations, but can also crush the high-level, creative, conceptual abilities that are central to current and future economic and social progress. The science shows that the secret to high performance isn’t our biological drive (our survival needs) or our reward-and-punishment drive, but our third drive—our deep-seated desire to direct our own lives, to extend and expand our abilities, and to fill our life with purpose.

To take on the bold, we need this third drive. Leveraging exponential technology to tackle big goals and using rapid iteration and fast feedback to accelerate progress toward those goals is about innovation at warp speed. But if entrepreneurs can’t upgrade their psychology to keep pace with this technology, then they have little chance of winning this race.

And this is another secret to skunk—it provides the full upgrade. Combine the rules for isolation and rapid iteration discussed in this section with the value-aligned big goals from the last and you end up with a great recipe for autonomy, mastery, and purpose. Walling off the innovation team creates an environment where people are free to follow their own curiosity—it amplifies autonomy. Rapid iteration means accelerated learning cycles, which means putting people on the path to mastery. And aligning big goals with individual values creates true purpose.

Most importantly, you don’t need to be running a skunk works to take advantage of these intrinsic motivators. Google taps “autonomy” on a company-wide basis with their 20 percent time—engineers are encouraged to devote 20 percent of their time to projects of their own design—and the resulting boost in motivation explains why Googlers often joke that “20 percent time should really be called ‘120 percent time.’ ”14Tony Hseih, CEO of Zappos, helped disrupt the retail space by emphasizing mastery, making the “pursuit of growth and learning” central to his corporate philosophy and famously saying: “Failure isn’t a badge of shame. It is a rite of passage.”15And Toms Shoes CEO Blake Mycoskie harnessed the power of purpose by deciding to give away one pair of shoes to a child in the developing world for every pair sold.

With this kind of psychological core, it’s no surprise that Google, Zappos, and Toms all became industry leaders in record time. Creating a company with autonomy, mastery, and purpose as key values means creating a company built for speed. And this is no longer optional. In a world of increasing rapid change, tapping our third drive is an absolute fundamental for any exponential entrepreneur. Yet, unlike big companies, which often have to go skunk to tap this drive, bold entrepreneurs can get ahead of the game, baking autonomy, mastery, and purpose into their corporate culture from the get-go, rather than bolting them on later.

How Google Goes Skunk
Astro Teller is tall and lean, with a thick goatee, rimless glasses and long hair, usually tied back in a ponytail. He’s the grandson of two different Nobel laureates, including Edward Teller, the father of the atomic bomb. He’s also the kind of guy who wears T-shirts. Usually the shirts say something pertinent yet ironic. A few years back, for example, when he gave a talk about the importance of innovation to a group of eighty Fortune 200 executives at Singularity University, he was wearing a T-shirt that read: “Safety Third.”
Teller heads GoogleX, the Internet giant’s skunk works, though his technical title is Captain of Moonshots. The title comes from a conversation he had with CEO Larry Page not long after he was hired. “In the early days,” explains Teller,16“Larry and Sergey’s interests guided GoogleX. But when I joined, they decided they wanted more definition behind the lab’s purpose. I asked Larry if he wanted me to build a research center.”
“No,” replied Page, “too boring.”
“How about an innovation incubator?”
“Boring too.”
So Teller thought for a while and finally asked, “So, are we taking moonshots?”
“That’s it,” answered Page, “that’s exactly what we’re doing.”
And that is exactly what they’re doing. Over the past few years, Google has repeatedly made headlines with the audacity of their moonshots, dedicating their skunk works to everything from space exploration and life extension to AI and robotics. In other words, as of right now, there is perhaps no other company in the world playing the skunk game at such an elevated level.

Over the next few pages, we’re going to examine exactly how Google takes moonshots, giving you an inside look at their skunk methodology and paying attention to which of Kelly Johnson’s initial ideas they’ve kept, which they’ve changed, and—from a psychological perspective—why.

Let’s start with what they’ve kept the same.

On many levels, Google’s moonshot factory is no different from a traditional skunk works. Isolation, for example, is also key to their process. “In any organization,” says Teller, “the bulk of your people will be climbing the hill they’re standing on. That’s what you want them to do. That’s their job. A skunk works does a totally different job. It’s a group of people looking for a better hill to climb. This is threatening to the rest of the organization. It just makes good sense to separate these two groups.”
It also makes sense to encourage skunk workers to take risks. “If you’re telling people to find a new mountain to climb,” says Teller, “it’s pretty stupid to tell them to play it safe. Moonshots are risky. If you’re interested in tackling these challenges, you’re going to have to embrace some serious risk.”
About this last bit—well, he’s not kidding. Where GoogleX deviates from traditional skunk is with the size of the goals they’re setting. Moonshots, by their definition, live in that gray area between audacious projects and pure science fiction. Instead of mere 10 percent gains, they aim for 10x (meaning ten times) improvements—that’s a 1000 percent increase in performance.

While a 10x improvement is gargantuan, Teller has very specific reasons for aiming exactly that high. “You assume that going 10x bigger is going to be ten times harder,” he continues, “but often it’s literally easier to go bigger. Why should that be? It doesn’t feel intuitively right. But if you choose to make something 10 percent better, you are almost by definition signing up for the status quo—and trying to make it a little bit better. That means you start from the status quo, with all its existing assumptions, locked into the tools, technologies, and processes that you’re going to try to slightly improve. It means you’re putting yourself and your people into a smartness contest with everyone else in the world. Statistically, no matter the resources available, you’re not going to win. But if you sign up for moonshot thinking, if you sign up to make something 10x better, there is no chance of doing that with existing assumptions. You’re going to have to throw out the rule book. You’re going to have to perspective-shift and supplant all that smartness and resources with bravery and creativity.”
This perspective shift is key. It encourages risk taking and enhances creativity while simultaneously guarding against the inevitable decline. Teller explains: “Even if you think you’re going to go ten times bigger, reality will eat into your 10x. It always does. There will be things that will be more expensive, some that are slower; others that you didn’t think were competitive will become competitive. If you shoot for 10x, you might only be at 2x by the time you’re done. But 2x is still amazing. On the other hand, if you only shoot for 2x [i.e., 200 percent], you’re only going to get 5 percent and it’s going to cost you the perspective shift that comes from aiming bigger.”
Most critically here, this 10x strategy doesn’t hold true just for large corporations. “A start-up is simply a skunk works without the big company around it,” says Teller. “The upside is there’s no Borg to get sucked back into; the downside is you have no money. But that’s not a reason not to go after moonshots. I think the opposite is true. If you publicly state your big goal, if you vocally commit yourself to making more progress than is actually possible using normal methods, there’s no way back. In one fell swoop you’ve severed all ties between yourself and all the expert assumptions.” Thus entrepreneurs, by striving for truly huge goals, are tapping into the same creativity accelerant that Google uses to achieve such goals.

That said, by itself, a willingness to take bigger risks is no guarantee of success. The rapid iteration approach of “fail early, fail often” still applies. As a result, some serious risk mitigation is equally critical.

At GoogleX, this mitigation comes from an especially vicious feedback process. “We try a lot of things,” says Teller, “but we don’t allow most of them to continue. At several different stages, we end most projects. Only a very small number are allowed to escalate to the next level. In the end, it looks like we got everything right, like we’re geniuses—but that’s not what’s going on at all.”
What’s going on is data or death. GoogleX demands that all their projects be measurable and testable. They won’t start a project if they don’t have ways to judge its progress. And they do judge its progress—repeatedly. Sometimes projects end, sometimes they’re absorbed into Google proper, sometimes they’re stalled—meaning they can continue but are not allowed to grow. “As far as individual projects are concerned,” says Teller, “this allows for a fairly freewheeling approach. But taken together, in aggregate, it’s actually a fairly rigorous process.”
It’s also Darwinian evolution applied to rapid iteration. Big ideas for progress are competing against other big ideas for progress. While it’s not a zero-sum game—as there’s more than one winner—it’s ruthless nonetheless. To put this in different terms, just as Google’s version of skunk amps up the risk taking with the size of the goals they set (their 10x requirement), forcing those goals to compete in an experimental ecosystem amps up the risk mitigation.

And while average entrepreneurs might not be able to afford to start, stop, or stall dozens of projects at once—the Google ecosystem—they can set up multiple experimental tracks, employing rapid iteration and tighter feedback loops to fail forward far more consistently. Even better, as Teller argues, this kind of rigor brings a funding advantage. “People think that bold projects don’t get funding because of their audacity. That’s not the case. They don’t get funded because of a lack of measurability. Nobody wants to make a large up-front investment and wait ten years for any sign of life. But more often than not, if you can show progress along the way, smart investors will come on some pretty crazy rides.”
Google’s Eight Innovation Principles
While Kelly Johnson had fourteen rules, Google has eight innovation principles that govern their strategy, famously summarized in a 2011 article by Google senior vice president of advertising Susan Wojcicki.17Throughout this book, we’ll see them highlighted in different ways and exhibited by different people. Without doubt, these rules are core to your success as an exponential entrepreneur. My suggestion is that you write them on your wall, use them as a filter for your next start-up idea, but above all, don’t ignore them. Let’s take a quick look:
1.  Focus on the User.We’ll see this again in chapter 6, when Larry Page and Richard Branson speak about the importance of building customer-centric businesses.

2.  Share Everything.In a hyperconnected world with massive amounts of cognitive surplus, it’s critical to be open, allow the crowd to help you innovate, and build on each other’s ideas.

3.  Look for Ideas Everywhere.The entire third part of this book is dedicated to the principle that crowdsourcing can provide you with incredible ideas, insights, products, and services.

4.  Think Big but Start Small.This is the basis for Singularity University’s 109thinking. You can start a company on day one that affects a small group, but aim to positively impact a billion people within a decade.

5.  Never Fail to Fail.The importance of rapid iteration: Fail frequently, fail fast, and fail forward.
