
6.  Spark with Imagination, Fuel with Data.Agility—that is, nimbleness—is a key discriminator against the large and linear. And agility requires lots of access to new and often wild ideas and lots of good data to separate the worthwhile from the wooly. For certain, the most successful start-ups today are data driven. They measure everything and use machine learning and algorithms to help them analyze that data to make decisions.

7.  Be a Platform.Look at the most successful companies getting billion-dollar valuations  .  .  . AirBnb, Uber, Instagram  .  .  . they are all platform plays. Is yours?
8.  Have a Mission That Matters.Perhaps most important, is the company you’re starting built upon a massively transformative purpose? When the going gets hard, will you push on or give up? Passion is fundamental to forward progress.

Flow
In trying to parse the secrets to skunk, we’ve covered a motley crew of mind hacks. On the motivational side, we’ve explored bold goals, value-aligned bold goals, and the trifecta super-charge of autonomy, mastery, and purpose. On the performance side, we enhanced creativity with the perspective-shift of 10x, boosted risk taking with rapid iteration, and shortening learning cycles with fast feedback. Then, to derisk the whole process, we introduced the rigor of experimental ecosystems. But there’s a larger point here—this crew is not so motley.

All of these mind hacks serve an additional function. Not only do they increase motivation and performance, they do double duty as triggers for the state of consciousness known as flow18
Technically, flow is defined as an optimal state of consciousness where we feel our best and perform our best. And you’ve probably had some experience with this state. If you’ve ever lost an afternoon to a great conversation or become so involved in a work project that all else was forgotten, then you’ve tasted the experience. Flow describes these moments of total absorption, when we become so focused on the task at hand that everything else falls away. Action and awareness merge. Time flies. Self vanishes. All aspects of performance—mental and physical—go through the roof.

We call this experience flowbecause that is the sensation conferred. In the state, every action, each decision, leads effortlessly, fluidly, seamlessly to the next. It’s high-speed problem solving; it’s being swept away by the river of ultimate performance.

This last bit is no exaggeration. Over a hundred and fifty years of research show that flow sits at the heart of almost every athletic championship, underpins major scientific breakthroughs, and accounts for significant progress in the arts. “In recent business studies,” says John Hagel III,19cochairman of the Deloitte Center for the Edge, “top executives report being five times more productive in flow.” This is a staggering statistic. Five times more productive is a 500 percent increase. As Virgin CEO Richard Branson says, “In two hours [in flow], I can accomplish tremendous things  .  .  . It’s like there’s no challenge I can’t meet.”20
Hagel explains further: “In all our studies of extreme performance improvement, the people and organizations who covered the most distance in the shortest time were always the ones who were tapping into passion and finding flow.”
How to find flow is a tricky question, yet it’s one my coauthor, Steven Kotler, has spent the past fifteen years trying to answer. Steven is the cofounder and director of research for the Flow Genome Project, an organization dedicated to decoding the science of ultimate human performance.

One of the lessons to emerge from this work is that flow states have triggers—that is, preconditions that lead to more flow. There are seventeen flow triggers in total—three environmental, three psychological, ten social, and one creative. We’ll go into greater detail about these triggers in the next section, but the first thing to know is that flow follows focus. It is a state of total absorption. Thus all seventeen triggers are ways of heightening and tightening focus, of driving attention into the now and thus driving flow.

This also brings us back to the secrets of skunk. All the various mind hacks described in this chapter—the so-called secrets—are also incredible focusing mechanisms. Increased risk taking is obvious: Flow follows focus, and consequences always catch our attention. As big goals have big consequences, they too serve this function. And value-aligned big goals work even better. When alignment exists, passion results. As we always pay more attention to those things we’re passionate about, value-aligned big goals further increase focus. Autonomy, mastery, and purpose—which all serve to boost intrinsic motivation and further passion—do more of the same. Fast feedback, meanwhile, allows real-time course correction; thus we don’t lose focus wondering about how to better our performance. By creating an environment packed with flow triggers, skunk works create a high-flow environment.

As a way of exploring how today’s entrepreneur can create such an environment, I want to introduce the book’s first how-to section. The idea here is to offer a series of actionable steps, immediately applicable to your life and work and guaranteed to move the needle. In this case, we’re going to break down flow’s seventeen triggers21in far more detail, focusing specifically on how they apply to exponential entrepreneurs.

Flow’s Environmental Triggers
Environmental triggers are qualities in the environment that drive people deeper into flow.

High consequencesare the first in this category. As mentioned above, flow follows focus, and consequences catch our attention. When there’s danger lurking in the environment, we don’t need to concentrate extra hard to drive focus; the elevated risk levels do the job for us.

And this doesn’t just mean taking physical risks. The science shows that other risks—emotional, intellectual, creative, social—work just as well. “To reach flow,” explains psychiatrist Ned Hallowell,22“one must be willing to take risks. The lover must be willing to risk rejection to enter this state. The athlete must be willing to risk physical harm, even loss of life, to enter this state. The artist must be willing to be scorned and despised by critics and the public and still push on. And the average person—you and me—must be willing to fail, look foolish, and fall flat on our faces should we wish to enter this state.”
These facts also tell us that those exponential entrepreneurs with “fail forward” as their de facto motto have an incredible advantage. If people don’t have the space to fail, then they don’t have the ability to take risks. At Facebook, there is a sign hanging in the main stairwell that reads: “Move fast, break things.” This kind of attitude is critical. If you’re not incentivizing risk, you’re denying access to flow—which is the only way to keep pace in a breakneck world.

Rich environment, the next environmental trigger, is a combination platter of novelty, unpredictability, and complexity—three elements that catch and hold our attention much like risk. Novelty means both danger and opportunity, and when either are present, it pays to pay attention. Unpredictability means we don’t know what happens next; thus we pay extra attention to the next event. Complexity, when there’s lots of salient information coming at us at once, does more of the same.

How to employ this trigger on the job? Simply increase the amount of novelty, complexity, and unpredictability in the environment. This is exactly what Astro Teller did by throwing out existing assumptions and demanding a 10x improvement. But it’s also what Steve Jobs did when he designed Pixar. By building a large atrium at the building’s center, then locating the mailboxes, cafeteria, meeting rooms, and most famously, the bathrooms, beside the atrium, he forced employees from all walks of the company to randomly bump into one another, massively increasing the amount of novelty, complexity, and unpredictability in their daily life.

Deep embodimentis a kind of total physical awareness. It means paying attention with multiple sensory streams at once. Take Montessori education. The Montessori classroom has been shown to be one of the highest flow environments on Earth.23Why? Because they emphasize learning through doing. Don’t just read about that lighthouse, go out and build one. By working with your hands alongside your brain, you’re engaging multiple sensory systems at once, grabbing hold of the attention system and forcing focus into the now.

Flow’s Psychological Triggers
Psychological triggers are conditions in our inner environment that create more flow. They’re psychological strategies for driving attention into the now.

Back in the 1970s, pioneering flow researcher Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi identified clear goals, immediate feedback, and the challenge/skills ratio as the three most critical.24Let’s take a closer look.

Clear goals, our first psychological trigger, tell us where and when to put our attention. They are different than the high, hard problems of big goals. Those big goals refer to overarching passions: feeding the hungry, opening the space frontier. Clear goals, meanwhile, concern all the baby steps it’s going to take to achieve those big goals. With these smaller goals, call them sub-goals, clarity is of the utmost importance for staying present and finding flow. When goals are clear, the mind doesn’t have to wonder about what to do or what to do next—it already knows. Thus concentration tightens, motivation is heightened, and extraneous information gets filtered out. As a result, action and awareness start to merge, and we’re pulled even deeper into now. Just as important, in the now, there’s no past or future and a lot less room for self—which are the intruders most likely to yank us to the then.

This also tells us something about emphasis. When considering clear goals, most have a tendency to skip over the adjective clearto get to the noun goals. When told to set clear goals, we immediately visualize ourselves on the Olympic podium, the Academy Award stage, or the Fortune 500 list, saying, “I’ve been picturing this moment since I was fifteen,” and think that’s the point.

But those podium moments can pull us out of the present. Even if success is seconds away, it’s still a future event subject to hopes, fears, and all sorts of now-crushing distraction. Think of the long list of infamous sporting chokes: the dropped pass in the final seconds of the Super Bowl; the missed putt at the end of the Augusta Masters. In those moments, the gravity of the goal pulled the participants out of the now, when, ironically, the now was all they needed to win.

If creating more flow is the aim, then the emphasis falls on clear, not goals.Clarity gives us certainty. We know what to do and where to focus our attention while we are doing it. When goals are clear, metacognition is replaced by in-the-moment cognition, and the self stays out of the picture.
