
Applying this idea in our daily life means breaking tasks into bite-size chunks and setting goals accordingly. A writer, for example, is better off trying to pen three great paragraphs at a time, rather than attempting one great chapter. Think challenging yet manageable—just enough stimulation to shortcut attention into the now, not enough stress to pull you back out again.

Immediate feedback, our next psychological trigger, is another shortcut into the now. The term refers to a direct, in-the-moment coupling between cause and effect. As a focusing mechanism, immediate feedback is something of an extension of clear goals. Clear goals tell us what we’re doing; immediate feedback tells us how to do it better. If we know how to improve performance in real time, the mind doesn’t go off in search of clues for betterment; we can keep ourselves fully present and fully focused and thus much more likely to be in flow.

Implementing this in business is fairly straightforward: Tighten feedback loops. Practice agile design. Put mechanisms in place so attention doesn’t have to wander. Ask for more input. How much input? Well, forget quarterly reviews. Think daily reviews. Studies have found that in professions with less direct feedback loops—stock analysis, psychiatry, medicine—even the best get worse over time. Surgeons, by contrast, are the only physicians that improve the longer they’re out of medical school. Why? Mess up on the table and someone dies. That’s immediate feedback.

The challenge/skills ratio, the last of our psychological flow triggers, is arguably the most important. The idea behind this trigger is that attention is most engaged (i.e., in the now) when there’s a very specific relationship between the difficulty of a task and our ability to perform that task. If the challenge is too great, fear swamps the system. If the challenge is too easy, we stop paying attention. Flow appears near the emotional midpoint between boredom and anxiety, in what scientists call the flow channel—the spot where the task is hard enough to make us stretch; not hard enough to make us snap.

This sweet spot keeps attention locked in the present. When the challenge is firmly within the boundaries of known skills—meaning I’ve done it before and am fairly certain I can do so again—the outcome is predetermined. We’re interested, not riveted. But when we don’t know what’s going to happen next, we pay more attention to the next. Uncertainty is our rocket ride into the now.

Flow’s Social Triggers
There is also a collective version of a flow state known as group flow25This is what happens when a bunch of people enter the zone together. If you’ve ever seen a fourth-quarter comeback in football, where everyone is always in the right place at the right time and the result looks more like a well-choreographed dance than anything that normally happens on the gridiron—that’s group flow in action.

But it’s not just athletes who play this game. In fact, group flow is incredibly common in start-ups. When the whole team is driving toward a singular purpose with incredible speed—again, that’s group flow in action. “Because entrepreneurship is about the nonstop navigation of uncertainty,” says Salim Ismail,26“being in flow is a critical aspect of success. Flow states allow an entrepreneur to stay open and alert to possibilities, which could exist in any partnership, product insight, or customer interaction. The more flow created by a start-up team, the higher the chance of success. In fact, if your start-up team is not in a near-constant group flow state, you will not succeed. Peripheral vision gets lost and insights don’t follow.”
So how to precipitate group flow? This is where social triggers come into play. These triggers are ways to alter social conditions to produce more group flow. A number of them are already familiar. The first three—serious concentration; shared, clear goals; good communication(i.e., lots of immediate feedback)—are the collective versions of the psychological triggers identified by Csikszentmihalyi.

Two more—equal participationand an element of risk(mental, physical, whatever)—are self-explanatory given what we already know about flow. The remaining five require a little more information.

Familiarity, our next trigger, means the group has a common language, a shared knowledge base, and a communication style based on unspoken understandings. It means everybody is always on the same page, and when novel insights arise, momentum is not lost due to the need for lengthy explanation.

Then there’s blending egos—which is kind of a collective version of humility. When egos have been blended, no one’s hogging the spotlight and everyone’s thoroughly involved.

A sense of controlcombines autonomy (being free to do what you want) and mastery (being good at what you do). It’s about getting to choose your own challenges and having the necessary skills to surmount them.

Close listeningoccurs when we’re fully engaged in the here and now. In conversation, this isn’t about thinking about what witty thing to say next or what cutting sarcasm came last. Rather, it’s generating real-time, unplanned responses to the dialogue as it unfolds.

Our final trigger, Always say “yes, and  .  .  .  ,”means interactions should be additive more than argumentative. The goal here is the momentum, togetherness, and innovation that comes from ceaselessly amplifying one another’s ideas and actions. It’s a trigger based on the first rule of improv comedy. If I open a sketch with “Hey, there’s a blue elephant in the bathroom,” and you respond with “No, there’s not,” the scene goes nowhere. Your denial kills the flow. But instead, if your response is of the “yes, and  .  .  .” variety—“Yeah, sorry, I had no idea where to put him, did he leave the toilet seat up again?”—then the story goes someplace interesting
Flow’s Creative Trigger
If you look under the hood of creativity, what you see is pattern recognition (the brain’s ability to link new ideas together) and risk taking (the courage to bring those new ideas into the world). Both of these experiences produce powerful neurochemical reactions and the brain rides these reactions deeper into flow.

This means, for those of us who want more flow in our lives, we have to think different, it’s as simple as that. Instead of tackling problems from familiar angles, go at them backward and sideways and with style. Go out of your way to stretch your imagination. Massively up the amount of novelty in your life; the research shows that new environments and experiences are often the jumping-off point for new ideas (more opportunity for pattern recognition). Most important, make creativity a value and a virtue. This is where we return to moonshot thinking again. As Teller explains, “You don’t spend your time being bothered that you can’t teleport from here to Japan, because there’s a part of you that thinks it’s impossible. Moonshot thinking is choosing to be bothered by that.”
Final Advice
One of the most well-established facts about flow is that the state is ubiquitous—meaning it shows up anywhere, in anyone, provided certain initial conditions are met. What are these conditions? These seventeen triggers—it really is that straightforward.

And there’s a reason for this as well. We’re biological organisms, and evolution is conservative by design. When a particular adaptation works, the basic design is repeated again and again. Flow most certainly works. As a result, our brains are hardwired for the experience. We are all designed for optimal performance—it’s a built-in feature of being human.CHAPTER FIVEThe Secrets of Going BigBorn Above the Line of Super-Credibility
“I watched the news today and I saw something sooooo  .  .  . awesome,” says Jon Stewart, host of Comedy Central’s Daily Show1It’s April 24, 2012, and Stewart is, well, a little excited. His eyebrows dart, his nostrils flare, he’s about to blow. A newsreel begins to roll. We see an anchorman in a suit, hands folded, cucumber calm: “This may seem like science fiction,” he says, “but today a group of space pioneers announced plans to mine asteroids for precious minerals.” Cut back to Stewart, in a tizzy, shouting, “Space pioneers going to mine asteroids for precious materials! BOOM! BOOM! YES! Stu-Beef is all in. Do you know how rarely the news in 2012 looks and sounds like you thought news would look and sound in 2012?”
What Stewart was boom-booming about was Planetary Resources, Inc.,2the asteroid-mining company I cofounded with Eric Anderson in 2009 and announced in 2012. Clearly, asteroid mining is a crazy science-fiction idea, bold on every level. To start this kind of company with any real hope of success and—equally difficult—to present it to the public in a plausible fashion requires a different kind of approach. Over the years, I’ve developed a series of strategies for tackling these kinds of challenges, none more important than birthing projects above the line of super-credibility.

As will become clearer later, getting above that line requires a deep passion. Mine emerged in 1969. I was only eight years old when Apollo 11 landed on the moon, and I decided then and there that going into space was what I wanted to do with my life. I was in my early twenties when I realized NASA was never going to get me there. Constrained by government spending and frightened by the risk of failure, the space agency had become a military-industrial jobs program unlikely to return to the Moon or push onward to Mars. It was clear to me, if we were going to boldly go, it was going to have to be without the help of government.

Thus I devoted the next thirty years to starting private ventures that I thought would open the space frontier. In addition to my work with the International Space University, these included three efforts to jump-start a space-tourism economy: the XPRIZE, Zero-G, and Space Adventures Limited.

It was thru the founding of Space Adventures3that I teamed up with Eric Anderson, my future partner in Planetary Resources. Back in 1995, Anderson, a recent University of Virginia aerospace graduate, joined me as an intern to help develop a company to leverage the vast assets of the once-powerful Soviet space program, now hungry for hard currency and willing to offer anyone with enough cash a ride into space. Within a year, Anderson worked his way up from intern to vice-president to president of Space Adventures (later CEO). Over the next fifteen years, he took the company to over $600 million in cumulative revenues—and if you’ve ever tried to sell a $50 million seat into orbit or a $150 million ride around the Moon, you’ll respect the achievement.

Others, impatient for this same dream, took a different approach. On October 4, 2004, when aviation legend Burt Rutan won the $10  million Ansari XPRIZE with SpaceShipOne, Sir Richard Branson swooped in to license the winning technology, committing a quarter of a billion dollars to develop Virgin Galactic’s SpaceShipTwo—the commercial follow-up to SpaceShipOne.4Next, Amazon founder Jeff Bezos committed over $100 million toward a secretive launch vehicle company called Blue Origin.5Perhaps most impressive was PayPal cofounder-turned-aerospace-disrupter Elon Musk, whose epic success with the Falcon 9 launch vehicle and Dragon capsule placed him in the category of “space god” and earned him a multibillion-dollar contract from NASA to ferry cargo to the International Space Station.6
Certainly, these were all amazing successes, but, in the summer of 2009, when I got together with Eric for our annual “What’s Next?” retreat, our outlook on the future of space was gloomy at best. Despite these great wins, everything was still moving too slowly. To really open up the space frontier we needed more than a dozen people heading into orbit—we needed hundreds of thousands. We needed the advantages of scale.

It had become clear to us that if we were ever going to open up space, then we needed to exploit the same economic engine that had opened every previous frontier: the search for resources. “Whether it was the Chinese pioneering the Silk Road or early European explorers looking for gold and spices on the other side of oceans or American settlers scouring the West for timber and land,” says Anderson,7“the search for new resources has always been the main reason for attempting the difficult and dangerous.” This was when Eric and I started having a serious discussion about asteroid mining.

