
3.  Repeat the same summer program in additional countries to prove out the concept and build a global community.

4.  Establish a permanent terrestrial campus.

5.  Establish an orbital space campus on the International Space Station.

While steps four and five—our moonshot goals—were aimed at capturing our supporters’ hearts, steps 1, 2, and 3, being much more incremental (thus believable) were aimed at their minds. And it worked. After receiving this first bit of support, we went from building our team to holding our feasibility conference to launching our first summer session.

The session was magical, gathering a hundred and four graduate students from twenty-one countries. Sure, it was totally bootstrapped—our campus borrowed, our faculty on loan (made up of the professors Bob, Todd and I recruited and borrowed from our respective alma maters). Yet it was still a complete success
Then we did it again, changing only the location (so we could create engagement in wider and wider communities). During that second summer, ISU borrowed the Université Louis Pasteur campus in Strasbourg, France. Then we were off to Toronto, Canada, in 1990, Toulouse, France, in 1991, and Kitakyushu, Japan, in 1992.

After the university had five years and about 550 alumni under its belt, we finally decided to try and parlay our assets into step 4 of our vision—a permanent terrestrial campus. One small problem: We had no tangible assets. As a fully virtual university with no campus, no cash, and a borrowed faculty—our only assets were our brand, our alumni, and our vision. Thus it was time to make stone soup.15
How to Make Stone Soup
A long time ago, in a tiny medieval village, a farmer spots three soldiers on the edge of town. Knowing what would likely happen next, he runs into the marketplace shouting a warning: “Quick, close the doors, lock the windows! There are soldiers coming and they’ll take away all our food.”
The soldiers are in fact hungry. When they enter the village, they start knocking on doors, asking for food. The first villager tells them the cupboard is bare. At the next, the second villager tells them the same. The next door isn’t even opened.

Finally one of the starving soldiers says, “I have an idea—let’s make stone soup.”16
With that, he strides over and knocks on yet another door. “Excuse me,” he says to the villager, “do you have a cauldron and some firewood? We would like to make some stone soup.”
The villager, thinking there’s no risk to her, says, “Soup from stones? This I’ve got to see. Sure, I’ll help.” So she gives them a cauldron and some firewood while another soldier gets some water. They bring the water to a boil and place three large stones in the pot. News spreads around the town and the villagers begin to gather. “Soup from stones,” they say. “This we have to see.”
So the soldiers are standing around the fire and the villagers are standing around the soldiers.

“I had no idea you can make soup from stones,” says one villager.

“Sure can,” replies the soldier.

Eventually, tired of standing around, another villager asks, “Can I help?”
“Perhaps,” says a soldier, “if you had a few potatoes, that would make the stone soup even better.”
So the villager quickly fetches some potatoes and adds them to the pot of simmering stones.

Another asks, “How can I help?”
“Well, a couple of carrots would sure make the soup even better.”
So the villager contributes some carrots. Soon others are adding poultry, barley, garlic, and leeks. After a while one of the soldiers calls out, “It’s done,” and shares the soup with everyone. The villagers are heard saying, “Soup from stones! It tastes fantastic. I had no idea.”
That story of stone soup comes from an old folktale that eventually became a children’s book. I heard it in college and it’s never left me. In fact, I’ve come to think of making stone soup as the only way an entrepreneur can succeed. The stones are, of course, your big bold ideas; the contributions of the villagers, the capital, resource, and intellectual support offered by investors and strategic partners. Everyone who adds a small amount to your stone soup is in fact helping to make your dreams come true.

What makes stone soup work is passion. People love passion. People love to contribute to passion. And you can’t fake it. The human bullshit detector is great at spotting the inauthentic article. The used car salesman, the carnival barker, and the disingenuous politician always rub us wrong.

Sure, I’m probably not telling you something you don’t already know. But passion is a trickier subject than most assume. For starters, there are versions of passion that are extremely unhelpful to entrepreneurs, such as what John Hagel III, the cofounder of Deloitte’s Center for the Edge, calls the passion of the true believer. “In Silicon Valley we have many examples of the true believer,” says Hagel.17“These are great entrepreneurs [who] are truly passionate about a very specific path and are notoriously not open to alternative views or approaches. Their passion is enduring and it does focus, but it can also be blind—leading the entrepreneur to reject critical input that does not match their preconceived views.”
Hagel and colleagues have made quite a study of passion,18coming to define the version that best serves individuals and organizations as the passion of the explorer. “These are people who see a domain,” he continues, “but not the path. The fact that the path is not clearly defined is what excites them and motivates them.  .  .  . It also makes them alert to a variety of inputs that can help them to better understand the domain and discover more promising paths.  .  .  . [Thus] they are constantly balancing the need to move forward with the need in the moment to reflect on their experiences.”
This is the same kind of passion that makes stone soup. Passionate people are deeply creative in seeking out and pulling in the resources they need to pursue their passion, but it goes further than that. “People who pursue their passions inevitably create beacons that attract others who share their vision,” says Hagel. “Few of these beacons are consciously created; they are by-products of pursuing one’s passion. Passionate people share their creations widely, leaving tracks for others to find them.”
And this is exactly what happened with ISU. In 1992, as we sought to establish our permanent terrestrial campus, we put out an RFP (request for proposals) that basically said, “Hi there, we’re ISU. We have this concept for a permanent campus. We’ve held five summer programs in five different cities, and this is our vision for what we want to create and where we want to go. Please tell us how much cash endowment, buildings, and operational money you will give us to bring our vision to your city.”
Had we gotten no response at all, I would not have been surprised. But that wasn’t the case. Within six months, we received seven proposals ranging from $20 million to $50 million in funding, buildings, faculty, equipment, and even the promise of accreditation. In short, everything we needed to implement the next phase of ISU.

So how far can the right combination of super-credibility, staged goals, and passion take you? In our case, pretty far. In the end, the city of Strasbourg, France, won the bid. They went on to build us a beautiful $50 million campus in Parc d’innovation. Today many of the heads of the world’s space agencies are ISU alumni. And while we haven’t yet built our orbital extension, we’re definitely betting that once asteroid mining becomes the norm, our space-based campus won’t be far behind.

Peter’s Laws—Mindset Matters
During the earliest days of ISU, I shared an office with Todd Hawley, who as a joke put a copy of Murphy’s Law on the wall. That depressing advice—“If anything can go wrong, it will”—stared at me every day. It also started to get under my skin. There’s an old saying in business: You’re the average of the five people you spend the most time with. The same is true for ideas. As was pointed out in the last chapter, mindset matters. Thus, a week into Murphy’s mental assault, I went to the whiteboard behind my desk and wrote: “If anything can go wrong, fix it! (To hell with Murphy!)” Then above the quote I wrote, “Peter’s Law.”
Over the years that followed I started collecting more laws—principles and truisms that have guided me in times of difficulty and opportunity. Most of these are my fundamental rules to live by, my go-to principles when the proverbial shit hits the fan. In the rest of this section, we’ll take a closer look, but before we get to my ideas, we first need to address something far more important: your ideas.

The maxims presented below are the ones that have worked for me, but that’s no guarantee they’ll work for you. So come up with your own. Borrow from anyone you like. The point isn’t to produce pretty pictures covered with inspirational quotes. The point is to trust your history. Plumb your past to plot your future. Start collecting mind hacks by examining your own life and seeing what strategies consistentlyworked along the way. Turn those strategies into your laws.
