
11.  No simply means begin one level higher.

12.  Don’t walk when you can run.

13.  When in doubt: THINK!
14.  Patience is a virtue, but persistence to the point of success is a blessing.

15.  The squeaky wheel gets replaced.

16.  The faster you move, the slower time passes, the longer you live.

17.  The best way to predict the future is to create it yourself!
18.  The ratio of something to nothing is infinite.

19.  You get what you incentivize.

20.  If you think it is impossible, then it is for you.

21.  An expert is someone who can tell you exactly how something can’t be done.

22.  The day before something is a breakthrough, it’s a crazy idea.

23.  If it was easy, it would have been done already.

24.  Without a target you’ll miss it every time.

25.  Fail early, fail often, fail forward!
26.  If you can’t measure it, you can’t improve it.

27.  The world’s most precious resource is the persistent and passionate human mind.

28.  Bureaucracy is an obstacle to be conquered with persistence, confidence, and a bulldozer when necessary.

*Laws 12 and 15 by Todd B. Hawley. Law, 17 adopted from Alan Kay, Law 21 adopted from Robert Heinlein, Law 24 by Byron K. Lichtenberg, Law 25 adopted from John Maxwell.CHAPTER SIXBillionaire WisdomThinking at ScaleFour Who Changed the World
In the past five chapters, we’ve been examining ways to raise your game. Exponential technologies added physical leverage, psychological tools provided a mental edge, and the combination allows entrepreneurs to become true forces for disruption. This chapter, which marks the end of that psychological exploration, focuses on the mind hacks of four remarkable men, a quartet of entrepreneurs who have already harnessed exponential technology to build multibillion-dollar companies that forever changed the world: Elon Musk, Richard Branson, Jeff Bezos, and Larry Page.

I’ve had the chance to work in varying degrees with each of these men. Elon Musk and Larry Page are both trustees and benefactors of the XPRIZE Foundation; Jeff Bezos ran the SEDS chapter at Princeton and has been passionate about opening space for the past forty years; and Richard Branson licensed the winning technology resulting from the Ansari XPRIZE to create Virgin Galactic. All four exemplify the central idea in this book, exhibiting a commitment to bold that’s fierce, enduring, and masterfully executed.

Equally important, each of these entrepreneurs mastered a rarely discussed skill fundamental to bold pursuits and exponential entrepreneurship: the ability to think at scale. Exponential technology allows us to scale up like never before. Small groups can have huge impacts. A team of passionate innovators can alter the lives of a billion people in an eyeblink. To say that this kind of impact is unfathomable is putting it mildly.

Humans don’t grok scale. Our brains evolved to process a simpler world, where everything we encountered was local and linear. Yet the four men described in this chapter have pushed through the limitations of linear thinking, and understanding their strategies for thinking at scale can help us do the same.

To get at those strategies, besides multiple conversations over years and in-person interviews with each, my research team combed through over two hundred hours of video footage of these men, breaking their ideas into categories and analyzing from there. In the end, we discovered that to think at scale, all four have leaned heavily on three of the psychological tools covered in earlier chapters—though, as we’ll see in a moment, each in different and insightful ways—and, equally crucial, each relies on five additional mental strategies. While we’ll get into greater detail in a moment, here’s a complete list:
1.  Risk taking and risk mitigation
2.  Rapid iteration and ceaseless experimentation
3.  Passion and purpose
4.  Long-term thinking
5.  Customer-centric thinking
6.  Probabilistic thinking
