“And if you’re going to invent, you’ve got to be willing to be misunderstood for long periods of time. Anything new and different is initially going to be misunderstood. It will be misunderstood by well-meaning critics, who are worried that it might not work out. It will be misunderstood by self-interested critics, who have a profit stream connected to the old way. Either way, if you can’t weather this kind of misunderstanding and criticism, then whatever you do, don’t do anything new.”
Bezos, though, can’t get enough of the new. His sideline aerospace business, Blue Origin,31is trying to solve the long-standing rocketry puzzle of vertical takeoff and landing, and, in a sort of an aerospace-meets-Amazon cross-pollination, in December of 2013, Bezos announced that some time in the next five years, drones will be delivering packages for Amazon,32enabling both half-hour delivery and Bezos’s big dream of getting into the food market and thus finally being able to unseat Walmart from its throne position and turning Amazon into the most successful “Everything Store” in history.

Bezos discussed his drones in his 2014 shareholder letter,33hitting again on his theme of experimentation and rapid iteration: “Failure comes part and parcel with invention. It’s not optional.  .  .  . We understand that and believe in failing early and iterating until we get it right. When this process works, it means our failures are relatively small in size (most experiments can start small), and when we hit on something that is really working for customers, we double down on it with hopes to turn it into an even bigger success.”
At TED 2014, when I asked Bezos what advice he would give to exponential entrepreneurs, he, like Musk, counsels a focusing on passion, not fads.

“It’s so hard to catch something that everybody already knows is hot,” says Bezos. “Instead, position yourself and wait for the wave to come to you. So then you ask, Position myself where? Position yourself with something that captures your curiosity, something that you’re missionary about. I tell people that when we acquire companies, I’m always trying to figure out: Is this person who leads this company a missionary or a mercenary? The missionary is building the product and building the service because they love the customer, because they love the product, because they love the service. The mercenary is building the product or service so that they can flip the company and make money. One of the great paradoxes is that the missionaries end up making more money than the mercenaries anyway. And so pick something that you are passionate about, that’s my number one piece of advice.”
Larry Page
In November 2004, about a month after the Ansari XPRIZE was won, I found myself at the Googleplex, making a presentation to a couple of thousand Googlers on the future of space travel. Afterwards, I was flooded by people wanting to continue the discussion. Last in line was a young guy in his early thirties, wearing a black T-shirt and carrying a backpack. “Hi,” he said. “I’m Larry Page, want to have lunch?”
During lunch, we covered everything from robots to space elevators to autonomous cars. Immediately clear was Larry’s intense curiosity about all things technical and his insatiable desire to push boundaries. His favorite questions were “Why not?” and “Why not bigger?” Clearly I was dealing with someone unaccustomed to limits. That conversation took place almost a decade back and little has changed, except the fact that, well, everything has changed.

Born March 26, 1973, in East Lansing, Michigan, Page had a hereditary predilection for computers.34His mother, Gloria, was a computer science professor at Michigan State; his father, Carl, was a pioneer in both computer science and artificial intelligence. Not surprisingly, Larry became the first kid in his elementary school to turn in an assignment from a word processor.

Page went on to get a degree in computer engineering from the University of Michigan—where he famously created an inkjet printer made of LEGO bricks—then went off to Stanford for a PhD in computer science. While searching for a theme for his dissertation, Page got curious about the mathematical properties of the web, specifically the idea that its link structure was based on citations and that these citations could be represented as a huge graph. This led to a partnership with another Stanford PhD student, Sergey Brin, and a research project nicknamed BackRub, which led to the page-rank algorithm that became Google. Not surprisingly, neither Brin nor Page ever finished their PhDs.

Instead, in 1998, they dropped out and started up and changed history. The PageRank algorithm democratized access to information, or as a recent article in Wiredput it: “Search, Google’s core product, is itself wondrous. Unlike shiny new gadgets, however, Google search has become such an expected part of the internet’s fabric that it has become mundane.”35Meanwhile, YouTube became the dominant video platform on the web, Chrome the most popular browser, and Android the most prolific mobile phone operating system ever. To put this in perspective, today a Masai warrior in the heart of Kenya who has a smartphone and access to Google has—at his fingertips—access to the same level of information that the president of the United States did eighteen years ago.

And it’s this kind of world-changing impact that especially interests Page. In an impromptu speech given at the Singularity University founding conference, Larry stood up in front of an audience of some 150 attendees and said: “I have a very simple metric I use: Are you working on something that can change the world? Yes or no? The answer for 99.99999 percent of people is no. I think we need to be training people on how to change the world.”
Today Larry’s desire to make good on this promise and Google’s vision for the future have become indistinguishable, and his actions have pushed the company to new heights and riches. In the three years following Page’s promotion from copresident to CEO in 2011, the company’s value has doubled to $350 billion (with Page’s 16 percent worth about $50 billion), its cash war chest has risen to $75 billion, and its annual research and development budget increased to $8.5 billion.36And Page, as visionary CEO, can spend that money almost anywhere he pleases. Autonomous cars, augmented reality, ending aging, ubiquitous Internet—clearly, what pleases Page is the big and bold.

In 2012, I presented at Google Zeitgeist, their annual customer conference. The organizers had slotted me at the end of the second day, asking me to give an uplifting speech with my Abundancemessage. Afterward, Page followed me onstage to deliver closing remarks, which was when I learned the origin of his appetite for bold. “When I was a student at the University of Michigan,” he said, “I took this summer leadership course. Their slogan was: ‘Have a healthy disregard for the impossible.’ That’s stuck with me all of these years. I know it sounds kind of nuts, but it’s often easier to make progress when you’re really ambitious. Since no one else is willing to try those things, you don’t have any competition. And you get all the best people, because the best people want to work on the most ambitious things. For this reason, I’ve come to believe that anything you imagine is probably doable. You just have to imagine it and work on it.”37
What helps Page imagine the impossible is a fervent belief in rational optimism.38The term, borrowed from author Matt Ridley, refers to the exact kind of optimism we advocated for in Abundance. It does not mean pie-in-the-sky daydreaming. It means rather a sober review of the facts, which include the fact that technology is accelerating exponentially and transforming scarcity into abundance, that the tools of tomorrow are giving us ever-increasing problem-solving leverage, that the world—based on dozens of metrics (see the Abundanceappendix)—is also getting exponentially better, and finally, as a result, that small teams are now more empowered to solve grand challenges than ever before. And it’s these reasons that make rational optimism such an important strategy for thinking at scale. Or as Larry Page famously said in his I/O 2013 keynote: “Being negative is not how we make progress.”39
This is not a passing sentiment for the Google chief, it’s a core philosophy. “I’m tremendously optimistic,” says Page. “I’m certain that whatever challenges we take on, we can solve with a little bit of concerted effort and some good technology. And that’s an exciting place to be. [It means] our job is really to make the world better. We need more people working on this. We need to have more ambitious goals. The world has enough resources to provide a good quality of life for everyone. We have enough raw materials. We need to get better organized and move a lot faster.”
Speed is of the essence for Page, which is why he backs up his rationally optimistic view of the future with an extraordinarily healthy appetite for risky, bold innovation. He has become famous for pushing people far beyond their comfort zones. When he recruited Sebastian Thrun to develop their autonomous car, Page declared that 100,000 miles was the incredible target for how far that car was supposed to be able to drive on its own (today the car has driven well over 500,000 miles).40When Google wanted to do simultaneous translation between languages, they found some machine-learning researchers and, as Page explains, “We asked them, ‘Do you think you can set up an algorithm to translate between any two languages and do it better than a human translator?’ They laughed at us and said it was impossible. But they were willing to try.  .  .  . And now, six years later we can translate between sixty-four different languages. In many languages, we’re better than an average human translator and we can do it instantly and for free.”41
Or, to offer an even more colorful example, in a Steven Levy story for Wired, Astro Teller talked about wheeling an imaginary time machine into Page’s office, plugging it in, and then demonstrating that it works. “Instead of being bowled over,” says Teller, “Page asks why it needs a plug. Wouldn’t it be better if it didn’t use power at all? It’s not because he’s not excited about time machines or ungrateful that we built it. It’s just core to who he is. There’s always more to do, and his focus is on where the next 10x will come from.’ ”42
So where does the next 10x come from?
For Page, like Musk and Branson and Bezos, that answer always sits at the intersection of long-term thinking and customer-centric thinking:
We always try to concentrate on the long term. Many of the things we started—like Chrome—were seen as crazy when we launched them. So how do we decide what to do? How do we decide what’s really important to work on? I like to call it the “toothbrush test.” The toothbrush test is simple: Do you use it as often as you use your toothbrush? For most people, I guess that’s twice a day. I think we really want things like that. We use Gmail much more than twice a day. And YouTube. Those things are amazing. Yet, when we first looked at YouTube, people said, “Oh, you guys are never going to make money with that, but you bought it for $1.4 billion. You’re totally crazy.” And, you know, we were reasonably crazy, but it was a good bet. We’ve actually been doubling revenue on YouTube every year for four years. And if you’re doubling things, no matter where you start from, it starts to add up pretty quickly. Our philosophy is that the things that people use often are really important to them and we think that over time, you can make money from those things.43
It’s also for these same reasons that Page has devoted considerable resources to the pursuit of AI. “Artificial intelligence would be the ultimate version of Google,” he explains. “The ultimate search engine. It would understand everything on the web, it would understand exactly what you wanted, and it would give you the right thing. And we’re nowhere near doing that now. However, we can get incrementally closer to doing that. And that’s what we’re working on.”
In the spring of 2014, when Page hosted a group of XPRIZE donors at GoogleX, he reflected on the benefits of bold ambitions. “You’d think that as we do more ambitious things, our failure rates would go up, but it doesn’t really seem to. The reason, I believe, is even if you fail in doing something ambitious, you usually succeed in doing something important. I like to use the example of our first attempt at creating AI, which was started when Google had less than two hundred people back in 2000. We didn’t succeed in creating an AI, but we did come up with AdSense, where we target search ads against web pages, which has become a good chunk of our revenue. So we failed at making AI, but we got distracted by something useful. Pretty much 100 percent of these things have gone that way.”
Of course, AI is not the only futuristic technology they’re working on. Google is also the title sponsor for the $30 million Google Lunar XPRIZE—with the goal being to put the first robot on the Moon (seen as a first step toward extending humanity’s reach and economic influence beyond the Earth), which is to say that, just like Bezos, Branson, and Musk, Page too dreams of outer space. But his ambitions don’t end there. Unlike the others, Page has taken an even more adventurous step, announcing the longevity start-up Calico in November of 2013,44which is Google’s entry into the anti-aging world, or, as Timemagazine put it: “Google vs. Death.”45
In his widely circulated essay “Google Wins Everything,” Internet entrepreneur and blogger Jason Calacanis puts it this way: “If you work for Larry and are not thinking 10x, don’t expect to keep your job for very long. That insanity-by-design is creating a one-upmanship that hasn’t been seen in the history of mankind. Larry’s campaign, if successful, will make Caesar, Napoleon, Columbus, the Wright Brothers, the Apollo 11 Mission, the Manhattan Project, and our Founding Fathers look limited in scope.”46PART THREETHE BOLD CROWDCHAPTER SEVENCrowdsourcingMarketplace of the Rising Billion
It’s the fall of 2000. There are now more than 20 million websites on the Internet.1The browser wars (AOL versus Netscape) are in full swing. And with the recent bursting of the dot-com bubble, there are a lot of out-of-work graphic designers hanging around cyberspace, just looking for something to do.

Jake Nickell and Jacob DeHart are among them.

Nickell and DeHart are both nineteen years old. They too are out-of-work designers. They met during an online T-shirt design competition—something that was then occasionally starting to happen—and decided they wanted such contests to happen more frequently. Instead of a competition just once a year, they decided to create a website that hosted them once a week. Anyone with a good T-shirt design could enter. Everyone in the community could vote. The winner got a hundred dollars, and the winning T-shirt was put up for sale on the site. They named their new venture Threadless.com, and mostly it seemed harmless enough.2
Turns out, people liked to vote on T-shirts. They reallyliked to vote on T-shirts. Within a few years, Threadless was turning an annual profit north of $20 million. Almost unintentionally, Nickell and DeHart had become the third largest T-shirt manufacturers in the United States.

And Threadless wasn’t alone in finding ways to tap into the burgeoning online community. During this same period, a software designer named Philip Rosedale noticed that hardcore gamers weren’t just interested in playing games; they also seemed to want to spend their time designing the games themselves. So he created Second Life, a massive virtual world that was essentially built for free, with Rosedale merely outsourcing software development to the gaming crowd. And the crowd, as Jeff Howe wrote in Wired, “[was] only too eager to do the work.”3
So eager, in fact, that throughout the early 2000s, the Second Life community generated 10,000 developer-hours worth of content a day. An entire economy emerged inside the game. Right around the time that Threadless was starting to make $20 million in annual profits, Business Worldput Anshe Chung on their cover—the very first virtual citizen who had become a real-life millionaire because of his Second Life business.4
It was also Jeff Howe, alongside Wirededitor Mark Robinson, who noticed what was happening with the likes of Threadless and Second Life and coined the term crowdsourcing. Howe defined the word as “the act of a company or institution taking a function once performed by employees and outsourcing it to an undefined (and generally large) network of people in the form of an open call. This can take the form of peer-production (when the job is performed collaboratively), but is also often undertaken by sole individuals. The crucial prerequisite is the use of the open call format and the large network of potential laborers.”5
As crowdsourcing gained steam, crowdfunding (covered in detail in the next chapter) was developing. While the idea dates back to the 1980s, it became a mainstream phenomenon in 2005, when Kiva.orgbecame the first microlending website, tapping the crowd to provide tiny loans (usually less than $100) to entrepreneurs in developing countries. By 2009, Kiva had distributed over $100 million in loans, with a staggering 98 percent repayment rate. By 2013 that number had jumped to $526,460,675 in loans from 1,047,653 Kiva lenders while maintaining a 98.96 percent repayment rate.6
This was also the same time when crowdfunding sites like Indiegogo and Kickstarter came into being, giving birth to a new way to raise money for creative projects. Want to make a movie? Cut a new CD? Design a new kind of watch? Just put a video up on either of these sites and ask the crowd for the money. It didn’t take long before theNew York Timesstarted calling Kickstarter “the people’s NEA [National Endowment for the Arts],” and well, they weren’t kidding.7In 2010, the site raised over $27 million and funded 3,910 projects. The following year, the amount raised jumped to $99 million, funding 11,836 projects. In 2013, these figures were north of $480 million and some 19,911 projects.8And Kickstarter is only one example. While Indiegogo has not released its growth numbers, in early 2014, its success was impressive enough to command a $40 million equity investment, the largest venture investment yet for a crowdfunding start-up. All told, across the entire sector, hundreds of crowdfunding platforms have materialized, giving entrepreneurs access to what will soon exceed tens of billions of dollars in annual funding.

As movements, both crowdfunding and crowdsourcing diversified quickly, with all sorts of commercial applications beginning to emerge. The graphic design hub 99designs, for example, allows users to submit a design need and an associated budget—say, a new logo for $299—and the crowd competes for the business. Gengo.comoffers crowdsourced human translators, CastingWords does audio transcription, and Maven Research—aka the global knowledge marketplace—provides expertise in hundreds of thousands of disciplines.

Big business has also gotten in on the action. Anheuser-Busch now relies on the crowd to craft beers. General Mills has tapped them for everything from packaging design innovation to novel ingredient suggestions. Scientific research has become another growth area. The Polymath Project pits the crowd against unsolvable math problems, Foldit harnesses them for protein folding, and Zooniverse allows anyone to categorize galaxies, discover new planets and even hunt for alien life.

So why does this whole crowdsourcing arena matter so much for exponential entrepreneurs? Consider what Larry Page’s dream of artificial intelligence might look like when it finally arrives. This would be a system that understands your intentions and desires and can help turn them into reality. Make your request to JARVIS and the AI will analyze data, write programs, create, design, and—probably via 3-D printing—manufacture exactly what you require, whenever you require it. Everything from the prototyping of new products to getting real-time data-mining insights about an entire market is in the offing. Sounds exciting, right? But while that extraordinary capability may still be a decade or so away, in the interim, we have the crowd.
