
Creatives are also getting in on the insight game. Take ReverbNation (www.reverbnation.com), a music distribution, publishing, and crowdsourced testing platform. Say you’re an aspiring musician. You’ve produced a few songs, but before spending money on paid advertising or management, you want to see whether anyone actually likes your music. Now you can have songs rated and reviewed long before you actually go to market.

The other side of this insight equation is the crowdsourcing of discovery-based insights.This can mean a few things. You can ask the crowd for their interpretation of a particular problem or question. For example, Genius asks the crowd to annotate song lyrics. Kaggle outlines a problem that its community solves with original algorithms. Or perhaps more simply, you can provide a platform for the crowd to come up with their own ideas and inventions, as Quirky does with its invention network and Threadless does with its T-shirt design competitions.

Discovery-based insights can be as simple as asking the crowd for answers and paying attention as the best solutions, designs, and inventions bubble their way to the top. As a personal example, in the spring of 2014, in preparation for rereleasing Abundanceas a paperback, I asked the crowd to help me discover new evidence of abundance that I could include in the appendix. People emailed me their data, charts, and graphics to evidence@diamandis.com (new submissions are always welcome). The response was extraordinary and yielded considerable evidence of our continued forward progress.

So there you have a top-level overview of the crowdsourcing space. Since this is an area that will change rapidly as new players enter and new AI capabilities come online, I wanted to point you to a few industry websites worth visiting that will keep the taxonomy fresh and up-to-date.

AbundanceHub.com:This is the place I’ll be posting my own experiences, providing updates on my lessons learned (successes, experiments, and failures) and working with entrepreneurs interested in creating wealth while creating a world of abundance. AbundanceHub content is driven by the Abundance360 community, my mastermind group of entrepreneurs whom I’ve committed to coach over a twenty-five-year period.

Crowdsourcing.org:The industry-leading resource for everything crowdsourcing. Known as one of the most influential and credible authorities in the crowdsourcing space, they are recognized for their in-depth industry analyses, definitive crowdsourcing platform directory, and unbiased thought leadership. Their mission is to serve as a complete resource of information for analysts, researchers, journalists, investors, business owners, crowdsourcing experts, and participants in crowdsourcing platforms.

Crowdsortium:Using the crowd to dissect, organize, and collectively move the young and evolving crowdsourcing industry forward, Crowdsortium helps organizations find, evaluate, and execute new ideas by working with online crowds and providing events, meet-ups, resources, and guides. Crowdsortium was formed by a group of industry practitioners that have the mission of advancing the industry through best practices, education, data collection, and public dialogue.

4. Crowdsourcing Best Practices
While there are way too many crowdsourcing platforms to get into the nitty-gritty of utilizing each, in our research we have identified twelve best practices to apply in almost all cases.

i.  DO YOUR RESEARCH
These days, almost anything you want done can be done online. Freelancer.comalone has experts available in six hundred disciplines.21The point here is whenever you need something, instead of defaulting to your normal fulfillment process, try leveraging the power of the crowd to do it faster, cheaper, and better. Define your crowd, get familiar with available platforms, and then pick the right one. “If you’re going to start a company, it’s never been easier and it’s never been cheaper to do so,” says Matt Barrie. “All the tools you need to build an Internet company today are basically free—all the software: Linux, MySQL, voice-over-Internet protocol, Gmail, and so on. The best thing I would suggest you do is browse the projects on Freelancer.com, and look at the mobile phone section or the web development section or whatever your area might be, and see what other people are doing and how they’re wording their projects and what they’re paying. Start from there.”22
ii.  JUST GET BUSY
The most consistent advice we received during our research was perhaps the simplest: Just get busy. In most cases, it’s free to sign up and post a project. People from all around the world will start bidding on it. And once you start talking to them and looking through their samples of work, they’ll give you ideas. They’ll tell you, “Hey, I’ve done similar sorts of projects. Why don’t you do it like this or why don’t you do it like that?” and so forth. Really, as with all things in entrepreneurship, it’s really just a matter of giving it a go and proceeding through trial and error.

iii.  TURN TO THE MESSAGE BOARDS
Completing a crowdsourcing project can be really tough your first few times. Each platform is different and there are confusing elements in all of them. For platform-specific guidance, turn to the site’s community forums for help. Experts and forum moderators will come out of the woodwork to give you incredible tips and guidance throughout the process. And all that help comes free of charge.

iv.  ESTABLISH CONTEXT AND BE SPECIFIC
Don’t expect the crowd to understand the core philosophy of your business. What is critical is to give people the context of the project and supplementary resources to consult should they want more background information. A properly established foundation means people spend less time trying to guess your desires and more time delivering exactly what you want.

v.  PREPARE YOUR DATA SET
For non-design-specific tasks, there is usually a data set that you must submit for analysis, categorization, and so on. If you don’t have a perfectly formatted and ready-to-go .csv file, you can turn to the crowd for help. Most of the time crowdsourcing workers have actually crowdsourced projects themselves, so they know all the best ways to prepare your data for this process.

vi.  QUALIFY YOUR WORKERS
Unfortunately, crowdsourcing does have the potential to create undesired results. The quality of the results can sometimes be inadequate, and crowdsourcing is not sheltered from the scammers and bots lurking on the Internet. Luckily, qualifying your workers and curating a trustworthy work force can help you avoid these issues. To qualify a work force, simply put out a few very simple and inexpensive requests to see how quickly and accurately the job gets done. For example, if you have one hundred images you need created, and a dozen crowdsourced workers to choose from, rather than choosing a single graphic artist immediately, consider taking a few of your images and asking a few freelancers to show you their style and speed. Then choose the best to give the entire job to for completion. Just this sort of quick prequalification can save you considerable heartache and time.

vii.  DEFINE CLEAR, SIMPLE AND SPECIFIC ROLES
The more clear you are about the role you want your crowd to play in the project, the better the results. If you want creative solutions, tell people. If it’s practical solutions, make that clear. Ambiguity doesn’t work well in crowdsourcing. Make sure you think through every element of the product or service you need, and be ready to field questions, concerns, or confused comments. These are almost inevitable.

viii.  COMMUNICATE CLEARLY, IN DETAIL, AND OFTEN
“Remember,” says Freelancer’s Matt Barrie, “you’re often working with someone on the other side of the world. If you just write a one-line sentence—‘I need a website’—that could mean anything. The better the description you provide of what you want and the less room [there is] for interpretation, the better outcome you’ll get.”23Many platforms allow you to communicate with the crowd during the campaign—choose one of these and communicate often. This collaborative strategy is critical for producing the best results.

ix.  DON’T MICROMANAGE; HAVE AN OPEN MIND FOR NEW WAYS OF THINKING
This may seem counterintuitive considering the previous two bits of advice, but often the best results from crowdsourcing come from unexpected angles. Sure, if you’re dealing with a microtask, then creativity isn’t welcome, but for larger projects—like, say, a Tongal video—give people the space they need to surprise you and they will. “Don’t do what’s expected,” DeJulio said. “Try something new. Allow the crowd to come up with wild and crazy bold ideas that might complement the genius of your brand. Trust the process; don’t try to re-create what you’re doing normally. The goal is to get something new and fresh.”24
x.  PAY TO PLAY—THAT IS, GO FOR QUALITY FIRST, THEN PRICE
Crowdsourcing is cheap, yes, but you shouldn’t be. If you’re running a 99Designs contest, for example, the difference between the number of design submissions you’ll get for $199 and $299 is far greater than the $100 you spent. “Put a budget range down,” says Barrie. “Then it’s a free market. The freelancers will bid on the project and tell you what they want to be paid. It may be an hourly rate, if it’s that sort of a model, or it may be a fixed price. You can look through the bids, but the most important thing is go for quality first, because the price is going to be so cheap anyway that you’re going to have tremendous cost savings. That gives you tremendous leverage in terms of what you can do with your starting capital.”25
xi.  PREPARE FOR THE FLOOD
Crowdsourcing offers a counterproblem to the classic dilemma of “not enough good ideas.” The issue with crowdsourcing is the opposite. You’re going to be flooded with good ideas. Prepare for the deluge. You’ll need to be clear about your big objectives, but remain open to new ideas—that is, new paths to your big objectives. This deluge is the true advantage of crowdsourcing.

xii.  BE OPEN TO NEW WORKING METHODOLOGIES
“The other day I was in London,” said Barrie, “and I met a financial analyst working from home doing financial models for pension funds on things like infrastructure projects. He needed a mathematician to develop these models in MATLAB to be able to do his research and present his findings, so he hired a PhD student in Pakistan to do the work. They set up a chat on Skype. The streaming video quality to somewhere like Pakistan is now unbelievable. It was just like the guy was in the room with him. He’d get up in the morning, have his cup of tea, sit down, put the iPad there, do the video call, and then they’d sit there and talk all day as if they were in the same room together. The ability to communicate with anyone on the planet is getting better and better. That means the ability for us to work with anyone on the planet is fantastic.”26
