So there you have it. A quick overview on the exponentially exploding world of crowdsourcing, today’s poor man’s version of artificial intelligence. More incredibly, today the exponential world is starting to overtake the crowd. Recently, an AI company called Vicarious, which is backed by such investors as Elon Musk, Jeff Bezos, Mark Zuckerberg, and Peter Thiel, announced that their machine learning software achieved success rates up to 90 percent on CAPTCHAs from Google, Yahoo, PayPal, Captcha.com, and others.27So stay tuned, since even the crowd can eventually be dematerialized and demonetized.

But one use of the crowd that AI is unlikely to disrupt in the near term is the ability of people from around the world to send you cash to underwrite your ideas. For more on the billions of dollars flowing into the crowdfunding space and the best way for you to capture those dollars, let’s turn to our next chapter.CHAPTER EIGHTCrowdfundingNo Bucks, No Buck RogersThe Money Question
When I started working on this book, my research team and colleagues at Singularity University polled a thousand would-be entrepreneurs and a thousand established entrepreneurs about the greatest barriers encountered when starting a business. Raising money topped almost everyone’s list. No surprise, right?
While the numbers move up or down a little each year, at any given time, there are roughly 27 million US businesses in need of capital.1According to the US Small Business Association, lack of capital is the main reason why 50 percent of new businesses fail within their first five years of operation. Yet, despite this clear need, 23 percent of the companies are so daunted by the prospect of raising money that they don’t even try, while another 51 percent get turned down for their effort.2
All of this, though, is starting to change.

Historically, our access to capital has been limited by our access to people. While reaching out to friends and family is how most entrepreneurs get started, by definition, this is a very limited group with potentially limited means. Next on the list are traditional investors—folks like angels, super-angels, and venture capitalists. But, in my experience, many of these professional investors are too narrowly focused and shortsighted for bold adventures. Yet in today’s hyperconnected world, entrepreneurs have instant access to millions of potential backers and a billion-plus potential customers.

Crowdfunding is the exponential crowd tool that lets you tap this new resource, allowing you to mine the world for like-minded individuals and fast-track passion projects like never before. The first crowdfunding platforms hit the scene in the latter half of the last decade. These early iterations were tools primarily used by filmmakers and musicians looking for ways to fund projects without the backing of a major label/studio, but it didn’t take long for a far wider range of entrepreneurs to get involved.

And stay involved.

Emergence of Crowdfunding
The Growth of Crowdfunding
Source:www.forbes.com, www.entrepreneur.com, www.gsvtomorrow.com
“E” refers to “Estimated”, as in estimated size of the market.

In less than seven years, crowdfunding has become a significant economic engine. There are more than 700 crowdfunding sites online today, funding every variety of project under the sun.3And that number is expected to double over the next few years. Globally, the total funds raised have followed an exponential curve from $530 million in 2009 to $1.5 billion in 2011 to $2.7 billion in 2012.4By 2015, experts predict a $15 billion crowdfunding market, which with the passing of the JOBS Act and the addition of equity crowdfunding to the scene could become an incredible $300 billion marketplace over the coming years.5
What has also increased is our confidence in the process. In the early days of crowdfunding, when a film was prefunded by the crowd, this was a clear sign that people actually wanted to see the film. The same holds true for a product or service. Consider +Pool, which raised over $270,000 on Kickstarter.6Its service? A filtered swimming pool floating in the middle of the East River. Who knew New Yorkers wanted to swim that badly? The fact is, the people behind +Pool suspected it, and their Kickstarter campaign confirmed it. That’s the unique power of crowdfunding.

For the entrepreneur, this kind of social proof is invaluable. It’s also lucrative. Crowdfunding expert Candace Klein believes that no matter who you are, there’s usually an untapped $100,000 floating around your social network. “I think this is true no matter what social strata you come from. I’m a perfect example. I was raised in a trailer park. The first time I tried to raise money from my network—it was almost a joke. No one I knew had any money. A lot of my friends couldn’t even pay their bills on time. It took two years, but I raised $200,000. And that was without the help of crowdfunding. Today these platforms allow you to speed up this process and expand your reach and allow you to market to a completely different audience of funders.”7
But crowdfunding does more than put an end to the never-ending fund-raiser’s dilemma, it also provides entrepreneurs with a significant psychological boost: the ability to start by starting.

It’s all about momentum. With any project, the most dangerous period is the zest-sucking stretch between “I’ve got a neat idea” and “I’m actually doing real work on that idea.” In my case, it took nearly a decade to raise the millions needed to fund the first XPRIZE the old-fashioned way. But it took just thirty-four days for me and the Planetary Resources team to crowdfund the $1.5 million to underwrite the launch of the ARKYD space telescope (a story we’ll come back to in a little while).8In other words, crowdfunding is the antidote to this energy-draining stall, allowing exponential entrepreneurs to immediately get into the game.

Here’s how to play.

The Types of Crowdfunding
There are four main types of crowdfunding, each based on what the investor receives in return for helping to fund a campaign: donation, debt, equity, and reward.

1.  Donation.This is simply the digital version of traditional charity. Donors get little beyond gratitude and a receipt to claim on their taxes. Examples include DonorsChoose, GlobalGiving, and Causes.

2.  DebtSometimes referred to as microlending or peer-to-peer (P2P) lending, this variety of crowdfunding involves an entrepreneur asking the crowd for a loan, and, in return, repaying that loan with interest. Examples include Kiva and LendingClub.

3.  Equity.This is the newest type of crowdfunding, a development made possible by recent changes to the US Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulations.9In equity crowdfunding, entrepreneurs can now sell equity in their company online, asking investors for cash in return for stock. Examples include Crowdfunder, Startup Crowdfunding, and (for those who have already raised their first $100,000 in capital) AngelList.

4.  Reward or Incentive.The funder sends money to support the creation of a product or service that inspires him or her and in return receives a reward. Simple as that. Send $25 and get a T-shirt. Send $100 and get a copy of the product you’re helping to fund (technically, a presale). The numbers vary a bit, but in general, reward-based crowdfunding is 60 percent more effective than straight-ahead donor funding. Examples include Indiegogo, Kickstarter, and RocketHub.

So which type of crowdfunding is right for your project? Well, of the four, donation funding is fine for social causes and political campaigns, but is not often utilized for entrepreneurial ventures. Debt funding, meanwhile, is best for local projects that benefit a community, such as helping someone open a new restaurant, hair salon, or retail shop, but has not performed well for larger entrepreneurial ventures. If you’re a business looking to expand locally, this platform is for you. Otherwise, look elsewhere.

Equity funding is the most recent category of crowdfunding, becoming possible only because of the 2012 Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, which allows new businesses to use crowdfunding to raise early-stage equity-based financing. “For the first time in nearly eighty years,” says Chance Barnett, CEO of the equity site Crowdfunder, “private start-ups and small businesses can raise investment funding publicly, using sites like Facebook or Twitter to help spread the word and taking in investment online via equity crowdfunding sites who power the investment process in a more open and collaborative way.”10
The potential here is tantalizing, with estimates running as high as $300 billion for the future size of the equity market. But even today, with equity just getting started, the amount of money involved is already considerable. As of July 2014, Crowdfunder has processed $105.2 million in deals with more than 11,000 companies listed and 62,000 investors registered on the site.11
AngelList is another equity platform that’s getting a lot of attention—and for good reason.12Started in 2010 by Babak Nivi and Naval Ravikant, AngelList is a platform for startups to meet angel investors, and vice versa. Investors and startups can create profiles, list their investments, and connect to one another. Participants are some of the best in the business. For example, Uber, the ridesharing service discussed earlier, not only raised their first $1.3 million on the site, but also met investor Shervin Pishevar, who later lead a $32 million Series B for Uber at Menlo Ventures (Pishevar has also become one of the biggest investors on AngelList). The best news: you don’t have to invest millions of dollars to get into these deals. In 2012, AngelList partnered with SecondMarket to give smaller accredited investors the chance to invest as little as $1,000 in start-ups alongside top technology investors.13
Yet, despite equity’s enormous potential, the focus in this chapter is going to primarily be on the fourth category: reward-based crowdfunding. We have chosen to place our attention on reward campaigns because equity crowdfunding is still too new and lacks the hard data required for accurate strategy suggestions. Debt crowdfunding, meanwhile, remains primarily a local mechanism and unsuitable for the bold. But the real reason for this focus is that reward-based crowdfunding already has a long entrepreneurial track record of success, proving itself effective for funding creative projects (movies, CDs, books) and actual products (watches, telescopes, even bioengineered plants). More importantly, as we’ll see in the following examples, it is a tool that continues to expand its reach.

To these ends, we’re going to examine three different reward-based funding efforts. The first is Pebble Watch, which is both one of the most successful crowdfunding campaigns ever and a really great example of how a small team of entrepreneurs can fund and launch a new product.14The second case study is Let’s Build a Goddamn Tesla Museum, which highlights the expanding abilities of individuals to fund far more unusual projects, showing how the combination of enormous passion and the right partners can make all the difference. The final example is the ARKYD Space Telescope, a campaign run by my company Planetary Resources, which helped us start and forge an enormously passionate community of space enthusiasts—generating the kind of support that is absolutely required by this kind of future-forward project.15
One quick clarification: these examples have been kept intentionally short because they’ll again be followed by a lengthy how-to section—the real meat of this chapter. It’s here we’ll break down everything you need to know to get started, providing information drawn from four sources: a meta-analysis of all the major crowdfunding guides that have appeared in the past few years (twenty-six in total); lengthy interviews with the founders and CEOs of major crowdfunding companies such as Indiegogo, RocketHub, and Crowdfunder; lengthy interviews with entrepreneurs who have run incredibly successful campaigns (for example, Eric Migicovsky, creator of the Pebble Watch campaign); and finally, my own personal experience raising $1.5 million via crowdfunding, which at the time was the twenty-fifth most successful Kickstarter campaign ever. In total, this chapter will enable you to design and launch a reward-based crowdfunding campaign, something that every exponential entrepreneur should plan on experimenting with and many will find core to their mission.

Case Study 1: The Pebble Watch
