How do you ride a bicycle and answer your phone at the same time? This was the question Eric Migicovsky was trying to answer in 2008. Migicovsky was an engineering undergrad enrolled at the University of Waterloo in Ontario, Canada, then spending a year abroad studying industrial design at Delft University of Technology in the Netherlands. He was also riding his bicycle everywhere. Everyone rode in the Netherlands, and Migicovsky was a fast convert to these two-wheeled ways.

But he was also a frustrated convert. Whenever Migicovsky was on his bike and his cell would ring or a text or an email would arrive, he faced that dread decision: Stop to answer or miss the message. Some of those messages were important. What would really help was a way to know at a glance who was on the other end of the line (or who was sending that email or text) and if it was worth pulling over to take the call or write a response. There were a few devices around that could do that—the Fossil Wrist Net, for example—but all came with hefty price tags. Migicovsky wanted something affordable—call it a smarter watch for the common man. That’s when he decided to build his own.

Back in Canada, during his final year of college, Migicovsky cobbled together his savings, winnings from a business plan pitch competition, and a $15,000 loan from his parents, then assembled a small team and built a prototype. The inPulse was born. It’s a smartwatch. It tells time. It syncs up with mobile devices. But mostly it’s an at-a-glance alert system—using its big flat screen to notify you about incoming cellular messages.

The inPulse developed a core fan base, but because the first iteration worked only with a BlackBerry (this was 2008 and Migicovsky, like BlackBerry, was Canadian), it didn’t go big. Yet there was enough early initial traction that Migicovsky decided to move the project to Y  Combinator in Silicon Valley, which is also where he found the seed money to start manufacturing an updated version of the inPulse. And that’s when he hit the wall.

Some great customer feedback had led to further rounds of design improvements, which resulted in an entirely new watch, the Pebble. It’s a great watch. It syncs up with iPhone and Android, runs apps, and allows users to check their calendar. “Basically,” as Migicovsky later told Inc., “the smartest watch ever.”16
Unfortunately, finishing this smartest watch ever required an additional $200,000 in funding, but Migicovsky and his team had problems raising the money. They met with VC after VC—many of whom had funded them before—but couldn’t ink a deal. No one wanted to take the risk. With just enough cash to keep going for another two months, Migicovsky and partners turned to Kickstarter for one last-ditch effort.

Migicovsky started making phone calls. He rang up the team at Supermechanical in Austin, Texas, who had “accidentally”—meaning their original goal was just $35,000—raised over $500,000 for Twine, a Wi-Fi sensor that connects everyday objects to the Internet. Migicovsky grilled them on the basics: how to make a video, how to post, what to expect. Then his team embarked on additional research, studying hundreds of winning campaigns and the strategies behind them. In the end, the Pebble crew settled on a pitch video that was fairly low-tech, sort of seventies funk meets geek dirty talk—“we created a prototype from cell phone parts,” etc.—while their reward levels were designed around customer feedback. Tip to tail, the whole campaign creation process took only six weeks. Then again, it had to, as they were out of money.

How a crowdfunding campaign performs in those first few hours after launch matters considerably, so the Pebble crew brought in the tech blog Engadget as their exclusive launch media partner. At 7:00 AM, the campaign opened for business and an Engadget article hit the web. The Pebble crew held their breath.

“We set a fundraising goal of $100,000,” said Migicovsky, “but that wasn’t actually the truth. We really needed to raise $200,000 to build and deliver the watches. I made a pact with the team—we set $100,000 as our target, but decided that if we didn’t actually raise $200,000, we would return everyone’s money because we just wouldn’t feasibly be able to make it.”
What happened next surprised everyone. “Two hours after the Engadget article went live, we hit $100,000,” recalls Migicovsky. “We hit $200,000 about two hours after that. In the first twenty-eight hours we raised a million dollars. The first day was spent mainly in awe at what we had started. By the end of the campaign, on May 18, 2012, we had passed $10 million. Our backers came from all over the world. This was a result we never expected.”
Also unexpected were their final totals. By the numbers, Pebble raised exactly $10,266,845 from 68,929 backers in thirty-seven days—a world record at the time. And the results since have been nothing more than stellar. After being turned down just a year earlier for $200,000 in funding, Migicovsky successfully raised an additional $15 million in VC backing on the heels of their successful campaign. Better yet, Pebble sold more than 400,000 watches in their first twelve months, beating iPod’s first year (they shipped 394,000).

Case Study 2: Let’s Build a Goddamn Tesla Museum
Popular web comic artist Matthew Inman, aka “the Oatmeal,” has been a long-time fan of inventor Nikola Tesla. And why not? This was Tesla, the man who invented alternating electric current (though the credit went to Edison), wireless radio (though the Nobel Prize went to Marconi), and, well, X-rays, radar, hydroelectric power, and large portions of the transistor (again, in each case, no credit). Tesla even experimented with cryogenics—fifty years before the field actually had a name. Thus, when Inman found out that Wardenclyffe, Tesla’s final laboratory (located in Shoreham, New York, and where the inventor attempted to create a power station that would provide the world with freeelectricity), was up for sale—with an offer already on the table to buy the land, tear down the lab, and put up retail stores—he had to do something.

Partnering with the nonprofit Tesla Science Center (which had been trying to buy this land for eighteen years), Inman turned to the crowdfunding platform Indiegogo. Next he created a long, funny comic about Nikola Tesla—who he was, why he was important, and why the world needed to buy that property and build a museum to honor his legacy. Humorously titling the campaign Operation: Let’s Build a Goddamn Tesla Museum, Inman released the project in August 2012.17
Within a day, it went viral. Over the course of its first week, it raised $145,000 per day, $6,000 per hour, and $100 per minute. Then things got really interesting. At one point during the campaign, contributors were donating over $1,000 a minute. By the end of the month, they had shattered their goal of $850,000, raising over $1.3 million from 33,000 backers in 102 countries.

Like the Pebble Watch campaign, the Tesla Museum campaign marked a turning point in crowdfunding. What made it unique was the fact that it was a nonprofit initiative (generally, nonprofits don’t do as well on crowdfunding platforms) without any real product to offer (meaning, unlike the Pebble watch, backers would never get a gizmo in the mail). As a result, the Tesla Museum pushed boundaries, becoming the most successful campaign on Indiegogo and opening the door for the crowdfunding of larger, more conceptual projects. The Oatmeal, of course, commemorated the whole thing with a new ending to his comic, writing: “Mr. Tesla  .  .  . We’re sorry humanity forgot about you for a little while. We still love you lots. Here’s a Goddam Museum.”
Case Study 3: The ARKYD Space Telescope—Access for Everyone
When Eric Anderson, Chris Lewicki, and I launched our asteroid mining company Planetary Resources, we knew we needed a powerful community behind us. When you’re doing something as radical as asteroid mining, having a group of passionate supporters is downright necessary. The question was how we could actively and authentically engage the public in our mission to explore space. After all, space is expensive, difficult to access, and—as we’ve learned by now—stubbornly impenetrable. Furthermore, people care most about things they can have an immediate impact on, but from the beginning of humanity’s extraplanetary exploits, most everything we’ve done in space has been done by a small group of experts and has taken decades to get off the ground. We wanted to stimulate people’s interest now, hopefully by providing them with a way to participate firsthand. This was when we hit upon the idea of crowdfunding the first ever crowd-controlled space telescope, the ARKYD.

Thus began a four-month journey as we started researching, planning, and developing our Kickstarter campaign. We appointed one member of our team, Frank Mycroft, to be in charge of the effort, assembled a group of affiliate launch partners, including notable space and science celebrities such as Bill Nye, Hank Green, and Brent Spiner, and finally hit on the idea of pulling together an army of super activists we dubbed Planetary Vanguards to help us implement and promote the campaign. Our media team got busy shooting, editing, and testing our pitch video. Our technology team finalized the prototype designs, renderings, and prototypes of the ARKYD space telescope so people could see what the finished product would actually look like.

But we had another problem. Most successful “product” campaigns actually had a product to offer. We didn’t. We weren’t selling a cool new watch; ours was a telescope designed to hunt for asteroids. While we could offer our backers an image taken from the telescope of, say, an asteroid, a galaxy, or the Moon, when we polled our existing community for feedback, we discovered this idea wasn’t likely to go viral. Then, in the month right before the campaign launched, one of our team members suggested offering a “space selfie”—a chance for anyone to send a photo of themselves up to our spacecraft, where that image would be displayed on a screen, photographed with the Earth in the background, then sent back down to them (more on this later). Priced at a $25 reward level, we thought this was the perfect solution, and when we tested it, our community agreed.

On May 29, 2013, we held a press conference and launched our crowdfunding campaign. Our goal was to raise $1 million—enough money to launch the telescope into orbit (the actual cost of the telescope was being covered by Planetary Resources). Within the first two days, we’d raised close to $500,000. Our Vanguards proved invaluable, spreading the word and pushing the movement forward. Thirty-two days later we finished with $1,505,366 in funding from 17,614 backers.18While this was the largest space-related crowdfunding campaign to date, more important was the community we built. As a company working to do something new and bold, having a group of passionate supporters will prove priceless when we seek to crowdsource future support and solutions.

The Money Solution: A How-To Guide to Crowdfunding
In the section below, you will find some of the most valuable lessons I’ve learned while researching successful crowdfunding campaigns and implementing my own. I’ll give an overview of the topics, then provide far more detailed analysis in the pages to come. In sharing this knowledge, I hope to enable many more innovators and disruptive entrepreneurs to launch their own wildly successful crowdfunding ventures.

Who Should Do a Crowdfunding Campaign?
While crowdfunding can be an immensely valuable tool to raise capital and grow a community, it isn’t for everyone. My research shows that the best crowdfunding campaigns have five key characteristics in common:
•  The product is usually in late prototype phases, sufficient to show prospective backers what they’re supporting.

•  The team is correctly assembled and capable of executing.

•  The product is community focused and consumer facing.

•  The team has access to a large community of followers who can be pitched directly, or has the ability to marshal significant public relations/media resources to attract attention.

•  The product aims to solve a problem, improve an existing product, and/or tell a new story.

