Seven Reasons to Consider Crowdfunding
Crowdfunding has a variety of benefits beyond raising capital. I’ve listed some of the most important ones below. Remember, a great deal of how you design your campaign depends on which of these benefits you desire most.

•  Market validation and real demand measurement. Perhaps the most valuable benefit is your ability to get real customer feedback on your product—what features they desire, what colors, what accessories, etc. Equally critical, you also find out what they don’t want. And unlike surveys or focus groups, here customers are voting with their wallets. Of course, as a bonus, you will also get far more general data—geographic info, price sensitivity, and so forth—that can help you shape strategy.

•  The raising of significant investment capital.Interestingly, some venture capitalists are requesting that a company run a crowdfunding campaign to validate market interest before making an investment. In this case, a successful crowdfunding campaign has two advantages: providing non-dilutive capital to grow the company in the early days, and allowing the company to command a higher valuation in its venture round. Just look at the results achieved by the Pebble Watch team, raising $15 million in venture funding twelve months after their campaign. Even more impressive, Oculus Rift went from raising $2.4 million on Kickstarter to being acquired by Facebook for $2 billion in just eighteen months.19
•  The development of a paying community of customers.There is enormous value in building and having access to a community of paying customers, yet this is very difficult to do in a normal marketplace, and almost impossible to accomplish before your product is released.

•  Cheap cost-per-customer acquisitionAcquiring customers through other means is often orders of magnitude more expensive. Moreover, if you execute correctly, not only do you get free advertising, but your customers both pay you to be involved and promote your product to their friends and family.

•  You’re passionate about your product.If you love your idea and want to get it out there quickly, there is perhaps no better way to make this happen fast and potentially at a profit.

•  Public relations benefit.Success begets success. The positive brand image and media attention associated with crowdfunding success has intrinsic value, putting the company on the map and making future product offerings easier and more lucrative.

•  Cash-flow positive.Oh yes, there’s also the benefit of near-term dollars. Balancing costs and earnings correctly puts cash in the bank for product development.

Execution—Twelve Key Steps
So if one or more of those seven reasons resonates with you, and you’re ready to create and launch your own crowdfunding campaign, the following is an outline of the twelve key steps needed for execution.

1.  Choosing your crowdfunding idea (product, project, or service)
2.  How much? Setting your fund-raising target
3.  How long? Setting your campaign length and creating a schedule
4.  Setting your rewards/incentives and stretch goals
5.  Building the perfect team
6.  Sharpen your ax: planning, materials, and resources
7.  Telling a meaningful story (and using the right words)
8.  Creating a viral video: three use cases, shareability, and humanization
9.  Building your audience—the three As
10.  Super-credible launch, early donor engagement, and media outreach
11.  Week-by-week execution plan: engage, engage, engage
12.  Make data-driven decisions and final tips
1.  CHOOSING YOUR CROWDFUNDING IDEA (PRODUCT, PROJECT, OR SERVICE)
The most basic question is what should you choose to crowdfund? The short answer is found at the intersection of two primary drivers: First, find something you feel deeply passionate about creating. Second, choose something the crowd is passionate about seeing come into existence. A quick review of sites like Indiegogo, Kickstarter, and RocketHub shows an extraordinary diversity of things getting funded these days (see below). The point is that just about anything you’re passionate about already has a crowdfunding history:
Arts/Entertainment
1.  Creating a film
2.  Writing and publishing a book
3.  Launching a new play
4.  Opening an art gallery
5.  Creating a CD or music video
6.  Producing a concert or festival
7.  Creating a video game
Charities
8.  One-shot charitable projects (a disaster relief project)
9.  Starting or growing NGOs
10.  Sponsoring a youth sports team
11.  Supporting a school
12.  Animal initiatives
13.  Supporting deserving individuals
For Start-ups and Existing Business
14.  Market-testing a prototype
