What to do if you don’t have active followers? First, take the time to correctly identify possibilities. Make sure you understand who is going to be interested in your offering and why. Next, find their online hangouts and reach out to them with an invitation to your website. Finally, on your website, have a capture page that invites them to join your community. One of the best ways to get email addresses is to use “ethical bribes”—trades. What can you trade potential customers in exchange for their email address and membership in your community? The simplest answers are often best: an invitation to receive access to your monthly blog, future discounts on products, early access to limited edition products, invitations to events, or in some rare cases (like PayPal back in the day), money. Get creative.

Activists.Activists are those avid supporters who want to do substantial and significant work for the campaign. For Planetary Resources, we created an army of core supporters we called our vanguards. To get this moving, a few months before the campaign, we sent an email to our list of 25,000 names. The email teased:
Hi there—
Everyone on the Planetary Team knows the moment. The moment when we knew our calling was to break boundaries and push humanity to the stars! For many of us, that moment was sparked by a mentor, volunteer or educator, often at a science center or museum.

Because of this, educating and inspiring the next generation has been a guiding force for everything we do. This month, we’re partnering with a major science organization to create a revolutionary way to make space accessible, interactive and fun. But to make it happen, we NEED YOUR HELP. We’re building a team. A select team. We’re turning to you, our supporters, to look for a couple hundred members. Only a small number will be selected. We’re calling this group the Planetary Vanguards. While we can’t share all the details, we can tell you that the Planetary Vanguardsare going to be an important, driving force behind making space accessible in a BIG way! Interested in joining the Planetary Vanguards? Here’s what you need to do:
1.  Fill out the application here. This will allow us to narrow our search for the right people to be a part of the Planetary Vanguards.

2.  We’ll reach out to you to confirm your interest and verify your contact information. Please note: for some, nondisclosure agreements may be required.

3.  We’ll invite you to an exclusive, interactive Google Hangout with our cochairman and cofounder Peter H. Diamandis to bring you into the fold and provide you with a confidential briefing.

End of Planetary Transmission.

Chris Lewicki
President & Chief Asteroid Miner
As you can see, we kept the details, names, and dates of the campaign a secret. Thousands of responses poured into our database. We asked them to fill out a questionnaire estimating how much time they could volunteer each week and how big an email list, Google+, Facebook, and Twitter following they had. We filtered these down to about five hundred names, then invited each to an exclusive Google Hangout for a “confidential briefing.” Part of this was about engaging our fans, but equally important was that we tested the idea of a crowdfunded telescope on them.

In the months prior to launch, we gave our vanguards assignments, held private meetings, and used them as test subjects for the different strategies we were considering. Then when Chris Lewicki, Eric Anderson, and I launched the campaign with a live event in Seattle, more than fifty of our vanguards showed up in person, some even flying in from Europe. All of them were ready to help. They weren’t getting paid. They had traveled on their own dime to be a part of something important.

How critical were these core supporters? Of the 10,000 or so unique clicks we received on the first day of the campaign, almost 50 percent were attributable to the vanguards.

The lesson? Find your most enthusiastic fans and put them to work. They love helping, and their contribution can be invaluable.

10.  SUPER-CREDIBLE LAUNCH, EARLY DONOR ENGAGEMENT, AND MEDIA OUTREACH
How you announce your campaign is critically important. The first few days after you launch is when you’ll gain the most traction and raise the most money. To come out of the gate with sizzle, there are three key things to remember.

Launching with super-credibility.As we discussed in chapter 5, when you launch above the line of super-credibility, people instantly accept your project as real and believe in their hearts that it is going to work. The key is bringing together as many credible sources as possible and aligning their efforts with yours. Credibility comes from the quality of your video, who is in your video, endorsements on your crowdfunding website, and, if you can muster a launch-day press conference, who is at your press conference.

Super-credibility also comes from the early success of your campaign. People love to back a winner. The better you do out of the gate, the more people will want to support you. This is where the next element comes in: early donor engagement.

Early donor engagement.In an earlier section, I explained that the $5,000 and $10,000 reward levels were as important as the low-priced options. Here’s why. In the weeks prior to the ARKYD campaign launch, Eric Anderson, Chris Lewick, and I reached out to our personal networks for help. The day before the campaign went live, we each sent out a couple of dozen emails of the following type:
Hi Larry,
Tomorrow, Wednesday, May 29, I’m launching one of the biggest and most exciting online projects of my life. No exaggeration. I’d love your support. It’s called “ARKYD: A Space Telescope for Everyone.” We are crowdfunding an orbiting space observatory (The ARKYD). We’re using crowdfunding to generate global awareness and to increase the observation time we can donate to science centers and K-12 schools. This project is about making space accessible!
How this Crowdfunding Campaign performs during the first couple of hours (i.e., pledges received) determines A LOT about its overall success. For this reason, I’m reaching out personally to my close friends—asking for you to consider pledging and passing this along to friends.

There are two levels ($10K and $5K) for you to consider. Both allow you to donate significant telescope time to any school, museum, or university you desire. You can read all the details on campaign page when it launches—it’s fair to say that we’ve put all the top benefits (a lot of them) into these top two levels  .  .  . We’ll even name an asteroid we discover after you!
Here’s the campaign for your viewing—take a look! But keep it to yourself: www.kickstarter.com/projects/1458134548/1966069095?token=2ab031d1
I will email you a link to the Campaign Page as soon as it goes live. Let me know. Thanks!
Peter
When we launched, the public saw us raise $200,000 in the first four hours. This much momentum helped us establish early credibility and created enough visibility to send the campaign viral. With such a solid funding base, we were unquestionably going to make our target. The only question was when and how much?
Hype.Create meaningful hype. People need a compelling reason to participate in the campaign, and particularly in the launch. In the case of ARKYD, we began teasing our community weeks before the launch, drumming up excitement with “something big is coming” hints. We then used our resources and those of our affiliate partners to promote a live press conference at Seattle’s Museum of Flight. We organized ahead of time, ensuring that four hundred enthusiastic fans (from the Seattle area) showed up at the event. For people tuning in via live stream, we offered exclusive perks—a T-shirt—to those pledged while the announcement was going on (about an hour).

Behind the scenes, we worked our network. One common misunderstanding about crowdfunding is that most of your backers are strangers. The truth is that crowdfunding is often a combination of normal fund-raising strategies (seeking capital from your own network) andcrowdfunding strategies (seeking anonymous public donors).

Engaging the media.The major mistake most people make in crowdfunding is their assumption that simply posting your campaign on Indiegogo and Kickstarter is enough. It’s not. You, not the platform, are responsible for driving traffic to your campaign page. And the more traffic you drive to your page, the more money you raise. It’s that simple.

In addition to social media and direct outreach via email, affiliates, and advocates, another critical mechanism for driving traffic is digital media—online articles and blogs that link directly to your campaign page. Here are some ideas.

