Approach those who know you.If you or your company have been in the media before, create a list of those media outlets familiar with your track record. Contact them and prebrief them. Arm them with a press kit or link to images and content they can easily use.

Create a list of relevant bloggers and journalists.Who are the bloggers who care about your area of interest? The Pebble Watch campaign did this masterfully. “We looked at every single blogger in the gadget blog space and charted how often they wrote about Kickstarter projects and created a list of eighty or so,” said Migicovsky. “Next we created a spreadsheet of the top sixty or seventy media journalists that we would look at contacting the moment that our Kickstarter project went live.”
Pebble chose Engadget as the exclusive launch media partner. They traded an in-depth news article about Pebble for the right to be the first to break the story. The partnership worked. News outlet after news outlet referenced the Engadget article and the campaign went viral.

11.  WEEK-BY-WEEK EXECUTION PLAN—ENGAGE, ENGAGE, ENGAGE
It’s critical to stay in touch with backers and would-be backers throughout the campaign. Start before the launch and keep going. According to research conducted by Indiegogo in 2012, projects with regular updates—blog posts, videos, and so forth—raise 218 percent more money than those without.28Even better, given the enormous number of communication channels now available and the incredible ease of use, engaging your community has never been easier.

Why is engagement so important? First, backers care about their money. They want project status updates. These are your first customers, so keeping them enthusiastic should be a priority. This is especially true in a fixed-funding campaign, where their contribution is processed only after the fund-raising goal is reached. During the length of a campaign, disgruntled supporters can always lower or even cancel their pledge—keeping them engaged is critical.

Second, engaged backers invite their friends to the party. A huge portion of the capital raised via crowdfunding comes from referrals. And the best referrals come from people who have already contributed to the campaign and continue to be excited about its possibilities.

Third, over 10 percent of the funds raised in our ARKYD campaign came from upsells. This means that during the campaign, backers who had already contributed actually decided to donate more money for a better perk package. These upsells were largely driven by high-engagement activities. Let’s take a closer look.

Promotions and contests.People like to play, too. One of the more successful strategies we used for ARKYD was a design contest on Freelancer.com. We partnered with Matt Barrie by putting up a $7,000 prize for the best T-shirt design incorporating the ARKYD space telescope. We were expecting a couple of hundred submissions. Then Matt emailed his list—all eight million of them. Before we knew it, we had over 2,500 high-quality design submissions and an enormous amount of engagement. Plus, the winning T-shirt design became another perk, ultimately driving more sales.

As a side note: When designing promotions, make sure to align the contest with the campaign’s ultimate mission. We ran a few contests in communities unfamiliar with crowdfunding and the Internet—they fizzled.

Live-streaming.During the ARKYD launch, we hosted a series of live-streaming Q&As with our celebrities, in which I interviewed Rainn Wilson, Bill Nye, and Brent Spiner. These events helped make the campaign more transparent, promoted deeper engagement, drove people to our campaign page, and ultimately enormously increased our donations.

12.  MAKE DATA-DRIVEN DECISIONS AND FINAL TIPS
The details are in the data. As crowdfunding campaigns gain steam, smaller trends and larger patterns start to emerge. Knowing how to leverage this information can give your campaign a huge leg up. Here are a few patterns to look for.

Timing.Timing is everything in crowdfunding. And there are two different timing sequences to pay attention to: market timing and launch timing.

Market timing means the world has to be ready for your solution. Why was the Pebble such a hit? Because the general public was hungry for affordable smartwatches. Be aware of development trends. Pay close attention to increased sales of similar products and do your homework. One of the best ways to test the market is to ask a hundred friends, family, colleagues, and—especially important—complete strangers what they think about your product/service/idea. Do this well before launch.

Launch timing means understanding that people follow schedules. Fewer folks are on their computers during the summer and on weekends. Take into account school holidays, religious practices, and even sports schedules when choosing the best time to launch. Internet traffic is higher earlier in the week. Launching on a Friday, Saturday, or Sunday is terrible from a media standpoint, so if you can’t launch on Monday through Thursday, then delay a few days. Don’t risk losing early momentum to bad timing. Most crowdfunding ventures have peak activity at the very beginning and very end of the campaign and a lull in the middle. Plan accordingly.

Trend surfing.You want to launch your campaign on a rising tide. Trends matter. Term popularity is important. Check out Google.com/trends. Trend surfing means riding the wave of a trending keyword just as it’s becoming viral. Position yourself correctly and you’ll surf the wave to its peak, using the term’s popularity to drive traffic to your campaign. In our ARKYD launch, this was the idea behind the space selfie. We weren’t sold on the idea until we searched for the term selfieon Google Trends. Based on the number of global searches we found the term was quickly rising in popularity, so we gave it a shot. That shot certainly paid off.

Upselling.One of the best ways to gain momentum during the campaign is to rally supporters to increase their contributions. Using this foot-in-the-door technique during periods of high traffic can increase sales significantly. But don’t beg your backers to buy more; instead, add engagement value at each reward level so backers become a substantially larger part of your movement when they level up.

Global focus.With the Internet, crowdfunding campaigns are no longer local affairs. For ARKYD, we had to translate our campaign page into multiple languages to cater to our international audience. Over 20 percent of our sales came from European countries. Three percent of our sales came from China. Pebble’s 68,000 backers came from all over the Internet and all over the world. “Our news spread from North America to Canada to Europe to Belgium to Holland to the Middle East to Singapore to Indonesia to China to Japan,” says Migicovsky. “Overall, the stats showed that roughly 50 percent of our backers came from North America and 50 percent came from elsewhere in the world. [And] it wasn’t just the English-speaking world.”29In other words, do your research and understand the global market. Prepare your campaign accordingly.

Ask questions and listen to your community:Campaigns are not static. This isn’t launch and forget; it’s launch and get busy. And get busy with your data. Gauge the opinions of your customers constantly. Make iterative improvements based on the information collected. Making data-driven decisions throughout the campaign can dramatically improve your chances of success. Here are a few pointers:
Listening to your community will not only help fund your campaign but will also provide important feedback about the product/service you’re offering and the right incentive structure to use. As you collect data, try to understand two things: What do people want? How much are they willing to pay for it? As expected, surveys work well in this context. Sometimes simply asking your customers and community exactly what you want to know is often the best approach. So remember to:
1.  Segment the audience.By reaching out to specific groups of people within the community, you can draw better conclusions.

2.  Ask only one question.People are busy. Answering one question is easy and doesn’t take too long. Ask the right question.

3.  Expect exaggeration.Be aware that people tend to choose the extremes in surveys. When it comes time for them to actually contribute, only a small percentage will actually put up the amount they selected in a survey.

So that sums it up. There’s a lot more information online at the www.AbundanceHub.comsite. My final piece of advice comes from our friends at Nike: Just do it. A major crowdfunding wave is just now hitting, and it will be growing tenfold over the next seven years. Don’t miss it. Pick a project, a product, or a service and get busy building your campaign.

Hold the Presses—Some Final Advice
Shortly after submitting this manuscript to my publisher, a Portland-based product development whiz named Ryan Grepper crushed all previous crowdfunding records—including both Pebble Watch and Ubuntu—getting 62,642 people to pledge $13,285,226 to support his Coolest Cooler campaign. What were they supporting? The creation of a beach cooler for the twenty-first century—a cooler that comes with a built-in blender, phone charger, Bluetooth speakers, and, of course, a waterproof lighting system so you can find your beverage of choice after dark. Since my close friend, the marketing genius Brendon Burchard, had helped with this campaign, I reached out to him to see how they pulled it off. Turns out, during their campaign, Brendon and Ryan had uncovered four ideas not discussed in any of our previous examples, but with enough importance that a last-minute insertion was justified. So here’s a quick look at what they learned along the way.

1.  Fail Forward.Despite their enormous success, the Coolest Cooler wasn’t an overnight sensation. In fact, this $13 million dollar success was Ryan’s second effort at crowdfunding the cooler; his first failed to raise $125,000, and the story almost ended there.

