And it’s a long story. “Over a decade ago,” explains Ryan, “I made a beach blender out of an old Weedwacker. It made for fantastic family outings. The next year, I took my old car stereo and added it to a cooler so we could also have music on those trips. For years, these gadgets worked great, but then we moved and I put them in storage and didn’t think much about them. But, last year, I pulled both the cooler and the blender out of mothballs and realized that technology had come a long way since I’d built them. Today, I could combine much more technology into a smaller, more portable cooler. And that’s when it hit me—this could make for a great crowdfunding project.”
But not so fast. Ryan’s first attempt at crowdfunding the Coolest Cooler actually failed. In a late 2013 effort, he only raised $100,000 of the $125,000 needed to reach his funding goal. Disappointed, but not deterred, and urged on by supporters from his first effort, Ryan took the cooler back to the drawing board—adapting, iterating, and ultimately succeeding. And this brings us to our first lesson: Fail forward. “The fact that your first crowdfunding effort failed doesn’t mean you can’t relaunch,” says Ryan. “In general, crowdfunding is a great way for any creative to put an idea in front of potential customers and get the most real and honest feedback you can imagine—feedback from their wallets. If you fund, fantastic. If you fail, you say, You know what, this wasn’t as good as I thought it was. So what can I change, improve, and iterate? Or, ‘fail early, fail often, fail forward.’ ”
2.  Start with a Crowd.The second lesson Ryan learned was the importance of having a community of people who care about your product. Earlier in this chapter, I showed you how to create a group of Vanguards to play this role. In the case of the Coolest Cooler, Ryan’s supporters from his first campaign filled that bill. “During that campaign,” he explains, “we did a lot of outreach—going to tailgating parties, networking, connecting. It was these same people who encouraged me to try again. And when I did, during our second campaign, these preexisting fans were with us from the start. They were a big boulder we threw into the pond. It made a very big ripple and had a very big effect.”
3.  Mockup Matters.The Internet is a visual medium. It’s why people care so much about the size of their screens. It’s also the reason that we talked about the importance of having a great video for your campaign. What Ryan learned is an extension of these facts—that having a great mockup of your product to display in that video is equally important. “The extra time between campaigns allowed us to build a great quality mockup,” he says. “It made a big difference. And it’s not all about looks—it’s actually about trust. With crowdfunding, you’re asking strangers to care and to believe in both you and your concept. You’re asking for a big leap of faith. Showing them how close you are to having an actual production model—something both finished and great looking—provides an incredible leg up.”
4.  Targeted Advertising.Market segmentation matters. “It’s critical to craft your message for a specific audience,” explains Ryan. “From our first failure, we had some data about our backers—who they were and what kinds of things they were excited about. So we put together targeted Facebook ads and connected with people who already had passion for boating and tailgating and camping and picnics and Jimmy Buffet and such. When you understand your buyer, the targeting power for some of these advertising platforms is astounding.” So here, our fourth lesson is the value of paid targeted advertising through platforms like Facebook, YouTube, and LinkedIn. Be a data-driven company. If the ads help your campaign raise more money than you’re spending on advertising, then go for it.

Finally, I’ll add one last point I found fascinating: The campaign’s incredible level of success brought an entirely different type of benefit. Ryan recalls, “One guy reached out saying, ‘Do you need $20 million in financing? I’ve got a team, and we can make this the next $200 million company.’ On top of that, we had countless partnership proposals for almost every major component maker—from batteries to blenders to speakers. Even potential distributors got in touch.”CHAPTER NINEBUILDING COMMUNITIESReputation Economics
“The trillions of hours of free time the population of the planet has to spend doing the things they care about” is how NYU professor Clay Shirky defines the term cognitive surplus1The entire third part of this book has been spent exploring strategies for tapping this surplus, but we’ve come to one of the most important lessons: how to build a community that you can tap into, work with, and use to accomplish the big and bold.

Let’s begin with what we mean by community. For starters, it’s different than the crowd. The crowd is everyone online. A community is pulled from the crowd. It’s everyone with whom you have a working relationship. There are different types of communities, but in this chapter we’re going to focus on two: DIY communities and exponential communities. A DIY community is a group of people united around a massively transformative purpose (MTP),2a collection of the passionate willing to donate their time and their minds to projects they truly believe in. These folks work for free. They work long hours. They remain committed. And they do so because they feel the work is meaningful and important. An exponential community, meanwhile, is a group of people who are immensely passionate about a particular exponential technology (machine learning, 3-D printing, synthetic biology), and who unite to share techniques and experiences.

On a certain level, there’s nothing new going on here. As long as humans have lived communally, they’ve been banding together to share passions and tackle problems. But today’s DIY and exponential communities (which I will refer jointly to as communities for the remainder of the chapter) are distinguished by differences of geography, scale, and structure. Let’s take a closer look.

Geography is the most obvious change. Historically, if you were building a boat and the best maker of masts was located on the other side of a mountain range—well, you were out of luck. But the Internet removes these barriers, and does so in important ways. As Bill Joy famously pointed out, the smartest people on the planet usually work for someone else.3Technology now gives you access to these big brains no matter where they live and without a host of traditional biases. Online, no one can see what color you are, which gods you worship, how you dress, what your hair looks like, if you smoke or smell or smile too much. This anonymity allows people who wouldn’t normally sit on a park bench together to share deeply meaningful and potentially profitable experiences.

Moreover, liberation from proximity and prejudice increases access to new ideas. Since creativity is recombinatory—i.e., breakthroughs result from new ideas bumping into old thoughts to produce novel insights—this increased access to ideas amplifies the rate of innovation in communities. In fact, if you combine this amplified rate of innovation with our newfound ability to tap any expert anywhere in the world, the potency of technologies like 3-D printing and cloud computing, and the power of crowdfunding to capitalize such ventures, you find the second key difference in today’s communities: the scale of projects they can now undertake has grown exponentially.

Communities are now empowered to tackle jobs far larger in scope and size than anything previously possible. For one example, the online hobbyist community DIY Drones has been able to build military-grade autonomous aircraft; for another, Local Motors is constructing fully customizable automobiles.4Ten years ago, challenges of this size were the sole province of large corporations and governments. Today they’re open to anyone with access to the Internet.

Structurally, the change has been equally significant. Consider that the major structures that handled the dissemination of information of the last century—radio, television, print—went in only one direction. Communication flowed from the top down, and even then just barely, by contemporary standards. But today the Internet permits top-down and bottom-up and side-to-side communication. In communities, these new possibilities for communication don’t just allow a leader to lead, they allow other leaders to emerge. They permit collaborative structures that would have been unthinkable just a decade back.

Even better, in many cases, these structures are self-organizing. If the community has been set up in the right way, then growth happens organically, without need for too much direct intervention or intensive capital spends. For example, after Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg wrote Lean In, her bestselling book on empowering women to pursue their ambitions, she decided to capture the energy it was generating by building an online women’s community. As part of their growth strategy, one of their ideas was to create Lean In circles—local groups of eight to ten women coming together to share experiences and offer support. “These circles are almost entirely self-organizing,” says Gina Bianchini, CEO of Mightybell, the online community building tool that serves as the backbone for the Lean In community (more on such platforms in the how-to section). “All they did was suggest the idea to the community and issue a set of loose guidelines for how these circles should form and function. There is no one in the Lean In organization whose job it is to create new circles or manage existing ones. But in a little over a year, some 13,000 circles have been formed, with more starting up every week.”5
The driving force behind all of these novel collaborative structures, self-organizing or otherwise, is an entirely new kind of value proposition, what technology expert and author Joshua Klein calls reputation economics.6The idea here is twofold. It starts with the fact that some two billion of us now have online reputations. Whether it’s your seller rating on eBay, or the content on your Facebook page, or your Klout score (Klout uses social media analytics to rank its users according to online social influence), people know far more about each other than ever before. And these reputations matter. A series of powerful blog posts can get you everything from a date for Friday night to an invitation to speak at a conference. People get jobs because of their StackOverflow.comexperience (a website that lets techies comment on one another’s questions and vote up the best answers) and TopCoder scores (TopCoder runs online computer programming competitions). In other words, our online reputations have real-world consequences.

Moreover, these reputations allow all sorts of entirely beneficial but—the key point—not always financial exchanges. “Because we can now get context-relevant information about anyone else in the world,” explains Joshua Klein, “we can decide, dynamically and personally, how to exchange with them in a way most beneficial to both parties. Essentially, this underpins everything that makes every community with an online component work, which these days is most of them.”7
But the interesting bit is that we can now take this one step further. Imagine a local baking club that’s getting into carbon dioxide infusions for their whipped-cream cupcakes. One day one of the club members decides they need a more industrial-strength infusion machine. A few minutes later she’s looking at the website of a guy halfway across the country who claims to be making a device that perfectly fits the bill—but he’s got only a couple of prototypes and doesn’t seem interested in sharing.

“Used to be,” continues Klein, “you’d try to figure out what he was doing from papers he may have written or a newspaper report, or maybe you’d write a letter and beg for more info. But now you can learn all about this guy. Figure out he’s really into Bavarian folk music. Bavarian folk music? No kidding, your lead baker’s wife’s mother’s aunt is from Bavaria. Turns out her nephew back home is a big deal in folk music. Would this guy making industrial-scale cupcake infusers be interested in an introduction, maybe for a trial of his device? That sort of thing just wouldn’t have been possible ten years ago. Now it’s as ordinary as breathing.”
By fundamentally altering the value proposition, reputation economics further accelerates the rate of innovation both in DIY and exponential communities. This means that communities don’t grind to a halt when money is not readily available. In fact, often just the opposite is true. Mutually beneficial nonfinancial trades can actually be better—that is to say, add more value—for the participants involved than a plain old currency exchange. There’s less friction, so people are often more motivated to make such trades. As a result, the accelerated rate of innovation that results from the removal of geographic barriers is itself accelerated, allowing entrepreneurs to go from A to B far faster than ever before.

Or as Gina Bianchini explains: “I’ve been around DIY communities my entire career, and these continue to surprise me, to startle me. Once a community gets going, it starts generating absolutely mind-blowing ideas of its own. Directions you would have never considered, never even imagined. This happens so regularly you can almost count on it. I think this is the reason DIY communities are such a powerful tool for tackling bold challenges. You can go big because you don’t need to know how to pull something off ahead of time. The community shapes the path and accelerates the process. It’s a shocking amount of leverage.”8
Case Study 1: Galaxy Zoo—A DIY Community
In early 2007, while working toward his PhD in astrophysics at Oxford, Kevin Schawinski was hunting blue ellipticals in the Sloan Digital Sky Survey data. A blue elliptical is a transitional galaxy, possibly the missing link between a galaxy engaged in active star formation and one long dead. The Sloan Survey, meanwhile, is one of the more ambitious endeavors in the history of astronomy. Imaging almost a quarter of the sky and containing ten times the data of any previous effort, Sloan’s goal was to give us a large-scale view of the universe—what the New York Timesonce called “a census of the heavens”9—in the hopes of revealing its structural framework. Thus, unlike pre-Sloan astronomers, Schawinski didn’t have just a few thousand photographs to work with—he had nearly a million. Unfortunately, at the time, our best computer algorithms couldn’t spot blue ellipticals. Only the human eye was capable of that feat. In other words, Schawinski had his work cut out for him
Ten hours a day for five days straight is what it took him to sort through 50,000 images, but that was the end of the line. “It was as far as I was willing to go,” Schawinski explains. “And we extracted some really interesting science and published a bunch of papers from what I had analyzed, but whenever we talked about what else we could do we came back to ‘wouldn’t it be amazing to sort the whole million.’ ”10
Then Schawinski went out for a beer with fellow Oxford astronomer Chris Lintott and together they stumbled upon the idea of putting the images on a website. “We thought that there might be a few people out there—like, maybe, two or three really dedicated amateur astronomers—who would be willing to help us,” says Schawinski. “With this method, by doing a back-of-the-envelope calculation, we thought it would take about five years for every one of those million galaxies to be classified once.”
With the help of some friends, and just two weeks after they shared that beer, this idea became Galaxy Zoo, one of the very first citizen-science websites to appear online.11As far as telling people about the website, well, they commemorated its appearance with nothing more than a short press release. Then they waited—but not for long.

Within a few hours, people were classifying more galaxies than Schawinski had done in a week. Within twenty-four hours, they were classifying nearly 70,000 galaxies an hour. “What we realized very quickly was there was this huge demand among people to get involved in this. At first we were kind of puzzled by why people would want to go to a website and classify galaxies in such huge numbers. Then we realized we’d hit upon an unmet need—people want to do this. They wanted to contribute. In fact, we teamed up with some social scientists and found that the number one reason why people do Galaxy Zoo is the desire to contribute to actual science. They want to do something that’s useful.”
A lot of people had this want. Schawinski and his colleagues had hit on a massively transformative purpose. The first iteration of Galaxy Zoo (they’re now up to version five) drew 150,000 participants classifying—wait for it—50 million galaxies. Subsequent versions pulled in over 250,000 participants and pushed the total over 60 million. And then Galaxy Zoo became a smorgasbord of citizen-science projects, now hosted at Zooniverse. Want to explore the surface of the Moon? Join Planetary Resources and NASA to find near-Earth-approaching asteroids for potential mining? Model climate change through the centuries using historic ship’s logs? Help researchers understand whale communications? All of these choices are now in the offing.

And that’s important. What Schawinski and his cohorts had accidentally stumbled upon is what I call the Law of Niches, the idea, quite simply, that you are not alone. This is one of the most telling features of the web—the somewhat humbling fact that no matter what oddball notion you’re deeply passionate about, well, there are plenty of folks who share the same passion. “The ability for entrepreneurs to nimbly find and serve niche interests—and to produce platforms that allow those groups to address their needs en masse—is better than ever before,” explains Joshua Klein. “It used to be that start-ups would have to compete with an established industry vertical—say, automotive parts. But I’ve got a friend who is building his entire business around Prius owners who want to hack their cars’ electrical system to make them even more fuel efficient. That’s a pretty small subculture, but today it’s more than enough to build a business upon.”
Case Study 2: Local Motors—A DIY Community
John “Jay” Rogers grew up loving cars. He also loved motorcycles. This was something of a family trait. His grandfather, Ralph Rogers, was the last owner of the legendary Indian Motorcycle company and the first distributor of the Cummins Engine on the East Coast. Growing up, Rogers always assumed he’d pursue a career in automotive design, but when he got to college, he discovered there was no place in the traditional university system for car designers, so he set aside his childhood passion and graduated from Princeton with a degree in international affairs and public policy (and a minor in art).

Rogers took a job with a medical start-up, spending three years in China before switching to a career as a financial analyst. That career came with an offer to go to business school, and he was accepted at Stanford. During a celebration dinner, a colleague asked Rogers what he really wanted to do with his life. “I told him I wanted to build something tangible,” says Rogers, “to actually lead people. My friend asked me if I knew how to lead, if I actually have any real leadership experience. When I said no, he suggested I join the military.”12
Which is exactly what Rogers did.

At age twenty-six, he gave up his position at Stanford and became a Marine, signing up in 1999 and serving six and half years, including a tour in the Pacific and another in Iraq. In 2004, on his second tour, Rogers brought along a copy of Winning the Oil Endgame, visionary environmentalist Amory Lovins’s book about how society can wean itself from fossil fuel dependence. The book was a turning point. He read it right around the time two of his closest friends were killed in combat. The combination made him realize that what he really wanted to do with his life was ensure that no one else ever died for oil. Since 71 percent of the fossil fuels imported by America becomes the gasoline that powers our cars and light trucks, he figured that the best way he could accomplish his goal was to build an entirely new kind of environmentally friendly car.

Rogers knew he needed more business savvy than he had to pull off this dream, so he left the military and went back to school for an MBA at Harvard. It was there he heard a presentation on Threadless, the previously mentioned open-source T-shirt company. He was stunned by the power of crowdsourcing. Certainly, building cars was far more difficult than designing T-shirts, but Rogers also knew that the talent he needed was readily available. In another example of the Law of Niches, Rogers realized he wasn’t the only kid who grew up fantasizing about designing cars only to later realize this was a very rare job. “Only 12 to 20 percent of the industrial designers who specialize in transportation end up working in the field,” Rogers explains. “And that doesn’t include all the people who wanted to build cars but didn’t become industrial designers. Or couldn’t become industrial designers. There is this huge pent-up need in people to create cars, this very frustrated passion.”
