
Stages of Community Building
If you’ve decided you want to start a community, there are nine key stages you will need to pass through along the way.

1.  Identity—What Is Your MTP?
2.  Designing Your Community Portal
3.  Community-Building Resources
4.  Early Days of Building Your Community
5.  Creating Community Content
6.  Engagement and Engagement Strategies
7.  Managing Your Community
8.  Driving Growth
9.  Monetization
Identity—What Is Your MTP?
People join DIY communities because it reinforces their sense of identity. So start by finding your people. Who is your tribe? What is your MTP? “Passion is the differentiator,” says Jay Rogers from Local Motors. “So throw up a flag and be very clear what you stand for.” Be as specific as possible. Write up a mission statement, post it in a visible place on your website, then cling to that statement. Put differently, the Law of Niches works only if you very clearly identify and authentically support that niche.

This is also why it’s important to tell your story. A mission statement is nice, but unless you’re already a public figure, then people need to know who you are and why you’re doing what you’re doing. This could be in written form, but better yet, turn on your cell phone camera and record a video. Don’t forget to let your passion shine thru.

Designing Your Community Portal
There are six basics regarding designing the look, feel, and engagement of your community portal:
1.  Just get started—design something authentic.LinkedIn founder Reid Hoffman famously said, “If an entrepreneur isn’t embarrassed by the first release of their product offering, then they launched it too late.” The same applies to communities. You want to start by starting. Don’t spend years designing the right portal, and don’t blow your bank either. Authenticity matters. And having a personality is key (so people can quickly figure out if they belong in your tribe), but giving people a place to have a conversation is more important. You can always add better window treatments later.

2.  Navigation.People need to know how to move around easily. They want to know where to go and what they’ll find there, and if you can’t tell them this information quickly and clearly, there are plenty of other places to visit online. In other words, the navigation bar is not the place to get creative. Take DIY Drones, an online community of UAV enthusiasts. The first thing you see when you land on the site is a big box that reads: “Welcome to DIY Drones” and directions for how to use the site, including the ever-important “I’m new to this—where do I start?” tab, prominently displayed.

3.  Simple Registration.If it takes more than thirty seconds to become a member of your community, you’re not going to have many members. Similarly, if you want much more than my email address, then I suspect you’re secretly planning to make money selling my personal information and I’m not interested. Ask for my email. Tell me exactly what I’m getting in return. Promise me that you’re not going to resell my data. And give me an easy way to invite my friends to join as well.

4.  The Information.What to post on your platform is much a matter of personal preference, but it’s helpful to remember that people join online communities for four main reasons: a sense of belonging, a support network, greater influence, and a way to sate curiosity/explore new ideas. Most everything you choose to put on the site should be designed to meet these needs
5.  Recognition.Whether you create a leaderboard/rating system or make your blog open (anyone can post), be sure to highlight popular content (for example, the right side of the DIY Drone’s is devoted to Top Content)—specifically, a short description of the blog post and, more important, a larger picture of the person posting. Remember, this is reputation economics; people want to be celebrated for their contributions.

6.  Scalability.Sure, you might think you want a gargantuan membership, but understand that good communities are messy places. This is key. You want some of this mess because it will generate more new ideas and help accelerate the rate of innovation and make those members who hate top-down authority feel more comfortable, but you also need to be able to steer (not control) the mess. This means you have to give members a way to break into smaller groups. This is why, for example, Facebook is not always the best home for a DIY or exponential community.

Early Days of Building Your Community
No way around it, getting out of the gate is always tough. But you don’t actually need many members to have an impact. In fact, as Richard Millington, founder of the community consultancy FeverBee, wrote in his blog: “The bigger a community gets, the less people participate. This creates wastage and makes it impossible for the community manager to identify and work with the top members. Better to extract 1 hour a day from 100 committed members than have 50,000 mostly inactive lurkers. Stay small and extract maximum value from the few, not a little from the many.”23
So how many members do you actually need? Again, less than you probably think. Most experts recommend handpicking (see below) your first ten to fifteen members so that when visitors drop by there’s something interesting going on. Gina Bianchini, CEO of Mightybell, has found that 150 members is usually the point at which the community itself begins to carry the conversation.

Here’s how to get started.

1.  Be the First Mover.It seems obvious, but being the first one into any space gives you considerable leverage. If people want to have a conversation and your community is the only place to have it, you’re already winning. If you can’t be first mover in a space, then the problem you’re here to tackle (your MTP) better be significantly different and arguably more visionary than the competition’s.

2.  Handpick Early Members.Research shows your early adopters tend to become your most ardent supporters. Get the ball rolling by personally handpicking your first ten to fifteen members. Be sure to engage these folks in the community-building process. Ask for their advice. Integrate their input. Don’t waste your time going after big names. As a general rule, these folks are busy with their own communities.

3.  Establish a Newcomer’s Ritual.You want to give members a way to feel like they belong—but they have to earn it. Create a ritual and tie it to a specific membership milestone. After a new member has their fifth blog post or one of their comments draws ten likes on Facebook, reward that level of participation with a token.

4.  Listen.No matter what your core vision is, you can’t get anywhere without your members. So pay attention to what they have to say and be prepared to change direction when necessary.

Creating Community Content
There is no way around the fact that running an online community puts you into the content business. While there are plenty of experts who feel that too much engagement from a community manager is not a good thing, too little is an easy way to increase member drift. Most of the founders we spoke with claimed that they were on the site and taking care of their community constantly, especially over the first six months after launch. In other words, they became content production machines. This goes with the territory. Expect it, plan for it, and execute.

Here’s a list of the five basic content categories to draw upon, and below that, a chart breaking down how typical communities spread out this content.

