1.  The Future.This takes many forms. You can preview an upcoming event or preview an upcoming product launch or preview the upcoming week (what will be happening on the site over the next seven days) or make predictions about the coming year. Previews are a great way to keep the community informed, while predictions are a great way to start a debate. Both are useful.

2.  The News.This can be a news roundup or breaking news or news about just-released products (product reviews). All are commonly used and fairly effective. That said, because plenty of other sites go this route, be sure to find a way to make your news new. Give it an edge. Be funny. More critically, be sure to do a member news section. What is the community doing? Did someone do something amazing or change jobs or bump into a VIP? Using your site as a way to celebrate member achievements is a great way to foster loyalty and enthusiasm.

3.  The Interview.The interview is one of the most powerful tools for building engagement. Choose a member of the month and interview him or her. Choose your oldest member and interview him or her. And equally important, do VIP interviews. One quick note of advice on VIP interviews: Unless you have an existing relationship, work your way up to the top. Start by finding VIPs slightly lower down on the totem pole—these folks are interviewed far less than CEOs and are often much more excited to talk to the media.

4.  Advice.This can certainly include advice from the founder, as people do like to hear from the fearless leader, but you can also solicit advice from members and do a roundup of general advice from the community or—very underutilized but useful—advice from those in an adjacent field.

5.  The Guest.Whether we’re talking about op-ed pieces or guest blogs from experts, giving outsiders a forum to communicate with your community can help serve the core and enlarge membership. But it’s also worth pointing out that people are busy and many find nothing more intimidating than the blank page—so offer to cowrite pieces as well (though be prepared to do the lion’s share of the cowriting).

Engagement and Engagement Strategies
There are two types of engagement that matter most. The first is low-friction engagement, such as a Facebook like or a re-Tweet. The only reason this type of engagement matters is cosmetic. Many newcomers want social proof that the community they’ve stumbled upon is the real deal, and having 10,000 or more likes on Facebook will help. That said, a like is not deep engagement. As opposed to low-friction engagement, deep engagement requires building living bridges between members of your community. A living bridge means people are connecting with you and connecting with each other, and in ways that generate real emotions. This is critical. People join communities for the ideas; they stay for the emotions.

Now, clearly there are many ways to generate emotions in your community. We’ll examine some of the more powerful below, but the most important thing to know is that deep engagement demands rapid experimentation. Remember the point of these experiments is to get people talking to one another and get them working together. Keep trying different ways to make communication easier and increase chances of collaboration.

Here are five of the most useful engagement strategies.

1.  Reputation.We saw with TopCoder how effectively a rating system and leaderboard drove engagement. Consider that there are now dozens and dozens of software companies that won’t hire new talent unless they have a TopCoder rating. When an engagement strategy becomes a business fundamental, that’s serious leverage. A leaderboard, meanwhile, allows you to add a game-layer to the community. Publically holding people accountable for their performance creates interesting social dynamics. For competitive members, these dynamics inspire them to work harder to improve their spot on the leaderboard. For the less competitive, having a leaderboard is a great way to identify areas of expertise among community members. Remember that it doesn’t always have to be complicated. Simply highlighting members’ contributions or achievements also enhances their reputation.

2.  The Meet-up.The goal is to generate real emotions, and nothing works better than live bodies in a room together. Even better, if you can figure out how to make these meet-ups self-organizing—such as Sheryl Sandberg’s Lean In circles—you are getting all the benefits of deep engagement with far less effort. Of course, if you can’t get everybody together physically, get them together virtually, though don’t be afraid of hosting a structured discussion. People are busy. Drawing up boundary lines and focusing the conversation is a great way of showing folks that you respect their time.

3.  The Challenge.Whether it’s an incentive prize (see the next chapter) or a group project or a well-crafted debate, challenging the community can be a great way to foster cohesion. And have challenges within challenges. Use deadlines to keep things interesting. Add rules that require collaboration—for example, a project must be viewed by a specific number of community members before being accepted as a competition entry.

Equally important, challenges are necessary because they help you keep “entitlement” to a minimum. “The goal of every community is to create a sense of belonging,” says Jono Bacon, the Senior Director of Community at XPRIZE. But there’s a flip side: the opposite of belonging is ‘entitlement.’ Many communities struggle with entitlement, and it can cause them to become stale when entitled members slow down the pace of innovation. All communities are at risk of becoming stale when they don’t challenge themselves.”24
4.  Visuals.Whether it’s community founder generated how-to videos or user-generated photos or a simple slideshare, ignoring the fact that the web is a visual medium will only hurt you. People expect a certain degree of eye-candy online today. And eye-candy is easy to crowdsource and easy to share.

5.  Be a Connector.As the community organizer, you’ll likely have access to information about the interests, activities, and backgrounds of your members. One of the best ways to engage them and create immense value in the group, especially in the early days, is to introduce like-minded members to each other. Make the introduction, suggest that they meet, and give them a topic or agenda to fuel the conversation. Then watch the ripple effect spread.

Managing Your Community
Communities are messy places. Yet you need to steer the ship no matter how turbulent the storm. There is a cornucopia of steering wisdom around, but here are the five lessons for managing a community that matter most.

1.  Benign Dictators.Everyone we talked to said the same thing: The best communities are run by benevolent tyrants. As Local Motors founder Jay Rogers explains, “There are certain times you need to be a benign dictator. For us, we knew we were going to make a car but had to decide which car to make. We could have let the community decide, but it wasn’t that clear-cut. We were worried that people would choose a design for intellectual or academic reasons, but the choice would not fit our business model. And we needed to make something that would sell. So we decided to establish parameters and then let our community make suggestions. We also reserved the right to make final decisions. We were transparent about it. We were benign dictators, but we still needed to be dictators.”
2.  Stay Calm.Let the kids play. Will it get loud occasionally? You betcha. But a little fighting is a good thing. So is a little meandering. Writing for Mashable, technology commentator Jolie O’Dell explained it like this: “Often, we jump in too quickly when a conversation we’ve started might actually need to simmer for a few hours without our intervention. People need to go off topic, trolls need to be smacked down by power users, sidebar chats need to occur, often without direct comment from within the organization. No one likes the idea that they’re being monitored all the time.”25
3.  No Panhandling.Stop trying to market things to your community. You’re there to support them and not to sell to them. The marketplace emerges organically, from the conversation, and not the other way around.

4.  Retention Matters.Too many community leaders spend all their time chasing new members. Don’t. In DIY communities, bigger is not always better. Plus, if you’re constantly trying to increase membership, you’re neglecting the members you have—which is an easy way to lose them. Retaining the members you have, making certain they are happily engaged. That’s far more important.

5.  Delegate.Distributed leadership is key. Let community leaders emerge, and be sure to spread power around. Find your best blog poster and put him or her in charge of the comments section. Find a friendly power user and put that person in charge of greeting new members. Delegate contests and research projects and everything else. And do this with authority. You’re the benevolent dictator, so establish guidelines and clear responsibilities, provide training when needed, and create perks to reward all this participation.

Driving Growth
Remember, you don’t need to be huge to be effective, but if you’re looking to grow, the best place to start is with the basics. “People like talking to one another,” author Seth Godin (who himself has an enormous community) once said. “We evolved to want to do that. So one of the most highly leveraged and powerful ways to grow a tribe is to connect people to each other. But, if you just have that, you have nothing but a coffee shop. On top of that, there needs to be a message from you, the leader, about where you want to go, about the change that you want to make in your world. You need a mission, a movement, a place that people want to get to.”26In other words, you’re not going to grow without a clearly defined MTP and a place for people to get together to try and attain that MTP.

With these basics in place, here are seven effective strategies for expansion.

1.  Evangelism.Word of mouth is still the most effective way to grow a community. Get your members talking about your efforts. To help create early interest in Local Motors, the staff visited sites frequented by car designers. Jay Rogers explains: “We’d simply say, ‘We’re going to make a car that you guys design. What do you think?’ The important thing is to plant the flag, tell people what you’re going to do.”
2.  Play Well with Others.Partner with neighboring organizations. Do this in the real world; do this in cyberspace. One of the reasons TopCoder exploded in membership was because they partnered with Sun Microsystems—with Sun both providing more members and the validation that this community was doing something special.

3.  Competition.People love to compete. Leaderboards, rating systems, incentive prizes, whatever—give people a way to square off against one another and they will show up.

4.  Pick a Fight.One of the best ways to strengthen a community is to go into battle against a common rival. Find an enemy. Take a stand.
