
5.  Buzz Marketing.Edgy demonstrations of new tech/products/ideas spark buzz and attract followers. Better Blocks, for example, creates community improvement flash mobs. They band people together to paint bike lanes on streets, plant trees in public spaces, and create outdoor cafés and pop-up shops—all without governmental approval. Not only does this help them build their community, the point they make with these crowdsourced, temporary urban improvements usually leads to changes in legislature and long-term urban renewal.27
6.  Host Events.This has been discussed before, but it’s worth repeating: nothing brings people together like, well, actually bringing people together.

7.  Technical Optimization.If you want a larger online presence, don’t forget the tried and true: search engine optimization tactics, AdWords, Facebook advertising, etc.

Monetization
Okay, so you are, after all, an entrepreneur, and making money—at some point—matters to you. Monetizing your community can be more art than science, but there are several hard and fast rules worth remembering.

1.  Transparency and Authenticity.DIY communities are built on openness, so if you plan on making money from your community, don’t hide this fact. Put it in your mission statement. Post it on the site. Everyone we interviewed agreed that being forthright about money means less trouble down the line. Moreover, there’s a good chance your community is also looking for ways to make money from their passion, so drive engagement by making monetization a topic for discussion.

2.  Sell What the Community Builds.The easiest way to make money without alienating members is to help those members make money too. This is the strategy that worked for Local Motors, TopCoder, and a great many others. And if your community isn’t building products, they are still building up expertise. You can sell this too via guides, summaries, ebooks, lectures, podcasts, whatever.

3.  Cater to the Core.Give the people what they want. Sell products that are authentic and do so after you have an established reputation. Chris Anderson waited years before trying to monetize DIY Drones, and when he did, it was by offering to build what his community had designed but (in some cases) had neither the time nor the resources to actually build—fully assembled quadcopters.

4.  All the Typical Stuff.You can, of course, sell ads to outsiders and premium membership to insiders—these are typical approaches—but again, remember to cater to the core. Make sure your advertisers are selling things the community really wants. Similarly, selling premium memberships can work, but make sure that membership really has privileges and that those privileges don’t detract from your established community. Giving paid subscribers access to job boards works great. Giving paid members access to events does as well, but know that if discussion boards end up dominated by insider chatter—that is to say, you had to be there to understand—then people who didn’t attend the event aren’t going to stick around for long.

Last Words
I want to close out this chapter by mentioning that two of the exponential crowd tools discussed in this section are themselves mechanisms to turn a crowd into a community. The first is crowdfunding. When a crowdfunding campaign is successfully completed, all those who have pledged are now part of your community. At the conclusion of the ARKYD Campaign, we had 17,000 new members to collaborate on with our MTP.

The second mechanism is where we’re going next. It’s the topic of our final chapter, the incredible innovation accelerator and community-building strategy that helped launch my career: incentive prizes.CHAPTER TENIncentive CompetitionsGetting the Best and Brightest to Help Solve Your Challenges
This final chapter focuses on one of the most powerful mechanisms available to the exponential entrepreneur for solving big and bold global challenges, a tool used by powerful companies and successful entrepreneurs. This exponential crowd tool is theincentive competition, an idea that combines all of the lessons discussed throughout this book and taps into the most power force in the human psyche, our search for significance.

An incentive competition is straightforward. Set a clear, measurable, and objective goal and offer a large prize to the first person to achieve it. As we shall see, this mechanism pulls together most of the knowledge from the previous nine chapters: the use of exponential technologies, thinking at scale, crowdsourcing genius, providing opportunities for crowdfunding, and stimulating the creation of DIY communities. Moreover, incentive competitions are brutally objective. They don’t care where you went to school, how old you are, or what you’ve ever done before. Billion-dollar corporations compete as equals against two-person start-ups. They measure only one thing: Did you demonstrate the target goal of the competition?
For the exponential entrepreneur, the incentive prize is a mechanism for solving a personal challenge or a global injustice or bringing a new technology into existence. As I mentioned earlier, my original use of incentive competitions stemmed from my desire to figure out how to get myself into space. I had given up on NASA being my ticket, instead turning to commercial space flight as a way to develop both the technology and the wealth needed to get myself off-earth. But there was another impetus as well.

In 1993, I received a copy of Charles Lindbergh’s 1954 Pulitzer Prize–winning book, The Spirit of St. Louis.This gift came from my dear friend Gregg Maryniak, who was then hoping to provide the inspiration needed for me to finish my pilot’s license (which I had started and stopped three times for lack of money and/or time). And it worked. I did complete my license, but the inspiration didn’t stop there.

Before I read Spirit, I’d always believed that Lindbergh woke up one day and decided to head east, crossing the Atlantic on a whim. I had no idea that he made his famous flight to win the Orteig Prize—a $25,000 prize for the first person to fly solo from Paris to New York (or vice versa). Nor did I know what extraordinary leverage such competitions could provide. In this case, cumulatively, nine teams spent $400,000 trying to win Raymond Orteig’s purse. That’s sixteenfold leverage. And Orteig didn’t pay one cent to the losers: instead his incentive-based mechanism automatically backed Lindbergh, who was, by most accounts, the least qualified of all the entrants. Even better, the resulting media frenzy created so much public excitement that an entire industry was launched. It was an incentive prize that led to today’s $300 billion global aviation market.1
By the time I finished reading The Spirit of St. Louis, the concept of an incentive prize for the “demonstration of a suborbital, private, fully reusable spaceship” had formed in my mind. Not knowing who my “Orteig” would be, I wrote “ ‘X’ PRIZE” in the margin of the book. The letter X was a variable, a placeholder, to be replaced with the name of the person or company that put up the $10 million purse. How I decided on $10 million as the purse size, raised the money, and created the rules, I’ll get to shortly. My first step, after realizing that an incentive prize might help me fulfill my personal moonshot, was to learn everything I could about prizes, their history, and how and why they worked.

The Power of Incentive Competitions
Orteig didn’t invent incentive prizes. Three centuries before Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic by plane, the British Parliament wanted some help crossing the Atlantic by ship. In 1714, the £20,000 Longitude Prize was offered to the first person to accurately measure longitude at sea. It worked. In 1765, horologist John Harrison pulled it off, but beyond opening the oceans to navigation, this competition brought incentive prizes—as a method for driving innovation—into the public eye.

The idea spread quickly. In 1795, for example, Napoléon I offered a 12,000-franc prize for a method of food preservation to help feed his army on its long march into Russia. The winner, Nicolas Appert, a French candy maker, established the basic method of canning, still in use today.2In 1823 the French government offered another prize, this one a 6,000-franc purse for the development of a large-scale commercial hydraulic turbine. The winning design helped power the burgeoning textile industry. Other prizes have driven breakthroughs in transportation, chemistry, and health care.3“Historically, for both royalty and industrialists, incentive prizes have long been a tool for fostering innovation,” says Deloitte Consulting Principal Marcus Shingles. “But it is only now that these competitions are beginning to reach their prime. In our hyperconnected world, with the maturation of social media and the explosion of crowdsourcing capabilities, our ability to design and utilize these prizes to drive breakthroughs has never been stronger.”4
The success of these competitions stems from a few underlying principles. First and foremost, large incentive prizes raise the visibility of a particular challenge, attracting innovators and nontraditional thinkers from around the globe. These competitions also help foster the belief that a given challenge is in fact solvable. Considering what we know about cognitive biases, this is no small detail. Before the Ansari XPRIZE, few investors seriously considered the market for commercial human space flight; it was assumed to be the sole province of governments. Afterwards, a half-dozen companies formed, well over $1 billion was invested, and hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of tickets to space have been sold.5
Second, in areas where market failures have hindered investment or entrenched incumbents have prevented progress, prizes break bottlenecks. By creating a race with a large cash payout, these competitions attract new forms of money to the problem area. Rather than backing a potential team solely for the investment opportunity, corporate sponsors and benefactors support a team for the publicity. Consider that every year, sponsors spend $45 billion backing teams whose sole purpose is to move different-sized and -shaped balls up and down fields.6In a very similar fashion, corporations can now support teams trying to solve grand challenges.

Corporate Sports Sponsorship by Category
Big Business: Corporate Sports Sponsorships
Source:http://www.sportsbusinessdaily.com, http://www.bizofbaseball.com, www.deloitte.com
The next factor behind the wild success of incentive competitions is their ability to cast a wide net. Everyone from novices to professionals, from sole proprietors to massive corporations, gets involved. Experts in one field jump to another, bringing with them an influx of nontraditional ideas. Outliers can become central players. At the time of England’s Longitude Prize, there was considerable certainty that the purse would go to an astronomer, but the winner, John Harrison, was a self-educated clockmaker.7Along similar lines, in the first two months of the Wendy Schmidt Oil Cleanup XCHALLENGE, some 350 potential teams from over twenty nations preregistered for the competition, including one that had come together in a Las Vegas tattoo parlor and had never been involved in the oil cleanup business before (more on this in a moment).

The benefits don’t stop here. Because of the competitive framework, everyone’s appetite for risk increases, which drives further innovation. Moreover, since many of these competitions require significant capital to field a team, crowdfunding can now be used to attract the requisite financial support—unlocking a potentially global field of backers. Finally, competitions inspire hundreds of different technical approaches, which means that they don’t just give birth to a single-point solution, but rather to an entire industry.

Why Prizes Work
The American anthropologist Margaret Mead once said, “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world. Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has.”8As we saw earlier, this same concept was echoed in Kelly Johnson’s third rule of skunk: “The number of people having any connection with the project must be restricted in an almost vicious manner.” There are pretty good reasons for these opinions. Large or even medium-sized groups—corporations, movements, whatever—aren’t built to be nimble, nor are they willing to take large risks. Such organizations are designed to make steady progress and have considerably too much to lose to place the big bets that certain breakthroughs require.

Fortunately, this is not the case with small groups. With no bureaucracy, little to lose, and a passion to prove themselves, when it comes to innovation, small teams consistently outperform larger organizations. And incentive prizes are perfectly designed to harness this energy.

