I spend a lot of time giving presentations to corporations. When I speak to executives, there are six key points I stress.

1.  The only constant is change.

2.  The rate of change is increasing.

3.  If you don’t disrupt yourself, someone else will.

4.  Competition and disruption are no longer coming from some multinational company overseas. They now originate from the guy or gal in a start-up garage harnessing exponential technologies.

5.  Given Bill Joy’s famous comment “No matter who you are, most of the smartest people work for someone else,” how do you tap into these individuals?
6.  If you’re dependent upon innovation only from within your company, you are dead. You must harness the crowd to remain competitive.

While the XPRIZE Foundation has been incredibly successful, a few years back I heeded my own advice and asked myself how I would disrupt my own company. Or more specifically, how might someone disrupt XPRIZE? The answer, which should now be evident, is the creation of an online platform that allows anyone to launch a challenge in any area he or she cares about, where the crowd can help design the prize, fund the prize, and ultimately compete to win the purse. A platform able to disrupt archaic closed innovation systems, where hundreds or thousands of smaller challenges can be launched per year, thus scaling way beyond the three multimillion-dollar XPRIZEs launched each year. Sort of a Craigslist meets Indiegogo scenario.

The platform, now named HeroX,18was incubated at XPRIZE headquarters, but, as with any skunk works, separation from the mother ship was critical. So HeroX hired a small, passionate virtual team, with members located everywhere from Canada to Ukraine.19The CEO, Christian Cotichini, turned out to be the venture’s first major outside equity investor.

As with any new start-up, launching early is critical, so we turned to our existing supporter base for help. Graham Weston, cofounder of Rackspace, stepped up to be our first customer. Weston wanted to help Mexican entrepreneurs open up stores on the US side of the border, specifically in his hometown of San Antonio. To do this, he launched a 24-month, $500,000 competition on the HeroX platform dubbed the San Antonio Mx Challenge.

“The top two obstacles faced by Mexican entrepreneurs are access to visas and access to information,” says Weston. “Getting a visa to work in the United States is very difficult. The laws are not designed for tech entrepreneurs. Second, many Mexican entrepreneurs struggle with the tactical requirements of launching a business in the US—around things like financing, recruiting, real estate, and employment law—and do not know where to go to for information and help.”20
To counter these obstacles, the San Antonio Mx Challenge will pay $500,000 to the individual, team, or organization that creates and implements a repeatable model to assist Mexican tech companies in opening active offices in San Antonio. The winner will score the highest on a points-based system that measures three things: the number of Mexican companies attracted over two years, the total combined revenue of those companies for two years, and finally, the sustainability of those companies and their business models.21
On the heels of this successful launch, HeroX is now developing dozens of challenges in dozens of cities. In conjunction with the city of Los Angeles, there’s a challenge being designed to decrease traffic on Interstate 405. Simply Music is using HeroX to create a virtual piano so that musical expression is no longer tied to physical instruments. The education software giant Ellucian is using HeroX to increase student retention and graduation rates, and a fifteen-year-old high school student, Eli Wachs, is using HeroX to show the world that young people are change makers.

But the real point here is accessibility. HeroX is helping build a passionate and knowledgeable community of prize developers who can help any entrepreneur design a prize, launch a prize, use crowdfunding to supplement the purse, operate the prize, and ultimately judge and award the prize. The big goal is to change people’s mindset—to help them realize that they no longer need complain about problems, but now can launch an incentive competition to solve them.

The Benefits of Using an Incentive Competition
My goals in this section are twofold: first, to help you to identify a prizable topic useful to you and your business, and second, to help you design your own incentive challenge with HeroX. But we’ll begin by considering why you might use an incentive prize in the first place. What are the benefits to you, your company, and society?22
1.  Attracting new capital to innovators solving the problem.We normally think of government agencies or big corporations as the primary funding sources for innovation. Yet, incentive prizes attract a very different, nontraditional pool of resources to the innovation game, specifically billions in resources normally allocated for both philanthropy and sponsorship.

2.  You pay only the winner.Prizes are efficient. They generate an enormous amount of innovation—often enough to create an entire industry—but you have to pay only the winner, none of the teams who attempt and fail. In the case of the Orteig Prize, most of the famous aeronauts of the time failed miserably, while Lindbergh, a relatively unknown pilot who was called the “Flying Fool” by the press, won the competition. Had Orteig been investing in teams, Lindbergh would have been the least likely to get an endorsement.

3.  Crowdsourcing genius.Prizes attract new players—outsiders, mavericks, and other innovators unlikely to work within a traditional research setting. A properly structured incentive prize will draw on a much larger global talent pool than traditional research efforts, pushing the world’s best and brightest minds (independent of age, race, and gender) to work harder, faster, and sometimes collaboratively (on the same team).

4.  Increasing public awareness and raising the visibility of a problem.The publicity generated by an incentive prize serves an educational function, focusing attention on the importance of the problem. In turn, this global media attention motivates the competing teams to work harder and, in many cases, take bigger risks
5.  Overcoming existing constraints.Incentive competitions reconfigure what is possible by transcending societal constraints, legal/regulatory hurdles, and policy regimes. Prizes don’t care how old you are or where you work; they measure only the quality of your idea and its execution. As such, solutions constrained by stodgy CEOs or self-reinforcing labor unions can be accelerated into action.

6.  Changing the paradigm.Incentive competitions help change the paradigm of what people believe possible. Before Lindbergh’s flight, aircraft were for aeronauts and daredevils. Afterwards, they were for passengers and pilots. The general view of transatlantic flight was transformed, paving the way for the emergence of the airline industry. Before the Ansari XPRIZE existed, space flight was a game played by governments; afterwards it was open to anyone.

7.  Launching an industry, with lasting benefit and impact.An incentive competition should be designed so that the awarding of the purse is not the end of the story, but rather the beginning of a new industry. To this end, innovation alone is not sufficient. To drive the kinds of breakthroughs that benefit humanity, these innovations need to be brought to market. Ultimately, the goal is to solve the problem and stimulate entrepreneurship, bringing about a new set of products and services that serve as the backbone for a new industry.

8.  Providing financial leverage.A well-constructed challenge can easily generate investments an order of magnitude greater than the purse. Innovators and investors are typically willing to invest more than the amount of the purse for two reasons. First, most competing teams are typically optimists. They initially believe they can win the competition by spending less than the purse amount and then incrementally rationalize larger investments over time. Second, a properly designed prize has a back-end business model that allows teams to capture a return on their investment.

9.  Creation of market demand.Before the Orteig Prize, there was no public demand for transatlantic airline flights because few believed such a crossing was even possible. Such was the situation with space flight and the Ansari XPRIZE. Successfully designed and executed incentive challenges create significant market demand, which tends to establish markets and attract investment capital.

10.  Attracting new expertise and cross-disciplinary solutions.True breakthroughs often come from outside the normal field of experts. Strongly designed challenges lift a problem to high visibility, attracting nontraditional innovators and driving interdisciplinary collaboration among unlikely partners.

11.  Driving regulatory reform.On some occasions, a powerful incentive prize can also drive governmental change, helping to clarify regulatory issues relevant to the competition. The publicity surrounding a prize coupled with a large number of entrants can provide the political pressure needed to foster change. In the case of the Ansari XPRIZE, the competition drove the US Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to adopt regulations that permitted human space flight in commercial reusable space vehicles.

12.  Inspiration, hope, and intelligent risk taking.Ultimately, challenges are about fostering innovation and creating hope in fields that are stuck in ruts. If nontraditional teams take intelligent risks in fields dominated by risk-averse incumbents, true breakthroughs are far more likely. Remember, the day before something is truly a breakthrough, it’s a crazy idea.

