•  When you explain your competition to your friends, do they clearly understand what a team needs to do in order to win? Can a child explain it to his/her parents across the dinner table? Do you have an easy-to-communicate one-line pitch?
•  Is the winning moment of the competition sufficiently telegenic that big media will be interested? Or have you designed a boring competition where winning of the challenge is determined by a single bit changing from a zero to a one at the end of a printout?
•  If your prize is actually won, will the winning technology actually cause the impact you desire? Will it solve the preexisting market failures? Will it birth a new industry?
5.  LAUNCHING YOUR CHALLENGE, REGISTERING TEAMS
Your next goal is to launch your competition above the line of super-credibility. You need to get media and social networks buzzing about the challenge, and you need to create an easy mechanism for newly excited teams to register for the competition. You also need to consider where teams might come from—universities, small companies, your employees, your local community—and make sure your launch is aimed at the right communities. Remember, teams are the core of your incentive competition; recruiting them and meeting their needs are paramount to success.

6.  OPERATING YOUR CHALLENGE
Most people don’t realize that operating an incentive challenge is not free. In fact the cost of operating an XPRIZE is often equal to the purse itself. Running the competition, interfacing with the teams, dealing with the legal work, making sure the playing field remains level, handling the PR, and so forth requires staff and time. The process can stretch from months to years. Make sure you have the resources in place to meet such challenges.

Even with HeroX, which offers a platform that facilitates most of these requirements while significantly reducing operating costs, challenges still require the following elements to succeed:
•  Legal.To register, teams must sign a robust agreement that outlines the rules of the competition and what happens under different circumstances. In my experience, the best practice is to create an easy mechanism for newly excited teams to express interest in the competition. A simple form that gathers their contact details works well. Participants then need to sign on to a Master Team Agreement, prepared by your legal counsel, which is effectively a contract that stipulates what a team needs to do to win, what rights you retain and what rights they retain.

•  Prize Lead.Someone to be the face of the competition, who can speak about the vision and the mission and field the hard questions that always emerge.

•  Community and Team Manager.The person who engages with the teams and the community as a whole. They’re there to answer all questions and ensure the competition produces maximum impact.

•  Judges.A group of individuals who are completely independent who will help you determine a winner.

7.  JUDGING, AWARDING, AND PUBLICIZING
The final phase of your competition involves determining the winner. Judging involves making sure that you, all the teams, the media, and the public know—in a noncontroversial manner—who won and why.

Next is the awarding of the purse (and trophy, etc.). Here the goal is to maximize the promotion of the winning moment. Celebrate the winner(s), sponsors, judges—really, everyone involved. The goal is to effect deep change. This can be accomplished only via exposure. A lot of people need to know this seemingly impossible challenge is now solvable. This is why having a telegenic finish is so important.

Closing Thoughts
Over the course of the last few years I’ve defined my own massively transformative purpose. After a few iterations and false starts, I find that I’m happiest with the following: “To help entrepreneurs create extraordinary wealth while creating a world of abundance.” This MTP comes from the realization that the world’s biggest problems are also the world’s biggest business opportunities. These problems are modern-day gold mines. The bigger the issue, the more valuable and important the solution.

And the number of players in the world who are able to mine this gold and take on such challenges has exploded. A few hundred years ago, such activities were solely the domain of royalty. A few decades ago, they belonged to national leaders and the heads of multinational corporations. But today, almost anyone with a passion has the power to bring real change into this world.

Ultimately, that has been the point of this book. The exponential technologies discussed in part one give us the physical tools for radical change, the psychological strategies described in part two are the mental framework for success, and the exponential crowd tools that fill part three provide all of the additional resources (talent, money, and so forth) needed to cross the finish line.

Here’s the most important point: Abundance is not a techno-utopian vision. Technology alone will not bring us this better world. It is up to you and me. To bring on this better world is going to require what could easily be the largest cooperative effort in history. In other words, there is a bold and bright future out there. But, as with everything else, what happens next is up to us.

And this brings me to my final thoughts. In Abundance, Steven and I closed the book with a section on the dangers of exponentials. This time we’re turning our attention to leadership. The importance of this topic was raised by Marcus Shingles, an innovation leader from Deloitte Consulting whom we met earlier in this book. “The coming age of exponentials will put game-changing technologies in the hands of everyone,” said Shingles. “And while this will no doubt lead us down the road to abundance, it also has the potential to concentrate wealth and power in the hands of the few. To navigate the turbulent times ahead, we will need a new breed of ethical leaders who are not corrupted by such absolute power.”26
Shingles’s call for a new caliber of moral leadership is indisputable and well timed. And while this book has been about bold entrepreneurship and bold impact, we want to close with a call for bold leadership.

Most evil is done in the dark. Dictators and despots oppress women, children, and minorities in secret, when few are watching. But, in the exponential times ahead, in a world of a trillion sensors, drones, satellites, and glass, someone will always be watching. While this raises serious concerns for privacy, it also offers us hope for the end of oppression and perhaps the beginning of an entirely new breed of moral global leadership.

Who will be the Martin Luther King, Jr., or Mahatma Gandhi of the exponential age? Our history tells us that this breed of leaders is extremely rare and often underappreciated at first glance. Perhaps such leadership will materialize from experimentation in virtual worlds, or emerge from some crowdsourced competition, or be yielded over to a benevolent artificial intelligence. Each is, for the first time ever, a real possibility. Perhaps such leadership will arise the old-fashioned way, from those few concerned citizens willing to suffer the long and lonely hours it takes to see farther and hope further and build bridges across the seemingly vast chasms that still so frequently divide us.

One thing is for sure, in those immortal words of Voltaire (famously stolen by Stan Lee for Spider-Man): “With great power comes great responsibility.” And each of us, like it or not, are now the recipients of great power. This means we now have the power to solve the world’s grand challenges and create a world of abundance. But this also means triumphing over age-old bad habits. Greed, fear, slavery, cruelty, tyranny—haven’t these curses outlived their usefulness?
Think about how far we’ve come. Shelter is among our oldest needs, yet right now we can 3-D print ten single-family homes in a day. Health care ranks right beside shelter. And sometime in the next five years, we’ll be able to diagnose disease via AI—and thus democratize health care. We have been reaching for the stars for as long as we have been able to tilt our heads upward and gaze in wonder. And sometime in the next ten years we are going to launch our first asteroid mining mission. No doubt about it, we are a species built for bold. But without bold leadership to help us set the course, our history also tells us that we can wander in the desert of bad decisions for a mighty long time.

“The adjacent possible” is theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman’s wonderful term for all the myriad paths unlocked by every novel discovery, the multitude of universes hidden inside something as simple as an idea. 27Abundance is one of those simple ideas. Its time has come. It is up to the bold to unlock this adjacent possible, to help humanity live up to our full exponential potential.AFTERWORDNEXT STEPS—HOW TO TAKE ACTION
It’s an exciting time. Every week, there are new technologies slipping out of the lab and into the market, driving us toward a world of abundance. We think it’s critically important for you to have access to this ever-expanding pool of knowledge, therefore we’re presenting five different ways for you to stay plugged in, interact with the authors, and join an ongoing conservation about the radical advances bringing us a world of abundance.

AbundanceHub.com: Free, Up-to-Date Content
Visit our website, www.AbundanceHub.com, where you’ll have access to up-to-date data, articles, blogs, and videos about abundance and exponential technologies. This site is free and media rich. You also can sign up for a free newsletter and participate in future initiatives, get weekly blog posts on “New Evidence of Abundance,” and much more.

Personal Coaching from Peter: Abundance360Summit (www.A360.com)
Join Peter Diamandis’s Abundance 360 Community—a group of entrepreneurs passionate about generating extraordinary wealth while creating a world of abundance.
