
Membership in the Abundance 360 Community is highly curated, focused on Top of Form entrepreneurs committed to expanding their business 10x to 100x, on a global level. The summit and monthly webinars are personally taught and curated by Diamandis, in cooperation with Singularity University and Strategic Coach. The content focuses on making exponential tools and technologies teachable and immediately usable in your business and your life. Diamandis has committed to running the Abundance 360 summit for the next twenty-five years. In a world of rapid, unpredictable growth, this is a program to count on every January to give you a road map for the year. To join the Community and begin receiving personal coaching from Peter, please visit www.A360.comand start the application process.

Flow Genome Project: Trainings and Programs
At the Flow Genome Project, the most consistent question we get asked after people learn about flow’s extraordinary impact on peak performance is how individuals and organizations can get more of it. If you want to learn more about how flow can help seriously raise your game, the Flow Genome Project offers a variety of courses and training programs, ranging from individual online trainings to multiday or multimonth corporate trainings. Details about all of our programs are available at www.FlowGenomeProject.com
Singularity University Courses and Programs
If you enjoyed learning about Singularity University (SU) and would like to participate in one of our programs, you are welcome to get involved. Graduate and postgraduate students can apply for the ten-week Graduate Studies Program (GSP). Others, including executives, investors, and entrepreneurs, can apply for the six-day Executive programs held on a regular basis at the SU Campus in Mountain View, California. Details on both programs are available at the university’s website, www.SingularityU.org
XPRIZE Foundation Membership
Philanthropists and corporate executives interested in the design or funding of an XPRIZE can learn more at www.xprize.org. Or for more information simply shoot us an email at alliances@xprize.org.

Keynotes: Hiring Diamandis and/or Kotler for Corporate/Association Events
For information about hiring Peter Diamandis to give a keynote address for your corporation or association, more information is available at www.Diamandis.com
For information about hiring Steven Kotler to give a keynote address for your corporation or association, more information is available at www.StevenKotler.com
Thank you for taking the time to read Bold. We hope our contrarian view of the future has provided an antidote to some of today’s pessimisms. Creating abundance is humanity’s grandest challenge—one that together, with intention and action, we can make happen within our lifetime.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
BOLDhas benefited greatly from the generous wisdom of a great many people. First off, the authors would like to express deep gratitude to their families, Jet, Dax and Kristen Diamandis and Joy Nicholson Kotler, for their incredible patience and support. We’d also like to thank our agent, John Brockman, our editor Thomas LeBein, Brit Hvide and everyone at Simon & Schuster who worked so doggedly on this project.

For insight and feedback, we thank a group of experts and friends, including Salim Ismail, Marcus Shingles, Andrew Hessel, Michael Wharton, Jamie Whealand, and Fred MacDonald.

Special thanks goes to Peter’s team at PHD Ventures (Marissa Brassfield, Cody Rapp, Maxx Bricklin, and Kelley Lujan) for their incredible support in doing research, crowdsourcing content, and providing twenty-four by seven input. And recognition to Connie Fox for the herculean task of coordinating Peter’s schedule and life.

On the research and inspiration front, we are also grateful to the Singularity University family of alumni, faculty, and staff under the leadership of co-founder and chancellor Ray Kurzweil and CEO Rob Nail. We are also thankful to the XPRIZE Family for the support and inspiration in writing this book and their dedication to solving humanity’s grand challenges. In particular Bob Weiss, Eileen Bartholomew, Trish Halamandaris, Paul Rappoport, Chris Frangione, and the entire XPRIZE staff.

For coaching and rock-star marketing advice we consider ourselves lucky to be mentored by Dan Sullivan (and the team at Strategic Coach), Joe Polish, Brendon Burchard, and Mike Cline.

Peter is thankful to the incredibly energizing and uplifting music of Sarah Brightman, which was listened to for countless hours while writing this book on airplanes and in hotel rooms.

Great appreciation goes to writer Bob Hughes for his support in authoring the early blogs to investigate the content of BOLD, and to Michael Drew for his support in promoting this book.

Finally, we wish to thank the hundreds and thousands of fans and readers who have given us feedback through Google+, Facebook, and email as we developed this content. The names of these friends can be found here: www.BoldtheBook.com/supportersPETER H. DIAMANDISis a New York Times–bestselling author and the founder of more than 15 high-tech companies. He is the CEO of the XPRIZE (xprize.org), executive chairman of the Singularity University (SingularityU.org), a Silicon Valley–based institution backed by Google, 3-D Systems, and NASA. He is cochairman of Planetary Resources, Inc. and the cofounder of Human Longevity, Inc. Dr. Diamandis attended MIT, where he received his degrees in molecular genetics and aerospace engineering, and Harvard Medical School, where he received his MD. In 2014 he was named one of “The World’s 50 Greatest Leaders” by Fortunemagazine.

STEVEN KOTLER is a New York Times–bestselling author, award-winning journalist, and the cofounder and director of research for the Flow Genome Project (www.flowgenomeproject.com). His books include The Rise of Superman, Abundance, A Small Furry Prayer, West of Jesus,and The Angle Quickest for Flight. His work has been translated into 35 languages and his articles have appeared in more than 70 publications including The New York Times Magazine, Atlantic Monthly, Wired, Forbes,and Time. He also writes “Far Frontiers,” a blog about science and innovation for Forbes.com
