Welcome to this TOK short video on ComMO.
ComMO is an integrative approach to
psychological mindfulness that guides
individuals to cultivate
a responsive reflective attitude toward
conflict and distressing emotions.
ComMO represents a significant advance in
psychological mindfulness because it is
grounded in a comprehensive model of
human consciousness and relationships that
guides individuals in understanding
why mindfulness is hard, why it helps, and
the domains of consciousness to focus on.
We can start with one of the basic elements
that results in psychological distress,
which involves negative reactions to
negative feelings.
Here we see somebody who feels lousy and
then hates feeling this way.
This sets up what is called a neurotic loop,
which is caused by negative reactions to
negative feelings.
This diagram depicts the central features
that drive neurotic loops.
Namely, it represents the fact that many
people try to avoid or control their
negative feelings.
They do this by adopting a stance of an
inner critic that is defensive or
judgmental or avoidant in the way they try
to cope with those feelings.
Unfortunately, this often leads to a
building up of negative feelings and a
trigger will then release strong emotions
and the person will feel flooded,
overwhelmed, and out of control and might
snap in a fit of rage or experience a
panic or overwhelming anxiety.
Of course, if this happens, it just
teaches the individual that negative
feelings are indeed bad and they will
often then double down in their efforts
to control them.
What is better is learning to approach
emotional functioning and how to be
aware and attuned to one's feelings on
the one hand and how to adaptively
regulate them on the other.
This is called the emotional sweet spot.
COMMO helps people learn how to process
emotions in the emotional sweet spot.
It starts with the MO, which is a
metacognitive observer.
This means adopting a deliberative,
reflective, responsive, versus reactive,
observing position of one's mind.
Take a minute and think about someone
you know who went through a stressful
event.
As you recreate the scene, allow
yourself to see in your mind's eye
what was going through their mind.
As you do, you're getting a feel for
this metacognitive observer stance,
which is to step outside the stream of
immediate experience and reflect on it.
Now imagine turning that lens of
observation and understanding on
yourself.
Imagine yourself seeing the feelings you
have, the rush of thoughts that follow
those feelings, and the situation you're
in and the history that led up to it,
and the other key people involved.
This is a participant observer stance
that is involved in the flow but can
also step outside and see one's thoughts,
feelings, and context from a distant,
and not become all the feelings that
are flowing through the stream.
Learning to take this metacognitive
stance takes practice.
It is not something people can do just
as soon as they hear about it.
But if guided, many can learn to do it
and become better and better at it.
The fact that it takes practice gives
rise to the second meaning of MO,
which is modus operandi, which refers to
one's mode of operating.
Modes of operating take practice to
internalize so that it becomes easier
and easier to achieve.
It can then be first practice when one is
calm, then in mildly stressful situations,
and then built up from there so that
even when the distress is significant,
the metacognitive observer will naturally
come online.
Calm, of course, is the word, but it also
is an acronym.
The C stands for curiosity, which is
the desire to know more.
This means taking a stance of wonder
seeking and understanding.
It means adopting a questioning attitude.
The curious part of the MO asks,
what is going on?
Where did this happen before?
How am I feeling?
When has this occurred?
Why might I be feeling the way I am?
And these questions are asked first
about one's feelings, then about one's
thoughts, what about the other?
About one's history, and ultimately
about other people involved.
All of this is in the service of
developing a rich and textured narrative
regarding what is happening and why.
This is in contrast to what many
individuals do when bumped by negative
feelings, which is to respond impulsively
and reacting negatively in their attempt
to control and escape from such feelings.
Accepting refers to the ability to be
with the pain and the awkwardness
without freaking out and without harsh
judgments or resistance.
It relates to the concept of emotional
distress tolerance.
It is hard, but with practice it can be done.
We can see this show up in the Buddhist
insights regarding suffering.
The first principle in Buddhism is life
is suffering, and the Buddha realized
that to run from suffering, to resist it
and pretend it is not there, to try to
jam it backstage or control it in other
ways does not lead to escape, but instead
leaves to more psychological difficulty.
The L stands for loving compassion
toward self and others.
This attitude recognizes the basic
wisdom that people have dignity and are
worthy of respect, and this is the
starting point for constructing a just
world.
It also means adopting the stance of
hoping that people will flourish and
have how high well-being and feeling
compassion or sympathy for those who are
genuinely experiencing genuine
difficulties.
This attitude is cultivated because most
people including oneself at their core
is generally doing the best they can.
The M stands for motivated toward valued
states of being in both the short and
long term.
The short term refers to the desired
outcome one wants given the actual
situation one is in.
A long term refers to the deliberative
ethical or moral principles that
individuals have about who they want to
be over the long term.
For example, kind, courageous, prudent.
This values-based element allows
individuals to separate their feelings
from the impulsive reactive instincts
and orient toward activities that will be
adapted.
In sum, Kamimo integrates many different
principles to provide a guide for the
kind of processes that are helpful
when one is bumped by the vagaries of
life.
If we can learn to respond to adversity
with a calm attitude,
both with ourselves and in relationships
to others,
we will be able to move much towards a
much healthier and more mature way of
being.
