Lecture 10 – The Eastern Front Experience
In this lecture we consider the war on the Eastern Front.
The Eastern Front is still not as well understood or as familiar as the relatively more familiar
fighting on the Western Front and the world of the trenches.
This lecture will seek to illuminate the unfamiliar clash of empires in Eastern Europe, beginning
with the Russian invasion of German East Prussia and the ominous disasters of the Austro-Hungarian
war effort from its very beginning, leading to growing dependence by the Austro-Hungarians
on their ally, the German Empire.
After the German victory against the Russians at Tannenberg in 1914, generals Hindenberg
and Ludendorff, the victors of that battle, became popular war heroes in Germany and
eventually were elevated to the high command, becoming essentially German dictators.
The great German advance of 1915 into the vast imperial territories of the Russian Empire
brought the Germans into control of vast new areas, often devastated by conflict, which
would now be occupied and administered as a new colonial empire.
When we speak of the Eastern War and its experience for millions, we really are talking
to a great extent about an experience that has not been imprinted as deeply in the collective
consciousness of Western Europe or of the United States, but its impact was a very important
one for Eastern Europe and for world history.
Winston Churchill, in his 1931 history of the Eastern Front, entitled his book The Unknown
War.
The Eastern Front certainly differed from the fighting in the West in its greater mobility,
its enormous scale, it was often twice the length of the Western Front, a thousand miles
rather than 500 miles, and also in its outcome, as we'll see by the end of today's lecture.
The Eastern Front and the fighting and the atrocities that took place there in World War
II, by contrast, have been very extensively studied and researched.
What came before in the First World War has remained less familiar, but is the subject
of this lecture.
The central powers themselves, that's to say Germany and Austria-Hungary, often could
not agree on priorities in fighting on the Eastern Front, and in fact, the coordination
of their forces was spotty until the latter, that's to say the Austro-Hungarians increasingly
found themselves simply subordinated to German direction as they grew increasingly dependent
upon Germany for aid, for the war went very poorly for them.
The war, however, on the Eastern Front began with an event that was tremendously traumatic
for German public opinion and for a sense of how the war was going.
The war in the East opened for Germany with a Russian invasion.
It was the only sizable incursion in the course of the war into German territory, the Russian
invasion of East Prussia, and this was precisely what had been feared by many in the years
before the war itself.
There were nightmarish visions of an irresistible so-called Russian steamroller, of Russian
armies made up of great huge peasant soldiers and of fearsome Cossack cavalry bearing down
on Berlin, and such anxieties had been current before the war.
But you'll recall that in the calculated risk, the gamble of the Schlieffen Plan, it had been
planned to leave Germany's Eastern provinces less defended in order to concentrate as the
Schlieffen Plan demanded as much force as possible to beat France first and then to
turn against the Russian Empire.
However, dismaying German policy makers and military planners, Russian armies moved more
quickly than had been expected.
They did so in part at the urging of their French allies to come to the aid in the opening
stages of the First World War.
So now two Russian armies bore down upon East Prussia the eastern areas of the German Empire.
From the north, East came General Rennenkamp's Vilna army and General Samsonov's Warsaw army
from the south, converging on this exposed German territory.
Russian forces had moved at the urging of the French before they were fully ready in
this hour of crisis and some of the disorganization that resulted would turn out to be fateful
for the Russian effort.
But at first things seemed to be going well as the Russians plunged into a lightly defended
eastern province.
At the Battle of Gumbinen on August 19th to the 20th of 1914, German troops were beaten
back and German officials prepared to evacuate East Prussia.
Russian forces outnumbered the German defenders two to one, they had overwhelming force, and
Russian forces occupied the eastern portions of the province as a whole.
The German officials who had ordered retreat were now simply dismissed from their positions
and new commanders were sent to the east to organize the war effort.
These included Colonel General Paul von Hindenburg, a venerable German soldier already well along
in years who was brought out of retirement in order to lead this effort, and as his very
able, talented, and now famous aide was Chief of Staff Major General Eric Ludendorff who
had acquired fame through the taking of the fortress of Liege on the western front just
recently.
These two men were sent out to take command and to salvage the situation in the east.
In a sense they were very lucky because an able officer was already on the scene and
had prepared plans.
This was Lieutenant Colonel Max Hofmann.
Using the plans that had already been prepared by Hofmann, together the military commanders
took a calculated risk which ended up yielding a great victory, what indeed is sometimes
considered by some historians as the greatest victory of the First World War, the Battle
of Tannenberg, which we'll talk about now in more detail.
The Battle of Tannenberg was a calculated risk which in some sense the Germans were
willing to take because of the role of technology at play in the opening stages of the battle.
German forces had intercepted Russian wireless messages.
This speaks volumes about the difficulties of communication in this war.
The Russians had been sending messages uncoated, not out of stupidity obviously, but rather
because of the tremendous difficulties involved in getting a message through at all.
The result was that the Germans now had in their hands valuable clues as to how the Russian
armies were advancing and what their plans were.
They were thus able to divide their forces, they were able rather to concentrate their
forces against first one part of the advancing Russian force and then to move them against
the other.
The battle proceeded thus.
German forces were directed first against the Warsaw Army, concentrating against this
oncoming force with their movement directed against it.
Meanwhile, only a thin screen of cavalry troops was used to guard against the Vilna Army,
the other Russian army moving in from the east in order to produce the impression that
the Germans were there in force as well.
The poor quality of communications between these two Russian armies resulted in an unclear
picture on the Russian side of what it was that the Germans were doing.
The Germans now had gambled by concentrating their forces against the Warsaw Army of the
Russians moving in from the south and concentrating their forces upon it, they surrounded it and
smashed it in a huge battle which lasted across vast territories from August 26th to the 31st
of 1914.
The result was in this battle of encirclement that vast numbers of Russian soldiers were
taken prisoner, the Russian command collapsed and in despair the commander of the Russian
forces General Samsonov asked himself what he possibly could do at this moment.
His officers recorded that he was in despair in a sense, repeating over and over again
his anxiety that the Emperor, that's to say the Tsar, Nicholas had entrusted him with
this army and he had destroyed it and the result was that he wandered off away from
his officers and shot himself so deep was his anxiety and despair.
The Germans took vast masses of Russian prisoners, 92,000 by one count.
This was an enormous defeat for an entire Russian army and a great historical novel,
painstakingly accurate, Alexander Solzhenitsyn's novel August 1914 describes these events
both on the vast strategic scale as well as in the experience of ordinary soldiers.
In an ensuing battle, the army that had proceeded from the east, the Vilna army, which had not
come to the aid of the Warsaw army as it was crushed, was also beaten back in the battle
of the Missouri and Lakes of September 7th to the 15th of 1914.
There followed more fighting in East Prussia and it was only finally in the winter campaign
of Missouri that East Prussia was finally liberated as Russian troops were finally thrown back.
The fighting in East Prussia had ended in disaster for the Russians.
It had cost Russia a quarter million men.
The Russian attack, however, had, for all of its losses, nonetheless some achievements
to show.
It had drawn away two German army corps that might have been used on the western front to
aid in the defense of embattled East Prussia and in that sense, though at tremendous cost
to the Russians, nonetheless they had contributed to the frustration of the Schlieffen Plan
in the west.
After these battles, German armies were shifted to Poland and to protect Prussian Silesia.
Soon a legend grew up around the Battle of Tannenberg, considered by some military historians
the great victory of the First World War.
The news of this victory spread like wildfire through Germany and the good news was very
necessary at this moment at a time when the Schlieffen Plan was failing.
A legend now grew up about Tannenberg almost immediately and it began with the naming of
this battle.
The name chosen for the Battle of Tannenberg was historically and symbolically significant.
Because it had historical resonance, there had been another or first battle of Tannenberg
back in 1410.
And this had been a famous German defeat when the Teutonic Knights, the Germanic crusaders
against the Poles and against the Baltic peoples had been defeated by Polish and Lithuanian
armies back in 1410.
The name was quite deliberately chosen to in some sense redeem this earlier defeat with
a far greater victory over Slavic forces.
But curmudgeonly military historians point out that the battle probably should have been
called Fürgenau, but obviously the name of Fürgenau didn't carry these deep resonances
and sounded a little bit silly, so instead quite deliberately the battle was named Tannenberg.
And legends now grew up around the leadership of Hindenburg and Ludendorff.
In particular it was claimed, sort of in a conspiracy theory, that Hindenburg had in
fact planned this battle years and years ago, that he had vacationed in East Prussia, that
he had obsessively ridden through the areas where the battle finally took place, and had
planned out in his mind years before a battle plan which eventually the Russians were lured
into as a trap.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff, the architects, so it was believed that this tremendous victory
became now very clearly war heroes in Germany, and such war heroes were very necessary at
a time of reverses.
In reflection of their increased status, on November 1st, 1914, General Hindenburg was
appointed the supreme commander in the east, and very clearly building on the sort of stature
and charisma that his new role had given him, the commander in the east would take on an
independence, increased independence, even from the commander of German forces as a whole,
Falkenheim, who was leading the war effort.
Hindenburg and Ludendorff together formed what sometimes has been called a dynamic duo.
They were very different in character as well as background, but together they had a certain
chemistry that allowed them to, at least in the short term, be quite effective as military
leaders.
Hindenburg himself even called their relationship at one point a happy marriage.
Paul von Hindenburg, the leadership figurehead, in other words of this dynamic duo, was a
man of tremendous historical antecedents.
His ancestors had been Prussian aristocrats or Junkers for centuries beforehand, and his
own family was identified very much with Prussian history.
He was a calm, imperturbable, icy-willed, and tremendously determined military leader
who, it was said, could keep his calm even in the most difficult military situations.
Eric Ludendorff, by contrast, was very different.
He was of middle-class origins.
He was not of exalted aristocratic background.
He was rather a technocrat.
He was in some sense a new breed of military man, a military professional who, through
scientific planning, through ambition, through hard work, had risen through the ranks and
had achieved the prominence that he now would use to the hilt.
The shared psychological chemistry of this group was supplemented by Ludendorff's nervousness,
his high-strung nature.
It was argued sometimes that these two men, so very different psychologically as well
as in terms of background, perfectly complemented one another.
Their shared fame helped them to rise in terms of stature as heroes to the German people,
eventually becoming war dictators of Germany from 1916 on, a war dictatorship that we'll
inquire into in more detail in a later lecture.
If the Germans had scored this very welcome victory at the Battle of Tannenberg, the fortunes
of their ally in the Central Powers, the Austro-Hungarians, were by contrast quite dismal.
The war began very badly for the Austro-Hungarian Empire, and for keen observers, this was a
very bad omen.
The Empire fielded three army groups at the start of the war, and it seemed almost as if
it couldn't decide where to concentrate.
One of these army groups was sent against Russia, the other was sent against the original
enemy in what had turned into a larger war, Serbia, and the third one managed to shuttle
indecisively in between these fronts, between the Russian front and the Serbian front.
From the start of the war, the Austro-Hungarians had expected an easy victory over the Serbian
enemy.
They started by shelling the Serbian capital of Belgrade, and on August 12, 1914, Austro-Hungarian
forces confidently crossed the Danube and Sava rivers, expecting victory, but four days
later were expelled by Serbian forces engaged in a nationalist defense of their homeland.
And indeed, in the rest of 1914, the Serbian forces would two more times beat off Austro-Hungarian
invasions.
After an initial advance into Russian territory towards Lublin in the Polish territories, Austro-Hungarian
armies were again beaten back, Austro-Hungary was expelled and lost Galicia.
In 1914, by the end of the year, Austro-Hungary was measuring a terrible toll.
It had lost more than a million casualties.
In a very real sense, it couldn't afford these precise casualties and these deaths because
these represented the professional military, the seasoned officers, and soldiers of an army
that now by contrast was lame.
From December 1914 to April 1915, horrific winter fighting took place.
Russian and Austro-Hungarian forces clashed in the high passes of the snowy Carpathian
Mountains, that's the range that extends between Galicia and Hungary, a mountain range in which
fighting now took place.
And the Austro-Hungarian forces fighting in this mountain warfare often lost more casualties
for men freezing than from combat itself.
This so-called Carpathian winter campaign and the fall of a famous Austro-Hungarian fortress,
the main fortress in Austrian Galicia, Przemysl, that had been occupied, had been surrounded
by Russian besiegers, cost the Austrians more than 750,000 casualties.
Nonetheless, there were some successes that the Austrians could point to and that they
were proud of.
With help from German reinforcements, a sign of things to come, on which the Austro-Hungarian
army would increasingly rely in the years that followed, a victory was produced.
This was the victory of Galicia Tarnov on May 2nd, 1915.
A 40-mile gap was smashed into the Russian front and the forces of the central powers
started to pour through.
This was truly a remarkable victory.
Galicia, which had been lost to the Russian forces, was now regained for the Austrian
Empire, the fortress of Przemysl was retaken, and Lemberg, or Lvov, as it's called, was
captured and a quarter million Russians taken prisoner.
What this illustrated was that the war in the east was more mobile in its nature and
still capable of producing the sort of breakthroughs that eluded the commanders on the western
front.
This breakthrough now opened out into a larger victory for the central powers, the so-called
Great Advance of 1915.
After their success in 1914 at the Battle of Tannenberg, Generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff
had carved out for themselves a position as the premier Easterners.
What was meant by this was that they championed within the debates about how strategies should
evolve the formula that victory could be won in the east, and forces should be concentrated
there in order to exploit the opportunity.
They argued for a battle of envelopment against the Russian armies.
The Battle of Tannenberg had been a great success, but it had been a tactical success.
It had not strategically, in the largest sense, beaten the Russians to the point where they
had to withdraw from the war.
The Russians to the contrary had simply retreated.
They had pulled back and withdrawn into the wide open spaces of the Russian Empire, and
a final strategic victory had eluded the Germans.
General Falkenhayn, who was in charge of the entire German war effort, was a Westerner.
He was convinced that final victory would have to be won on the western front, and viewed
the east as important, but not ultimately decisive.
And nonetheless, Falkenhayn, humoring his subordinates, went on the defensive in 1915
on the western front, and allowed forces to be moved to the east to win what victories
might be won there.
The breakthrough at Garlitsche Tarnov was even greater than had been expected, in fact
it's sometimes considered the only real breakthrough of the entire war.
And now a larger German offensive in Eastern Europe unfolded, and it conquered vast territories,
an area essentially the size of all of France from the Russian Empire in the course of the
so-called Great Advance of the summer of 1915.
German armies occupied present-day Poland, Lithuania, and Latvia on the Baltic.
Russian armies seized important fortresses that supposedly had been the impregnable defenses
of the Russian Empire, the fortresses of Konos, of Grodno, of Brest-Litovsk, and the cities
of Warsaw and Vilnius.
Russian armies were pushed back an average of 300 miles, and as they did so, as they
retreated, they used scorched earth policies.
These scorched earth policies aimed to destroy the lands that were being given up to the
enemy in order to make sure that by burning buildings, by destroying towns, by blowing
up bridges, by tearing up railroads, by burning fields with crops standing in them, the enemy
would not gain anything worth having.
It was very clear that what the Germans would remember as the Great Advance of 1915 would
go into Russian memory as the Great Retreat of 1915.
And the blow was stunning.
Russian forces lost two and a half million men, dead, wounded, or taken prisoner as a
result of this campaign.
Russia was almost knocked out of the war entirely.
What followed at this point was really more in the nature of a symbolic gesture, but it
was enormously telling in terms of what it had to say about Russian leadership.
In what turned out to be a fateful mistake in September of 1915, the Russian Emperor,
Tsar Nicholas II, personally took over as Russian Commander-in-Chief from the Grand
Duke Nicholas Nikolievich.
Henceforth, the Russian Tsar would be held responsible for any setbacks to the Russian
war effort.
In a very real sense, Nicholas II, who felt a deep sense of obligation and a deep sense
of responsibility, which unfortunately didn't match his talents as a military commander
or a political leader, had now engineered a situation in which his regime did not have
plausible deniability, but instead would be very personally identified with the defeats.
The Eastern Front finally stabilized by the fall of 1915, and its expanse was huge.
The front ran from the Baltic Sea, just short of Riga in what today is the Republic of Latvia,
all the way down south to Romania.
At this point, satisfied with these gains and still convinced that victory would have
to come in the West, General Falkenhayn returned his attention to the fighting on the Western
Front and to that titanic battle that he was planning, the Battle of Verdun in 1916.
By contrast now, in the East, large territories had been won.
This was a great contrast with the several miles of advance that might be achieved on
the Western Front at great cost.
Here in Eastern Europe, by contrast, huge territories had been conquered by German forces,
and they now needed to be administered as occupied territory, a formidable task given
their state of devastation as a result of both conflict itself, the front moving through,
as well as scorched earth policies, and the relative unfamiliarity, the strangeness of
these regions to the German occupiers.
Poland was given a civil government.
The lands north of Poland were consolidated into not a civilian government of the variety
that Poland had, but rather an odd sort of hybrid form, a military state, a military
colony that was called Oberost, and we'll talk much more in a coming lecture about what
the realities of occupation were like.
Here it would suffice to simply mention that German soldiers, ordinary soldiers, would
now, in these vast wide open territories, be engaged in a daily encounter, a daily confrontation
with Eastern Europe and what it was like on a daily basis, its nature, its populations
of tremendous ethnic diversity, including Russians, Poles, Lithuanians, Latvians, as
well as the Jews of Eastern Europe, a very important minority, even some German minorities
who living in the Baltic territories might have been familiar to the Germans, but instead
also had traits all their own that made them unfamiliar as well.
Generals Ludendorff and Hindenburg frustrated at the fact that a total victory in Eastern
Europe had still eluded them, now concentrated on administering these occupied territories
and behind the scenes were busy conspiring against General Falkenhayn, their own superior,
aiming eventually to take control of the German war effort themselves.
Nonetheless, what now intervened was a surprising and in many cases very proud Russian success,
showing that the fighting on the Eastern Front most certainly still continued, and this was
the proud effort of the Russian army, the so-called Brusilov Offensive.
Unexpectedly, in June to August of 1916, General Alexei Brusilov, a Russian general,
launched an offensive.
Now in part, this was intended to draw German forces away from the Western Front, where
the crisis at Verdun was playing itself out.
And what this very usefully illustrates is the extent to which the fighting on the Eastern
Front and the Western Front, different as it was, was nonetheless in a very real military
sense linked in terms of its fortunes and its changing balance.
The Brusilov Offensive made dramatic Russian gains.
Russian armies on the southern sectors of the front, where Brusilov's offensive took
place in Valinia and Galicia, smashed into the Austro-Hungarian forces.
They took a quarter million Austro-Hungarian soldiers prisoner.
The Austro-Hungarian Front collapsed, and it was very clear that in a real sense, their
fighting spirit was exhausted.
This too was a continuing, very bad omen for the fortunes of the Habsburg monarchies'
war effort.
And there were certainly other side effects of these dramatic successes.
Succeeding on the battlefield meant that one was probably more likely to find allies
willing to join one.
And the result of these Russian successes was that the Balkan, a Eastern European country
of Romania, now settled on joining the allies in order to share in what it expected soon
would be a decisive victory.
This turned out to be a miscalculation because Brusilov's offensives, successful as they'd
been in the south, did not receive support from other Russian commanders in the north.
And the result was that as the fighting continued, Brusilov's army took a million casualties,
and as it turned out, this successful offensive would be the last real success of the Russian
army, which was reaching exhaustion itself.
Three successive, following offensives by Brusilov were without greater successes.
Ultimately, in the last analysis, the fighting in the east would end with what seemed to
be success for the Central Powers, with a balance of victory tipping in their favor.
By 1917, the Central Powers had scored seemingly impressive gains on the Eastern Front.
Bulgaria had been impressed enough with the success of the Germans to join the Central
Powers in September 6th, 1915.
In the winter of 1915, German, Austro-Hungarian, and Bulgarian armies overran Serbia and shared
in the spoils of that conquest.
In December of 1916, the Central Powers also conquered Romania, which had entered the war
as it turned out at a very bad moment.
After the Brusilov offensive, the Russian army itself was in the process of disintegration.
Even the overthrow of the Tsar, that we'll be discussing much more in a later lecture
about the Russian Revolution, and the installation of a new government in March of 1917, could
not ultimately halt this process of the disintegration and undermining of the Russian armies as
a whole.
In July 1917, German and Austro-Hungarian forces attacked once again, and they pushed
the front forward even further, retaking most of Galicia, taking Riga and the Estonian islands
of Sarima, Huma, and Muhu, preparing for greater successes.
At the end of 1917, it was clear that Russia had reached the point of exhaustion.
Russia left the war.
It proclaimed its own defeat, was forced to sign a crushing peace treaty, the Treaty
of Bresletovsk, on March 3, 1918, that we'll discuss in more detail later.
This was an enormous and crushing blow to the Allies in the West.
They had lost their Russian ally.
Now France and Great Britain were without a weight in the East that they might use in
their plans.
Russia was now defeated, and to the Central Powers, it seemed that half of the war, the
war in the East, had been won by their side.
What the fortunes of fighting on other fronts was like, especially the Southern Front, we'll
explore in our next lecture.
