These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled World War I, The Great War, Part II.
Lecture 13 Soldiers as Victims
In this lecture, on the subject of dimensions of violence and captivity,
we'll be addressing the exact opposite reality of all of that exalted rhetoric and heroic images with which the war began.
The expectations of heroism, of violence that was limited to the battlefield and ultimately would bring glory.
Instead, in today's lecture, we'll be examining some of the outlines of the realities, the lived realities of soldiers in their identity as victims.
In this lecture, we'll seek to grasp the sheer scale of the carnage and the violence of this industrial war wrought on the bodies of the soldiers themselves.
We'll discuss the nature of wounds and death.
We'll discuss military medicine.
The attempts that grew out of the searing experience and the damage of the First World War upon soldiers' bodies to restore the shattered lives of invalids through prosthetics.
The slowly dawning recognition of the psychological phenomenon of shell shock.
We'll examine how soldiers themselves were affected by the experience of this sort of damage.
We'll see how disillusioned soldiers increasingly felt themselves to be expendable, trapped in a predicament of dehumanization.
We'll pass then, in the second part of our lecture, to discuss another situation of helplessness on the part of ordinary soldiers, those occasions on which soldiers became prisoners of war.
We'll discuss capture, the experience itself, with its uncertainties, its fears, and the shame that accompanied it.
This was an experience that was shared by many soldiers.
It's estimated that some 8.5 million soldiers on all sides became prisoners of war.
We'll discuss their experience in the camps, as well as attempts through the Red Cross and other international agreements to improve their conditions.
Let's begin first by trying to understand or outline the sheer scale of the carnage itself.
The estimates that we have, and they're still admittedly rough, suggest that about half of all of the soldiers who fought in the war were either killed or wounded in the process.
So the experience of being subject to this violence was most definitely a common and shared one.
In fact, at the time one spoke of a lost generation.
We might expand this phrase, the lost generation, which applied to the demographics scooping up of so many young men who had idealistically gone off to the battlefields.
We might expand this to talk about lost generations in the plural, to apply also not just to those who were killed, but also those who survived, but were in some sense shattered and changed and altered by the experience itself.
In fact, this brings us to a renewed underlining of one of the main themes of our course, the totality of the First World War as an instance, the first modern instance of total war.
In such a total war, which inevitably blurred the lines between who was a soldier and who was a civilian on the home front, nonetheless participating in the war itself,
we are reminded by historians that we need to think of soldiers really in some sense as civilians in uniform.
The term comes from the French historian Stéphane Audoin-Rousseau and Annette Becker, and it's especially apt to recall that these civilians who had been put into uniform, many of them,
who had not been professional soldiers, but were mustered into the mass armies of the Great War, could be both perpetrators of violence, killers, as well as the victims of violence and subject to it themselves.
It's tremendously difficult for us to even wrap our minds around the statistics that we have, the numbers that we are provided with of the deaths that are involved in the First World War.
It's estimated that somewhere between 9 to 10 million soldiers were killed in the conflict. How does one begin to understand or to take in the reality of 9 to 10 million deaths?
And in part, this was one of the features that made the experience even more searing.
Mass death on this sort of scale, as it became seemingly normal, as it became part of a feature of this conflict itself, made the figures who are counted in these millions of mortality figures even more anonymous.
Another feature that added to that anonymity was the disappearance of the bodies of so many of the soldiers in the trench landscape or the battlefields of the Great War.
It's estimated that nearly half of all of the bodies of the dead of the war were never found or identified, but instead thrown into mass graves.
And this is perhaps one way that we can start to allow to penetrate into our own consciousness the notion of just what these astronomical figures of deaths involve.
When in orderly rows one has casualty figures for battles or for the war itself with one row stating those who died, another row stating those who were wounded, all under the category of casualties, there's often another figure which is the missing.
We need to stop for a moment to think of what missing in this context means.
Missing most often simply meant physically obliterated beyond the ability to be identified or honored as a victim of the war.
The losses themselves were simply enormous, staggering.
And this was part of a reality that those who participated in the First World War needed to start to take a board.
They needed somehow to come to terms with this as best they could.
And one of the major themes of our course is this constant set of shocks of the new.
And it was this reality of mass death that was among the novelties that contemporaries had to cope with.
The losses were enormous.
Just to give some statistics that allow us to assimilate this reality, think of the nation of Serbia, which had borne the brunt of so much fighting on the eastern front.
It's estimated in rough statistics that Serbia lost perhaps 37% of its soldiers.
It's estimated that France, which took the brunt of the first fighting on the western front, that France lost some 16% of its soldiers.
And these casualties could be tremendously concentrated within certain groups,
especially the officers who took it upon themselves to lead those first, as it turns out, disastrous charges across no man's land.
In the French infantry, for example, it's estimated that one-third of all the officers were killed and didn't survive the war.
At the same time, we need to keep in mind that casualty figures include not only those who were killed or died outright on the battlefield,
but also those who were wounded, those who struggled with the consequences of the damage done to their bodies as a result of the violence on the battlefield.
We could say a few words about the phenomenon of wounds in the First World War,
because in some sense military medicine changed the equation.
It's estimated that about 85% of all of the wounds suffered in the First World War came not from bayonets or from bullets from snipers shooting from afar with rifles,
but rather it's estimated that 85% of wounds came from exploding shells, exploding shells.
Here we see the tremendous importance of artillery and of heavy munitions in making this an industrial battle or war of materiel.
The result of the sorts of wounds that were torn into human bodies by exploding shells were jagged wounds,
and in particular in the trenches, wounds where dirt and mud and fragments of the battlefield itself got mixed into the wounds,
and thus the rate of infections due to this dirt and mud was extraordinarily high.
The shell wounds also tended to cause damage that was especially extensive to bones and to muscle.
This was anything but the sort of clean wound and heroic death that had been so celebrated at the start of the war in idealized images of chivalry and the adventure that lay ahead.
And particular theaters of the war could see distinctive patterns of wounds as well.
To give just but one example, which is quite compelling, in the war in the Alps between the Austro-Hungarian forces and the Italian forces that we had described in an earlier lecture,
wounds took on a distinctive significance as well because in that rocky landscape, shrapnel or bullets banging off against hillsides or against rocks themselves
could produce even more shrapnel in the form of stone that would tear apart soldiers' bodies even further, giving a distinctive experience to that theater of the conflict.
In the trenches, as we'd already mentioned in outlining the life and death patterns of trench warfare, new diseases or diseases particular,
maladies particular to this theater of the war and this landscape of the trenches also took hold.
Trenchfoot was the name given to a particular form of frostbite that not surprisingly came from standing for hours or days on end in soaked trenches with water at the bottom in very wet conditions.
Soldiers also spoke of trench fever, a mysterious malady that was habitual to those who spent longer time in the trenches,
which as careful scientific investigation showed was actually a form of typhus that was carried by the lice that were epidemic in soldiers' uniforms and in the trenches themselves.
We need to add to this list of wounds also another category which speaks to something of the desperation and the horror of this sort of war itself.
Those were self-inflicted wounds, ones that soldiers had deliberately wrought upon their own bodies.
And those self-inflicted wounds were a sign of desperation on the part of men who simply felt the imperative of getting away from the front
and not being subjected to this mind-numbing violence of the sort that we've been describing.
This sort of self-inflicted wound could include, and human ingenuity being what it was, there were many forms,
but it could include willingly contracting frostbite on the eastern front, that's to say exposing one's limbs to the severity of winter there in order to become incapacitated.
It could include shooting oneself in quotation marks accidentally in order to be invalided out.
There were also soldiers who injected themselves with various kind of toxins in order to produce undiagnosable diseases that would have them invalided away from the battlefield as well.
A particular horrific form of wound and one that was quite new in this sense to military medicine were the consequences of gas poisoning.
And we'll speak later in a lecture about technology of total war, about the gas warfare itself.
It suffices to say here that gas poisoning, which affected an estimated 1.3 million men, had not only immediate consequences of destroyed respiratory systems or difficulty seeing,
but also consequences that lasted for decades afterwards.
And this is very suggestive of the difficulty that we have in pinning down exact statistics as to the damage of the First World War,
because men who would cough afterwards for decades and into old age experienced the damage the gas warfare would wrought,
even though they'd remained alive in some sense continued to be victims of the First World War.
And in addition to this was the psychological terror experienced by those who were gassed who felt that they were being choked alive by this new form of warfare.
We need to discuss paradoxically the enormous advances that were made in military medicine in this dreadful context of such enormous violence and new forms of violence as well.
Because in the First World War, military medicine not only made tremendous strides in terms of a learning curve and new technologies and new methods,
but also in comparison to earlier warfare was able to truly deploy for the purposes of saving lives and caring for the wounded
some of the advances of medicine that had been made in the course of the 19th century and the early 20th century.
But first it was necessary to remove the soldiers who had been damaged on the battlefield to the point where they could be cared for.
Brave stretcher bearers, this was a particular task in the trenches, would move up into the battlefield or out into no man's land,
it would carry the wounded away back away from the trench lines to special new medical installations that were called casualty clearing stations immediately behind the front lines.
And there a process of triage would be undertaken. Soldiers would be examined to see who might still be saved or who on the contrary was fated to expire there on the spot.
And those who could be bound up or could be helped on the spot were helped there.
And then also in those casualty clearing stations 10% of the wounded who needed immediate surgery and couldn't be moved would be operated on.
Others would be evacuated further back through motorized ambulances and ambulance trains.
And one needs here just to keep in mind the pictures that are vivid to us of what the trench landscape looked like
and the rutted roads that led up to the trenches themselves, the jolting of the ambulances must have been horrific.
And I'll always recall a picture that had much to do with my initial interest personally in the First World War.
A photograph I saw as a child of soldiers being loaded onto military ambulances essentially stacked one on top of the other in their stretchers.
And it seemed to me inconceivable that human beings in such tight spaces could be turned into, in other words,
dehumanized individuals who now are simply the object of earlier violence and now of medical care.
And some of the pathos of that image really does stay with one over the years.
At the same time, and this is a tremendous paradox, even in the context of this enormous destruction,
the very experience, the very learning of how to deal with this destruction and this scale produced tremendous advances in wartime medicine.
These advances included improved antiseptic care, dealing with the infections of the threat of infection that we'd mentioned earlier,
included blood transfusions, improvements in anesthetics to dull the pain,
and to also prepare for far more extensive medical surgery than could have been possible without anesthetics.
Also, extensive amputations to save lives that would not have been possible under earlier medical medicine by the state of the art.
At the same time, volunteer female nurses gained enormous recognition as important actors in this entire scene of military medicine
due to their bravery and their tremendous utility.
It's not surprising that in this context of military medicine, it was not only desirable, but indeed natural,
that attention would focus not just on saving those who were wounded, but also preventing epidemics, preventing infections.
And thus in all armies, hygiene took on a nearly obsessive concern.
This included aspects of the soldier's life that became quite ordinary,
delousing in special military baths, vaccinations against mass epidemics among the troops,
and included phenomena like medically supervised prostitution for soldiers in the armies
where even this process itself was under close supervision by medical experts
so that venereal disease wouldn't spread as an epidemic through the armies,
something that generals were very concerned about.
Paradoxically, and this was a morally very difficult question for doctors,
at the same time the aim of much of this military medicine was not only to save lives,
but to put some of those same wounded men back into the battlefield and back into the trenches.
One of the especially poignant advances that came with this form of military medicine came in prosthetics.
That's to say the creating of artificial limbs or artificial body parts
in order to replace that which had been lost on the battlefield.
These artificial limbs included fake noses, fake ears,
they included for those who had mutilated faces, face masks of rubber or of wax,
and over time these grew more sophisticated,
but it was part of the complexion of the war to see people whose faces essentially had been replaced
as a result of the violence they had suffered.
Cosmetic surgery saw tremendous advances given the new urgency in this context of war.
Now, just to state the obvious, it's clear that even such measures that sought to make good,
some of the damage could ultimately never restore normalcy to those who had been mutilated in the war itself.
And it's a poignant anecdote to note that there certainly were soldiers whose faces or bodies had been left mutilated by the war,
who lived out the rest of their lives, even decades after the war itself,
hidden away in special wards of hospitals precisely because they were so sensitive to the horrified reactions
that their destroyed visages would evoke among ordinary civilians.
Nonetheless, many of the disabled, many of the mutilated did go out into society both during the war and afterwards,
and the figure of the mutilated, devastated veteran became ubiquitous in European societies for much of the 20th century.
This included later the mutilated veterans of the Second World War,
and to see them in society was a visible witness, a reminder of the war and a reproach of the war's cruelty.
These generations are fading away in Europe today.
One might ask oneself how one keeps alive then the memory of the destructiveness of the war.
The self-image of soldiers was also affected crucially by this experience
and by seeing how little their lives meant in practice on the battlefield determined as it was by industrial power and sheer firepower.
The realities of combat, death and wounds that we've just been discussing contributed mightily to a growing disillusionment among soldiers.
Soldiers on all sides increasingly saw themselves as expendable.
This was reflected in their bitter language, their eschewing of high terms of honor and glory,
and in the names that they gave for themselves.
The French soldiers called themselves Paulus, that's to say the shaggy ones, referring to their state of uncleanliness and degradation.
German soldiers in an evocative phrase sometimes called themselves frontswine,
meaning essentially dehumanized animals who were sent to the slaughter,
and the British for their part, along with other more bitter names, called themselves Tommy Atkins.
And this was simply the name allegedly of the ordinary British soldier and anybody,
someone who was anonymous by his very nature.
All of this tended to accent their replaceability, their anonymity.
There was a further category of damage that could be done by the war itself,
which was not physical, but nonetheless very, very real, and this was a phenomenon of shell shock.
Historians estimate that nearly half of all surviving soldiers experienced psychological traumas as a result of their participation in the war.
And one can well imagine here as well why it's so difficult to quantify this.
Some of this could be eventually worn down over time and might fade.
Other soldiers had nightmares that stayed with them for the rest of their lives.
The new recognition, and this is another example of the shock of the new,
a newly recognized psychological condition was called shell shock in 1915.
But it was experienced as a malady before it was understood what caused it.
It wasn't understood for considerable time.
There was a learning curve here as well for medical experts to understand what was going on here.
At first, as the very name shell shock suggested, doctors thought that this was a physical malady
that soldiers were psychologically affected by the impact of a shell blowing up nearby,
a concussion to the brain perhaps, causing this psychological change.
As it was understood over time, this was in fact a psychological outcome of prolonged stress.
And shell shock could leave even apparently physically healthy
and often very motivated and patriotic soldiers reduced to conditions of mental collapse.
Even very strong soldiers who had been committed to the cause might break down crying for no reason.
They might be reduced to a state of trembling or unable to hear the orders that their officers gave them.
Some soldiers were reduced to fits of screaming or of convulsions.
Some soldiers experienced amnesia, didn't know who they were, how they'd gotten where they were,
or constant insomnia and sleeplessness.
The learning curve on understanding this disease was marked by tragedy
because at first, military leaders and military medical experts had a suspicion
that such soldiers were malingering or cowardly.
There were tragic instances of soldiers who suffered from this disease being executed
in the first half of the war, especially precisely because it was suspected
that they were simply shirking their duty.
The first treatments that were put in train were also correspondingly brutal
because it was assumed that this was a problem simply of the will
that someone needed to snap out of it in order to become once again fit to fight.
Some doctors prescribed shock therapy or solitary confinement in order to treat this disease.
There was also a certain stigma that attached to shell shock as a diagnosis
because it was sometimes called hysteria, which in the 19th century had been understood
as a supposedly typically female illness.
What this suggested in the gendered terms of the day was that these men had lost their manhood.
They'd somehow become denatured.
Less than humanely, hypnosis and psychotherapy were also used.
Medical science has since understood that shell shock was not a physical illness
or a failure of the will, but a psychological phenomenon
due to the longer duration of stress on the battlefield,
and today it's referred to as post-traumatic stress disorder.
This shell shock could leave a long-lasting impact.
Even outside of danger even years afterwards, soldiers could experience flashbacks
or anxiety triggered by sounds or unexpected memories.
Numbers of soldiers actually went mad under the impact of bombardments
or the horrors that they saw, and one might think that this in fact was a rational response
to the mad world they saw around them.
I'm always left haunted by one anecdote that I'd read about a Russian soldier
who went mad under the impact of the fighting who kept repeating again and again.
Murder is being done in this world.
Devils and evil are abroad.
Now you ask yourself, was this man mad or was he seeing the reality all too clearly?
Murder was being done in the world on a daily basis on a mass scale in the First World War.
Giving some indication of the horrors,
approximately 3,000 German soldiers committed suicide in the war, unable to go on.
It's been argued in fact by literary historians that shell shock became the symbol of the human consequences of the war
for poets and writers afterwards.
At the same time what it's fascinating to observe is how many men escaped enduring shell shock
and somehow managed psychologically to adjust to the horrors and escape the worst.
This was something that needed to be taken aboard by experts
and after the war the psychologist Sigmund Freud would reflect that in his earlier work
where he'd stressed the erotic drives of human nature
he had neglected to explore what one might call a death drive
at work in human beings among their other urges.
I want to pass to discuss the prisoners of war.
French historians Edouard Rousseau and Becker speak of a camp phenomenon of internment
of populations during the First World War
that's very important to understand the nature of the war itself.
Capture and imprisonment for soldiers brought uncertainty, fear and shame.
Experiences that were shared by an estimated 8.5 million men throughout the war.
It's estimated that about 10% of all soldiers mobilized for the war became prisoners of war.
Being taken prisoner was not an easy or safe experience.
Soldiers who were captured might very well be killed on the spot.
Killing of prisoners at the moment of capture or immediately afterwards
just not to have to deal with them by the enemy forces was after all not uncommon.
However there were cases of larger capturing of troops
especially where demoralization played a role.
In the Austro-Hungarian army given its multinational nature
some units of Slavic origins facing the Russian front for instance
apparently defected en masse simply throwing down their weapons
and walking over to their ethnically related cousins on the other side.
This was a different case but the process of being taken prisoner could be a very dangerous one.
Ordinary prisoners of war were used as laborers
and sometimes they were used close to the front
actually in violation of international law and conventions used before
but in total war the rules seemed to be bent.
Imprisoned officers by contrast were kept in separate camps
reflecting the social hierarchies of the 19th and early 20th centuries
in better conditions.
But on both parts boredom and squalor and degradation
could produce what contemporaries themselves and prisoners themselves
called barbed wire psychosis going stir crazy in these conditions.
Hunger and disease rather than a deliberate attempt to destroy physically
the soldiers taken prisoner exacted a toll.
It's not entirely clear within reasonable ranges
what the casualty rate was of soldiers behind barbed wire in the war
in part because all of the competent countries had a public relations interest
in downplaying the numbers of prisoners of war who died in their custody.
But one thing is clear the order of magnitude compared to that of World War II is very different.
The contrast of the treatment of prisoners of war in World War I
which could include neglect or fewer food rations or bad conditions
is very different from the genocidal mistreatment of prisoners in World War II
by the Nazis for instance.
Nonetheless some historians have compared the two experiences
and have advanced the controversial thesis that captivity in World War I
especially in Russia would later become a model for later institutions of incarceration
including the Gulags of the Soviet Union
or the concentration camps of Nazi Germany later in the 20th century
sometimes called the century of the camps.
But this is an interpretation that's very controversial
and it's been challenged forcefully by historians who point to repeated attempts
to better the conditions of the soldiers out of humanitarian motives.
Just to speak briefly of some of these international agreements
before the war the Geneva Conventions of 1864 and 1906
and the Hague Rules of Land War of 1899
had sought to regulate the more humane treatment of prisoners of war
but many ambiguities remained and being a prisoner of war
left one during the First World War in a very exposed position
less likely to receive good treatment.
Nonetheless attempts were made again and again during the war itself
even in this time of passions and hatred on both sides
to better the conditions of prisoners of war by initiatives of the International Red Cross
the Vatican as well as neutral countries.
Towards the end of the war some exchanges of older prisoners of war
were arranged by a special agreement in Bern in Switzerland in December of 1917.
The restraints that such agreements tried to put on the treatment of prisoners of war
would be lost in World War II, the next total war.
Now that we've discussed some of the intensity of human suffering
and the destructive potential of the war
we need to pass on to discuss those who actually enjoyed this experience of war
a disturbing phenomenon of stormtroopers and dictators
that we'll discuss in our next lecture.
