Lecture 17 War at Sea
In this lecture, we'll be considering the war at sea.
Though the naval arms race before 1914 had very much contributed to those growing tensions
that we had earlier described, that finally erupted in World War I, the role of the great
navies turned out in fact during the conflict itself to be deeply ambiguous and also marked
by stalemate.
One of the major themes that we've been weaving through this course is the extent to which
the First World War, the actual experience of the conflict, represented a series of shocks
or novelties or surprises.
And in this sense, the war at sea was most definitely a surprise in that it didn't turn
out at all as earlier planners or observers had expected.
Indeed, this was in many cases deeply embarrassing.
The lead up to the First World War had represented an enormously expensive naval arms race and
now in fact the war at sea turned out to be not a resolute and conclusive battle but instead
a confusing series of encounters.
Indeed, the only giant British-German naval clash, even approximating the sort of apocalyptic
battle that had been expected previously, was marked by confused sparring and ultimately
an indecisive result.
By contrast, a slower form of naval warfare or the use of naval weapons was the naval
blockade that was imposed by the British navy on Germany's economy, was a far greater
effect, an economic weapon that tried to choke off Germany industrially and economically.
We'll examine the really tremendous debates among historians concerning the real impact
of the naval blockade on the German home front, on civilians' diets and civilians' health.
And we'll also examine how Germany's shift to a new form of warfare, another example
of the shock of the new, unrestricted submarine warfare in 1917 in turn threatened the British
economy but also had the result of faithfully antagonizing the United States and bringing
it into the war against the central powers, Germany, Austria, Hungary and Turkey.
Let's start first by considering some of the expectations that had preceded the war and
that indeed marked the outbreak itself as attempts were made to put into action some
of these earlier expectations.
Many pre-war tensions between Germany and Britain had centered on the naval arms race
from 1898 on as Germany starts to build an ever larger navy, seemingly challenging British
preeminence on the seas.
But paradoxically, within the war itself, the expectations of how the war would unfold
on the seas were radically overturned.
In the years preceding the First World War, a new class of battleships that simply made
all others obsolete in terms of their gunnery, in terms of their armor, had revolutionized
the naval buildup.
These were the so-called Dreadnought battleships, which soon were coming to the fore in all
of the major navies.
Britain's navy was the largest.
Simply because for the British, the existence of a large navy was essential, crucial to
the defense of its global empire and global interests.
Many British would keep in mind that phrase, Britannia rules the waves.
It seemed to be a matter of existence for the British empire.
And it was precisely because of this existential importance of British domination of the seas
that the German navy, as it was being built up, was seen as a symbol of the German empire's
dynamism, modernity, and potential threat to the British as well.
All of the great powers had large navies, and that included Austria-Hungary, which we don't
usually think of as a naval power, but which needed this particular weapon in order to
underline its status as a great power.
Naval blockades had been very important tools of war in the past, and indeed during the
Napoleonic Wars, Great Britain's role in the conflict had included naval blockades.
Germany, in its wartime planning, thus looked back to earlier patterns of warfare and expected
that the British would, as had been seen in the past, would be mounting a close blockade
of the ports of Germany, that's to say stationing of ships close by to the ports that held Germany's
traffic of imports and exports, and would intercept or block off any trade that might
be going on at the time.
That was the expectation, that a close blockade close to German ports would be affected, and
one of the ways in which they thought they might counter this close blockade was by the
use of a new weapon, submarines.
We think for good reason of submarine warfare being especially identified during the First
World War itself with the Germans, but in fact all sides were experimenting with this
new weapon.
Germany in 1914, when the war opens, in fact, as it turns out, had fewer submarines at first
than Britain or France or Russia, but it did have newer ones.
Submarines at this time were viewed mostly as defensive weapons, as ones that would be
able to frustrate the onslaught of an enemy navy, that might be able to also defend against
the possibility of a close blockade by sallying out from ports and engaging the close blockading
battleships of an enemy side and sinking them.
Well, the First World War opened, as on land, so to on sea, with initial encounters that
really overturned many of the expectations that had been held in mind at the start of
the war.
The first task of the British forces, essentially, was to bottle up the German navy, to make
sure that it could not set out to sea and represent an existential threat to the British
by dominating the lanes of sea traffic.
And in this case, geography, as it turns out, would play a very important role, because
the British were so positioned that they would be able to really accomplish this task
of bottling in German forces quite effectively.
The British navy was positioned with a grand fleet stationed at Scapa Flow, near the Orkneys,
between Scotland and Norway, and this grand fleet then was in a position to really very
effectively screen the 200 miles of sea lane between Norway and Scotland.
And then the other access point to the open seas and to the Atlantic was a far narrower
strait. That was the channel with the Straits of Dover, where the channel fleet was stationed,
an expanse of 20 miles here that was very effectively cordoned off by British forces.
These forces were also at the same time in the Eastern Mediterranean, where in fact they
were reinforced and aided by a group of Japanese destroyers, very far from home, but exercising
some of Japan's naval power as well.
While the French, by contrast, as allies of the British, were responsible for the Western
Mediterranean, in particular, keeping Austria-Hungary bottled up into the Adriatic.
The Russian navy and its naval forces found themselves in a difficult position bottled
up into the Black Sea because of the control of the Dardanelles that the Central Powers,
and in particular Ottoman Turkey, retained, and bottled up in the Baltic.
At this point, when earlier expectations would probably have prophesied a huge overwhelming
encounter between the British and the German navies right at the start of the war, by contrast,
and contrary to these earlier expectations, British and German commanders showed extreme
caution.
In part because of an awareness, perhaps even an exaggerated awareness of just how much
had been poured into the resources that they had in their own hands as military commanders.
They were aware, as the saying went at the time, that while generals on the land might
be fighting army battles that might or might not have decisive results, an admiral, by
contrast, in charge of great navies of dreadnoughts, could very well lose the entire war in one
afternoon if the encounter did not go his way.
It was as a result of this mood of caution, this awareness of just how much was at stake
in naval encounters, led to indecisive battles at first.
A confused encounter took place in Germany's sea territory, the battle of Heligolan Blight,
of August 28, 1914, in the North Sea.
In this battle of Heligolan Blight, British forces under Admiral Sir David Batey nearly
faced a disaster, and this was exactly the anxiety that British admirals had from the
start, but they did end up defeating the Germans in their own territory.
This defeat on a smaller scale made the German Kaiser, Wilhelm II, who wanted very much to
protect and to shield that precious project of his, the German navy, and made him very
wary of risking battle afterwards.
At the same time, and this is one of those surprises or shocks that marks the experience
of the First World War, the new role of the submarine, not just as a defensive weapon,
but as a fearsome offensive weapon, was now demonstrated.
Just to give one example, one that was very vivid in the minds of British naval commanders,
on one day, September 22, 1914, close to the start of the war, one German submarine, the
U-9, and the U stood for Unterseboot, the underwater ship, the U-9 sank three British
cruisers in one hour.
This was a dreadful toll.
At the same time, the British weren't averse to experimenting with this weapon as well,
and British submarines very stealthily crept into the Baltic Sea and operated later through
the war from Russian ports, harassing German naval forces in the Baltic.
Now too, the German navy, rather than advancing towards an apocalyptic sea battle, as had earlier
been expected, instead emphasized raiding activity.
German forces concentrated at first on commerce raiding, that's to say, either seizing or
sinking enemy commerce and merchant ships, or threatening troop shipments as they were
moved across the seas as well.
The German Mediterranean cruisers, Göben and Breslau, raced to Constantinople, where
they were turned over to Ottoman Turkey, and ultimately were helpful in bringing Ottoman
Turkey into the war on the side of the Central Powers, that's to say, Germany and Austria-Hungary.
The East Asian squadron of German battleships, under Admiral Count Maximilian von Spey, which
formerly had been based in the German protectorate of Qingtao, set off for the Pacific as it
became increasingly clear that that German protectorate would come under attack by other
imperial or colonial forces.
Spey then essentially took off on a rampage of the Pacific and the South Atlantic.
He smashed a British force that had been sent to intercept him off of the coast of Chile
in the Battle of Coronel on November 1st, 1914.
And this was of fateful significance because this was the first British naval defeat in
a century and a tremendous blow to the prestige and the self-concept of the British navy.
Sailing then to the South Atlantic, Spey was ambushed in an attack that he had at first
planned on British wireless station on the Falkland Islands.
He was intercepted there by a British squadron on December 8th, 1914, and Spey himself was
among those who were killed in the battle.
The Allies then also caught up with and sank the remaining German raiders that had been
creating havoc in the sea lanes, the Emden, which had operated in the Indian Ocean, the
Königsberg, a battleship off of East Africa, and the cruiser Karlsruhe, which raided in
the Central Atlantic but then blew up accidentally.
The British gained a very important advantage in naval warfare and in other forms of warfare
by intercepting or finding in wrecks the German code books.
The first of these was recovered from a German ship sunk off Estonia in the Baltic Sea, and
other code books as well for the other German naval codes were collected and brought together
in a decoding operation, top secret, run by British naval intelligence called Room 40.
That's how secret it was, only its geographic location within the halls of the naval ministries
was revealed as a code name for it.
The reality then of this decoding project was that the British had advanced warning
of many German naval plans, and eventually also broke the German diplomatic codes, which
would take on a very great significance later in diplomatic sparring.
On January 24th, 1915, another battle then loomed up, the battle of Dogger Bank in the
North Sea, which yielded a British victory against German forces, which had been shelling
British coastal towns in another example of raiding.
But even in this battle, no decisive ultimate result was achieved, the main German force
managed to escape.
And this only further underlined the caution and reinforced the caution of Kaiser Wilhelm
II of Germany, who henceforth kept the navy very close to port.
It seemed now that the sea war, in a sense, was stalemated in ways that remarkably and
uncannily resembled the stalemate on the western front.
That allowed a new and tremendously, over the long term, effective weapon, the naval
blockade to come to play.
Because submarines and torpedoes had as new weapons changed naval warfare, and had made
life tremendously dangerous for cruisers and other battleships as the opening stages of
the war made clear, the sort of close blockades, the near stationing of battleships to intercept
commerce close to an enemy port were made impossible.
Instead, it became necessary, as the British discovered, contrary to German expectations,
to impose a distant blockade.
That's to say, a far more thorough interception at far off of the enemy's ports, far off
the enemy coast of commerce or of ships intended for enemy ports.
The British set about this with a tremendous methodical carefulness and efficiency.
They established even a ministry of blockade, which not only intercepted ships at sea, but
also prevented neutral countries that were close to Germany's borders itself from trading
with Germany by setting up mutually advantageous economic agreements or monopolies that guaranteed
that the goods that were transported would not go to the central powers.
And thus ultimately, over the long term, this blockade proved to be a very formidable
economic weapon.
On November 1914, starting the blockade, Britain declared the North Sea a war zone.
One British merchant ships patrolled north of Scotland and enforced the blockade itself.
And the same was true of naval forces, obviously, in the Channel.
At first, British forces only intercepted weaponry and very clearly military supplies.
But eventually, in the context of the totality of total war, where even food, for instance,
could become a factor in terms of which side was winning or losing, eventually more and
more items were added to a list of strategically important materials that were banned from
being moved into Germany.
And in the process itself, German commerce was strangled.
Germany as a modern economy had been tremendously dependent on its industrial exports and the
imports of raw materials from overseas.
Even imports plummeted, German exports plummeted.
Germany itself faced a crisis in terms of the raw materials that it had to work with.
And indeed, by one estimate, Germany at the start of the war only had stockpiled about
six months in terms of crucial supplies like nitrates that would be very important for
explosives as well as for fertilizer in agriculture.
And one needs to just imagine what the experience of this blockade would mean in terms of German
views of Great Britain in particular.
Though the Germans had started the war with an invasion of France, Great Britain now loomed
up to a great extent because of the blockade itself as very much the arch enemy, even surpassing
the hatred of the hereditary enemy, the French, for the Germans.
The British, it was argued, were fighting in an underhanded, treacherous way.
They were especially evil in their conduct of the war.
And it became almost the style among some German nationalists no longer to greet one
another if they met in the street by saying hello or good day.
Instead, this was replaced with a ritualistic statement, may God punish England?
And the correct answer on the part of another nationalist would be yes, may God punish it?
This gives us some view of the tremendous antipathy towards the British that would be
underlined not just in submarine warfare but also in propaganda that we'll be discussing
in a later lecture.
There came now finally what seemed to be, after a period of indecision, perhaps the Titanic
apocalyptic battle that had been expected.
This was the Battle of Jotland.
German planning during the course of the unexpected twists and turns of the sea war had soon moved
towards hoping to lure a portion of the British fleet into a trap in terms of naval warfare
and then to destroy it and to even the odds and to, as it were, whittle away at British
naval supremacy.
What remained a little bit unclear was why the British, who after all had a naval advantage,
would allow themselves to be lured into a trap, but nonetheless wishful thinking played
its role here.
The German admiral Reinhardt Scheer, commander of the high seas fleet, agitated for something
to do for his navy.
He agitated for aggressive action in 1916 after a period of quiescence.
British forces were to be lured into an ambush at the Skagorak.
There they would be attacked by subs and fast ships and it was hoped to be sunk and a decisive
result achieved.
The Skagorak is the strait between Norway and Denmark's Jotland Peninsula, so this was
seen as a tremendously promising location for just such an ambush.
However, this is where decoding operations of the British naval intelligence came into
play.
Having decoded German communications planning this, British admiral Gellico also moved his
forces towards Skagorak.
So there was sort of an ambush plan and a counter-ambush plan as well.
The result was the largest naval battle in history, the Battle of Jotland.
It's called the Battle of Skagorak by the Germans, but the Allied side used its name,
the Battle of Jotland, which began on May 31, 1916, there in the waters between Norway and
Denmark.
The British forces that had been moved up in this counter-ambush were far larger than
the German as the enemies moved closer together and something on the order of about 300 ships
engaged in this conflict.
The British lost two ships in quick succession, so the battle was not starting well for them,
but then the traditions of British seamanship won out as the British managed twice a maneuver
which is called in naval military history, crossing the enemy's T. That's to say, moving
one's own line of ships into an advantageous position where all of one's ships can open
fire on the exposed line of the enemy.
And twice in quick succession, the Germans were threatened with annihilation by the British
Navy rather and the German forces withdrew.
Speaking to the confusion of this battle, the British Navy lost them at several junctures
during the battle and by the early hours of June 1, 1916, the Germans slipped away rather
than being pursued and annihilated by the British.
Arguments have raged afterwards and indeed to this very day about whether the British
Admiral Jellico might have let slip the opportunity to completely crush the German naval forces
facing him decisively.
On November 1916, in part because of this sort of acrimonious debate, Admiral Beatty
succeeded Jellico as commander-in-chief of the Grand Fleet.
Because the British had lost more ships at this battle, it's often been considered a
German tactical win, but not a strategic victory in the larger terms of winning the war.
A local triumph rather than something ultimately really decisive.
The German planned ambush had failed and the German conclusion from now on was that more
investment was needed in submarines as a decisive weapon that could turn the war.
Let's turn our discussion then to this formidable submarine warfare or U-boat war.
German Admiral von Tirpitz had urged extensive submarine warfare, responding in a sense to
the British blockade.
On February 4th, 1915, Germany declared that the seas around Britain were a war zone too.
If the British had made that declaration about the German sea lanes, so too the areas around
Britain.
And British ships, they announced, would be sunk on site and no guarantees would be made
for the safety of neutral shipping.
Chancellor Batemann Holweg was opposed to this.
He sensed the dangers to international opinion and especially the opinions of an important
neutral power of the United States and his worries turned out to be prophetic.
In spite of countermeasures and technology that was developed to fight the submarines,
like nets or listening gear or depth charges that could blow up submarines, submarine warfare
proved massively destructive.
But that very dramatic destructiveness also tended to horrify public opinion abroad.
Just to give some examples, on May 7th, 1915, the British liner Lusitania, which was on
its way from New York to Liverpool, was torpedoed by a German submarine and it sank in less
than half an hour with a loss of over a thousand lives among them 128 Americans.
Now the reality was that the Lusitania was in fact carrying contraband ammunition, which
was banned by the German blockade and German officials had issued warnings, but the outrage
when this passenger ship was sunk was enormous.
And in fact, German celebration of this event in propaganda that we'll discuss more in a
later lecture made the public relations effect internationally even worse.
Outcry was heightened again with a sinking of the British liner Arabic on August 19th,
1915, again off the coast of Ireland.
And American firm protests forced Germany to alter its policy in September of 1915 and
simply suspend this unrestricted submarine warfare, disgusted with what he saw as the
Germany's official meekness Admiral Tirpitz resigned.
Nonetheless, Germany felt itself forced to return to unrestricted submarine warfare.
On January 1917, in a calculated risk, a gamble, resembling in many ways the Schlieffen
Plan with the full awareness of the hazards involved, German leadership turned back again
to unrestricted submarine warfare at the insistence of Germany's war dictators, Generals Hindenburg
and Ludendorff.
Submarines were at the very heart of this gamble because German military planners had
poured through shipping figures and analyzed Great Britain's economic needs.
They were certain that even though submarine warfare would likely bring America into the
war, they thought that Britain could be strangled economically before this ultimately had a
decisive result.
Submarines in other words were expected to choke off Britain in about five to six months
well before the Americans arrived.
On February 1, 1917, Germany declared unrestricted submarine warfare.
And as many German planners had already taken into account, the United States entered the
war against Germany on April 6, 1917 as a result of outrages of the variety earlier discussed.
German experts had estimated that sinking 600,000 tons per month of shipping would strangle
Britain and during the first months this actually seemed to be working.
British planners were tremendously worried.
In the spring of 1917, only one month's grain reserves were left in Great Britain and a quarter
of the ships were being sunk.
Their anxiety was high.
As it turns out, the anxiety was probably a little bit heightened or exaggerated because
as it turns out, careful rationing and planning was able to obviate the worst of these bottlenecks.
And also, a simple change in organization, as it turns out, of how shipping was set to
sea could make a tremendous difference.
On April of 1917, the civilian leader, the prime minister of Great Britain, David Lloyd
George, insisted, in many cases overruling the received wisdom of the naval authorities,
on the use of the so-called convoy system.
A convoy simply meant not allowing ships to sort of trickle across the sea lanes alone
in the hope of evading German submarines, but instead organizing them into packs.
Organizing them into larger groups called convoys that then would be protected by battleships
or special cruisers that were actually devoted to the task of eliminating submarines should
they attack.
And these turned out to be tremendously effective.
The convoys by summer of 1917 had reduced the shipping losses to only one percent of
the entire bulk of shipping that was being sent across the seas.
So ultimately, the submarines, as it turns out, had failed in their promise.
And this gamble, the gamble of unrestricted submarine warfare, taken in full awareness
that neutral opinion, and in particular American opinion, would be so outraged at what was
seen as a barbaric German weapon, had misfired, had miscalculated entirely.
The Germans, for their part, argued that the submarine warfare was but a response to British
economic warfare and the suffering that imposed upon Germany's civilian population as well.
We had already mentioned in an earlier lecture the extent to which technology itself could
create new moralities.
In the case of submarine warfare, the submarines were simply, as experts argued, unable to
follow the earlier conventions of warning ships before they were sunk.
The submarine itself was tremendously vulnerable if one of these ships turned out to be a decoy
that was armed and able to fire back at the submarines.
The result was that in what was announced as a new morality dictated by the technology
itself, submarines would sink merchant ships without warning.
And in terms of propaganda, the German submarine warfare was held up by the Allies as an example
of barbarity far exceeding that of the far slower and, in many ways, much subtler economic
blockade.
Finally, it needs to be noted that the very phenomenon of navies being cooped up and not
sallying forth into those enormous apocalyptic engagements that had been expected at the
start of the war also created what one might call a tinderbox, a potentially explosive
revolutionary situation in the ports of those navies where sailors were essentially left
idle for great stretches of time.
And in particular, the confinement of the German and the Russian Navy, which also was
bottled up in its ports, had tremendously negative effects on crews that were left without
work in the ports.
Their harsh naval discipline could produce disaffection on the part of the troops.
Also the drawing off of especially talented German officers from the battleships and instead
stationing them with the submarines meant that, in many cases, some of the most talented
leadership was taken away and instead heavy-handed authoritarians were left in charge of the
fleet.
The results of this sort of claustrophobia of being bottled up in port included things
like the mutiny in the German fleet in August of 1917, which portended far greater mutinies
to follow in the last stages of the war, and later participation of both German and Russian
sailors in larger revolutions, to a great extent, looked back to this frustrating inactivity
during the course of the war.
If the naval war and its worldwide scope already suggested a lot to us about the geographic
totality of the war, we'll explore this theme further in our next lecture about the global
nature of the First World War.
