Lecture 20 Propaganda War
In this lecture, we'll be examining the fascinating topic of propaganda war.
That's to say not actual combat on the battlefield,
but rather the battle of beliefs, of ideas.
Propaganda, defined as the politically instrumentalized attempt to form people's attitudes and thoughts,
certainly grew to tremendous importance in a time of total war.
In total war, hearts and minds themselves would be a key strategic resource,
just like guns, ships, or industrial production.
In this lecture, we'll examine the varying propaganda styles and approaches of the combatant powers.
We'll see their increasing sophistication as they moved away from narrow censorship
to far more effective propagation of entire organized media campaigns.
We'll see how paradoxically governments were slow to understand the potential value of propaganda
that came not from above, but from below, what we might call spontaneous propaganda from the populace itself.
We'll examine how such spontaneous inner propaganda is part of what some historians have called a larger war culture.
Voluntary propaganda in this war culture could take on the form of rumors, myths, common stereotypes of the enemy,
all of which could assume great psychological significance.
This lecture will also critically evaluate a debate that really is still going on
about how important propaganda really was to the outcome of key moments in the war as a whole.
First of all, we have to address the fascinating phenomenon itself of propaganda.
It's a satisfying one to undertake for our course because propaganda as a topic is one of those moments
where so many of the major themes of this course come together.
We've accented the role of ideology.
That certainly plays a great role in the mobilization of belief and of ideas in the propaganda war.
Another of our themes is the totality of the conflict and certainly the reaching out to form people's beliefs
and their minds themselves, that certainly speaks to the totality of war.
Another one of our major themes, you'll recall, are the multiplicity of meanings assigned to the war
and that's precisely what one or another form of propaganda sought to do to convince people
that this is how the war is to be understood and this is how your participation in it has meaning.
And finally, we also have examined the psychological phenomenon of the eagerness with which the war was met
and that certainly shows up in the spontaneous propaganda we'll be discussing.
Propaganda itself is a term with fascinating origins.
It originally has a religious meaning coming from the Age of the Reformation and the Counter-Reformation.
In prior centuries, propaganda was the term that implied propagating the faith, the spread of belief.
And certainly, though in a more secular sense, propaganda, as we'll see in today's lecture,
certainly involved ideology.
It makes clear that the common assumption that the First World War had less ideological content than other modern wars
is unwarranted and indeed, there was a lot of ideological content.
Paradoxically, the warring powers themselves only slowly came to understand
how to mobilize the propaganda resources at their disposal.
Today, there are truisms in the study of propaganda, which are so self-evident as to be obvious,
but they can be usefully thought about in this context nonetheless.
The most effective propaganda is not that which tries to create beliefs where they haven't existed before,
but instead the most effective propaganda builds on established opinions.
The most effective propaganda builds on what spontaneously is believed or felt in the group of people that one is seeking to influence.
So beyond censorship or the restriction of news, states would only slowly begin to, with ever more art and organization,
craft what one might call positive propaganda campaigns,
building on a certain spontaneous enthusiasm that was there before.
Most immediately, in a very conservative way, all of the warring powers were very concerned about censorship,
in particular, aiming to keep from the populations under their control bad news,
or news that might threaten the cohesion of the war effort.
Censorship was crucial, and one just needs to think of a classic phrase which indeed came to be the title
of probably the most influential piece of literature to grow out of the First World War,
the Eric Maria remarks novel All Quiet on the Western Front, which had an ironic meaning.
The classic phrase All Quiet on the Western Front, from which the title of the novel was taken,
came from those terse dispatches of the German High Command as to what was going on on the Western Front,
and it obscured the horrors, the reality of trench warfare under the phrase of
All Quiet on the Western Front as if nothing had changed, as if all was normal.
Soon, however, in order to mobilize for total war and to meet its ever-growing demands,
a positive motivating message would become crucial, beyond simply hiding information or obscuring it.
Propaganda has undergone a transformation in how historians have sought to analyze the phenomenon in the last years.
Earlier, and this is still most certainly largely the case in how the word popularly is used,
propaganda often is understood and was understood earlier as implying above all the top-down manipulation of opinions by elites.
That's to say, a devious government setting out through lies and falsehoods to reshape and manipulate the opinion of an innocent populace at large.
Scholarship of late has tried to rethink the relationship between propaganda, governments, and populations at large,
and one tremendously provocative way of thinking about this newly conceived relationship comes from the French historians,
Stéphane, Edouard Rousseau, and Annette Becker, French historians who have proposed, maybe not even speaking of propaganda anymore,
but instead talking about war culture, by which they mean the process through which societies propagandize themselves,
and rather than having ideas or notions imposed upon them from above by devious manipulative elites.
Instead, through a social process that could be considered a horizontal phenomenon, not a vertical one,
but a horizontal phenomenon come to take on and reinforce within themselves beliefs that are of use to the war effort.
Let's examine some of these provocative ideas by looking more closely at varieties of propaganda as they showed up on all of the warring sides within the war.
Let's begin with official propaganda and how governments presented at first the message of what the war was all about.
At the start of the war, and with tremendous effect, as we've seen in an earlier lecture about the August madness of 1914
and the self-mobilization of all of the European great powers for the war, all warring sides proclaimed this to be a war of defense,
a holy war of the nation against the threat of outside powers.
And I think that it goes a certainly significant distance towards starting to explain for us some of those scenes of jubilation and celebration
to keep in mind the central truth that Europeans as they marched off to war felt that they were engaged in a war of defense.
But over the long term, it would be essential to motivate the home front to a total exertion of effort, such as required by total war,
by offering yet further reasons, a greater and more detailed articulation about what this war was all about.
Beyond that, in the battle for neutral opinion that we discussed in an earlier lecture about the global context of the war,
it was also true that through one's interpretation of the war, through one's propaganda, neutral opinion could be swayed.
International sympathies could be won or lost.
At the same time, it was true that a certain inequality obtained in this propaganda war.
There were national differences involved in the challenges that were faced by individual powers in making the case to their own populations,
as well as other populations and neutral countries as to what the war was about.
Let's consider, just to get a handle on this phenomenon, some of the cases that were of special importance.
In France, the case was once again fairly straightforward, as with French war aims.
The defense of national territory was a holy duty.
France had been invaded, France needed to be defended against the hereditary German enemy.
This was a fundamental grounding theme and certainly was present throughout French propaganda.
In Britain, by contrast, the national interest, the protection of a European balance of power
so that Germany would not dominate the channel and thus be in a position to threaten Britain's earlier splendid isolation,
these were somewhat bloodless concepts and instead they needed to be explained or couched or framed in terms of larger political principles and idealism.
The defense of international law, the rights of small nations like Belgium, the holiest principles of civilization,
German propaganda, for its part, had also claimed that the war was a war of defense.
It had argued that Germany had, in the years before 1914, increasingly been surrounded in devious and threatening ways by jealous great powers,
which aimed to encircle Germany and to choke off this young rising dynamic power.
Certainly, many Germans felt that this was an accurate presentation of their own existential state,
but over the longer haul, after the initial clashes of the war, when Germany stood in northern France and in Belgium
or had occupied vast territories in the Russian Empire, German propaganda faced serious internal weaknesses.
It was difficult to argue for a war of defense when your armies were standing on enemy territory while your own was unoccupied.
Further, the increasing articulation of war aims was also a dangerous one in terms of German self-understanding and propaganda,
and that's one reason why in the first years of the war, before the generals Hindenburg and Ludendorff established their far more aggressive military dictatorship,
there was a certain unwillingness to tolerate open discussion of war aims within Germany itself,
and certain wilder expressions of expansionist sentiment were censored.
The problem lay in this fact that presenting ever larger shopping lists of areas that one wanted to annex,
or strategic territories that would belong to one in the future, ultimately could break down the conviction of a defensive war,
even as it might certainly be alluring to certain segments in society.
At the same time, the threat was the largest, most significant one within Germany of breaking down the Burgfried
and that internal truce that was so essential to the fighting of this total war.
To state a crucial existential fact about the reality of the propaganda challenge for the great multi-ethnic, multinational, conservative,
and authoritarian empires of Austria, Hungary, and Russia, they simply could not, without peril, without great risk to their own sense of imperial cohesion,
frame their appeals in national terms.
For Russian propaganda to present this as a patriotic Russian war was certainly dangerous.
What of the other minority groups that were being mustered into the fighting forces?
What of the Poles? What of the Baltic peoples?
Similarly, in the case of Austria-Hungary, to present this as an Austrian war, or a Hungarian mobilization,
certainly could lead to disaffection among the many other minorities of that empire.
Over time, on all of the warring sides, propaganda would grow in sophistication as the war progressed,
with more targeted messages, with coordination across different media of one message.
Poster campaigns, which borrowed a lot from advertising techniques and that later would be brought to a high pitch of sophistication
by American propagandists, as we'll be discussing later when we note American involvement in the war,
as well as film campaigns were systematically deployed to present a propaganda message.
In the German case, an entire film company, the UFA, was produced for precisely these purposes
and represented in some sense the start of a dynamic German film industry, which produced classics after the war in the 1920s.
Propaganda imagery is also a fascinating topic.
Women played a very important role in that imagery. It was very much gendered in terms of its appeals in often very complex ways.
Women were universally used in propaganda to symbolize the home country and the home front,
whether in the figure of the mother of the family, or the wife, or another female relative at home who needed to be defended,
or perhaps in allegorical representations of France, or of Great Britain, or of Germany, or of Mother Russia,
or in symbolic representations of the principle of justice, or the principle of a righteous peace.
At the same time, hearkening back to the religious origins of the word propaganda itself,
religion also played a role in propaganda imagery.
It could be deployed to portray the war as a crusade against evil,
or to offer consolation for sacrifices by identifying it with the doctrines of Christian theology.
At the same time, as we've already noted in the past, the messages of bloodthirsty propaganda
could often only, with great difficulty, be reconciled with the traditional Christian messages of peace and charity.
Moreover, it's fascinating to observe a particular dynamic that really set German propaganda off from that of other powers.
In the Competition for Effective Propaganda, German propaganda in particular often backfired catastrophically.
I want to give just a few examples of this that are very suggestive.
One of them was one of these initial enthusiastic poems of the war.
It was called The Hymn of Hate, The Hymn of Hate Against England.
It was written by a German Jewish writer, Ernst Lissauer.
The Hymn of Hate was directed against Britain in particular.
It was felt that Britain had played a treacherous role by not making clear that it would enter the war,
even though this is something German policymakers certainly should have understood well before 1914,
and also because of the British role in the economic blockade, which was choking the German home front.
The Hymn of Hate is a ludicrous piece of poetry.
It talks about all Germans being united in one hatred against Britain.
Hate of the heart and hate of the hand, hate by sea and hate by land.
It goes on and on, really a hymn to hate.
Well, this piece of propaganda turned into a disaster because it didn't even need to be mocked by Allied propagandists.
They simply needed to reprint it as an example of bloodthirsty nonsense.
Another example of this sort of catastrophic backfiring came after the sinking in 1915
of the liner Lusitania with many civilian casualties.
Even though this was a private initiative, its result was disastrous.
In Germany, a commemorative medal was struck of the event itself, and it's really a gruesome creation.
On one side, it shows the Lusitania going down under the waves.
On the other side, it shows death himself selling tickets to unwary Allied customers
or travelers who are letting themselves in for a ride to perdition.
This sort of thing, once again, simply needed to be reproduced and shown as an example that was soon decried.
More generally, German propaganda stressed less inspiring themes than that of Allied propaganda,
themes of endurance and just holding out.
In all propaganda, however, there were certain unifying themes, the key concepts of what one was fighting for,
civilization and culture.
At the same time, if one was engaged in a crusade for civilization or culture,
the enemy was increasingly dehumanized in propaganda, often in racialized terms,
which are surprising to an audience of contemporary times to think of Europeans as seeing themselves as distinct races
rather than all being Caucasian or another designation, but increasingly to be German or to be French
or to be British was thought of in terms quite distinct from that of the enemy.
The terms of civilization and culture thus took on great significance in identifying oneself against that demonized enemy.
In German rhetoric, this was turned into an entire world philosophy.
German culture or culture was supposedly completely juxtaposed with or opposed to the concept of civilization.
Now, this is a little bit mysterious to English-speaking audiences because we use the words culture and civilization as synonymous,
but supposedly German culture was something organic, rooted, idealistic and real,
as opposed to the Anglo-Saxon and French civilization, which was technological, artificial, commercial and deeply inauthentic.
It was argued that the Germans were a people of heroes fighting against the forces of commercialization and capitalism,
especially the trader people, the British, as the German economist Werner Zombart argued.
At the same time, Allied propaganda would in turn present Germans as the enemies of culture and civilization,
as barbarians or as Huns, which unfortunately from the German perspective was actually not a term that was invented,
but borrowed from a speech by Kaiser Wilhelm II in which he'd urged his soldiers to be as fearless as Huns
in one of the colonial conflicts of previous years.
And in making the case that the Germans were barbaric, they certainly used many ample instances of Belgian atrocities,
the burning of Louvain, as well as fabricated stories of German cruelties.
On all sides, professors and academics and teachers joined in a furious debate concerning culture, who had it and who was the enemy of that culture.
Just to add another disastrous example of German improvisation in this regard, in October of 1914 an entire manifesto
signed by over 90 German intellectuals was published, which was called a Manifesto to the World of Culture,
which denied German atrocities, which argued that Germany was fighting a war of self-defense,
and which further, and this was especially damaging to public opinion, identified German culture,
the great achievements of German writers and German composers with militarism of the Prussian variety,
arguing that these were in an inextricable relationship with one another.
This was ultimately to have very bad effects on public relations in neutral countries,
as German intellectuals were identifying themselves with military values.
The initiator of this piece of propaganda was, as it turns out, a German Jewish writer,
who felt very deeply that he wanted to participate in this way in patriotic mobilization.
And these German Jewish cases, even though they represented a small portion of a far larger mobilization
of German society, are especially poignant, because here you had the very enthusiastic self-identification
of German Jewish patriots with a national cause, many of whom later would be hounded and denounced as non-Germans
by the Nazis, as was the case of the author of this manifesto as well.
Images of the enemy would be sharpened into overwhelmingly negative stereotypes,
which ultimately cut off even the possibility of compromise in a coming piece.
Kaiser Bill, as Kaiser Wilhelm II was known to the Allies, was demonized in Allied propaganda
paradoxically at precisely the time when he was being sidelined and increasingly irrelevant
in the face of the German military dictatorship.
Images of the enemy also led to the scapegoating of foreigners in one's midst, including a hysterical fear
of alleged spies, so that German stores were looted in Britain and aliens interned on the Isle of Man,
but this same pattern of harassment and internment took place in all of the warring countries.
We need to conclude with an examination of the spontaneous propaganda and war culture
that's being accented by newer research.
The war obviously unleashed a spontaneous upwelling of profound sentiment.
You'll recall that more than one million war poems, most of them of really horrendous quality,
were written in the first months of the war in Germany, not ordered by the government, but spontaneously produced.
Rumors also circulated with tremendous speed and could function as effective propaganda.
We've talked already about stories proliferating about German atrocities on the western front,
many of them with bases in fact.
Rumors on the eastern front concerned scorched earth policies and fears of entire populations being deported,
also with elements of truth.
At the same time, propaganda could also lift the spirits of discouraged populations,
at times when the fortunes of the allies were not going well,
rumors might circulate as they did in Great Britain of reinforcements that were arriving to tip the balance.
There was a story of a secret shipment of Russian troops arriving in Scotland, in Aberdeen,
with, as the phrase went, snow on their boots.
So the rumor went they would be placed into the fight on the western front,
and thus hopes for victory were reinforced, even though it turns out that this had no basis in fact at all.
Social pressure represented an aspect of this spontaneous propaganda and self-mobilization of a society.
And in a particularly eloquent, though certainly not unproblematic example of this sort of self-mobilization,
was the instance in Britain of young women fanning out through the streets of British cities looking for young men not in uniform.
These young women, upon encountering such a young man, would pin a white feather to his suit or through his buttonhole
as a badge of this young man being condemned as a slacker.
This was a mockery of the manhood of someone who was not in uniform,
and was intended as a very vivid expression of social disapproval at someone who was not participating.
Over time, such instances of trying to put social pressure on those who were not conforming to expectations
could really backfire and led to a sharp reaction against precisely this sort of activism,
because there were cases where a soldier on leave from the front who had no longer to be wearing his uniform
had walked out into the street and precisely someone might be targeted for this sort of abuse.
At the same time, there were also instances of shell-shocked soldiers who had been invalided out of the service
or who had been wounded otherwise being denounced as slackers
when indeed ultimately they had contributed more than their fair share.
The reaction against this sort of activism on the part of young women
showed that even as women's roles were changing, something we'll be discussing in more detail in coming lectures,
there nonetheless were still social sanctions that were negotiating what was an appropriate role and what was not.
War culture is a phenomenon that has been described by historians today
to denote that fervor with which the war was participated in,
with dynamics that were quite distinct from those of official manipulation ordered from above.
Very clearly, there could be a confluence of official propaganda and this sort of impulse from below,
and the historians I'd earlier mentioned, Edouane Rousseau and Becker,
are so suspicious of the problematic use of the word propaganda
for this sort of self-mobilization that they propose only speaking of propaganda in quotation marks
to do justice to the historical reality.
Very clearly, older social forms could flow into a larger self-mobilization.
Older forms of folk art, for instance, were in a real sense enlisted into the battle.
A traditional French kind of woodcut called the Image d'Epinale,
showing heroic French soldiers or the idyllic France of nationalist longing,
were deployed as modern propaganda.
And similarly, the traditional Russian woodcut, the Luboc,
connected to older customs and older ways of a society.
In a similar process of trivialization,
all sorts of knickknacks and souvenirs sought to domesticate the ferocity of the war
by rendering them in forms that were familiar or at least less threatening.
Heroes in Germany like Hindenburg or Ludendorff,
and there were certainly equivalents in the other countries,
would be celebrated with Hindenburg ashtrays or vases or postcards.
And indeed, a vast wooden statue or idyll of Hindenburg was set up in Berlin
and ordinary civilians could buy nails, depending on how much they had contributed to war bonds,
in order to hammer into this wooden idyll,
so that over time, in a very eloquent symbolic rendering,
this wooden idyll would become clad in sort of sheathed in metal
that represented the projection of an entire nation's desires and hopes.
One thing is clear, the massive proliferation of such objects, such souvenirs and trivialities
suggests in part the eagerness of an audience for this kind of expression,
and yet disillusionment would follow.
With growing war weariness, a distrust of propaganda and authority would set in.
For front soldiers, it was often a radical disjuncture
between what they read in propaganda from the home front
and what they had lived in the trenches, a reality that was obscured.
Soldiers' morale could be affected by communication with the home front as well
and hearing of the sufferings there.
Though some soldiers would often resent what they perceived as the unthinking jingoism on the home front that persisted.
Propaganda would be increasingly mocked by such disillusioned soldiers as eye-wash
or, in the French phrase, head-stuffing.
And indeed, it's been argued that heroic language itself increasingly became discredited.
In a paradox, this disbelief with which propaganda was met
would soon extend to cases of true atrocity, such as those in Belgium.
In conclusion, we might ask, what was the ultimate effect of propaganda?
Well, after the war, one man in particular, Adolf Hitler,
would grow convinced that Germany's poor propaganda had lost the war
and he would devote himself, in the lead-up to and within World War II itself,
to perfecting propaganda as a weapon.
In fact, historians often argue that it's not so much that Germany's propaganda
was intrinsically worse in terms of quality, but that Germany's propaganda
had a harder case to make, given the realities of its position and its aims in the war.
Paradoxically, the democratic allies had an advantage in harnessing popular energies
because democracy, as a way of government, had already started to create social cohesions.
The notion of war culture, thus, as proposed to us in current scholarship
is a very valuable insight, because it brings to the surface something that afterwards
disillusioned participants later wish to forget.
They had showed wartime enthusiasm, at least at the start,
and the participation they had felt had been real.
In conclusion, now that we've examined the attempt to influence the home front,
we'll be turning in our next lecture to examine the reality of endurance and stress
in the civilian population.
Thank you.
