Lecture 21 Endurance and Stress on the Home Front
In this lecture, we'll be examining a key aspect of the First World War, which really
speaks to its identity as a total war, as we've been describing in earlier lectures,
the endurance and stress on the home front as a phenomenon.
The home fronts in all of the warring countries reacted to the privation, the shortages, rationing,
surveillance and government control with a variety of reactions, both endurance as well
as signs of growing stress, which we'll outline in this lecture.
In particular, hunger confronted the German population in 1916 to 1917 very sharply as
a result of the British naval blockade, a form of economic warfare.
In all of the warring countries, as masses of women entered war industry factories, as
children experienced militarized educations, as well as increased independence without
adult supervision, social roles and moralities were felt by many people to be buckling or
in the process of being transformed.
In this context, religious institutions, churches, would often seek to reinforce social stability
and underwrite the spiritual war effort.
At the same time, the home front itself could experience a disconnect from the experience
of the troops in the trenches.
This could often drive a wedge between men and women, civilians and soldiers, but another
symptom of societies under strain.
And as a byproduct of that enormous strain, it was also often the case that minorities
within warring societies could be scapegoated, and we'll examine key instances of this as
well as the evidence of rising antisemitism in Germany itself.
First let's consider physical life on the home front.
It was most certainly part of the logic of total war, an all-encompassing conflict that
civilians would be targets as well as participants in the larger war effort.
Civilian life on the home front showed evidence of how civilians were being targeted and suffered
in this war in the profound changes that their lives went through as well as the privations
that they experienced.
A key example of this civilian suffering and the effect upon civilian life of total war
was the imposition of the blockade on the central powers by Great Britain.
Britain's imposition of the naval blockade was a very important form of economic war,
and we already have discussed some of the ways in which this worked in terms of naval
warfare.
After 1915, as the blockade really started to bite on Germany's economy, the economic
balance of power shifted to the Allies because of this fundamental fact.
The Allies had access to overseas trade, to trade with the United States and other neutral
countries, something that the central powers, and in particular Germany, with its earlier
vibrant economy, now was without.
And increasingly, the vulnerabilities of Germany's position were revealed.
Before the war, Germany had imported about 20% to 30% of its food supplies, and these
imports were now cut off.
Likewise, other pressures were at work in terms of total war on Germany's economy that
further exacerbated these problems, the drafting of farmers to fight in the war, the requisitioning
of horses, which were essential for the agricultural economy, as well as other factors led to a
dislocation of agriculture in Germany producing food shortages.
And in our earlier lecture on wartime states and the mobilization by the government of
economies, we had noted in the German case, civilian needs tended to be shortchanged at
the expense of producing ever more for the war economy in terms of material and war industry
and munitions.
It was especially the case in Germany as well that the weaknesses, the liabilities that
had been revealed through the economic blockade of Germany had to be made good through the
use of technology.
And in our earlier lecture on the role of technology, we had talked about the phenomenon
of Erzats or substitutes, which were intended to make good some of these losses.
That's to say the ability to fix nitrate from the air in the process that had been pioneered
by the German chemist Fritz Haber, also essential for the production of agricultural fertilizer
as well as munitions. We had also seen the way in which substitutes increasingly played
a role in the food supply so that, for instance, a product called k-bread or war bread increasingly
was substituted for earlier German forms of bread. This was a far rougher substance
with potato meal substituted for wheat. And many people felt that this was a very key
symbol of the privations that they were undergoing. Recently, on a visit to the German Historical
Museum in Berlin, I had the opportunity to see behind glass actually a piece of this
wartime bread, and it certainly looked as if it was about in the same state as it had
been in the war itself, largely indigestible. At the same time, as people felt this to be
a keen privation, worse was yet in store. Because in the harsh winter of 1916 to 1917, blockaded
Germany experienced a further ratcheting up of its misery when the potato crop had failed.
The result then was something that many Germans remembered for decades afterwards with a sense
of horror, the so-called turnip winter of 1916 to 1917. With the potato crop failed,
the unappetizing root vegetable, the turnip, became a staple food. Earlier this had largely
been used as feed for livestock, so there was certainly a sense that this was part of
a significant change taking place during the pressure of war itself. It now became common
to have patriotic urgings from the government that one used the turnip creatively to stand
in for all of the earlier foods that people had enjoyed, and soon experiments were being
undertaken not very successful as it turns out to produce turnip coffee, turnip hamburgers,
turnip pudding, turnip dumplings, anything one could imagine now produced with a staple
crop. Food supplies were massively curtailed within Germany, and the caloric intake which
already had suffered as a result of wartime privations was cut even further. Even middle
class people who had prided themselves on their economic independence further were now
standing in lines at the soup kitchens along with the poor. The caloric intake cuts were
significant, and there's one particular statistic that for me really sums this up. According
to estimates of the time, while the average German on the home front had consumed in 1916
in the second year of the war about 1,350 calories daily, that number plummeted in 1917
to about 1,000. And if you look at current dietary recommendations in the United States
for instance today, you'll see that 2,000 calories a day is really what's recommended
for an active person. For example, somebody working in the munitions factories of the
home front in Germany at the time. So we're talking here essentially about a near starvation
diet of half the recommended calories, 1,000 per day. This has produced a large historical
debate which we had hinted at in earlier lectures concerning how many civilians died as a result
of hunger and the disease associated with that hunger as a result of the British blockade.
This is still very much the subject of vigorous historical debate. Some historians tend to
downplay the results of this economic warfare arguing that those who unfortunately were
the victims of the greatest cuts in terms of caloric intake and nutritional values were
those who already the most vulnerable in society and in some sense this didn't affect the largest
outcome of the war in some strategic sense. Other historians argue that given the totality
of the war, even vulnerable people being targeted in this economic warfare certainly would in
the long run have an effect. Some historians cite a figure of 750,000 starvation deaths
or hunger disease related deaths in Germany at the time. This figure is contentious because
it's obviously very difficult to parcel out as it were neatly or conclusively those deaths
that resulted from starvation or associated diseases from the general privation, the general
suffering of war itself. What's clear is that civilian mortality within Germany rose dramatically.
These statistics in themselves are stunning. If that figure of three quarters of a million
dead in Germany as a result of the blockade is true, that would mean that German civilian
deaths in World War I as a result of the blockade were larger than the deaths in the second
World War on the German home front as a result of the air war and strategic bombing. What's
also very difficult to exactly quantify in a sense or pin down exactly is nonetheless
the sense that some contemporaries had at the time and expressed afterwards of the feeling
that the value of human life or the perceptions of the value of human life was changing as
a result of wartime suffering itself. In this context of economic war within Germany
and the civilian suffering and civilian mortality rising, there are haunting hints that are
being explored in some of the most recent research that in Germany during the war in
mental asylums, something amounting to passive euthanasia may have been taking place through
purposeful neglect of those who were most certainly the most vulnerable in German society.
Some estimates suggest that about 70,000 inmates in mental asylums and other medical institutions
may have died as a result of this neglect and lessened diets as well. It's very clear
that economic life in all of the competent societies was changing as a result of the
privations on the home front and this immense economic pressure that was taking place as
well. We've already mentioned in an earlier lecture that inflation became a universal
phenomenon in the warring countries as it was used by governments quite deliberately
as a way of deferring the costs of the war for later, largely in the expectation that
the defeated enemy side would end up paying. The result of this inflation was quite severe
for ordinary civilians. In France, prices roughly doubled during the course of the war.
Most workers' wages did not entirely keep pace with inflation, though we've mentioned
that valued industrial workers had their salaries more in line with the rising prices. Britain
was an exception in this regard. Workers' wages seemed to keep pace with inflation better.
In terms of ordinary experience of civilians, now standing in line to buy rationed food
became a common feature of life on the home front and in these cues and these long lines
waiting for food, discontent and rumors could certainly circulate and could lead to disturbances
and riots on occasion as well. One might mention as well that for the women who were increasingly
being encouraged to take on new roles in the factories of war production, having also to
stand in line during their lunch hours or after work in order to get food for their families
represented a double burden and added imposition in terms of the privations of life on the home
front. The unavoidable nature of the black market also tended to erode ordinary civilians'
confidence in authority itself. In its estimated in Germany by 1918 that maybe a third of all
food that was circulating in the economy was being sold on the black market. The common
figure of the profiteer, the wartime black market salesman or for that matter the munitions
producer who was making huge profits was seen as an increasingly hateful figure but one
who was needed to keep this war economy humming. Private initiative could also take over as
civilians would spread out to the countryside to find food there as well. There was even
a word coined for this in German called hamstern, that's to say going out like a hamster and
trying to find food where one could. This could lead to clashes with farmers who didn't enjoy
people privately coming in and stripping their fields bare. Rural areas while they were often
spared the food shortages of the cities nonetheless experienced the loss of manpower as farmers
in particular were recruited to serve in the armies and women were expected to take their
place. The regimentation of the war effort on the home front became part of ordinary life.
Ordinary people were subject to increasingly intense conscription, pressure and surveillance
by their governments. The skilled industrial worker was often valued and exempted from
service at the front while farmers seen as sort of the backbone of the vigor of the nation
were conscripted for their armies. Even as valuable industrial workers gained bargaining
power through their importance, attempts continued to militarize their service and to stop them
from changing positions or seeking out better wages where they might be offered to them.
In this context, the trade unions took on a very interesting new role. The increasingly
formal role that unions had in coordinating the war economy cooperating with governments
was fraught with paradox. Were they winning a new kind of social acceptance and political
role or were they on the contrary, as many union laborers started to worry, were they
being domesticated and tied into the war economy in a way that wouldn't allow them to effectively
represent their membership. Due, however, to the growing influence and role of the unions,
they certainly took on new membership during the war itself. We've also mentioned in an
earlier lecture the extent to which the government's new perceived role of providing for those
who were left behind by the soldiers, their families and the payments that were then paid
out as subsidies to these families or to wives represented in the long run the laying of
a basis for the welfare state. The churches played a very interesting and in many senses
equivocal role in the attempt to regiment and to firm up the conviction of the home
front that the war that was being fought was just. Certainly there were sermons preached
from the churches of many denominations urging endurance, urging holding out to the last
and what was a just struggle. There were certainly bloodthirstier sermons as well urging the
annihilation of the enemy. The churches institutionalized as they were, part of government structures
as they were in many European societies also represented part of the war effort and this
was made very vividly clear in the role of chaplains in the armed forces as well. We
want to turn to a fascinating and very important aspect of this increased mobilization of the
home front changed roles of women in particular. Women were urged in this new situation of
total war to take on a more active role, a challenge that indeed was very often eagerly
accepted. Just before the war there had been waves in western Europe of suffragette activism
and protests and suffragettes were protesters and activists who were urging that women be
given the vote and finally a role in politics and a voice. This sort of activism and protest
ended all at once as the war erupted and leaders of the suffragette movements often saw war
work which they threw themselves into very often enthusiastically as opening the way
for a greater political role and the vote after the war. Women's roles in the workplace
also changed. Now it needs to be emphasized that women's work in industry and the factories
was not fundamentally new, not caused by the first world war. Women had certainly been
working in the factories during the industrial revolution of the 19th century and often paid
far less. But now women entered the munitions factories and harder, heavier labor in the
factories in great numbers and the influx of women into jobs that earlier were male preserves
was especially dramatic. This included positions like clerical posts. Before the first world
war the position of secretary, for instance, was seen as a man's job. Now it's stereotyped
as a woman's position and the result was that this transformation came during the first
world war itself. In Britain the number of women in banking, for instance, increased
more than sixfold. The number of women in other branches of commerce doubled. And other
statistics in this regard are especially striking. One figure that's suggested is
that within France, for instance, about 40% of the workforce was now female during the
course of the war. In Vienna about half of the metal workers in that center of production
were women as well. Women working in uniforms also were, this was a new site, trolley conductors
as police or as military auxiliaries. And this was a very eloquent statement about women's
participation in war itself. Women also were more conspicuous in heavy labor, including
in munitions factories and other heavy industry. In the Krupp armaments plants in Germany famed
for the monstrous guns that they were producing in 1918, 38% of the workers were women. And
this munitions work was certainly not without its dangers. This was shown by the case of
the so-called yellow canaries in Britain. They were sometimes also called canary girls.
These were young women whose skin was over time turning yellow because they were slowly
being poisoned by the chemicals that they were handling in the production of high explosives.
And certainly many of them later with their health problems or inability to bear children
as a result of this poisoning had sacrificed in the war effort. But these changes, the
entry of women into the workplace often led to friction with resentful men workers, even
though women continued to be paid less than the men's wages. There was anxiety about the
dilution of the workforce and this new role for women. The expectation that however reigned
was often shared by many women workers themselves was that employment, women's employment in
these factories and in these new roles would end with the war's conclusion. And indeed
that would often be the case as the war closed. Women would be fired and men returning from
the battlefield taken on. Nonetheless, important changes had taken place. Altered ideas of
what a woman's scope of activity would be, as well as changed manners and dress, all
of this representing a significant psychological alteration. In a dramatic fashion, women could
also play roles in espionage and resistance. An archetypal case here was out of the famed
exotic dancer Matahari, her real name was the less exotic Margaret Gertrude MacLeod,
who was shot by the French as a spy for the Germans in 1917, though it appears far more
equivocal about whether her activity really in fact amounted to much in terms of espionage.
More effectively, women in German-occupied northern France and Belgium did participate
in networks which smuggled Allied soldiers out of the country. And in a notorious case
later trumpeted by Allied propaganda as a German atrocity, in 1915 the Germans executed
one of these women, a British nurse by the name of Edith Cavell, in Belgium who had helped
more than 200 Allied soldiers escape to Holland. Children's lives were also affected. Increasing
demands for manpower meant that recruits in the armies included young men only coming
of age at the time, and sometimes the smallness of helmets that have survived from the First
World War fairly sends a shiver down one spine when one realizes it because of the youth
of the new recruits being drawn in. Even children too young to be recruited into the armies
were increasingly affected by the conflict. Primary school education was militarized in
subject after subject. Children were urged to join in raw materials collection drives,
and even in their free time, the maps which allowed them to follow the movements of the
armies or children's books or outdoor games of capture the flag tended to lure children
into psychological involvement in the war and perhaps preparation for later combat. Being
orphaned or losing a brother became a common destiny to many children, and historians still
debate today whether a broad social process of brutalization was taking place as war
seemed increasingly normal. Contemporaries did feel anxieties about how moral life and
roles were changing. Social structures tended to buckle under the pressure of war and earlier
certainties were eroded. A key example of this was the passing of traditional castes
or classes, with a decimation of European aristocracies that had been overrepresented
in the officer corps. Junior officers' death rates were often three times higher than
those of other soldiers as they led the feudal charges at the start of the war. Some social
Darwinists grew anxious about the war, producing a process of negative selection as they called
it as these elites were mowed down while those they considered less fit by contrast
were spared. Traditional morality was also under strain. The armies ran brothels or houses
of prostitution under medical supervision, afraid of explosions of venereal disease. In
occupied territories, fraternization was a common reality as relationships developed
between the occupiers and the occupied. Within society, economic burdens, which had a moral
dimension clearly were visibly not even. Earlier hierarchies were reversed when skilled
industrial workers fared better economically than some members of the middle class. And social
critics agonized over what they saw as symptoms of chaos, swearing by women at work, profligate
spending, and juvenile delinquency on the part of young people who no longer had fathers at home.
Outward changes in women's roles were often most visible in the middle class,
for other women had long been working. But in the middle class, changes in dress, living alone
rather than in the family context, smoking, as well as the free disposal of wages that were now
being earned were criticized by social critics. In many countries, women were at last granted the
right to vote as the war drew to a close or as the war ended, in part in recognition of women's
role in the conflict itself. Women gained the right to vote in January 1918 in Britain, in Germany
and Austria immediately after the war, and in 1920 in the United States due to the 19th Amendment.
We want, however, to turn now to a final example, unfortunately, of how the strains
of wartime society might express themselves. And this is the phenomenon of scapegoating.
With a certain grim inevitability, elements in society might be singled out as undermining the
cohesion and the health of a society under the strain of total war. Vulnerable elements within
a wartime society could be singled out and blamed for larger problems. Very often, this was summed
up under the concept of defeatism. The notion was that a society which had to gird itself
for the immense exertions of total war had within itself, so it was claimed, so it was charged in
this sort of conspiracy theory, elements that were working for defeat, quite literally, in order
to pursue nefarious purposes. It was often the case that groups which had ethnic relations or
relatives across borders were especially vulnerable to this sort of scapegoating. The Poles were a
key example of this because they were divided between the three empires of Austria, Hungary,
Germany, and Russia as an ethnic minority. Ethnic Germans in the Russian Empire could also be quite
vulnerable. Armenians who had populations both on the side of the border that was part of the
Russian Empire as well as Ottoman Turkey in the areas of the Caucasus and Anatolia could be
vulnerable in this regard as well. And in particular, the Jewish minorities of Europe, strewn as they
were throughout all of the countries involved in the fighting, could take on this role of being
scapegoats unfortunately as well. Poles were considered suspect from the start of the war,
especially in the German Eastern provinces, as a Russian invasion unfolded in 1914. And rumors
circulated which expressed these fears. Some German nationalists claimed that when the Russian
armies had first invaded, they had been helped in East Prussia and in other German borderlands
by Polish populations. One rumor suggested that Poles, even though they were subjects of the
German Empire, had somehow mysteriously been handed red cards by Russian spies that allowed them to
be spared the depredations of Russian invasion. In a parallel case, in the Russian Northwest
territories that would soon come under German invasion, ethnic Germans had been deported at
the start of the war, suspected of spying for the German side, even if their families had lived there
for generations before. In the Ottoman Empire in particular, the minority Armenian community
was considered suspect because as a Christian minority, it allegedly sympathized with the Russian
Empire across the border and planned to make common cause, so the conspiracy theory ran
against Ottoman rule. As the Russian army met disaster in the first two years of the war,
in the borderlands and as as Russian armies retreated, Jewish communities in particular
were persecuted and ethnically cleansed from areas under military control in forced evacuations.
A final and riveting case is one that I think really speaks very largely to
a theme that will continue to explore the breakdown of internal truces and a sense of
social cohesion. In earlier lectures, we've spoken a lot about the role played by patriotic German
Jews in the German war effort. They represented one percent of the German population roughly
and had felt that the war offered a chance to be fully integrated into a society that earlier
had subjected them to harassment and social discrimination. In Germany, however, as the
war unfolded, these hopes were to be cruelly disappointed. German anti-Semites demanded
and finally got from the German army a so-called Jewish census. The German word that was used
for this was in fact much uglier than it's rendered in English. The word was Juden Selung
or a count of the Jews. The anti-Semites charged that German Jews were not serving in the German
army in numbers proportionate to their presence in the German population at large and that they
were not fighting in the front lines. And the result was that in 1916, at long last, after this
sort of slander had been circulating that the Jews allegedly had been shirking their duties,
the army finally undertook a count of how many were fighting in the ranks and how many were
participating in the war effort more largely at the front. Though the census results showed,
in fact, that this was a lie and that German Jews were participating in exactly the proportion
that they represented in the German population at large, the results for some reason were not
announced publicly. And anti-Semites proclaimed loudly that this was evidence that their claims
had been true. It further fed their hateful rhetoric. And while in reality, 12,000 German Jews,
it's estimated, died in the war as a result of their conviction in the national cause,
one could discern a growing anti-Semitism and targeting of this vulnerable minority
within one's own midst. We've examined in today's lecture the pressures operating on
home fronts and wartime societies. In our next lecture, we'll be examining the voices that were
lifted in protest and in dissent against the war.
