Lecture 27, America's Entry into the War
In this lecture, we'll be examining a crucial event that truly changed the nature of the First World War.
And this was America's entry into the Great War in April of 1917.
One of the major themes of our course is the totality of war.
Well, the American entry in part would expand the war in a geographical sense,
but it would also expand it also in terms of giving it a larger ideological character
in tandem or in parallel with the Bolshevik seizure of power that we had discussed in our last lecture.
Worsening relations between Germany and the United States, in particular over submarine warfare,
as example by the sinking of the Lusitania in 1915,
and growing economic ties between the United States and the Allies,
with which it could trade more freely than with the blockaded central powers,
finally led to the United States joining the Allies as a so-called associated power.
And we'll see shortly that the term there was quite significant.
American President Woodrow Wilson articulated in this context of American entry into the war
a revolutionary set of war aims, Wilson's 14 points,
which aimed, as the phrase went, to make the world safe for democracy.
In this lecture, we'll follow America's past war.
Together with the revolutionary events in Russia of 1917,
American entry into the war combined to give the year 1917
a truly special significance as a world historical watershed.
And it's sometimes been argued that 1917 represents in a very real sense
the beginning of world history ideologically as well.
But first we need to examine the record of American neutrality.
In the first years of the war, America had stood aside from the war that was unfolding in Europe.
Many Americans, one clearly can imagine this,
of immigrant origins certainly felt grateful to be spared the bloodletting of the old world.
America was a country being transformed by a truly massive immigration at this time.
According to one estimate, 12 million immigrants had come to the United States since 1900.
Many of them coming from Europe, they had experiences of conscription
or of the increased militarization of their societies that they had left behind,
or poverty that made them glad of a new world to replace the old.
And the result was that many of precisely such immigrants
could feel either relief at having left the old world behind
or might still feel residual ties and sympathies to some of the old world political realities.
To give one example, German Americans, for instance, might feel little sympathy for the allies.
Irish Americans, whose nationalism likewise would stand in the way of sympathy for the British,
also urged American neutrality in simply staying out of old world conflicts.
Elites in the United States, both politically as well as culturally, however,
often felt affinity for the British and for the French
and a certain sense of being involved in terms of their sympathies in the Allied cause,
even if America was not involved directly.
Both the allies as well as the central powers would seek to win American sympathy through propaganda efforts
and truly vast sums had been invested in trying to sway public opinion for one side or another.
At the same time, when we consider the evolving picture of American neutrality
trade as well as economics were certainly shaping that reality.
American trade patterns had been crucially disrupted by the war at sea.
In principle, though America condemned both sides for violating the freedom of the seas,
that's to say the British for the blockade of the central powers
and their interdiction of materials that were considered war essential material,
as well as obviously the German torpedoing by submarine of neutral shipping,
even as the condemnations came down on both sides from America,
nonetheless at the same time trade with the allies was growing,
while trade with the central powers essentially had been choked off by the reality of the blockade.
And there's a very interesting phenomenon to observe here.
In terms of propaganda, in terms of public opinion,
German submarine warfare acquired a very special notoriety.
The readily imagined scenes of civilians being sent to the deep
by the sinking of passenger ships or of neutral shipping,
all of this had a certain immediacy and created a visceral reaction in many neutral populations.
By contrast, the British blockade of Germany,
which America also considered to be an illegal use of sea power
and obstruction of American free trade, was protested against.
But the blockade, as we've already discussed in its effects,
crucial as they were in the long-term grinding down of the civilian populations
and the economies of the central powers,
somehow was less immediate, less vivid than the German sinkings
of shipping on the part of the allies or neutral powers.
German sinkings of the Lusitania liner in May of 1915
and of the Sussex in March of 1916,
both of which had been carrying American passengers who went to their death,
provoked great protests and also started to lead to a mobilization
in an American society that was quite divided
on the question of whether America should maintain its neutrality
or whether it should move towards sympathy for one or another side in this conflict.
It led to the growth and mobilization of a so-called preparedness campaign in the United States.
This was to be seen among private citizens as well as parts of Congress,
which pressed for an expanded American army and navy to ready for war
if such should become necessary.
There were certainly prominent personalities who got involved in the preparedness campaign as well,
and Teddy Roosevelt in particular, the very picture of a vigorous
and often quite aggressive exponent of an American energetic foreign policy,
was among those who criticized the government relentlessly and ceaselessly
for what he saw as its lack of vigor.
At the same time, a national security league, as it was called,
was founded and encouraged in part by contributions from big business
in order to promote the ideas of a preparedness campaign.
Some young Americans indeed couldn't wait for American entry into the war
and instead volunteered to fight on the Allied side.
In particular, this took the form very romantically of the so-called Escadril Lafayette,
an American group of pilots who flew in tandem with the French Air Force
in a unit that had been named after the Machide Lafayette,
a French nobleman who had come to aid the American cause of the wars of independence in the 18th century.
And this unit in particular saw itself as spearheading American involvement in the First World War.
At the same time, Woodrow Wilson tried to calm tempers and to lessen the outrage
that was felt by many over the sinkings of neutral shipping and American losses
by trying to take a middle course in American public opinion.
He was keenly aware that public opinion was evolving and changing, and he sought to adjust to this.
He praised in particular the stance of, as the phrase went, being too proud to fight.
That's to say, there was a vigorous condemnation of what were seen as these depredations,
a vigorous condemnation of German U-boat or submarine warfare,
but at the same time it was argued that America was staying out of the war.
At the same time, and this is certainly part of the complicated reality of the time,
American production was booming in parallel with American trade.
American iron and steel production increased in this period by 76%, a truly remarkable figure.
Another remarkable figure that testifies to the way in which American trade and economics
was experiencing a boom as a result of the war industrialization.
From 1914 to 1917, American exports quadrupled rather than going down as a result of the war at sea.
At the same time, America was also shifting its identity in terms of international finance.
America earlier had to a great extent been trying to invite and had been dependent upon foreign investment.
America's identity had been that of a deader nation.
Now, during the war, American loans flowed across the Atlantic to subsidize the Allied war effort.
And America changed in this period from being a deter nation to a creditor nation.
By 1917, the Allies had borrowed the astronomical sum of $2 billion.
So while there were certainly many factors at work in determining American feelings towards the war
and understanding of American neutrality and whether this was a course that people agreed with,
it was certainly the case that American economic interests were increasingly tying the United States
to the Allied powers by preference, even as neutrality was the formal policy being announced.
It would be crucial in this context to take stock of the figure of Woodrow Wilson,
something of his background, something of his personality, because he truly was playing a significant role in these events.
Woodrow Wilson was a Virginian. He was an academic.
He was a president of Princeton University and went on to a meteoric political career
as a progressive politician in the Democratic Party and governor of New Jersey.
And he then became president of the United States in 1913.
One might note that Woodrow Wilson was the only American president so far to have a PhD, a doctorate,
and depending on your estimation of Woodrow Wilson's historical role,
that's either an argument for or against having academics in the position of the chief executive.
But Woodrow Wilson was a truly striking personality who was marked by extraordinary confidence in his own providential calling.
Woodrow Wilson very seriously believed that in some sense in expressing his ideals,
in articulating a message and an American policy, he was in some sense embodying the will of the American nation at large.
And indeed, this conviction of his was reflected in his very characteristic rhetoric,
a rhetoric of noble ideals and moral fervor, a certain universalistic impetus to his ideological message.
In a very real sense, political historians have argued that Woodrow Wilson's very outsider status,
his lack of a grounding as a politician in a political machine,
not having come up through the ranks, but instead having jumped from an academic career to one in politics,
in some sense predisposed him to a very characteristic approach to politics.
And that was to not so much engage in the complicated backroom dealings that are so often a feature of the political process,
but instead again and again to appeal or try to appeal directly to the people at large,
to seek to convince public opinion, if necessary, speaking over the heads of political leadership.
And this is a phenomenon that one would see repeatedly in the course of events that we'll be describing.
At first pursuing a neutral stance for the United States,
Woodrow Wilson also sought, what he saw as an American mission perhaps in this entire conflict,
to mediate between the warring powers after 1914,
and perhaps to craft a liberal peace which would not have victors,
but instead might represent a new beginning for a new kind of democratic world politics.
There was very strong sentiment as we've suggested already in a divided American populace
to keep the United States neutral, and indeed Woodrow Wilson, who later would lead America into the war,
had won re-election in 1916 under the slogan, he kept us out of the war.
Nonetheless, his repeated attempts at mediation, his repeated invitations to the warring sides
to come to the bargaining table, to negotiate were without success,
and indeed his last attempt at mediation in December of 1916 failed.
And then finally there came a key historical event that in some sense forced his hand.
Germany's declaration of unrestricted submarine warfare,
a return to a policy of unrestricted warfare on the seas against neutral shipping,
including American shipping, came in February of 1917 and forced a crisis.
German policymakers, as we've already suggested, were engaged in a gamble,
one that, if ill-advisedly, they at least took with open eyes.
Their conviction was, and the statistics that they had gathered,
mountains and mountains of statistical evidence suggested to them
that even though unrestricted submarine warfare probably would bring the United States into the war,
the American contribution to that war would come much later.
And it was hoped, and certainly believed at the time, that the gamble would pay off
because Britain in particular would be choked off by a sort of counter blockade
of submarine warfare before the Americans were mobilized in order to tip any sort of balance in the conflict.
This was a grievous miscalculation.
Events now very quickly pressed the United States towards war.
The United States broke diplomatic relations with Germany.
It had made clear that unrestricted submarine warfare was unacceptable,
and now American merchant ships were armed and already preparing for war on the seas.
Woodrow Wilson then, in his careful cultivation of public opinion,
made public a scandalous communication which outraged public opinion.
This was the intercepted Simmerman Telegram of March 1st, rather made public on March 1st, 1917,
which had tried to lure Mexico into the conflict against the United States
in Germany's policy of revolutionizing other powers that it saw as useful to its own balance in the war.
American public opinion mobilized dramatically
with demonstrations in favor of entering the war against Germany taking place in the streets.
And there were also instances of German industrial espionage or sabotage
in some American munitions factories that stirred outrage as well.
Now the time arrived for a declaration of war.
The United States entered the First World War on April 6th, 1917.
Woodrow Wilson announced that the American aim, setting it apart from the aims of the other allies,
was a vast one, a universal one.
In his words, quote, the world must be made safe for democracy, end quote.
And this was where the particular designation that was chosen by the American political leadership
to describe its involvement in the First World War really took on symbolic significance.
And I think it's worthwhile to dwell on it for a moment.
The Americans joined the allies, that's to say in this case France as well as Great Britain,
as not a fellow allied power but with, described in the term, an associate power.
And the aim here was to underline that while the United States was associating itself
with the cause of defeating the German threat in particular and the central powers more broadly,
the Americans nonetheless were underlining their independence
and suggesting that perhaps their war aims were significantly different
from those that were, that obtained for the Western allies.
And the part of the American public outraged at German policies,
and this included the news of atrocities in Belgium,
it included what seemed to be a war of conquest,
it included as well the submarine warfare as well as sabotage,
all of these together with certain cultural sympathies for the French and the British,
as well as the growing economic ties to the allied side of the years previous,
all of these contributed to the American entry into the war.
And the American entry into the war would indeed change the nature of that war fundamentally.
Not only would it expand the geographic scope of the conflict,
it also injected a new ideological message.
In American propaganda explaining the aim of the war,
one could see very many of the same themes that we already had discussed in our lecture on propaganda.
The Germans were depicted as enemies of civilization,
and in particular Kaiser Wilhelm II was demonized as Kaiser Bill
with a wicked twirled mustache and an evil expression,
the always obligatory spiked helmet.
He was very much sort of an embodiment of the vaudeville villain
that had been current in popular melodrama.
But at the same time, American propaganda also had an added ideological message of enormous force.
I'd like to speak about that briefly.
The ideological message that was allied to these more traditional themes and tropes of propaganda
was summed up best in Woodrow Wilson's pronouncement,
the 14 points speech as it came to be called.
On January 8th, 1918, after America had entered the war,
Woodrow Wilson outlined in a speech before Congress
what it was that the Americans were fighting for.
United States war aims.
These included principles.
The principles of implicit support for the notion of national self-determination.
That's to say generally the very democratic concept
that no people should be subject to foreign rule in an authoritarian way.
Rather, in line with democratic ideas,
each group ought to be able to determine its own existence
and to have a voice in its government, some role politically in its own administration.
Another principle was explicitly called for,
and that was open covenants openly arrived at.
Open covenants openly arrived at.
And this was in very highfalutin phrasing,
actually simply the demand that diplomacy and international affairs
needed to be conducted in a way that was open and more democratic,
and we today would say transparent in its operations,
a break with the secret diplomacy
which had done so much to shape international relations
in the lead-up to the First World War.
It was precisely the secret agreements and the treaties
which someone like Bismarck had excelled at,
which here were being condemned as conducive to the outbreak of World War.
Also called for was the concept of disarmament.
The notion was that the massive build-ups in arms and navies and armies
had helped to contribute to the outbreak of the First World War,
and this needed to be ended in the name of establishing peace.
Finally, Woodrow Wilson's speech also suggested
a new international organization called the League of Nations,
which would enshrine these principles in an institutional way
in order to give them permanence and ensure it was hoped a new world order.
Other demands of this speech included freedom of the seas,
free trade, which the Americans had espoused so strongly
in their outrage against the violation of free traffic on the sea lanes,
freedom for occupied lands as well that were to be evacuated of foreign rule
during the course of the First World War.
And then there were other specific demands as well.
Italy, in line with the notion of national self-determination,
was to gain ethnically Italian areas that were under the control of the Habsburgs.
Borders were to be redrawn in line, largely with the notion of national self-determination.
A free Poland was to be resurrected after decades of non-existence,
and this free Poland, whether this would be in accord with national self-determination,
was less clear, should have access to the Baltic Sea in order to be a viable economic unit.
And then it was also suggested that the peoples of Austria-Hungary,
the many diverse nationalities of that empire,
as well as the peoples of the Ottoman Empire, should be given free development.
Now, what this would mean in concrete political terms, that was not entirely yet clear.
But this was of a piece with a rising nationalist expectations
that we've described in our lecture on the stresses of the war producing national revolts.
It was a message that would be most welcome to those who hoped for national self-realization.
This idea of national self-determination directed that all ethnic groups
should have their own governments rather than being under foreign rule.
And this revolutionary principle obviously would be enormously attractive
to the so-called submerged nationalities that were parts of larger empires without free expression.
A question that later would be a very open and existential one
was where was national determination to be applied?
On what sort of scale? How small a group could have its own government?
What of groups that were dispersed or geographically not contiguous in their areas of settlement?
How would all of this be realized in practical terms?
But one thing was very clear and gave this ideological message a real charge in its novelty.
Clearly these principles represented not just a statement of American war aims in a concrete,
but also a rejection of what was seen as old Europe's way of doing politics.
The notion, the traditional notion of the balance of power,
of negotiations trading territories back and forth in order to ensure the balance of power.
Secret diplomacy carried on on the part of aristocratic elites in order to ensure the balance of power.
All of this, which was blamed in part for the outbreak of the war, was to be replaced by something new.
New democratic statecraft, a new democratic world order, and a concept of collective security,
replacing balance of power, jostling, and competition with a common dedication to keeping the peace.
At the same time, the 14 points also had yet another ideological significance
because they were intended also as a response, a counter to Bolshevik propaganda taking place at the same time.
By the time the 14 points were published, the Bolsheviks had come to power in Russia
and were announcing their revolutionary program or prescription for peace and world revolution.
An ideological struggle very clearly was taking place and was being fought out in ideological terms in such speeches and propaganda.
Once it was publicized, the 14 points speech gained in popularity, not just in the United States,
but also on the part of long-suffering populations in Europe and indeed in some cases worldwide.
And Woodrow Wilson began a meteoric ascent in terms of his stature as a political figure.
He became a figure of hope for millions of war weary populations on all sides.
At the same time, realistic and much more cynical European politicians felt that of necessity,
they had to tolerate what they considered Wilson's very irritating and pretentious utopian notions and rhetoric.
In particular, the very caustic and energetic French politician Clemenceau equipped that Woodrow Wilson was just out of control.
God himself had only needed 10 points for his agenda, but Woodrow Wilson needed 14.
But Clemenceau kept such comments to himself, it was clear that as America entered the war that the Allies could use reinforcements.
More seriously at the same time, the principles that were enunciated in this speech could be troubling to established Allied politicians
because implicitly there clearly was a conflict with some of their own policies, some of their imperial ambitions,
some of their imagining of the gains that they hoped to make in the peace settlement that would follow the war,
and with some of the promises of their secret diplomacy.
At the state just one obvious instance, the secret treaty of London which brought Italy into the war
in some of its measures and some of its territorial promises ill-comported with the notions of national self-determination.
But this was a problem that would be stored up for later.
Now Americans prepare to go, as the phrase went, over there, across the Atlantic to the big fight.
American military might was built up with astonishing speed.
In ways that resembled Britain's breaking with its long tradition, its long liberal tradition of a volunteer army,
so too the United States reinstated conscription, which had taken place in the Civil War as well,
in the Selective Service Act of May 1917, registering all men from 21 to 30 years of age.
And by the end of the war, as a result of this massive mobilization of manpower,
nearly three million men had been drafted for the conflict.
This was an army that would resemble America in many ways and its upheavals in terms of ethnic transition,
it was estimated that about a fifth of the soldiers of this army were foreign-born
and it was hoped by some American nationalists that the very experience of a national mobilization
would replace the many different ethnic groups or hyphenated Americans, as they were called at the time,
Irish Americans, German Americans, with one American identity.
Counting the volunteers as well as the conscripted forces by war's end,
the United States Armed Forces numbered nearly five million.
This armed might also resembled America's complexion at home
in the sense of perpetuating some ugly racial discrimination as well.
African-American soldiers who were conscripted too were relegated to segregated units
or given menial tasks in support positions.
There were certainly racists on the home front who worried about the implications in the long term
of what might happen if African-Americans acquired a new sense of confidence
and a new sense of deserving more political rights as a result of their sacrifices and involvement.
And the flip side of these anxieties were the hopes of some African-American organizations
that it was precisely such proud involvement and participation
that might finally at long last bring about more equality in political and social terms in the United States.
General John J. Pershing was charged with a command of this AEF, or American Expeditionary Force,
in May of 1917.
In short order, the American First Infantry Division, nicknamed the Big Red One,
because of its characteristic badges, was shipped to France in preparation for a larger American involvement.
Pershing now prepared to send a million dough boys, as American soldiers were called,
to France by the spring of 1918, hoping to tip the balance.
It was expected that this infusion of fresh American energy,
as yet unexhausted by the rigors and the sufferings of the First World War,
would tip the balance with American pep.
At the same time, America was preparing for war over there.
The country was also mobilizing for war over here in the United States.
And these are linked phenomena that we'll be exploring in more detail in our next lecture.
