Lecture 35, The Rise of the Mass Dictatorships
In this lecture, we'll be considering one of the especially troubling aftermath results
of the conflict of the Great War, and that is to say the rise of the mass dictatorships.
The First World War very vividly showed the massive power that could be organized and mobilized
by a state as it prepared for war.
In the chaotic aftermath of the Great War, and especially in those areas that had been
most unsettled by the war's conclusion, where in some sense there was still a sense that
the war itself was continuing in its after-effects, there arose ideological mass movements which
drew inspiration from the model of totally mobilized societies, and then they sought
to recreate that state of mobilization.
These totalitarian movements included Benito Mussolini's fascism in Italy, Adolf Hitler's
Nazism in Germany, and the communism of Lenin and Stalin in the Soviet Union.
This lecture will reveal how strongly the imprint of the First World War's experience
shaped these mass dictatorships and their mental horizons.
Indeed, these regimes saw politics as war, and war as politics.
All of this set them on a tragic course to repeat disaster in the form of the Second
World War.
Indeed, some analysts have spoken of a totalitarian wave that, but shortly after the First World
War, begins to sweep through western civilization.
At first there had been the encouraging signs, which seemed to fulfill so many of the hopes
of Woodrow Wilson for a new democratic world order, there had been signs of a wave of democracies
taking over in the immediate aftermath of the First World War.
But these then, many of them, were in short order replaced by a wave of dictatorships that
were, many of them, totalitarian in their aspirations.
That means seeking to capture all of the individuals under their control, not merely wanting passive
acquiescence, but something far larger, enthusiastic participation, heart, mind, body, and soul.
This trend, in fact, towards dictatorship, predated the Great Depression of 1929 and
the 1930s.
Very clearly, however, economic crisis would later play a role in speeding this development
of the wave of dictatorships.
The experience of total war had clearly helped shape the ambition for total rule.
The vision of a state able to completely mobilize the societies under its control was most certainly
an appealing one for these dictators.
We should take a moment to address and define, a little more in detail, the whole notion,
the concept of totalitarianism.
Totalitarianism is a term used to describe modern dictatorships that differ from the many
earlier tyrannies there have been, unfortunately, through human history.
What made these modern dictatorships new was not only their use of technology, though that
was important as well as a means of control, but their aims as well.
The aim, distinguishing them from earlier tyrannies, of trying to totally control the
individual and the society.
Not by compulsion alone, but by a combination of, on the one hand, terror, inspiring fear
in order to gain obedience, and on the other side, the other side of the coin, as it were,
ideological faith and true belief, a combination of fear as well as conviction.
The term itself had a very interesting origin.
In 1923, the term had been used by a journalist who was critical of the Italian fascists,
and he used the word totalitarian to sum up everything he didn't like about the fascists
and why he found them so very worrying.
But when the fascists themselves read this polemical journalism, they actually liked
the phrase and thought it captured their agenda well and began to use it about themselves.
A theoretical model of totalitarian regimes and how they function was best articulated
by the controversial German-Jewish philosopher Hannah Arendt, who was one of the German Jews
who escaped the Nazi regime as it was being found and came to the United States as part
of that brain drain that so enriched American intellectual and cultural life as well.
Her study, published in 1951, entitled The Origins of Totalitarianism, is a very significant
attempt to capture something distinctive about the violent trajectory of the 20th century.
It's my personal conviction that this work, debatable and controversial as it is, will
likely be read hundreds of years from now to try to understand what was going on in
the 20th century.
This work of Arendt's, Origins of Totalitarianism, argued that even ideologically opposed regimes
that might be each other's mortal enemies, like Nazi Germany and the Communist Soviet
Union, nonetheless, in spite of the differences of ideological message and faith, had certain
structural similarities and shared internal dynamics that in spite of all the other differences
tended to give them a common identity as totalitarian regimes.
Similarities that Hannah Arendt pointed out as being shared across regimes included the
cult of a leader, the strong leader with whom the movement itself was identified.
Static claims of ideological infallibility that were made by these regimes and that animated
them to constant motion, in part to make their prophecies come true.
This constant motion, moreover, had not limited goals, as might have been the case in traditional
politics of the 19th century.
Instead, their goals were universal.
Their ideologies in and of themselves drove them to the final goal of world domination.
They also were said to share the prolific use of violence to fulfill their ideological
prophecies.
They also were marked by the institution of the concentration camp, which was essentially
a microcosm or a laboratory of what total perfected totalitarian rule would look like.
The regimes shared hierarchies of believers and elites.
They shared institutions of the secret police as a crucial way of exercising terror within
a society made up of atomized masses of individuals lonely in the crowd who were ever more susceptible
to the ideological claims and demands of the movement.
And then finally, more an epiphenomenon, Hannah Arendt pointed to something which other contemporaries
had noticed at the time, the very fact that the monumental art dwarfing the individual
and the propaganda of these ideological regimes bore similarities as well.
Now, very clearly, World War I had played an important role here.
It had shaken 19th century liberal society very badly.
And the very ambition of total mobilization for total war made clear that there was a
certain linkage there, a certain inner logic to the extension of these ideas into totalitarianism.
The very totality was a key aspect here and it's a theme we've been following throughout
these lectures as well.
It has to be pointed out that the theoretical model of totalitarianism in its full elaboration
by Hannah Arendt as well as others still remains controversial and has been controversial
ever since she articulated it.
In the 1960s in particular, in American intellectual life, some considered the very idea of totalitarianism
the concept as really an artifact of Cold War rhetoric.
They charged that it unfairly identified what were claimed to be common phenomena between
the Soviet Union and the now defeated power Nazi Germany.
Some of these critics of totalitarianism argued that the very concept was unsuited to grasp
the many ambiguities, the many shades of gray of what everyday life under a dictatorship
was like, arguing that the total control was never ultimately achieved.
After the 1990s, however, something really remarkable happened.
The term itself enjoyed a revival.
It was endorsed by many Eastern European thinkers who had been liberated from communism as a
reflection of their own experience under dictatorship.
Even if total control had not been achieved, nonetheless the impulse, the ambition to capture
the totality of a human being and the society of which that individual was a part seemed
to them to capture something of their own lived experience.
Now, apart from the argument, a theoretical argument on the merits of this theoretical
model, it nonetheless seems that the emphasis on the total claims and the ambition or the
intent to totally dominate and totally mobilize a society, nonetheless does indeed capture
some important quality of these regimes and also indicates their linkage to the earlier
total war, the Great War.
Let's turn first to examine the case of Mussolini's fascist Italy.
And it should be pointed out here that Hannah Arendt was skeptical about whether Mussolini's
fascism ultimately represented a true example of the phenomenon of totalitarianism.
Obviously seemed to her to be still on too small a scale to have the true sort of mass
potential and anonymity of people in crowds that she felt was crucially necessary for
totalitarianism to function.
Nonetheless, obviously the fascist model would go on to be a very important one for other
dictatorships.
The war veteran Benito Mussolini, the future dictator, after the war's end, continued to
follow the ideal of trenchocracy, an organized political movement in which the experience
of the trenches and the wonderful fusion of community that allegedly had happened there
during the war was a project that he found very attractive.
This produced a new political movement which came to be called fascism.
Fascism drew upon the perceived lessons of World War I and sought to fuse revolutionary
ideas with nationalism.
Mussolini, after all, had been earlier a socialist.
Italy was in a volatile state after the close of the First World War.
The peace had been disappointing to many Italian nationalists.
They felt that a mutilated peace was the best way to describe this phenomenon, the way in
which Italian hopes of a vast colonial empire and vast holdings around the Mediterranean
had been disappointed.
There was often also labor unrest in the form of large-scale strikes.
There was rural conflict out in the countryside over land reform, and Italy was marked by
a succession of weak governments.
It was in this context that Mussolini as a revolutionary sought to use this crisis.
In March of 1919, in Milan, Mussolini organized groups of like-minded, often former soldiers
which came to be called fasci di combattimento, which might be translated as combat squads
or combat groups.
In Italian, moreover, the word fascio had a very rich significance.
Fascio means league on the one hand, or a grouping, a unit, but it's also the name of
an ancient Roman symbol of state unity, of incidentally a symbol that can be seen on
many older American monuments and government buildings as well.
This symbol of state unity was an axe surrounded by a bundle of sticks, and what the symbol
tried to convey was that one stick alone, that can easily be broken.
It can simply be smashed over one's knee, but a bundle of sticks tied together and fused
into a greater unity has enormous strength and can't be broken.
What fascism meant was not entirely clear.
Fascists remained vague, and in our own times, fascism turned into simply a blanket term
of abuse for the opposition politically.
Nonetheless, it's worthwhile to stop and think about how fascism as an idea was presented
and how it evolved.
Mussolini, who was anything other than a modest man, at one point was asked, Signore Mussolini,
how do you define fascism?
And he answered, me.
Well, that's obviously not an adequate political theory.
Fascism, we might abstract from his irrational answers, in fact had certain core ideas.
Fascism praised action.
It wasn't a rational philosophy, and instead praised irrational values like action, vigor,
dynamism, and violence.
It also praised a powerful leader, and obviously Mussolini had himself in mind.
It praised a strong and warlike state to which the individual would be subordinated, not as
in liberal philosophy, the individual served by the state, but rather the individual there
for the state to dispose of.
Fascism also praised the notion of corporatism, that's to say, gathering people into larger
unities and subsuming the individual in an organic form of organization.
Because of the vigor and the dynamism of imperialism, the conquest of foreign peoples, fascism
praised this as well.
And finally, and this grows by a certain internal logic out of these irrational ideas, fascism
also praised war as hygiene, adventure, and the true test of a state and a people.
The black-shirted fascist squads, which often incorporated former stormtroopers of the Italian
army, those who had been known as the Arditi, the fearless ones, roamed the streets and
engaged in really a form of political civil war by brutalizing and murdering their opponents,
socialists, communists, others in the streets of Italy.
Mussolini now presented himself as a savior for the chaos that was besetting Italy.
I wasn't pointed out that the fascists were helping to create much of that chaos.
Claiming that he was forestalling or getting up in front of a coming communist takeover,
Mussolini in October of 1922 led his fascist squads on a march on Rome.
And in this respect, he was actually drawing inspiration from the bold seizure of the city
of Trieste by the Italian nationalist poet Denuncio in the immediate aftermath of the
First World War.
There was a direct line in this sort of nationalist adventuring.
Mussolini's black-shirted fascist squads descended on Rome in this carefully staged public relations
event the March on Rome and took power.
The reality was actually that behind the scenes, through negotiation and through backroom
dealings, a transfer of power had already been negotiated with conservative elites.
But it added to Mussolini's charisma, he felt, to present this as a bold stroke of
violent statesmanship.
Once in power, Mussolini solidified his fascist dictatorship.
He started to ready the Italian people for wars of conquest, to move them out of what
he felt was their comfortable existence and to restore the glories of ancient Rome.
And Mussolini, for all of these reasons, was often admired and emulated by many would-be
dictators in Europe as well as elsewhere.
The first key example of what came to be a wave of imitations and dictatorships.
Among those whom we might call, in some sense, pupils at the feet of Mussolini in How to
Become a Dictator was an obscure, initially, veteran of the First World War, Adolf Hitler.
He was definitely among Mussolini's admirers.
A key question that historians debate theoretically still today is whether Nazism, which evolves
out of the movement that Hitler spearheads, whether Nazism is best understood as drawing
its inspiration from fascism and indeed being a subcategory of fascism, or whether on the
contrary Nazism drew its inspiration from aspects of fascism, but evolved into something
entirely separate and distinct, unique in, for instance, its far more ardent racism than
Italian fascism initially had been.
The concept of there being one overarching principle called fascism was one that many
Marxists subscribed to.
In their analysis, they saw both fascism and Nazism as the ultimate outgrowth of capitalism
in its last late desperate stages, and thus, for instance, their thinking spoke of a war
against fascism as being the overarching imperative of the day.
Other historians, by contrast, emphasize Nazism as being, while linked to these earlier models
of Italian fascism, as being something quite distinctive to Germany and to German history
as well.
In January of 1919, in southern Germany, in Bavaria beset by revolutionary movements and
turmoil, an obscure party was founded in Munich.
It was initially called the German Workers' Party, and its strange name in part was the
testimony to the ambition of the German nationalists who founded it to reach out to the German
working classes.
There's an interesting link here to the experience of the later stages of mobilization or remobilization
for war within Germany during the First World War itself.
Many of those nationalists who were involved in the founding of this party and this initial
stages had also played roles in the Fatherland Party of the later stages of World War I.
Hitler, at this point, who remained in the army because he felt it was his home, it was
a place he felt comfortable in.
He visited as a secret observer who had been dispatched by the army.
He visited a meeting of the German Workers' Party in September of 1919 and soon became
a member.
It's pretty clear that he wasn't supposed to do this as an observer, but he not only
became a member but began to rise through the ranks.
Hitler's talents for oratory very clearly played off of the charge and the memory of
the First World War.
He presented himself in many of his most effective speeches as a simple, unknown soldier of
the Great War.
He brought with him into the German Workers' Party, which had remained unknown, a tremendous
capacity and talent for propaganda and oratory.
He reshaped the party and renamed it in a way that spoke to its total ambitions.
He renamed the German Workers' Party the National Socialist German Workers' Party,
uniting terms from the left wing of the spectrum, socialist and workers, with the words national
and German in order to create something new and distinctive.
In imitation of Mussolini, the new Nazi Party, as it was called not officially but by some
of its enemies, organized squads of brown uniformed thugs called the Sturmabteilen Troops after
the very name of the Sturmtroopers of World War I, and a story suggests that Hitler initially
had wanted to have black shirts just like Mussolini, but that in fact the military surplus stores
were out of them, but there was a sale on brown shirts, so he settled for that.
The movement gained attention and maybe even a measure of increased respectability from
its position on the lunatic fringes of politics when it started to attract famed figures who
had played roles in the First World War, General Ludendorff, an earlier war dictator
of Germany, or the famous fighter ace, Hermann Göring, who had succeeded to the Red Baron
in his fighting squadron.
After a failed attempt at revolution in 1923, which broke down into a comic farce when Hitler
tried to imitate the march on Rome, this comic farce was called the Beer Hall Putsch, or
coup attempt.
Hitler rethought, while serving a short jail sentence, he rethought his tactics and decided
that the way to go was a legal route to power, to use democracy to destroy democracy, to
enter politics in order to end democratic politics.
Nazi propaganda throughout promised a revival of the celebrated inner truce, or Burgfrieden,
of World War I, in the form of a racially defined Volksgemeinschaft, or Peoples' Community,
sometimes also translated as Racial Community of Germans, excluding those who were considered
to be outsiders or aliens, in particular German Jews.
The Nazis denounced the Versailles Treaty, they enthusiastically endorsed and elaborated
on the notion of a stab in the back legend claiming that treacherous elements on the
home front had defeated Germany's armies, not the allies, and above all, German Jews
were blamed for Germany's present problems.
The impact of World War I on the Nazis can be vividly traced in many respects, their hierarchical
structure of ranks, their military language, their rituals, their solutes, their uniforms,
and most of all, their glorification of war itself.
The Great Depression won support for the Nazis' promises of fundamental change, and
in January of 1933, Hitler finally came to power in Germany.
Hitler prepared for war, partly desiring, apparently in his own psychology, a replay
of the Great War, but with a different ending, this time ending in a final victory for Germany.
But these aims now were further radicalized.
The notion of a racial empire in Eastern Europe and massive ethnic cleansing of those territories
now was part and parcel of this expanded agenda.
Germany itself was to be violently cleansed of alleged impurities to prevent a repetition
of the alleged stab in the back, and eventually not only minorities like the German Jews were
to be affected, but also Germans of not Jewish background who were considered to be unfit
as specimens of a future master race, and euthanasia, or killing, medically supervised
killing of these people, was among the policies for purification.
The Nazi elite was very proud of its ethos of toughness, unsentimental efficiency, and
coldness, not coincidentally the very same values that have been celebrated in the figure
of the stormtroopers of the First World War that they emulated.
Paradoxically, Hitler used his own wartime service as a way of reassuring international
opinion, which was worried about his attentions, and sought to appease some of his appetites
by claiming that he, as an unknown soldier of the First World War, knew what war was
like and wanted peace above all.
He was obviously lying through his teeth, because at the same time within Germany, cult-like
celebrations of the Battle of Langemark, when in 1914 young German idealists allegedly
had gone into battle singing the German national anthem, celebrations of these events emphasized
spiritual preparation of the German people for the Second World War yet to come.
Finally we'll conclude by examining Stalin's Soviet Union.
The Soviet Union itself had been launched as a project of a new form of society, a new
utopia along communist lines, out of the wreckage of the First World War.
By 1927, Joseph Stalin had established himself as the heir to Lenin after the initial Bolshevik
leader's death in 1924.
From the late 1920s to the late 1930s, Stalin set about preparing for an event that he was
certain was going to come.
And that was a repetition of the Great War.
If the First World War in Marxist ideology was a capitalist crisis, a capitalist war,
then ultimately, because capitalism had not yet collapsed, another such war was sure to
follow.
In order to prepare, to gird oneself for this later conflict, and to fend off capitalist
challenges, Stalin set about Stalinizing Soviet society through the purges of the great terror,
violent collectivization of the countryside, and forced industrialization of the country,
a process of Stalinization that cost millions upon millions of lives.
In his campaign, Stalin was able to draw on cadres of supporters, he obviously didn't
enact all of this terror himself, he found supporters who shared with him an ethos of
realism and self-conscious toughness in pursuit of ideological goals.
Historians of this regime argue that this ethos had shaped an entire generation of younger
Bolsheviks during the brutal years of the Russian Civil War.
And this hardness, this valuing of toughness, was also reflected in the militarized language
that was to be seen throughout Stalinist propaganda, which spoke of campaigns for development,
and of enemies within and without who needed to be confronted, and of fronts in the battle
for progress, the front for the battle for food, or the front for the battle for industrialization.
Such terms were rife throughout the language.
In Stalin's ideological perspective, a global war, similar to that of World War I, and probably
even larger, was on the horizon.
It must be approaching, it was part of the internal logic of history itself, as capitalism
neared its inevitable crisis in its decline and ultimate collapse.
And in Stalin's psychology, insofar as one can ever plumb the psychology of a man so
deeply paranoid and so deeply anxious about his own security and his own stability as
the leader of the Soviet Union, his goal seems to have been to stand aside from the coming
war.
If capitalists would go to war against capitalists once again, as Marxist interpretation had
it, the First World War had been a capitalist struggle, so if it were possible, the new
regime, the new utopia of the Soviet Union, should stand aside if it could from that coming
war and not get involved.
In some sense, this was a repetition of precisely the plan that Lenin had urged in the last
stages of World War I.
This is the course that he had urged at the negotiations of Brest-Litovsk in 1918, when
his skeptical comrades were unsure whether they could accept the very, very harsh terms
that Imperial Germany was imposing upon them.
Lenin had argued ceaselessly for the accepting, even of these harsh terms, of a dictated peace
at Brest-Litovsk in 1918, because that's what it would take to save the revolution.
And moreover, Lenin had assured his comrades, these promises were not permanent.
The beating that the revolution might take at first would be more than compensated for
by the fact that it would emerge as the sole victor from the inevitable collapse of the
regimes that were representing capitalism.
And thus, ultimately, if the Soviet Union could stand aside from the next coming World
War, it might very well find itself, as a result, the great winner, inheriting the earth
that had been shattered by capitalist conflict.
It was precisely this calculation, this expectation determined by ideology of what the future would
likely hold that led Stalin into a bizarre alliance with the man who otherwise would
have been his ideological mortal enemy, Hitler, and his Nazi regime.
This alliance, which in ideological terms seemed to make no sense to contemporaries
at the time, and which Hannah Rent presented as an example of some of the inner logic of
totalitarian regimes, this alliance was known as the Nazi-Soviet Pact of August 1939.
The Nazi-Soviet Pact, a non-aggression treaty which also divided up Eastern Europe between
these dictatorships, allowed Stalin to feel that he was moving in the direction of being
able to stand aside from the coming clash, the coming great war that was sure to follow.
In fact, this alliance, which certainly helped Hitler and Stalin together to unleash the
Second World War, turned out, from Stalin's perspective, to have been a dangerous miscalculation
and mistake.
Hitler, after benefiting from this alliance, later attacked his former ally in 1941, and
the Second World War would take on a new significance, a new dimension.
When the Second World War finally broke out in September of 1939, its origins were linked
to the experience of the First World War.
In its violence and its scope, however, it would exceed that very great war that had
done so much to shape and prepare the way for it.
This question of linkages to the Second World War and linkages, most fundamentally, to our
own lives and our own times, we'll explore in our next lecture.
