This is a conversation with Daniel Schmacktenberger and Jenny Stefanotti about the Consilience
Project.
And it is part of a series of conversations within DENT, which is a co-learning community
that convenes several times a week on Clubhouse.
And the conversation starts putting the discussion in the context of the broader and ongoing
inquiry and then gets into why this particular project is a very important leverage point
in the very significant systemic and existential challenges that humanity faces today.
We had the conversation just on the heels of the launch of the beta of the project.
It's very much in need of support and resources.
So we hope that you will enjoy the discussion and we hope that you will be inclined to support us.
You can find out more at denttogether.org and consilienceproject.org.
I always like to say that the scope of the DENT inquiry is this foundational base layer of society.
And we obviously have a focal point around economic institutions,
given the massive impact of capitalism on society.
But you can't talk about reforming economics without talking about the political institutions
that create the rules for the markets or the cultural beliefs and values that it's filtered
through. And of course, the enormous role that technology plays in redefining that playing field.
I might think of that as a foundational layer, but if you look at the problems that face humanity
today, there's really a layer beneath that, which gets into how those institutions get
created and reformed in the first place. And that's really where Daniel is focused today.
So I'm so thrilled to welcome you back. I'm honored to have you again.
He's actually really been heads down since we talked in August.
He's really just an extraordinarily brilliant mind with a heart that's almost as big.
And so it's a great delight to talk with you. He's a close colleague of Jordan Hall and Forest
Landry's, who we've also had on DENT a couple of times. Jordan and Forest and Daniel really took
a lot of the ideas, the early ideas of Game B and evolved that thinking. And so last August,
Daniel came on and we talked kind of about the epistemic crisis. This was a first of a series
of conversations where we were really looking at social media and the internet and how that affected
the information commons. And then we honed in a little bit more talking about social media
and democracy. And then honed in a little bit more talking about free speech and content
moderation. But the conversation with Daniel really kicked that off. And we talked about the
epistemic crisis. The bulk of the conversation was about that. And then we got into the
Consilience Project. But really, Consilience actually addresses a little bit of a wider lens
than the epistemic crisis, which is problem solving. It's not just how do we access information
to assess reality as we understand it, but then also how do we work at both an individual and
collective capacity to problem solve. And that's really the challenge that the Consilience is
focused on. We'll talk about the Consilience Project today, just disclosure that I am advisor
to the project. And so first, Daniel, I want to take a step back because I think it's actually,
well, one, for those in the room who are new to you and you're thinking, I would be remiss
without exposing everyone to the extraordinary eloquence with which you articulate the state
of civilization and how we got here. But I also think it's really incredible to have context in
why you honed in on this particular problem as the most critical leverage point for humanity right
now. And then we'll dive into, of that leverage point, why this particular intervention and how
this intervention fits into a broader theory of change. So we'll spend most of our time talking
about the Consilience Project, but I did want to start off by taking this broader lens of
what really is ultimately about the novelty of the problem landscape and the inadequacy of the
problem-solving capability. So I wanted to take just a little bit of time and start with talking
about that. Yeah. Yeah, thank you for the intro and nice to be here and nice to be connected to
the people that are here. I don't think this needs belabored because I imagine everybody here is
pretty aware that the kind of problem landscape that the world faces today is pretty distinct from
what it faces at the time that the people who are developing theory of markets and the Scottish
Enlightenment were coming up with their idea of markets or when the Founding Fathers were coming
up with the idea of American democracy or really any previous time in history. And there are some
ways in which the problems are similar and just kind of more in scale. But there are times where
more in scale crosses a threshold and it actually becomes different and kind. And I believe that
the problem landscape we face today is different and kind in some pretty fundamental ways from
problems that we have needed to navigate in the past, such that our problem-solving processes
are inadequate. So rather than say like the problem is climate change or the problem is systemic
racism or the problem is, you know, the great game of power in US-China relations or AI or whatever,
if we step back and say, well, how well have we done with those types of problems over the last
few decades? And does it seem like the combination of our business solutions and our government
solutions and our nonprofit solutions and the various types of solutions we have are converging
towards adequacy? Or does it seem like we're actually getting more catastrophic risks, higher
probabilities of them? The latter is the way I mostly assess this. And we can see that, you know,
the sustainable development goals haven't occurred with the UN-IGO kind of landscape that was the
most advanced governance system after World War II when we realized that nation-state government
mints alone weren't enough to prevent World War. And now the scope of technology was such that we
couldn't have major empires war anymore. Obviously, we haven't been able to succeed at nuclear depriliferation.
We went from two countries with nukes to more countries with more and faster nukes. But also
every time a new technology came about, an arms race around it started. There's been an arms race
around drones, around AI weapons, around cyber attacks, around biotech. And so clearly our
governance systems cannot stop arms races effectively. They can't reverse existing ones,
all of those increased the fragility of the world. And the other kind of thing like an arms race,
arms race is a kind of race to the bottom where if any actor does something that provides near-term
game theoretic advantage, all the other actors kind of have to race to do it first, otherwise
they lose by default. But with everybody racing to do that near-term advantageous thing first,
it creates the worst situation globally for the long term. It's a very tricky kind of coordination
problem. And the other race to the bottom is the tragedy of the commons type things, which is why
we don't just have climate change as an environmental issue. We have planetary boundaries
across most of the planetary boundaries becoming a critical factor from species extinction to
dead zones to overfishing of the oceans on and on. And so for me, I step back and say, okay,
I don't think that we can take another step and say we have this idea in the west of an open
society, whether it's a democracy or a republic or something where there is some
concept of the people not being ruled by some small top-down force but participating in their own
governance. And we particularly like that because of the dignity of the individual and liberty and
non-tyranny. And then we can see that there are some really interesting situations in which,
for instance, China has been able to develop high-speed rail not just throughout the country,
but has an almost monopoly on export of high-speed rail throughout the world. And the US still has
not created a single high-speed rail even within its own country. And this is a decade since that
tech was invented situation. And we can see a lot of other things like that where if there's a country
that can institute a more autocratic process and doesn't have term limits, the lack of term limits
means they can do long-term planning and long-term thinking. And the lack of internal left fighting
right and most of the energy getting just dissipated as heat and entropy means that they can actually
coordinate more effectively. So not only are the global problem-solving mechanisms inadequate,
but the ones that we feel particularly ethically attached to are particularly decaying. So
Jenny, it sounds like you've got a thought. Oh, no, I was just concurring.
Ah, yeah. So the gist of what I'm paying attention to is...
Well, I think this, sorry, I actually would say, I think this point is particularly fascinating
about that open society leading to infighting versus solving the actual problems at hand.
Well, if you think about what an open society is, you think about like what a democracy or
a republic at a nation-state level is, it's actually a kind of wild proposition to imagine
that it could work at all. Because what we're saying is we're going to have a humongous number
of people, and especially in a situation like the US where there isn't a lot of shared culture,
history, ethnicity, but it's a humongous number of people across a huge geographic space from
different cultures and different life experiences who believe different things and want different
things. And the idea that all those people can figure out how to make choices together,
can sublimate violence and figure out how to make choices together, is actually a wild proposition.
The idea that most of human history was tribal, like really almost all of human history was tribal,
and there was this hard upper limit to the size of tribes, and it programmed in us pretty deeply,
evolutionarily, was this kind of tribal type dynamic where at the Dunbar scale,
I could have a say in every major decision. There was a small enough situation that I knew every
person intimately, and everyone could be part of a single conversation like this room.
Beyond the Dunbar scale, I'm going to be subjected to some laws that I have no say in,
possibly, and so the tribes would just cleave and stay smaller. And so then when we needed things
larger than tribes, because tribal warfare started to create an advantage for larger groups,
then we got a lack of open society, like those early societies were what you could call an early
form of open society or more consensus society. But then the idea that you have a king or a
nobility class or an aristocracy or some small group that rules, that small group is basically
like a tribe again. It's a relatively small number of people to coordinate together. And then
everyone else is carrying things out. The idea that a humongous number of people can all coordinate
together is actually a wild proposition. And in the Greek city states, they were not humongous
numbers of people, they were very small numbers of people. So the idea of a modern democracy,
again, even at the time of the founding fathers, it was a tiny number of people where the
foundational idea was everybody could get in a town hall and talk. So we weren't voting on a
proposition that some special interest group created, and we weren't voting on a representative who
would vote on propositions. We got to help craft the proposition through an open conversation where
everybody could hear everybody's perspective. And that that sense of scale was bound to the
idea of it being possible. And that was following modernity and the kind of proliferation of both
the philosophy of science and the Hegelian dialectic, that we could all come to understand
reality similarly through the application of similar epistemic processes. And we could all
come to understand each other's position through a Hegelian dialectical process where I could
actively take their position, try to make their point, they could do the same. Then we could
figure out a way where we could coordinate so as to sublimate warfare. And so the epistemic
comments that we've talked about is this idea of if we have a huge number of people, and we want
order, but we want the order to not be imposed, it has to be emergent. How do you get, so you either
get imposed order historically, a talk of some kind, where you don't get order that's imposed,
and you don't get it at all, and you get chaos. And to have something that isn't chaos or oppression
has to be order that's emergent, to be emergent, that people have to be able to make sense of
the world similarly, to come to understand what each other value and care about, and to be able to
generate problem-solution sets that are adequate. And so this is why we say there is, there are
cultural prerequisites to an open society being able to work. And we have seen the institutions
that are supposed to help those prerequisites, education in the Fourth Estate in particular,
have undergone major erosion and capture while the world has been complexifying. So the things
that we have to engage in governance about actually take more capacity to understand.
And so to have any chance of something like effective problem-solving for the current
problem landscape in the current world situation, and to have it be commensurate with an open
society at all, we will need new problem-solving capacities, new institutions that are adequate
to the problems, which means we have to understand the problems well enough
that we can think about how to do that. And it has to arise from the people understanding it,
wanting it, and being able to take responsibility for it. Otherwise, if it comes from some small
number of people and is instituted by force, it'll be a progressive.
Sure. And let's just touch on, we remiss without just in quickly summarizing where we're at,
just how extraordinarily profound the role of the internet and social media has been
in our ability to sense make. Yeah, this is one of the places where there is a change
in the nature of the situation we face, both the problems and the possibilities that is
change in kind, because we had a movement from a broadcast style type media, kind of starting
with the printing press, and then moving into larger printing press, meaning that, and again,
this country was founded on the idea that this didn't must, that the Fourth Estate and Education
were both prerequisites to democracy functioning. But what that meant was that there was a capacity
to understand what was going on and have that be shared with everyone's on some shared basis.
Yeah, and talk about. And so then that moved from broadcast via print to radio to television
and started to fragment with more channels and the channels appeal to different, you know,
political biases and like that. But then with the internet, you get not just more channels,
you get something that isn't broadcast at all. You get this rather than one to many,
a many to many style communication, decentralized communication, which is why books like The Sovereign
Individual, way back in the early days of the internet, said, Oh, the digital age will actually
end nation states, because the people won't be geographically, their geographic proximity
is going to bind them to each other less than their network proximity. And so people are going
to be more connected to people in geographically dispersed areas outside of their country, less
connected to their own country, and their fealty relationships are going to be more powerful.
Network dynamics are going to make it to where you have, you know, Google's and Facebook's
having more people than China and the US combined, and the ability to share information and coordinate.
So that new change to the techno industrial base is going to change the social systems.
But they were hoping that it would be a kind of a libertarian rising because of the democratization
of the ability for everybody to share information. But of course, what ended up happening was when
everybody can share information, you get an information overwhelmed flood, and there's a
billion search results for anything. So nobody will ever see them all. So there isn't the possibility
for rational actors, even if that thing existed, which it mostly doesn't, for rational actors to
select the best information, have it come to the top. Instead, you have some AI that's going to be
able to search everything and determine what you see through what shows up in the recommended videos
or this feed. And so what you end up getting is a concentration of power radically more than
even the broadcast had in the past, and a concentration of power that based on its
those companies that do that are financial agents and based on their own agentic motives,
how they fund themselves end up curating the information space of people's attention in
ways that are fundamentally incommensurable with a shared sense of reality.
And then I feel like that power concentration, in generally a attribute of the current system
of asymmetric power, is so important. Maybe I'll just have you say a little bit about that and
then we'll transition into conciliants. Do you want to say one more thing of what you have in
mind on asymmetric power? Yeah, well, no, I just I think that this, I mean, maybe I'm taking this
a little bit too tangential in it because you just mentioned the the concentration of power
within the information ecology with the intermediaries given the volume of information,
right? But you also say concentration of power in the economic systems. You see concentration of
power. So that feature of the current institutional infrastructure is part of what makes it
self-terminating, but that may be getting a little bit too into the weeds.
It's worth speaking to briefly is again, go back to the time and the writing and the Scottish
Enlightenment of thinking about theory of markets, obviously a lot has changed when the ideas were
being developed through then through von Mises and Hayek and towards Rand of Homo economicus and
the idea of a rational actor where demand people would want real products and services that would
immerse the quality of their life and they want them at the best value. So the demand creates an
evolutionary niche for supply and the rational actor will choose the best product or service of
the best price, which creates a selective pressure for healthy innovation and resource distribution.
That idea, we've seen through the whole field of behavioral economics that that thing is mostly
not true that Homo economicus, the rational actor, people aren't getting exposed to all of the feature
sets in an equal way there. There's a tremendous amount of status making bias that can hijack people
decision making and where there's more incentive to invest in marketing and product and you know
that kind of stuff. We've seen that so there's many places where we can say that underlying
thinking about markets has shifted, but one of them is the scale of asymmetry. The largest
corporations at the time of that thinking and even at the time of the founding of the US were tiny
in comparison to the size of corporations today, but individuals are still individuals and so the
total asymmetry of power between individual interests and corporate interests has moved to
a place where to the degree that there is a agentic difference, they have a game-theoretic
relationship with each other, it's an asymmetric war that really can't be addressed in the same way.
So the idea even at the size that corporations or kind of financial wealth consolidation was
at the founding of this country, the founding of this country had the idea that we'll do this
thing called liberal democracy where we will have a market, we won't try to have a state
planned economy, we'll have a market because we think markets are actually good systems of
collective sense making and choice making. People will determine what they want and value,
they'll determine who does a good job of it, that'll that's the sense making part and it'll
get up regulated and it'll do a good job of resource allocation and production and incentive,
but we don't have a pure laissez-faire economy. We do have a state because people want to hire
someone to kill people for them or sex traffic or all kinds of things. So we want, there are
certain things that we don't want markets for that markets would otherwise grow up for, we
want to keep some national parks where all the trees don't get cut down even if there's profit
incentive to do so. So we're going to make a thing called rule of law and the other key insight
was it was known even then that if I start out a population, if I could start out a population
at t equals zero where everyone had the exact same amount of money and then hit go in a market
type dynamic, a power law distribution of the ownership of wealth would eventually emerge
in almost every scenario again and again, some people will do better at making money than others
and then the more money they have will make it, you know, you gain interest on interest compoundingly,
the same thing happens with debt plus access to other financial services and things like that.
And so you end up getting this power law distribution. So how do the few who have a lot
of wealth not have their interests in that being oppressive to everybody else and then you get
feudalism again, which was the same we were trying to get out of. Well, those you can't just trust
those who have the wealth to care for the view of the mini and the and the common. So we're going
to make this thing called a state that is going to represent the will of the collective people.
And the state has to have even more power than the most powerful economic interests have.
And so that's the idea that it has a thing called a monopoly of violence that can
through the police force, mostly internally, military externally, so it can institute rule
of law. But the rule of law in a government of foreign by the people who are voting on the law
is to represent the collective will or ethics of the people. So the values of the people
are the basis of jurisprudence get codified in law. And you have this protective watchdog who is to
basically allow markets to do the good thing they do. But where there is a unhealthy market
incentive, somebody wants to rob a bank as a market incentive in the broadest definition of it,
where there is a predatory market incentive, the rule of law is going to bind it.
Well, we can see now with the difficulty in realizing that Facebook and YouTube and like that
have splintered the information commons so profoundly and the cultural cohesion so profoundly
that it's undermining the capacity for democracy, undermining any sense of like
patriotic solidarity. And so you get so much infighting, which means you can't coordinate
relative to an autocracy that doesn't have that, which means the 21st century gets lost to
technologically empowered autocracy because the technologies being used to fragment rather than
create order in the open society, and it's being used to create more order in the closed society.
So we can see already that those companies have a scale that has more coordination power.
I'm talking about asymmetry, then the government has coordination power to be able to effectively
regulate. This is one of the issues where we say we need different problem solving institutions
or institutions and capacities again is we're used to regulating some market thing after the
harm of it is very well known and established. So many people have died of DDT or died of
Vioxx or cigarettes that in some extraordinarily slow process we regulate after the fact with
exponential tech and auto poetic tech that goes very fast and once it's going can't really stop.
If you try to regulate that way, it'll just not work. And you know, Elon made that point with
regard to AI by the time you see the harm that has come, it's too late. And yet we don't have
processes in place to be able to do anticipatory law. And even if we did, we don't have
the kind of institutional integrity and transparency that the people would actually want the
institutions to have that much power. So this is why we need institutions that are trusted
because they're actually trustworthy, which means they have to be checked by the people,
which means you need a cultural kind of renaissance of people that can make sense of
the issues that we're governing on to give rise to new adequately capable institutions.
That's right. Now we're back to the prerequisite for democracy to function and the demise of
the education in the fourth estate, which brings us to the Concelion's project.
Yes. So I just, it was a little bit more time than I wanted to spend on this, but I think it's
fascinating case study of the complexity of the problem and the need to have this very wide lens.
But then how do you actually identify an intervention that a group of people can enact?
Right. And so we'll talk about that intervention. And then I think it then we'll widen the lens
again and talk about, well, how does that intervention fit into a broader movement in
what are the spillovers and what does that look like? So you talk about the aim is to facilitate
a cultural renaissance, developing the full human capabilities and orientations needed for
effective and emergent governance adequate to the novelty and scope of the current problems
and the catastrophic risks that we collectively face. I found it interesting that you described it
as the aim of the project is to help catalyze a cultural enlightenment that will develop a new
set of shared values and capacities. When I look at what Concelion's is doing, I see it so much as
developing the capabilities, the sense making capabilities, both in terms of what that process
looks like, but also the information itself. But I find it curious that you frame it as a
cultural enlightenment. And this may be just a way that I think about what I say when I say
culture. And so I'd love to just double click on why that's the frame that you have for this.
Yeah. What do you think of when you think of culture?
I think of values and beliefs and narratives and worldviews less around problem solving capacities.
Yeah. I don't think you can separate problem solving capacities from values
or beliefs from the process by which we come to believe things.
And so if we're solving a problem, we're solving it in service of something we value.
That's kind of a key. Yeah. I mean, that was my next question since you're integrating your
response was I also found it interesting that values are coming up unless there's sort of a
fundamental value around truth seeking. You won't invest in it. Yeah. Yeah. So even if we just thought
it's about sense making, like, okay, if some people think climate change isn't a real thing at
all and some people think that it's a real thing, but we have time to solve it and some people think
that it's a real thing and it's too late, their different assessments of the world lead to them
thinking different solutions are totally insane or totally necessary. And so there is no way to be
able to coordinate a choice with people who have a completely different sense of what base reality
is. So this is why we need coordination of sense making. We call this epistemic comments. I will
make a distinction real quick of why I use the term epistemic commons rather than knowledge or
information commons. A knowledge commons, which, you know, you can see things like Wikipedia and
kind of open digital movements trying to make a knowledge commons. Can the things that we accept
as the facts of reality that go through some process to determine if it's a fact or not,
what that means, that it is a trustworthy thing, that that's openly available?
Well, that's necessary but not sufficient for a number of reasons. How do we decide that this
was an appropriate process and this thing is a fact or what the confidence margin on this truth is,
or if these are facts that were on one side of a distribution of things we could look at,
so they're true but they're not representative. And so that's an epistemic process to say
how do we know that our knowledge is knowledge and how do we know that our knowledge is relevant
to the choices that we have to make? And let's say I have access to a lot of data but it's more
data than I can possibly process. I don't just need access to the knowledge, I need access to the
knowledge processing capacity. Some of that is computational but some of it is also just the
epistemological capacity to understand. And ultimately, if I've got a bunch of
data and we all agree that it's true and representative, we still have to be able to say
how do we make sense of that in a way that's going to inform a solution that we're going to agree on?
Ultimately, with governance, what we're trying to do is coordinate choice making. How do a lot
of people make choices that don't affect each other or make agreements about choices that end
up working for everybody? And so the sense making is upstream from the choice making. So this is
why we don't talk about the information commons as adequate. We talk about the epistemic commons.
What is the shared process by which we come to understand the world together? Now, if I still
want a totally different world than you do and maybe a world that I think is mutually exclusive
with yours, our values commons isn't in place. So even if we both agree that X is true but I think
X is good and you think X is bad, that's not a third person epistemology philosophy of science
data kind of process. That's a first and second person values kind of process. So if what we're
really trying to do is coordination, which means shared choice making upstream from our choice
making is our sense making and our meaning making, meaning making or values generation, what do we
think is happening in the world is choice making? What do we think the effect of a particular
action will be on that forecasting as part of sense making? But then what is it that we care
about that we're trying to make a choice and service of? Now, we don't just have to share
sense making so we can have a shared sense of the world. We also have to care about what other
people care about to be able to say how do we identify what are all of the values that are
seeking to be served here? Because oftentimes the main reason we can't move forward with something
isn't a breakdown in sense making. Sometimes the breakdown in sense making is secondary to a
breakdown in shared values. So I know a lot of people who don't believe in climate change
and they've never looked at the science. They don't care that they the reason that they don't
believe in it is because the people who believe in it are proposing solutions that they believe
harm something that they care about more. So they think that there's a carbon tax that is going to
be instituted on the whatever countries agree and it's only going to be western countries it's
going to lower the GDP of those countries. China is not going to implement it and they see that
there is a great game of geopolitical power for control of the 21st century between societies that
at least care a little bit about open society versus full technologically empowered autocracy
and they're like your carbon credit solution the way you currently have it proposed in trying to
decrease carbon in a way that will still not be sufficient seeds the 21st century to technologically
empower autocracy. So they can't even come to focus on the sense making because there's a different
problem that they feel more connected to. And so this is why I say we don't understand the
problems well because the problem isn't climate change and the problem isn't U.S.-China relations
the problem isn't the relationship between carbon and GDP or the energy return on energy investment
time of moving to energy economy. The problem is how those problems relate. If I don't understand
how they relate and this is why we get to that the underlying problem is that our problem solving
capacities are inadequate and we have problems. And a really critical point here that that that we
didn't make earlier that I just want to make sure is that so many of our problems are a consequence
of the externalities associated with solutions to the prior problems that we solved. This wrong
scoping of the problem is such a critical piece of the puzzle. And so let's say we go back to the
issue that you brought up earlier of are there kind of infotech and social media technologies
that were trying to solve a problem that have had externalities that weren't intended. So what problem
would Facebook say that it was trying to solve early on? Well it was like giving social connectivity
to people. Now it made all the sense in the world to do the basic things they did. Let's try to make
it useful to as many users as possible so we'll make it free. In order to be able to pay for that
we've got to have an ad model. And we're going to give social connectivity. Well now the ad model
is going to create to optimize for time on site to optimize for ad revenue and it turns out that
when you don't try to figure it out theoretically you actually are empirical and you do the split
testing. The thing that optimizes people's time on site actually makes them more tribal
rather than less tribal. It appeals to their biases and limbic hijacks. So the second order effect
is increased extremism of all kinds on almost every issue. And epistemic nihilism and overwhelm.
Yeah it's a great example. I'm going to take that one with me. But just to help me understand values
for example I think a lot about how capitalism and its insatiable quest for growth has led
to a corruption of values or things like the extent to which we value status which I think
has something to do with human psychology. So when I think about those as values I think about
paradigm shifts like from scarcity to abundance from me to we the narratives around the self from
independent to interconnected. I think of those around the values but I'm still not clear to me
how a concealance is addressing that. Maybe I'm just thinking about values definitely yeah.
So let's say we talk about me to we. There's another step which is small we to larger we right.
We can have a ethnocentric set of values or you know some kind of tribal set of values that is
highly partisan like we feel very identified with blue democratic left ideals and we want to win over
the you know crazy people on the right or with our particular race or religion or whatever it is.
So there there is actually a sense of we but it is a kind of little we that is an arrival risk
relationship with larger we. And because in inhabiting that particular worldview particularly
in this time where there is the incentive in the entire information landscape to drive extremism
and limbic hijack it feels right and righteous to engage in culture wars. Because the other guys
are so wrong and so bad and your situation is so right and so dire and they're bad faith actors
that engaging in whatever kind of method that you need to be able to create the win is the only
appropriate thing to do and so we've seen places where the parties have damaged the solidarity of
the country for a party win. Now what you get is four years if you if you win you get four years
where you don't have enough time because that person needs to get re-elected in four years or
your party needs to win again you're not going to build high-speed trains that take 30 years.
You're actually not going to do anything that takes more than about two years because you need to show
return on that to get elected again. So you'll never have long-term planning you'll actually try to
spend a chunk of the time to appeal to your support base by undoing whatever the other side
didn't last four years knowing they're going to undo your shit in four or eight years and
all of them kind of energy just goes into heat and the other party that you beat doesn't stop
existing because you won and they don't feel better about things they feel worse and they don't
stop being political actors and they learn whatever technologies you employed to get that win and they
iterate on them and up-regulate them and come back stronger so you drive arms races and culture wars.
That's interesting and there's a point that I really want people to understand is
war is very it's a pretty fundamental part of the human story when we study history we're largely
studying histories of wars. World War II was a unique situation up until World War II major
empires always fought there was no time where there was a long period of time where the major
empires weren't fighting. World War II was the first time where our weapons got so big that if
the major empires ever fought everyone would lose you couldn't win anymore that was a fundamental
bright line in the sand change point where and this is why we say that when lose games eventually
become lose lose games because the scope of harm becomes larger than the playing field can handle
and the scope of harm either by the direct harm in a war or the indirect harm in externality you
can't run exponential war you can't run exponential externality on a finite planet. So with World War
II we had to make a world after that where the major superpowers wouldn't war we would proxy war
we would unconventional war but we couldn't kinetic war so mutually assured destruction
was the only way we survived from World War II on and then to be able to say okay well mutually
assured destruction so we're not going to use our kinetic weapons but also we have to then
relate to each other some other way so let's create a bunch of international agreements and
economic interdependence so it's more economically advantageous to run globalism than it is to
war with each other. Well what we get to see is that when the weapon when the kinetic weapon
became large enough the logic of war broke something that I would say is that kinetic war
is only one type of war it's a rivalrous win lose type dynamic there's political war there's
economic warfare there's diplomatic warfare there's information and narrative and the
medic warfare with the exponential tools we have in the narrative landscape and the information
landscape the ability to be able to have someone's news feed just show images that hit their deepest
wounds and bias causing massive vicarious drama and kind of what seems like an overwhelm of supportive
information that creates a sense of both certainty and outrage that is exactly opposed to some other
group certainty and outrage these are the equivalent of nukes in the information space in the epistemic
common space and if you keep trying to win culture wars with them you get the a similar effect to an
actual nuclear war it's as you get a comprehensive lose lose scenario where you end up getting a
fragmented war of all against all and the destruction of the epistemic commons where nobody
actually has an idea what is true anymore and those bad faith interactions that we have with
the out group become what we're most trained in so they end up happening in subtle ways even
within our in group and we get fractal defection so culture war is short-sighted it doesn't recognize
that like the multipolar traps of other kinds that in pursuing the what seems like necessary
short-term win but that has myopia in it it's actually foreclosing on the chance for its own
goals long-term it's creating a world in which its own goals become impossible yep all right
well let's double click on conciliants i want to talk in a little bit more detail about what is it
and then we'll get into to the type of contents and their objectives and and how they interrelate
tell us about the conciliants project you just launched the alpha last month to a few of us
and then you've just launched the beta in in the last week i have this challenge of that the thing
that we are endeavoring to do is doesn't fit into a easy class of it's not doing a journalism
project or a traditional education or a kind of political movement because as we said the
we think the problem-solving processes are inadequate so it's kind of a different class
of things what takes me a little bit more to describe yep fundamentally there's a relationship
between three things that we're trying to elucidate and make clear to a larger group of people that
can use that information and coordinate in a number of ways the three things are helping people
understand the actual nature and novelty of the problem landscape the world currently faces
as we were mentioning earlier climate change isn't a problem it's the relationship between
which is why the attempts to solve climate change keep either not working and driving
polarization and like that or if it works it can work and externalize harm to another area
but mostly because someone sees the area it'll be externalized to they oppose it
it's the relationship of climate change to the relationship between violence and gdp
and us- china relations and on and on you have to be able to think about what is both generating
the problem and how do the problems and are connected to come up with solutions to truly
global scale things that don't continue to polarize half of the population against your solution
which means you have to do shared sense making and values generation to be able to come up with
solutions that can actually be points of real coordination so we're wanting people to understand
the unique problem landscape that we face now and how it is fundamentally different than what
marks looked at the founding fathers looked at what the development of any previous social
system was even trying to deal with and then we want to be able to show how the previous social
systems whether we're talking about socialism or markets or liberal democracy what types of
problems they were trying to solve where those are successful and relevant and we need to factor
them but where they still on their own catastrophically fail in this current problem landscape to show
the need for fundamental innovation in social technology not physical technology physical
applied to but fundamentally innovation and social technology so that's the second step so
the first step is the unique situation we're in now unique problem landscape second is that we need
new problem solving capacities and institutions third is where do those come from if they come
from anything other than the will of the people both asking for them and taking responsibility
to participate with them then they will be oppressive and that's why we say cultural
renaissance ultimately it has to be the people's shared values and shared understanding giving rise
to the change in social technology for it to be commensurate with an open society and
kind of liberty at the level of individuals that's also is commensurate with harmony at the
level of groups right and so so that that's the thing we're trying to elucidate so we have
basically two arms of focus now I'll talk practically that's that's kind of like the
the topics practically there's a publishing focus and a movement building focus the publishing
focus the thing we're focused on first because it's kind of laying out foundational concepts
that we can do movement building around and so in our publishing focus we've got we're developing
a thing called the conciliants papers and a lot like how the writings in the Scottish enlightenment
were kind of philosophical about social theory gave rise to modern capitalism or the federalist
papers and the writings of the founding fathers gave rise to and kind of reified constitution as a
system of government or throughout history that's that's happened we're looking at what are the new
systems of governance and coordination and people are experimenting in blockchain and
countries like Taiwan and Estonia are looking at countrywide experiments and what are the new
coordination capacities the new social technologies what are some of the necessary criteria that they
must have in place to be adequate to the problem landscape enough people have to understand that
that they can be doing prototyping and innovation that is well-informed and we want to see lots of
prototypes and innovations in the future of journalism the future of education the future
economics all of the major institutions so we're writing this series of papers and
there's three major types of papers one question for you because one of one one of the questions
as i'm holding is i'm looking this is about also process and you just mentioned a really crucial
component of process around just this embracing of prototyping and experimentation and iteration for
defining what the new system looks like how does that and that's a very significant shift
in mindset from the dominant way we think about problem solving of just sitting around a table
and finding the answer and then going and implement that answer how does that problem
solving paradigm shift fit into conciliance well it's it's fundamentally the heart of it and
like we said earlier almost all of human history it was tribal depending upon which
model of early human origins we're looking at two or three hundred thousand or more years of
almost all just nope never more than about a hundred and fifty people together and then this
thing of larger numbers of people being very very recent and beset with environmental difficulties
in war and subjugation and stuff kind of throughout and so there were problem solving processes in
that place where it based on the scale everyone could participate in coming up with a solution so
everybody could feel at least relatively informed by and good about and they could feel a certain
fealty to each other and interconnectedness with each other so that and they could all sense the
same base reality and so there was something about the problem solving process that was the
majority of human history that was very scale dependent and then we can see clear reasons in
history why that thing couldn't continue but the other thing that took off wasn't because
it was comprehensively better at problem solving it solved the problem of effective warfare better
it made it through famines and wars better but while actually destroying environments faster and
subjugating and killing people faster in many ways too so and as we know about evolution that
evolution can be kind of blind and select for things that are advantageous now that actually make
more likelihood for extinction in the future because of fragility we see a similar thing here
where what has one that has made it through wars of various kinds with exponential tech
applying the same principles self-terminates and that's I think the kind of key insight is that
what has been selected for was game theoretic dominance at the level of group game theoretic
dominance at the level of group we would argue self-terminates in the verticalizing part of
exponential tech so we actually need something beyond that so there's like tribal which was
scale dependent then there was like empire up until now which is not scale dependent in the
same way but has these massive externalities then there is is there something that can operate at
the scales that we need to operate that can also be a safe vessel for the amount of power we have
that can be not massively externality driving and a way of thinking about that is
technology extends the power of our choices exponential technology means exponentially
more powerful choices what does it take to have humanity be a safe vessel for the power of
exponential technology where we neither utilize it in intentionally harmful or unintentionally
harmful ways to not even use it in unintentionally harmful ways like the facebook example and a
million other examples we can give like that is requires not just values but also the kind of
thoughtfulness and wisdom and problem-solving process to not just define problems in a narrow
way a win for our group or a win for some metric like you know co2 or gdp or whatever it is that
it can externalize harm to other metrics that also matter so there has to be an in as there's an
increase in the scope of effect in systems that are intrinsically interconnected there has to be
an increase in the capacity to process those interconnections and internalize those externalities
to the problem definition itself yep well let's talk about the three different variants of the
publishing component yes so basically three types of papers that interlink there's kind of
theoretical papers we're calling them the foundation series uh situational assessments about current
situations in the world and this meta-news thing the foundational papers are addressing
some of the stuff we're talking about today like what was the basis of the dunbar number or kind
of scale limitations and then how different social technologies operate at different scales and where
we look at things like the binding energy of a group relative to the cleaving energy of a group
and different systems of coordination and what we're really doing with the foundation series is
helping to understand principles of human social coordination the various types that have occurred
the way that changes in our technology and the techno industrial base have always created
different types of behaviors and world dynamics that ended up mandating new types of social
technology and then an awareness of how the new physical tech that both exists and is emerging
now is both obsolete in the adequacy of our previous social technology and then foreshadowing what
does the adequate future social technology look like so i'll give you an example in one vertical
let's say we take education we have a series of pieces on education there will be a similar
one on the fourth estate and economics but on education fundamentally we want to start with
what is education like what is the role of education in the most fundamental sense to
any civilization from a triumphant well it has to do with the intergenerational knowledge transfer
of the entire knowledge that needed to run the civilization plus the capacity development to
develop the new capacities that will be needed moving forward so maintain the old relevant ones
develop new ones and so we can think of it as kind of social auto poesis and obviously when
you have a change in the technological base so now we have an industrial revolution people
need to learn how to do new things that they didn't need to know how to do before now they need to
learn machinery and how to you know operate industrial capacities and those types of things
and so there's just kind of more principled fundamental understanding of what a necessary
education system must be which is the development of the humans and everything that they need from
civics to law to to all the aspects of manufacturing and industry and etc to be able to mediate the
civilization moving forward then we have to explain how an open society has a higher educational
demand than a closed society because if I have a monarch and or a nobility that is making the
major decisions then people need educated how to do their labor function how to do their specific
kind of market function but they don't need educated on how to make the major decisions of
the society but if we have this idea that rather than a few people where you can have some cognitive
elite that just learns that stuff who are focused on making the decisions if everyone is going to
participate in the decision making so you have something like governance of foreign by the people
then the people need educated not only for their position they're going to have in kind of the
market and labor and but also the position they're going to have for civic duty that they can
understand the issues upon which we are need to govern well enough that they can actually
meaningfully engage yeah I mean I I see the foundational series is really essential for
understanding human society I mean very much as the conversation that we're having at dent right
how did we get here and and how do we use that understanding to inform a social redesign
right and and this is something that you have explored you know incredible beautiful detail
for decades so it's an extraordinary contribution to humanity to have that laid out and I know
there's a tremendous amount I mean what I also think well let's talk about the three types because
it's just really beautiful how you allocate alloc excuse me how you how you describe the guidelines
for the team and I think this is so fascinating right how the team presents information and does
it in a way that is modeling sense making how it protects against its own bias how recognize how
the way that it's presented might reflect how that information is received I think that that's
also fascinating but I want to talk about that so there's this the foundational piece
and then there's two more so let's talk about those yeah I appreciate you moving us along
if you don't mind I I want to just leave a last part on that education thing yeah yeah of course
an example of how for a single kind of institutional capacity it closes because that part was largely
theoretical and historical there's a one more historical part of an overviewing how the decay
of education in the US and the west in general has happened in over the last several decades
but then the key part what is all that culminating to is a vision for the future of education that
says if this is what education is fundamentally so has to do necessary for it to do for civilization
to work and for it to be an open civilization these things well then in a post digital age
and information singularity age and age with technological and AI automation
what the fuck is the role of education what would it look like in that world
when you don't have to educate humans to do things that you can program robots to do
and you can't educate humans to be subject matter experts when there's more information than any
human can learn in a subject after information singularity in the way you used to be able to
but you can have AIs do it now you have a very deep existential question of in that world
what is the role of humans and what do we want it to be how do we want to steer what is fundamentally
meaningful about human life and what are humans also uniquely good at relative to automation
where then there is a symbiotic intelligence between what gets programmed and machinery and
what gets developed in the humans this now gets to core this is why the values come up core
existential questions that are going to guide the future and if we don't consciously do it
then whatever way the market happens to steer exponential tech accidentally does it and almost
all of those attractors are dystopic so being able to point to what could the future of education
look like there and this both gets this both shows a way through the dystopic things that can occur
with an information singularity and technological automation and unemployment whatever and shows
it can go particularly terrible ways is there any good way that it could go is there a pro-topic
attractor and if so what does that world look like and what does the restructure of our social
technology look like so I just wanted to close that because I think that's that's the in that
that's what we're actually trying to converge towards and it's so that more people can be
engaged in these conversations and actually the participation and critiquing the ideas making
the ideas better expanding on them and prototyping them yep so that's the foundation series that is
the core of the thing we're trying to do the situational assessments are where we take the
social theory that we're laying out there and assess current situations in the world that we
need to govern on that are important critical things but where we're assessing them not just
through the normal kind of geopolitical economic lenses that foreign affairs with the diplomat
or the economist would but where we're if we're looking at US-China relationships we'll be applying
the concept of multipolar traps and race to the bottom scenarios to be able to look at the fundamental
coordination challenges to say what would it take to actually shift this or being able to apply
models of institutional decay to say if this was actually still the government of the 40s or 50s
we would have built high-speed trains what happened so there's a bunch of social theory
that makes the world make more sense than the current models through which it's being perceived
and this both makes the social theory get reified and people can understand that it also can give
people insights into the current world landscape that can bring about more effective problem
solving so that's the situational assessments as an application of those principles of kind of
how to think about society to how to think about the current world problems yeah and I love the
interconnection between the foundation and the situational assessment and so far as the
situational assessments are really modeling that sense-making right and and then also feeding back
into it with the with the way the specific details can give clarification and then wherever
we're going to do a situational assessment on a world topic where people's opinions are already
fraught where there's highly polarized perception then either what we're going to do is going to
sound like just a new one of the chems in the narrative landscape so if we're doing a topic like
COVID viral origins or climate change or anything like that where the existing landscape is already
highly polarized then in addition to just doing the situational assessment we have to also say
what are the various kind of primary trending narratives that already exist that people are
camped out in having culture wars around and how did they come to be what are the partially
true things they're looking at what are the values they're connected to that's the steel manning
side where is there either kind of omission or some epistemic mistakes happening or even vested
interests driving narrative warfare and propaganda happening and then after being able to survey the
landscape of narratives look at the forensics of how they emerge both steel man them and do critical
analysis then we step back and say what can we say about the space as a whole with high certainty
and what stuff should just live in uncertainty the goal there once you do several of those is to
hopefully one give people better when they get to see how oh that looked like a fact and it made
it to the fact checker but it was cherry picked so yes it was a true fact but the cherry picking and
the decontextualization of the fact and then the kind of narrative framing or layoff framing on it
made a conclusion that was somewhere between wrong and partial from things that all looked
true in their parts now that i see that i can look for it everywhere and be less susceptible so it's
creating like a memetic immune system to inoculate against the propaganda narrative warfare while
hoping to train people on the epistemology to actually make sense after they've recovered their
sense making from being hijacked this is such an essential piece of the puzzle right and that it
after you are able to see the meta-news you build up your own capacity to notice information and
narrative warfare and in a sense inoculate yourself from it and because we said the problems need new
institutions the institutions have to emerge from the people which means we have to have a culture
of people that understand and care we have to be able to have some people stop being pulled into
the existing broken culture and culture wars and be able to say like no i actually don't want to be
partisan i don't want to be part of a camp that has partial views and have my bias confirmed like i
want to understand what is true as effectively as i can and i want to understand what matters to
everybody there's a certain respect and dignity for all humans that i have where i realize that
whatever i do i can't make them stop being actors in the world so i'm stuck with them and
that they love their kids and they dream about things and they're afraid of things and they
have feelings and i i want to understand well enough that i can help work towards solutions
that could actually be viable for everybody and that means we have to have people who stop getting
captured by the existing culture war nonsense so that they can then start seeking each other and
developing a new culture that is oriented in this way yep and and that is a really critical
question about who who who is this built for in the most important sense in the broadest longest
term sense everybody though that obviously isn't the initial answer the initial answer is
especially with the foundation's work we're we're trying to do like what is fundamentally
knowledge work at the edge of social theory to be able to not just give deeper and better
understanding of the nature of the problems but also criteria for what it would take to solve them
so then we're looking for other people who are who want to think about and work on those issues
thinking and also people who want to implement and prototype and so that could be anyone who's
from people who are working in journalism to who are working in education to who are working on
blockchain and decentralized autonomous organizations to people who are working in
government and want to make different applications there you know whatever any anything like that now
those are the people who we think will be automatically drawn and see the relevance and
be able to participate right away but it is for us to really be talking about a cultural
enlightenment it has to actually become decentralized wide and the zeitgeist of it represented
in all of the subcultures so we had we had someone who's working on a rap battle platform
reach out to us and we had an interesting conversation because they they said you know
people are pissed off and the rap battle allows people to express their kind of anger emotional
energy and upset in a way that doesn't require violence and can kind of sublimate it but to
be good at it you also have to have good command of language which means that you have to think
about topics better and have better words and better kind of verbal fluency and you have to
listen to what the other guy rapped about so you have to listen well if you're gonna rap out a well
so there's a way to be able to take people's passion take their upset sublimate it and actually
create an incentive for them to grow in their in their listening and thinking and communication
skills and like fucking awesome that's great so then they were saying could we get the best rap
battlers that we're bringing there to learn some of the information that is more comprehensive and
nuanced that you're bringing about on the topics they like to rap about like yeah police violence
and whatever yeah where then people are impressed by that and say how did you learn that stuff and
that creates an on ramp that wouldn't be for us to figure out it would be for them to figure out
and for us to help how we could sure and there were similar groups that were saying how do we
how do we do a uniquely Islamic enlightenment how do we do a unique enlightenment to the culture of
all of the different cultures and it's not going to be ours to figure out it's going to be ours to
facilitate as best we can to the degree that there is interest and so that's where the project
has to be decentralized and this is the movement building side we're putting some information out
the movement building side is less engineered on our part and more supportive well i want to
zoom out to the movement building piece in a minute but i want to stay into the the weeds a
little bit on conciliants because i think there's some more interesting pieces to talk about what i
find interesting about the rap battle example is that some people are more amenable to messages
from different messengers that decentralized nature i think is important for that but there's
such great care that the conciliants project is putting into thinking about how to present the
information in order to not cause a reflexive reaction understand how people with different
political or philosophical views might respond to the information be very very cautious about
showing really what's under the hood what you don't know and i just love to speak a little bit more
to that because having just an awareness around how things are presented and perceived in order
to hold the position that conciliants aspires to is such an important part of it yeah this is a
very sensitive thing which is the moment that virtue starts being signaled intentionally for
the benefit it provides rather than the signal be in almost unconscious and automatic byproduct of
its of it being lived earnestly it starts to destroy the basis of virtue everywhere because
people can't tell which one is which and then kind of it there's a nihilism that can occur so
there's a way of being diplomatic for strategic reasons and people will learn this in rhetoric a
lawyer might be able to learn how to argue either side but they don't actually seek to inhabit it
they're not necessarily feeling it or caring it's actually a skill to be able to win arguments
or to be able to avoid critique or something like that that's not what we're seeking to do
ultimate like we're writing a a piece right now on what we would call good faith and bad
faith argumentation but there is a naive version of good faith argumentation that doesn't recognize
that some people who feel and are oppressed by a system end up having understandably
drawn emotions about the nature of things and less patience and capacity for patients and
maybe even less access to the education that can do the good faith thing so they're like no
fuck this good faith thing is a is a type of like gas lighting and but then you get culture wars
that lead to lose lose for everybody so there has to be not the naive version not the cynical version
but the post cynical version what does earnest good faith actually look like and it looks like
the worst kind of bad faith is performative good faith where someone is speaking like they respect
or they care but they don't really this is one of the things that we've that's that I found most
interesting in studying cluster b dynamics that narcissism and sociopathy often have the trait
that the people have higher than average cognitive empathy well lower than average embodied empathy
and that means that they can model someone else's theory of mind well enough to sell you
something or kind of manipulate you but because of the cognitive empathy but the embodied empathy
means they don't actually care and so the like yes you can see our guiding principles of when
we're writing things that if we're taking a particular social theorists idea on something
we both under and we're going to utilize it we both want to study that social theorist and we
want to study the critiques of them at minimum if not the whole environment that they were emerging
in response to and we want to think about the various political camps and cultural camps that
will be reading this and how we'll land for them not though from the strategic purpose of you know
how do we communicate without blemishes but from the point of view of if the solutions that we're
working towards are not authentic solutions for everyone they won't work and so nothing less than
actually and if they don't factor the the values and the truth that every perspective has they will
be missing critical stuff and they won't work and so what we'd say is an erratically interconnected
world whatever you think you don't care about is connected to what you think you do care about
and if you are even rationally clear enough you'll recognize the things that you don't care about
you should and so yes there's a lot of principles in our writing of how to be able to factor the
various perspectives and be thoughtful about it and and that factoring advisors or if we're taking
advisor input on a topic we're seeking far left and far right views we're seeking you know if we're
if we were going to do a topic on the india china border or the israel palestine border we'd want to
be seeking views on all sides of that and really seeking to understand them otherwise
otherwise what are we doing we're not going to be able to offer anything that could possibly really
help but all of those practices arise from the the actual belief that it's it that it's
authentically important and necessary to understand where people are coming from and actually caring
as opposed to a performative basis so it just had to underline that is it possible to not have
the work biased and influenced by worldview no you just do the best that you can we don't
say we're doing unbiased work we're saying we're doing active bias correction
and so rather than try to say there is some objective point of view this is like you know
einstein made this clear with there is no non-inertial reference frame yeah what is the
mass or the length the most fundamental physical properties of a thing depends upon your relative
inertial reference frame and there is no absolute inertial reference frame and then postmodernism
kind of took some of the critiques further of there's more stuff in any given situation to pay
attention to than you possibly can there's a thousand or a trillion times more bits of information
than you can pay attention to so even if you do perfectly good objective science which subset you
chose to pay attention to has a bias built into it and so rather than try to do the naive objectivist
move that says no bias instead we'll try to say what seemed like the various biases that are
clustering together as camps and how do we take all of them how do we really try to inhabit as
best we can talk with the people that are there and inhabit as best we can so that we can bias
correct and say oh there there's some signal here there's actually really key that taking this
particular lens on it was key to taking this other lens was key to now then when we factor these
together is there some higher order reconciliation that we can start to endeavor towards and then
recognize that that will never be perfect right so there is a continuous process improvement
where the confidence margin is always less than a hundred percent and the there is active seeking
of what it is we're currently missing so you were talking about one of the things in culture was not
just shared values but shared beliefs i would say that i i mostly am interested in the types of
culture that are more about the process by which we come to belief in the belief itself and all
the beliefs held softly enough that they can evolve with the input of new information i just love how
deeply you've thought about bias correction which makes a lot more sense to me than not
having it bias in any way because if i ask the question i don't think it's possible but then
there's the layer of the governance and incentive structures within the organization that i very
much appreciate so i think it's worth speaking to that quickly you have a handful of ethical
commitments maybe i'll just articulate them and we'll double click on a couple of them
so one is open access to all the content i think that's a pretty straightforward one
freedom from competing incentives why don't you say just a quick something about that one
well i mean this is a tiny little team trying to do some work but we had to think about
you know there's there's a reason that everyone who is putting information into the information
landscape of the the media space why there is so little trust and so we wanted to think about what
are the you know a news organization has to pay for itself and it either sells subscriptions in
which case appealing to the beliefs that keep people subscribing or it sells ads and you know
there's some it's very hard to not have perverse incentive of some kind and so we were trying to
think about what are all the types of perverse incentive and how can we correct for all of
them as best we can and so we decided that we would do this as a pure non-profit with no
none of the standard revenue models that an information project would have so we're not
selling the content the way that a subscription journal would because even though we think that
is better oftentimes than a ad model if we're really trying to make open society possible we
don't want people's money to determine whether or not they have access to the information to
participate civically that the that the epistemic commons really must be a commons and must be
managed with no other agenda so pure non-profit and only those people who believe that this is a
commons it should be supported will end up funding it and we'll be able to do as much as we can do
based on the funding we can give that kind so we're not selling ads we're not selling the content
we're not selling people's data right and so then that then there's transparency financial
resources you're structured as a 501c3 and to your point about competing incentives you double
clicked on this with one of the commitments which is just freedom from donor influence so it's all
non-restricted support yeah but donor wants to be able to say that they're supporting us great
that's true if they would like to have some place on our side or whatever where we discuss who our
donors are we're probably open to that we haven't got there yet if they want to influence our editorial
process in any way then it's in absolute no we won't take their money and that's already come up so
far and like it would just that is antithetical to the goal of the whole thing so the support has
to be that people actually believe in the project and that's it and so what that means is it's
fucking harder to fund this thing because I foreclose most of the funding methods and so we
are actively seeking people who believe in it and want to support it we won't make compromises on this
to be able to have scale like that's a very easy political compromise to say hey what they're asking
us to do is really minor and it allows us to fund the thing we just won't do it we'll just do less
stuff but we feel that it's critical that what we do has the best integrity we know how to create
and that that's more important than the scale consideration and that speaks to the next commitment
which is quality over quantity and then and I really appreciate this one so I wanted to speak to a
little bit more because I think it just speaks to how carefully you're thinking about the incentive
structure within the team and the implications of who's reading it which is collective attribution
of authorship yeah yeah we are not innovating here like we're following practices that other
groups have thought about it seems to make sense here so the economist for instance has a lot of
its writing with no specific bylines we thought that was important for this project so some someone
can go to the team page and see who's on the team who's involved in writing but there are no bylines
on any specific article there's a couple reasons for that several reasons one is honestly our
editorial process there is no one person writing these there might be a lead author that kind of
does first writing but there are multiple different types of editing that are editing for the social
theory for the facts for the quality of readability for the citations and even as far as the kind of
theoretical framework goes there is a deep intellectual process where everyone who has
knowledge on the thing is contributing upfront so it really is being produced by a group collective
intelligence process as best as we can so it's just more honest to say that i love the other reason
though is that someone can't critique the article based on identity politics and add harm in the
meaning the the person you actually have to engage with the content of the article because we have
people on our team of different races and different genders and different nationalities and they're all
contributing but the the content is the thing that we want people to engage with the other thing is
we're going to say things that are controversial and we want to protect the authors from not
having to not say what's true or be targeted and we also don't want that if someone is a
was going to be a primary author on a piece and have their name that they would put more energy
into that than where they're supporting another piece just their own internal perverse incentive of
identity so structuring it this way everyone is really just focused on the quality of the content
of everything oh i love it no and i just really appreciate again the incentive implications of
that particular commitment so related to that you mentioned the authentic diversity of viewpoints
and backgrounds transparency and methodology we've talked about just going under the hood and seeing
what your modeling is to to lead you to conclusions in the analysis and then the last the last one
is expiration of the project which i really appreciate too so why don't you speak to a little
bit more to that one yeah this is this one is a little bit more challenging decision to make than
the other ones but we decided that we would give the project a five-year time to live
so that's five years as of a week ago i say it's challenging because there's not that much time
to be able to try and have some of the effects that we want to have why did we consider that
important in one way it seems stupid if you're going to do the work to actually try to build
operational capacities in a team and trustworthiness that you would kill that thing as opposed to
continue with it but for this purpose it actually felt really important
organizations end up having a desire to keep living independent of their ongoing utility
and we can see in the nonprofit space in particular where this is a source of perverse incentive
that if we have a nonprofit that is managing some world problem if it truly solved or obsolete
that problem would obsolete itself and the power of everyone in there would go away so so the
incentive of a system to keep being the system can be perverse so we wanted to just get rid of
that upfront we wanted to make it clear that this will not be a part of the long-term power or
meteor institutional landscape and it wasn't seeking such a position and as a result when the
project closes we're going to do a public postmortem of where we feel that we were successful
where we feel that we failed so that other groups that want to do similar things can can learn
our ability to succeed at affecting culture which is a long-term project obviously has to
continue past five years so we're only successful if we helped lots of other groups be more successful
so we didn't want any other groups to think oh we're trying to do something kind of like
consignance projects or they're a competitor it's like no if you want to do something good in
journalism or in education or in governance or whatever we fucking want to help you if we can
limited only by our bandwidth nothing else to the extent we have bandwidth we want to help any
group doing meaningful things and then the other thing is it for for a cultural enlightenment
right to truly be that it has to become the zeitgeist of a time in a way that is totally
decentralized there is no control of the memes or the hashtags it is actually the spirit of the time
that lots of people are feeling and sensing and truly directed by the collective intelligence so
it's important that there isn't something like a center right so in so far as what we're doing
had any kind of directive nature to it it's important that it's temporary and so there are
other reasons but those are some of the main reasons for the finite time to live well that's
naturally flowing into just the again looking at it in the context of its role in a broader
movement and i know you've touched on it in the conversation but why don't you speak to it just
a little bit more yeah movements is a weird word i i use it sometimes because there's a
sense that a movement is bigger than a particular organization or project but most of the movements
we can think of in recent times are like for a particular political party or or a problem that
again is higher up on the problem yeah and and so then they those movements engage narrative warfare
to try to win and things like that in cultural war what we're talking about i think like if we if
we talk about a cultural enlightenment we're not being naive to the fact that every previous
cultural enlightenment had major problems of course when we're looking at modernity we're
like well all of the destruction to the environment that happened because of the industrial revolution
and all of colonialism whatever was empowered by that thing so we're not we're not pretending that
it was something that it wasn't and the same with the kind of greek hellenistic enlightenment
but we can also look at the hindu enlightenment and chinese enlightenment and the confucius
daoist times that when i think of a cultural enlightenment what i think of is a time period
where there is some increased access to knowledge widely as opposed to just a priestly or a nobility
or a limited class having access and when there's some capacity that the culture as a whole values
and invests in the the knowledge and really the knowledge virtue and development of the people
widely that's roughly the thing we'd call cultural enlightenment the previous ones
weren't adequate to what the world needs now so we're talking about one that is different in kind
but that's what we feel is like it's it really is cultural enlightenment or bust for the world
in the way we look at it because anything less than a population that wants to build new systems
and is capable of participating with them not just systems but things that are beyond systems new
capacities and doesn't just want the rights associated but is willing to take the responsibilities
to make it happen anything less than that is still a dystopic failure mode and because either you
don't get the capacities or you get them with oppression which is a different type of dystopia
saying like cultural enlightenment or bust we would say that like dense is already a nascent
expression of that thing that there are people that come here to want to think about what is the
future of capitalism what's the future of democracy in a post-digital world and we'd say that the
social dilemma getting the huge scale of traction that it got is a sign of that and we'd say that
all of the awareness of fake news and could we could we establish some better kind of news and
like that there's a lot of little pieces of people recognizing the depth of the problem
landscape and that the the information sphere the cultural sphere is one of the places we
have to work we'd say that that kind of movement or enlightenment is starting it's nascent but it
doesn't the part that's focused on social media the part that's focused on journalism the part
that's focused on the perverse incentives of capitalism don't necessarily recognize themselves
as the same thing yep and so how we reframe those is all working on necessarily integrated facets
of the next phase of civilization and culture rising to be able to meet that that's one of the
things we want to help do is that framing that makes a lot of sense i i do want to i want to
now get into the specifics because of what we're where you're at right now with the project and
what you need but before we do that i do have one question related to sense making i had actually
had a really interesting conversation i don't know a month or so ago with with ali and david
from rebel wisdom i know you've done a lot of videos with them and your war on sense making is
you know a must must watch that i i've sent to everyone really really insightful really clarified
my thinking on these topics and we were just talking about sense making and and one of the
other things that we've been touching on a dent is i'm i'm sure you're familiar with danela meadows
work i just find it so interesting as she talks about we actually can never understand the complexity
of the universe and to do the best that we can we have to bring our whole humanity beyond our
intellect and our intuition one of the things i've come to appreciate just quite recently
is the the role of our gut and intuition we've looked at personal versus social change and
turning inwards and just your your intuition around the right direction and this sense making
that we've been talking about with resilience feels very very intellect dominant or exclusive
intellect we also talked in that conversation about the importance of having a sophistication
emotionally or in in your body or in your own just a mindfulness to to seek because some of
these are hard conversations and they might trigger traumatic experiences so understanding
having the sophistication to know okay my physiology is as elevated it's compromising
my sense making that sophistication feels important for sense making competence understanding
that we're integrating with other components of sense making not just intellect feels important
so i'm curious just your take on those things as it relates to this medic question that you're
addressing which is the sense making crisis yeah totally this is why you were reading the
kind of mission statement that's on the home page which is a work in progress because it's
it's kind of accurate but not obvious what it means yet but it said something to the effect of
that we're focused on developing the full human capacities necessary to a culture that can give
rise to institutions adequate to the problems the full human capacities not just the cognitive
capacities now it's not specifying in there what those full human capacities are because it's already
a long sentence yeah but you're mentioning some of them and this is why i said ultimately if we're
trying to coordinate good choices choices are not just informed by our cognitive process they're not
just informed by our sense making but by what we value in our meaning making and by lots of other
subtler process a lot of times our choice isn't really a choice it's a reaction out of kind of
emotional trigger so to even have the possibility of choice there has to be a level of mindfulness
and capacity to both notice and work with those types of emotional and physiological responses
and so it seems like it's intellectual on the surface but not really once you scratch a tiny
bit just okay great because if you're going to steal man another person's perspective which includes
both what they see in the world and their values well enough to have a conversation that could
actually lead somewhere you're actually the only way to do that is to really really try to hear them
and not just try to hear them but try to inhabit as best you can knowing that you can't right this
is there's an epistemic humility and an epistemic commitment at the same time yeah most people have
there's an article on the site on the challenge of 21st century sense making
currently and it talks about that most people go from epistemic hubris to epistemic nihilism in
one step they're they're either certain they know what the world is or when they see the complexity
of it they give up and don't feel like they can can understand or flip back to certain and we have
to walk something that is totally between those which is holding the depth of uncertainty and the
desire to progressively know better so that we can make better choices knowing that we'll still
never get to 100 certainty but this humility has come up a lot in our conversations too I think
that's incredibly important yeah so there's this epistemic epistemic humility and kind of moral
humility because it's so easy to be both certain and righteous and that just makes you dangerous
anyone who's certain and righteous is going to be part of a war very likely and so we need
it something that is more open more curious and curious doesn't mean not rigorous I can I don't
have to accept every idea to listen to it and try it on and to seek is there some signal in it and
maybe also some distortion or or something missing and but yeah if in order to do sense making that
can go anywhere I have to really try to listen to where someone else is coming from and oftentimes
not just to what they're saying but if we're going to be able to present something that's viable
it's almost like the generator function of what they're saying yeah you have to trying to sense
into understand the emotional landscape so that you can understand how they'll respond
emotional identity group affiliation all of those types of things to be able to say
could this actually work for them if I am am I coming up with a proposition
and it's not going to be my job to do it they're going to make a counter proposition but am I even in
like if I'm communicating I'm seeking communion and so it's not the hubris to say I can know what
they're thinking no nonsense it's the seeking communion that is real communication you know
it's funny I I just thought about identity and I thought to raise it and then I thought oh I don't
want to take us two sideways but I think that this is extremely just mentioned it so I'm glad you
did I think that this is an extraordinarily important piece of it because sometimes oh oftentimes
maybe most of the time these beliefs are tied to one's identity which makes them much less mutable
because it's in a front on one's identity to admit that those beliefs are wrong and evolve them
I'm curious your thoughts on that piece
yeah so you know lots of philosophers throughout history have noticed that
the soldiers on both sides of almost every war were certain their side was right
and in the you know Protestant Catholic wars or whatever you've got people praying to supposedly
the same god to deliver the righteousness of their holy war and so this kind of I'm identifying with
a group that is less than everybody for and see other groups as in fundamentally but also
inexorably rival-risk relationship and my own sense of safety security belonging okayness requires
fealty dynamics that keep me from being able to hear other perspectives that's part of war
right that's part of at minimum culture war and the larger scope of economic and diplomatic
and political and even kinetic war is part of that if there's a tribe that's isolated
and there's no other tribes very close the people have to have at least their sense of identity
bound with the other people in the tribe enough that they're willing to make certain compromises
of what they would want most in the moment for what others want because they're going to do that for
them and but they don't necessarily have to have an identity with the other tribes because
they're not affecting them are affected by them as soon as we start having other people
and not just people obviously this also comes to the earth and and the world in which we live
beyond the human sphere but we'll start the human sphere soon as there are other people
that our actions are affecting their actions are affecting us if we don't identify with them
then we're going to be bound to rivalry as soon as we get that exponential rivalry
self-terminates and that right now the phone that we're all talking on was made on a six
continent supply chain that many many countries that we are all inexorably affecting everybody
an identity with anything less than everyone ends up being self-terminating I would argue
and that doesn't mean I can't have groups that I have more
familiarity with that's of course going to be the case but it means that
there is some kind of universalism that I am seeking as well in addition to whatever groups I
might happen to have more proximity to okay so let's talk about where you are now with
conciliance you just launched the beta yeah I happen to you and I know each other I happen to
be on here speaking but the whole team just launched the beta and the whole team there
there's a whole group of people before it was called the conciliance project that we're working
together on what is the theory of change and how do we develop that and so just important to make
that distinction so yes the the the beta just launched and in all honesty if it wasn't for
fundraising I wouldn't have even wanted it to launch yet but we're like we said a non-profit
that is seeking only funds that are not conditionalized and conditional I mean they can be conditionalized
or tranched on can we actually execute that's fine but so we raised just what we needed to
get to a prototype because since what we're talking about doesn't fit into a normal project
category and since it's oriented towards abstraction we thought it would be reasonable
for people to wonder can these people who are oriented to abstract things actually execute
so we're like well let's go ahead and put something up and then we'll raise the rest of the funds
that we need where we have at least a prototype and someone can get more of a sense of it so
we got that up and concilianceproject.org you can have a look and it really is like I said quite
early yeah up a week ago in the theory pieces or the foundational pieces the first one
that you'll see on there is a democracy in the epistemic commons and it's just explaining how
in epistemic commons is a necessary thing for an open society in a way it isn't for a closed
society it's an antecedent we've lost at what does it take to regain it that kind of thing
and it's a simple concept but it's not well described in a concise way anywhere else it's like
embedded in lots of books of political philosophy and so then the next one in that series was the
unique challenges to the epistemic commons are to sense make in the 21st century why is it much
why is this not the founding fathers world of what it takes to make sense of the world
and so you can see there's a couple pieces in that foundation series we actually have a list
of the theoretical pieces that we're working on like the next 60 of them and we're going to get it
up on the site soon because it'll give people a sense of the shape of where it's going and
we're seeking more collaborators that have depth of expertise and wisdom so if someone has real
expertise in these we'd like them to reach out and there's also a list of the situational
assessments in the meta-news that we're going to be doing the few situational assessments that are
up there like china's activity in east africa or understanding what is uniquely different about
french secularism the new s secularism they did not yet get to be applications of the social
theory because we haven't written all the social theory pieces they were really just showing we had
a team of people with the kind of political and epistemic and journalistic and intelligence
backgrounds to do good situational assessment so really early prototype in that way you needed
examples of each of the variant and it might seem like they are relatively randomly selected
topics because to some degree they are like why would we pick china in east africa rather than
china's activity in latin america or in telecom or in the digital currency space why didn't we just
start with the topic of us-china relationship shaping the power dynamic of the 21st century
that bigger piece is harder to do a really really good job you've got a factor what's
happening in all the other places so we need more people and resources so we you know we started
in that way we will be building out the theoretical pieces largely first and then the situational
assessments it's our goal to start with the kind of highest topic highest leverage ones
like an overview of the current catastrophic risk landscape ai risk biotech risk grid fragility
risk those types of things yeah and all of it how fast we get to it is based on resource dependence
sure sure and then you did one meta news one and i appreciated how you talked about how the meta
news is particularly labor intensive obviously because you're looking at the entire landscape
of the narrative around a particular issue yeah the meta news is a method that we prototyped and
obviously it'll we'll keep getting better at the method as we go we we did not choose to try and
take on something like climate change or vaccines or systemic racism that like the etiology of it
is forever ago and millions of articles we we did honestly just for ease of ability to do it as a
prototype yeah there was this topic during the george floyd protests of bricks being used to break
windows and like that and the escalation from peaceful protests to riots seeming to have
bricks involved and there were these pallets of bricks and were the pallets of bricks planted
and there were indications that there were agent provocateurs in some place that agent
provocateurs also mean there were bricks and the media landscape polarized over this for like
three weeks it was a major topic the right said that antifa did it and the left said that white
supremacists did it and the mainstream news said it's a conspiracy theory nobody did it and and
then we just moved on to the next topic and yet that particular everyone believing rapidly very
different things without good epistemic process it actually led to an increase in violence the
belief that the other side was escalating to violence or doing something that would make it
look like our side was the side that escalated the violence actually helped an escalation to
violence and so it was just a very good example but where there was really only like three weeks
of stuff total so we could actually get every single article and news piece ever written on it and
use some ml tools and study the whole thing so we did that and we did apply some kind of big data
machine learning tools to then be able to see what the total types of arguments were and then
analytic processes on those arguments and be able to break down what is known and not known about
the situation how did the ideas trend where did some stuff look like an organic growth that actually
looks like it was inorganically facilitated that kind of thing and then make generalized
insights of like what went wrong here what went wrong in the epistemic process and those
generalized insights are object lessons to say when you're looking at other things look for this
kind of thing and our hope is actually we do a few more of those and then we're we made the
methods by which we're doing it open source and we'll make in more detail open source we would
love for organizations that have better resources than us to take that on like this all open source
we would love for writers or you know some big news organization to take that kind of thing on
and do it with the transparency that people could trust it or new new orgs to do so and so that one
is really hopefully just an example of an open source prototype of a way to try to heal the
fragmentation in the information landscape around polarized topics yeah okay so we've got a prototype
that's up the very lightweight prototype that it gives us examples of these these different variants
and then we've got a very long list of of topics to cover let's talk about what you need right now
what kind of support do you need yeah great one other thing I will say is we're not just writing
long form articles I forgot to say this part and I'll come back to the need so the conciliants papers
I was mentioning we've got these three different kinds of papers but they all interlink because if
we're talking about the current state of education we need to reference in that one the other piece
that is written on principles of civilizational and institutional decay so that people can actually
apply and understand how institutional decay occurs and etc so there's like they interlink
and the goal is rather than write this as like some three-volume QGS book that nobody would read
that being able to write it in these articles means that whether someone's interested in
entering through the perspective of education or economics or public culture or whatever
they can enter through lots of places even though an article is long for normal articles for if you
think of it as reading a book or you know a book chapter like it's 30 minutes you know 30 40 minutes
you can read it in one sitting but it's deep enough that if you actually want to work in the
space and make progress you have a deep enough set of insights to actually be able to work with the
space and then you can follow the connections in the way ways that you want that's the that's the
interlinked papers but then we still also want to make it available to more people so we're already
prototyping making animations like a 15 minute animation that makes the same concepts available
at a high school level and other forms of kind of media translation that we would do in addition
to as we mentioned other groups that get inspired by the idea and do their own thing with it which
is awesome that we would support yeah this seems right for decentralization and also
plugging into education you've got carolin in the audience she'll probably have some things to say
about that yeah we like you know you can imagine that in the same way you want to make an easier
on ramp for you know high school students you also want to make a deeper version where someone
could get a graduate training in the social sciences it would be the future social sciences needed
and so someone would maybe all of the articles would make up the basis of a graduate curriculum
with the reference materials that are involved so we already had one really great university
talk to us about starting such a graduate program and like those are the types of things that are
very interesting partnerships there's a lot of things that we will need that i really look forward
to that we just can't get to yet because of bandwidth so you know things like hey you're working on
a blockchain program and want to implement better governance technologies and how how can we work
together on the design of those or you're working on making a graduate program in the future of social
sciences or you know a new type of journalism we have to increase our internal bandwidth as a team
to do the partnership work because we already have this very fortunate position of more partnership
interests than we just have bandwidth for so really understanding what an early phase we're in
the thing we need right now is to actually grow our team by a number of people both for
publishing and for starting to do kind of partnership and just basic operations so we're
looking for a few key team members and upstream from that is raising the capital to be able to
do so so we're in the position that a startup nonprofit would be in of a line donation is number
one people who can facilitate introductions of that kind even would be like number 1.5 with that
then would be some of the right team members following would be advisors who have real
expertise on some of these topics and who would be willing when we're working on topics in their
area to give input and then as we gain the capacity people who can start thinking about
how do we get this into different forms of media how do we build technology
and forums and whatever that help advance the conversation those those are all things to come
so we're we're actually going to write up pretty soon a what are the things we're hoping to get to
on the site so that people who are interested can start to kind of submit and we can get to that as
soon as we're capable and then there were a couple of other things on the list too around
institutional partners I guess that's that's part of helping with that right also pro bono services
oh yeah pro bono services is basically another version of donation I guess yeah we have to pay for
legal services to make sure that we're compliant and there's no trademark reliable or whatever
types of issues of course if someone had legal services to donate or you know other things
like that so there's a list of professional services and if you have a if you have a professional
contracting service that is relevant to a non-profit you probably already know that because
that's come up before in which case we probably have the same needs that most other ones do and
would love to hear from you awesome well that that concludes our outline I think we should wrap
we're here to to support you and your work and it's always such a pleasure to hear you speak
and learn from you learn something new every time I mean I'm in a fortunate position of
having the floor with you and getting to share some things I I think the things that I'm thinking
about are things that probably everybody here thinks about cares about so even a phrase like
my work feels wrong it feels like fair enough the work that we're all interested in and this
happens to be a project that feels like it has some potential right now which is exciting and
a hundred percent so far as anybody feels aligned and can help with it awesome yeah no I mean I
think what's amazing what's been amazing about these conversations it really has drawn an incredibly
diverse community together with a shared social mission and I think we all have our unique roles
to play and no I appreciate that that's a really important point well I just want to thank you
so much for your time I know that you have been very heads down on this for many many months as I
said I'm honored that this is your second clubhouse appearance and the first one was with me it is an
honor to host you you know how much I absolutely adore you and I always love to to have time with
you so thank you so much there's a thought I I just felt to share and as you're saying this in
terms of being heads down because because I am and I guess it's something that I hope everyone
is experiencing and if not I hope you know is a possibility to think about is you're saying it's
an honor to be on here talking I feel that I feel like it's an honor to get to have a chance to
possibly work on things as meaningful as we get to now that previous humans didn't have a chance
to work on things that could be as effective at the scale that this is so in some way it's like
terrifying and overwhelming and whatever but it's also really a fucking honor and there's a way to be
enlivened by your work because it's coming from a place of a depth of meaningfulness as opposed
to taxed by it and yeah I hope everybody finds that I overflow with excitement every time we get
together so I certainly know what that feels like thank you Jenny thank you everybody here
Daniel thank you so much bring you back another time
