Welcome everyone back to TrimTab Space Camp. We're here today with Daniel
Schmockenberger. TrimTab Space Camp, as you all know, is this opportunity for all
of us to think big and to explore the world around us and understand the wider
context within which we all live. We're looking at different sense-making
frameworks. We've learned about ecology and guidance systems and rapid
prototyping in this course and leave it to Daniel to go meta and teach us about
sense-making itself. Daniel is a good friend and student of Buckminster Fullers
started reading him before he could read actually. His parents couldn't read him
synergetics as bedtime stories and he's kind of a protege of Fullers amongst
others and just I look to you Daniel as a source of wisdom and confidant and
advisor for the Buckminster Fuller Institute and just such an honor to have
you here today. Thank you so much for making the time amidst this wild global
crisis and thank you for all the response work that you've been doing for
this. I really appreciate it. I'm very happy to be here. I remember when you and
I first talked about this type of course happening for a Buckminster Fuller
Institute where people could learn good sense-making tools and be able to apply
them so I'm just really delighted this happening now. I think it's a great
service. Yeah, we met a great time. So we're gonna explore sense-making today. Could
you kick us off with just telling us some of the kind of core principles of
sense-making and how we can maybe apply that to this global crisis?
It's a good way to start a conversation like the core principles of sense-making and the
reason we use a term like sense-making is how do we make sense of the world and
reality that we live in. Which is kind of a common vernacular for epistemology. How
do we go about knowing things and what is the basis for appropriate belief in
something? And this is obviously not only the basis of the philosophy of
science, which is how do we go about knowing objective things about the
objective world, but all of philosophy, the epistemics of whatever it is that we
were claiming is true about anything. What is our basis of our truth claim? And
so someone can easily study this field for their whole life and scratch the
surface of all the good thinking that has been done. And our basis for right
action in the world to be effective at anything is going to be our basis of
understanding the nature of the world and the nature of being able to consider
what the effect of a particular action are going to be. So overview of sense-making
101, like what I hope we can do is share a few principles that are a valuable
start to just add something to the picture that can also inspire people if
they're interested in terms of where they can go further and maybe be able to
show the application of those to things that are currently trending questions
with regard to this COVID-19 global crisis and the attendant set of world
issues that are happening. So I'm going to assume also that the basic philosophy
of science and kind of basic Karl Popper sensibilities and kind of
understanding of logical fallacies and critical thinking is at least somewhat
familiar. And if that's not true, then take a look at those terms that I said
and at least go read the Wikipedia page on them. Logical fallacies, critical
thinking, philosophy of science, Popper, those would be starting places. Those are
by no means an adequate frame for sense-making, but they are common valuable
frames, good starting places. So I'm going to kind of assume those and build on
there. If I use terms that you think would be unfamiliar, please stop me and
we'll unpack them. So the difference between science and epistemology writ
large, just to kind of say it is, science is an epist... the method of science is
an epistemology. It is a process of knowing about the object of world we
find ourselves in, meaning objects that can be measured and then where we can do
repetition on measurement and then be able to abstract patterns from those. But
measurable things are third-person things, right? We can all measure something
independently, get the same type of measurement and then be able to... so
measurable and replicable. Science exists within the domain of the measurable and
the replicable. If you imagine we have a two-by-two matrix of things that are
measurable and unmeasurable, there are a lot of things that are real and are
unmeasurable, like in a motion. You can measure a neural correlate and you can't
get anywhere close to actually measuring all the things that are happening. We
don't even begin to understand how to do that. We can do very rough, you know, QEG,
whatever kind of stuff. You can't measure in motion. It's a first-person thing. You
measure third-person things. You can't measure the inside of a black hole. You
can mathematically infer stuff. You can't measure things that are below the scale
of measurability. There's a lot of things that are real that are unmeasurable,
which means they're formally outside of the domain of science, but that doesn't
mean that we can't... that any claim about them is equally true, right? There are
still methods of sense-making that are going to be more reliable than others.
And then replicable. There are certain things that are measurable but not
replicable because it's not a control kind of situation where we can replicate
it. So formally, the thing that we call science, the processes of science,
exist within one of four quadrants in which the real includes all of them. So
when we talk about sense-making, we're including all of it. And so science is
necessary but not sufficient and it ends up becoming actually bad epistemology
when you collapse the real to the objective, right? Because then subjective
is not real if you make real an objective synonymous. Subjective is also real but
it's not measurable and you can't do repeatability on the non-measurable
things, right? And intersubjective things are also not subjective, right? That's
actually a whole different quadrant of things. And even some things that are
objective are not properly measurable. Or there's causation but there's no way to
assess necessary and sufficient causation in a formal way. There's nexus
causation like in complexities. We have to apply different kinds of principles.
And this is when you hear people talk about the problems of reductionism, right?
Trying to reduce all of the real to the objective. Trying to reduce complex
situations to a subset of the variables. And that can be very useful.
Reductionism is super useful but it also has limits. And so it would be bad sense
making to use reductionism without understanding its limits. It would also be
bad sense making to reject reductionism in a kind of overly sweeping sense.
Now, when we're looking at social situations, there's and trying to make
sense of politics and economics and whatever, there's a lot of things where
we won't really be able to measure what's going on. There's information that
are company secrets and trademarks and patents that are intentionally kept
classified or obscured by governments. There's stuff that we haven't figured out
yet and yet there's still consequence to what's happening now. And we want to
figure some stuff out that we don't have the ability to do the appropriate formal
science on even if it was in the domain of science. And why are certain agents
doing the things they are has to do with intent, which is outside of
measureability. We can only measure the effects of it and try to infer it. So
sense making of what's actually going on and how do we know and how do we get
enough confidence to inform right action? And when do we not have enough
confidence to inform right action? And how do we have a clear basis for what
our confidence margin is and what our confidence margin for right action
based on the consequentiality of the situation? What should it be? This is
like kind of how you start to think about what the topics that sense making
is addressing are. But I'll actually speak about confidence for a moment. One
of the things, oh, we'll actually come one step back. The essence, if you wanted
to say there was an essence, the essence of good sense making is earnestness in
the desire to understand what's happening. And an earnestness that both wants
to know what is rather than wants to believe something in particular. And an
earnestness that is willing to do the work that it takes to actually come to
understand that rather than jump to premature beliefs because that is
comforting or allows you to be part of an in-group or seem knowledgeable or
whatever else. Kind of brings us back to a couple of things we've learned, both
in ecology and in rapid prototyping, just like the importance of humility and
curiosity, you know, of not being attached, being maybe committed to
something, but not attached to what it may be in the case of rapid prototyping.
And then in the case of ecology, yeah, just being kind of humble and curious
about the world around you and seeing it in more of that kind of dynamic.
So curiosity and humility and earnestness, these words all kind of go
together here, right? And so it was a very nice definition of science, Eddington
gave that science is the earnest endeavor to put into order the facts of
experience. So what are the facts of experience? How do we know? And like,
what are we, what am I experiencing? What are others experiencing? Can I trust
that they're recording the facts of their experience, you know, in an adequate
way? And how do we put into order some kind of sensibility of them?
So if earnestness and like depth of curiosity is the kind of essence of
science and epistemology in general, then bias would be the enemy of it.
And bias can come from lots of sources. It can come from wanting to be part of an
in-group that believes a thing. So you, where it's costly not to believe that
thing, because you'll be excommunicated from your religion or seen as a
conspiracy theorist or a status quo or whatever it is that your particular
in-group would happen to see as bad. That's going to create a source of bias.
If you want to be seen as in the know, because you have particular kind of ego
identifications or you want the previous thing that you did your PhD on and got
famous for to keep being right, even though new stuff is coming out that might
suggest otherwise, right? Ego stuff can obviously be a source of, I want this to
seem true, whether it actually is true or not. Financial interest is probably the
main thing that messes science up because somebody's funding the science.
And typically that funding is coming from some existing pool of money that made
the money by doing something that makes money that is going to fund stuff that
makes it more money. So it is not interested in things that are not going
to make money. It's interested in things that probably will. And that means that
either... Self-dealing, right? Self-dealing. And, you know, even if...
So it's totally possible that someone is doing science in a way where they're
actually doing authentically bad science because of financial interest. They are
hiding data and whatever. But it's also possible that someone does quote-unquote
good science, but that where the preponderance of evidence is misleading
because they're only looking at the parts of the whole picture that have
profitability. So if I look at pharmaceuticals, for instance, and the
research into healthcare, doctors currently, because of the regulatory
landscape in the US, aren't allowed to prescribe something if it is not FDA
approved to prescribe that thing. FDA approval process requires phase three
clinical trials that cost most of a billion dollars. Who's going to pay for
that? Well, a pharma company can pay for it if they can make that money back and
make enough money back. So to be able to make that much money, you have to look
at a patented thing because otherwise I put in the research money, I put in the
billion dollars, and then I'm selling something competing on the margins with
other people that can make the thing at the same cost and didn't have the upfront
billion dollars. So I've got to be able to recoup that money by having a much
higher price that nobody can undercut me. So we can only patent synthetic
molecules, for the most part, not things that are in plants or nutrients or
whatever. So those things are just never going to get the same kind of
research funding. So then you'll have a preponderance of evidence that says
these things are more effective than these things, but it was because they
were, and it's not even necessarily that each study was bad, but it's not
well distributed. The distribution of what's being studied and the
distribution of reality don't match, right? And so that's another place where
bias is going to be able to affect in a sense making. So because of that, I
would say that we have less real science in the world than I would like to see
and we have a lot more of the R and D arm of capitalism. And this becomes one
of the things that for individuals trying to make sense of the world when
you're even if you're reading scientific papers, trying to make sense of all of
the papers in a space together, trying to make sense of the biases of the
authors, trying to make sense of the bias associated with the funding, looking
at the methodology itself. These are all things that are worth factoring when
trying to make sense of something. I was going to say something about
confidence and certainty. So it's very one of the major sources of biases,
emotional biases. Do we talk about cognitive bias a lot in science and
that there are like all of these logical fallacies are cognitive bias, but a lot
of them come from emotional or identity or existential or social kind of needs.
Where believing something actually feels like it is meeting some need or way for
me to live. So I have a basis other than just knowing what's true to want to
believe something in particular. So a lot of people who are seeking security
conflate that the way to get security is certainty about the nature of reality.
And so they will seek excessive levels of certainty with an insufficient process
for gaining it because they actually have a certainty bias because they're
unsafe if they don't have that, right? Or something like that. That's an
example. It's not exhaustive. So a fundamentalist religion would be a
classic example where I am utterly certain about the absolute nature of
reality, the name of God, what happens after you die and all this kind of stuff.
And it's like, really? That whole idea only came about not that many thousands
of years ago. And before that, people were just a certain about other shit.
That particular God name it never even been proposed. But there is that you
can see in the face of the uncertainty and the unknown of death, if someone is
not friends with the unknown, if they're not friends with uncertainty, where
they can't see, they can project scariness into that space, then they want to
be certain and so they want to have faith even if it's not epistemically
grounded. This is actually very interesting. People's fear of dark and it's
like, why is it that I'm more afraid of the exact same environment when I just
can't see it than when I could when it's the same environment with the same
agents in it? And I'm not even somewhere that has nocturnal animals or whatever
like what? Maybe sometimes that's warranted, but a lot of times that's not
warranted, right? So where does that come from? Well, if I can see, I know
there's nothing bad. If I can't, then my mind starts projecting stuff in there.
People have this of dark water, of deep water, you know, where they can't see
in death, right? So and unknown in general. So it's very easy to have a bias
towards certainty and now that can be expressed through people who are quote
unquote using scientific ideas just as much as it can religious ones. So there
are people who are quoting science, but what you can see is they don't think of
science as a process of knowing. They think of it as a body of knowledge and
there are these things called facts and that they're totally well known and
that those people who understand it are right and other people are not just
wrong, but stupid and and and they you'll notice that the bias and the nature
of their communication is to always have pretty high certainty. Even if it's
just even if it's just very high certainty that other people who are
presenting something that doesn't look like the science they want are
certainly wrong. And so you're like, oh, they've got that same bias going and
they're plugging in a science set of languages rather than a religious set.
Now, on the same side, people can have a bias towards uncertainty, but these are
still biases. So this is classically what happened with postmodernism, right?
And postmodernism said science actually claimed some shit that it shouldn't
have claimed. It actually had the wrong epistemology and it had bias going and
this was specifically in the social sciences where whatever Victorian white
men were looking at the racial superiority of men or the white race or looking
for monogamous pair bonding in nature because of Victorian ideals when they
did zoology or whatever, you're like, oh, this is actually a pretty significant
confirmation bias messing up the thing that we're calling science, but being
accepted scientific ideals. So then they become this idea that science was just
the same as all the other. And I'm giving an extreme example. So forgive me,
obviously Foucault and Derrida were not stupid and they didn't say this, but a
lot of the people who don't read them all that well, make this kind of
generalization that that there is no truth. There is no absolute truth.
There is no way of knowing what is more true and that anyone who claims to
have a more access to or a valid process of truth is just some form of
imperialism and that because science was in spreading industrialism at the same
time that empires were using it to suppress the lower class and kill
indigenous people and ruin the environment, that those are somehow
conflated and that then all perspectives on reality are equally valid and we need
to listen to them all equally and there are no valid truth claims. This is
gibberish, right? Because recognizing that social science is subject to bias in a
particular way where you have extraordinarily high complexity and a
high basis for bias is very different than say physical chemistry that does
not conform to like that's very, very simple and doesn't have the same kind
of bias being admitted. So and also then the fact that some people did social
science badly doesn't mean that it can't be done more earnestly and better. So it
doesn't mean, does it mean that we always want to be looking at bias, yes, in
science, that we shouldn't consider science unbiased, yes. But does it mean
that all truth claims are equally valid? No.
The social science thing is the acronym Weird, Weird Populations, White
Educated, Industrialized, Rich, and Democratic. There's a narrative, you
know, rightfully so narrative that a lot of the social sciences have been
studied on weird populations, those, you know, people who are kind of readily
available in industrialized college settings. So that's one thing that
people have been pointing to more and more and I think it's really important
right now for us to kind of just point out like where, where are we exhibiting
different, you know, racist or colonialist perspectives, but yeah, also not
growing up, maybe with the bathwater and I think that differentiation made of
science being a methodology rather than like the set of
truth that's already known is really critical. You know, as we're putting
out the design science, you know, decade as weapons for fuller Institute, like
getting people to kind of blend in the design thinking with all that we can
glean and understanding the world through science. It's really helpful to
have that differentiation.
So when you think about the social sciences here and what we said in the
beginning about the measurable and the repeatable, I can measure a chemical
pretty well. I can do different types of measurements. I can use microscopy and
spectrometry and whatever and and then contrast that and a lot of other people
independently can and the physical properties, the chemical properties of
it will conform pretty well. I can't measure what someone feels or really the
nature and nuance and complexity of what they think or the sense of their
relationships or their motives are or whole populations or how those change.
I can observe certain things about the output behaviorally, but then I have to
infer a whole lot. And so the total complexity of social science is way more
complex, way more variables. And there's way more that I can't directly measure,
right? It is out. It's not third person. It's first person and second person.
And so that was absolutely an overstepping of the idea of what would fit into
the rigorous domain of science and what the nature of the truth claims could be.
So while it's true, so yes, it's true that there's a lot of stuff that we have
excessive certainty of that we shouldn't. It's also true that we can overcompensate
and pretend that we don't have the certainty on some things that we should.
And that there are not better epistemic processes, even if none are perfect for
coming to confidence and something. So this question of what is for a particular
topic in that domain? What is the appropriate epistemic process to come
to relative confidence? Why do we think that it's that as opposed to something
else? And what are the axioms that we're drawing upon and how do those reify
themselves? And what is an appropriate level of confidence and what is an
appropriate process to come to that level of confidence to inform certain
kinds of action? Those are all kind of important questions. Now, I'm getting
into this a little bit more formally than I thought we would. And to get into the
more probably daily practical stuff, we'll get there in a moment and might go
beyond the course of what we can do in this short time. But I wanted to say
something about certainty and uncertainty is a mature relationship to
certainty. There's a rabbi friend of mine that actually first told me this. So it
came from that background. But a mature relationship to certainty is it were
comfortable having certainty where it is warranted, knowing that it's never 100
percent. But there might be 95 or 99 percent based on the total amount of
data that we have relative to the total situation. And we're also comfortable
on uncertainty because if like the postmodernists, we're scared of
certainty or uncomfortable with it. Or like on the other side, we're uncomfortable
uncertainty. Both of those are biases that won't actually have us just think
clearly. So we want to be friends with uncertainty, knowing that the unknown
and actually the unknowable is a very large infinity. And then we also want
to endeavor earnestly to gain the certainties that inform appropriate
right action, responsible right action, where we can actually take responsibility
to affect the things that we care about in the world. So I don't want to be
attached to that what I think is right, but I do want to be attached to
understanding reality as clearly as I can so that I can act as effectively in
service of the good. So if I am working towards helping hunger, and I work
really diligently and earnestly and make no progress and more people are getting
hungry, I want to be able to say that I'm failing. Right, like it's very
important. And then I want to be able to say I should do something different
rather than continue doing that thing, because I actually am result oriented
here, not just process. I actually care about the people getting fed or the
coronavirus getting solved. And so I want to make sure that my understanding
of what's going on that informs what I think would be effective, that informs
things that I try, that then I retest to see are they working, is actually
working. Okay, that's all very basic, but it's still worth kind of framing
up. I think we can get into how does, what are good tools of epistemics, but
probably I think the place where maybe the most value can be harvested the
fastest is what are the most common places where people mess up? Like how
do you, you're probably sense making badly if. Yeah, I think that's really
helpful, especially in this moment as we are all trying to make sense of this
crisis and what it means. And you know, a lot of people in this course looking to
like what is the opening that's being provided by all of this, right, and
wanting to step into that without being tone deaf too. I think it's a theme
that a lot of us are looking into. And part of that is just making sense of
what's happening. Yeah, making the tragedy worse.
Okay. So with regard to that, you know, the tragedy worse is there an opening
to make it better, the better and worse are not what we'd normally think of as
epistemic questions. They're ethical or existential, right? Like what is good and
what is bad. But that's absolutely relevant. So there's bias there. And
let's speak to it. So there is a bias that I notice really damaging people
sense making when it comes to coronavirus. And it also damages their
sense making regarding climate change and existential risk and kind of risk writ
large. I'm going to oversimplify on purpose to start the topic and knowing
that I am oversimplifying and we could get into a much richer discussion of
it. There are it's it's easy to have a bias that we could kind of flatly call
a positivity bias that doesn't want things to be really bad. Like just
doesn't want to believe that thing that can't be with it doesn't want to feel
it. And so wherever there, people are claiming that shit is bad, they're
likely to think that it's probably alarmists. Those are probably people
that are catastrophizing. There's probably some good innovation that's
going to come along that will solve it like they there's a before even
researching it, there is a immediate bias either to be kind of almost
aesthetically repulsed by it or to move away or to assume it's probably wrong
or probably won't be the whole story. Whereas when evidence comes along of
things are getting better or it's not that bad, there's an instant resonance
before doing a similar level of sense making that's like oh this is look see
things are getting better. And there's a kind of positivity bias that I think is
actually worth having and the kind that isn't worth having. The kind that
biases our assessment of what is is terrible. The kind that is committed to
understanding what is very, very clearly including all of the negativities that
are current and the negativities that could be the risks so that we are
empowered to help make things better. And the positivity bias is that I want my
thought word indeed to all be working towards making things better which
requires understanding what is. That kind of positivity bias is great. It's not
messing up our sense making. It's applying our sense making in an
empowered and constructive way. But I'm not going to be good at making things
better if I'm not seeing what is clearly. So there is a you know when you
think of the term spiritual bypass but it can be a psychological bypass or a
kind of epistemic bypass of any kind. It's any spiritual idea or
philosophic idea or bias that wants us to not be with some pain. Right. So in the
kind of spiritual bypass whether it's like well they reincarnated to have
the they incarnated to have those lessons or their soul chose this or there
will be some silver lining in it or God works in mysterious ways. It's some way
of being able to say I don't have to feel bad about this thing that otherwise I
would feel really bad about because I don't feel like I can hold that be with
it. Which is kind of like a pseudo sociopathy. Right. One of the things about
sociopaths is that others can be hurting and they don't feel bad. Which is why
they can hurt others. And so any idea that makes us able to not feel bad in
the presence of others feeling bad is taking beliefs that are moving us in
the direction of a sociopathy like set of behaviors. So when I'm seeing people
who are gasping for air and dying in that way and their family members can't
even be with them on their deathbed because they would get sick. I'm upset
about it. Right. And that it's unnecessary and it could have prevented
that. I'm super sad for them. And I'm super fucking mad at the people that are
making choices that they for poor reasons that could have prevented it or done a
better job. And I don't I wouldn't want to feel any other way. Like there would
be something wrong with me if I didn't feel those feelings. It would mean that
I like I had to be fractured inside. I'm speaking to this because I see this
rampantly with people latching on to Oh, there's this new drug. It looks like
it's going to work before there's really good sense making that we know enough
about the drug because they really want something that's going to work. Oh,
there's this great new diagnostic test. Oh, there's this one epidemiologist that
said it's really not that bad. Oh, look, there's this thing that shows empty
hospitals. Maybe it's really not that bad. And they'll latch onto that ship
before really studying it but reject the other, which means that they won't be
part of making things better. So this is a very common bias. And of course, it
goes without saying the exact opposite bias is also common, which is a
catastrophism bias, which is whenever there is something that looks like it
could be that something isn't that bad or that there might be a solution,
someone tends to think that it is probably going to fail. And when they see
anything that looks like a possible risk, they assume it's probably going to
happen. And they emotionally, and it's, it's like, okay, let's say we look at
the situation today where the response to COVID has started to damage the food
supply. That's a huge deal because messing up the food supply and wars and
riots over food supply and insufficiencies of food supply and whatever could
kill a lot more people than the virus. And that's a place where our responsive
virus might be much worse than the virus itself. And we, this is a big deal. So is
there a big deal when you start messing up the food supply? Yes. Does that mean
that food supply is already so messed up that it's inexorable that two billion
people are going to starve? No, we can still totally do stuff about it. But there
are some people who I've talked with over the last couple of days who've called
me freaking out saying, did you see like, there are locusts in Northern Africa and
the Middle East and crops rotting in India, we're losing the food supply,
everybody's going to starve. Well, it's true, there are locusts in Northern Africa
and the Middle East. And it's a big fucking deal and crops are rotting in
India. It's not true that two billion people are going to starve. It is true
that they could. And, but what's happening is that
typically we want to do worst case scenario forecasting so we can prevent
it. Because if you don't know that it could happen, then you don't see what
the escalation pathways are, then you can't prevent it. And, but then if we
prevent it, the people with the positivity bias will say, see, you were just
catastrophists for doing that. Nothing bad really ever happens. All that bad
ever happened. It would have happened had we not done these things, it only
didn't happen because we did the worst case scenario planning and saw what it
took to prevent it. So I want to do worst case scenario, but know that it's a
scenario. It's not that it's already happened and then I want to see how to
prevent it. So I want the positivity to be oriented towards action, not towards
sense making. So does this make sense on positivity, negativity bias and how
they mess up our sense making, especially where there are high
consequence, high pain topics? Yeah, yeah. And it seems like there's just kind of
this through line of kind of like the ego getting in the way of like people
want to have the bias towards certainty. But a bias towards certainty kind of
shows up in this way too, intermingled with the positivity and the catastrophic
bias of just people, especially right now because everything's so up in the air
and people just want to have some grounding. And so I've seen in myself
and in others just bias towards, okay, I want to make sense of this. I want to
know what's happening in what order, with what time frame. And I think
something that we've seen again in a through line through a lot of what we're
learning is just like the world is dynamic, it's always shifting, changes the
only constant. And so how can we kind of be more comfortable with not knowing
exactly what's going to happen, but be in that state of
not still widening our view, still having like facing that with like a deeper
hunger for knowing as much as that we can. Yes, and the deeper hunger that is not a
hunger that jumps to false conclusions because we want them, but it does the
hard work that it takes to actually endeavor towards. So I really want to
know what you were just saying, right? I really want to know what's going to
happen, what could happen, what the right order of operation should be, how we
should tend to think. I'm working on knowing that stuff, but I don't think
that I can scroll my Facebook feed and read for several hours and have a good
sense of those things. It's kind of like I want to be buff and I don't want to
work out that hard. Like it's just not going to work, right? So there is an
input output equation that has to happen and like being buff or being able to
play the piano, like being able to make sense of a topic takes the work that it
takes. And so now this brings us to the next bias. Well, I can't do that much
work because I'm not an expert in virology or an epidemiology or an
immunology or an industrial sanitation engineer or in diagnostic medicine or in
the privacy considerations for contact tracing or in macroeconomics or in
domestic politics security or in the nature of what's happening with geopolitical
positioning or in supply chains of food. How the fuck could I possibly know all
that? But there are authorities that know this. So I'm going to defer to the
authorities. I'm going to cognitively offload that complexity. Now there is a
bias in terms of how people relate to authority that's important and it's
similarly oversimplifying has a bias on two directions, both of which are
bias, which means not clear, which is there are people that tend to think that
most of the people who are in the primary authorized positions are probably
trustworthy, which would be a silly thing to think. And other people who assume
that they're always untrustworthy and corrupt, which is also a silly thing to
think. And those are very kind of sweeping generalizations that keep us from
actually doing sensemaking because we're not looking at what are they actually
saying? What is the track record of where they've been right and wrong on this
topic so far and historically and where is there a divergence or a convergence
of opinions of people and am I biasing towards some of them because of
political association or because of positivity or negativity bias or
things like that? So can I find virologists that are saying oh this is
not mutating in a way that's going to have a worse strain? Yes. Can I find other
ones that are saying oh the next strain is probably going to be many times worse?
Yes. Who are experts? So how do I possibly make sense of this if I'm not a
PhD virologist and there are eminent ones who disagree
you know pretty intensively? And on every topic we can say something like that
right? Well you actually can. This is the nice thing is that the
you have the benefit of being able to look at where experts are converging
where they're also diverging and what the basis of the divergence is.
And possibly having less bias than them because you didn't get a Nobel Prize
saying this thing where you have an ego invested in defending this particular
thing and you don't have research grants that need to believe in this thing
and you haven't had all of your attention in this one part of the picture
where this virologist is looking at this, this one's looking at this, this one's
looking at this, you can have an epistemic flexibility that can look at
those and also look at what the nature of the bias they might
be running is and try to get some parallax across those.
And so but on this one about authoritarian versus
anti-authoritarian bias this is one of the most
fucking common things that I see that messes up everyone sense making.
So
there is a meme complex you can see all over the
Facebook say which is I'm tired of fucking 1040 hat wearing conspiracy
theorists talking nonsense and armchair epidemiologists.
This is the place for experts if John Hopkins and the CDC say that's what's
true nobody else should be weighing in on this what we should listen to the
things that they say and empower the experts on this and
vaccines work and I don't want to hear anything else about it and
whatever the authorities think are appropriate measures are the things that
we should do right and that everything else is gruesomely
responsible and then of course we also hear
this other memeplex that all of the authorities were completely corrupt for
various vested interest purposes and we can't believe any of them and
everything that they're telling you is false and etc.
And I think both of these are pretty close to equally gibberish.
Yeah you know Hanlon's razor it's a philosophical razor that's like
don't attribute to malice what can be adequately
attributed to ignorance yeah and I think so many of us
you know yeah our trust has been broken and
however many ways and then we like think you know they are out to get us
I think it can be a waste of precious
to learn brilliance. Okay so there's very strong bias in both
directions when it comes to conspiracies. Conspiracy
are there times where some people conspire meaning share information with
each other that they don't publicly share to advance particular agendas
that if publicly shared wouldn't work all the time
like that is the nature of the world now does
and so like for every Watergate and Enron there's a million of those that are
not publicly caught but like that's what Machiavelli told everyone to do
that's what Sun Tzu and the 36 Strategies that's what military theory and
political theory is all about right how do you
conspire with some in group to advance a particular agenda
against outgroups and anyone who'd get in the way
and when you look at Genghis Khan and Napoleon Alexander the Great when you
look at the barbarism of the 12th century we're genetically those people
still. We have the same brains and the
same hormones like we're not that different we have just
like we were more civil in some ways we also just hide it better
so you know our lovely previous democrat president we
bombed a lot of civilians to death in the Middle East
with the largest military the world's ever known
but it wasn't here right and factory farms are as brutal
as anything has ever been and their mass scale and most people
contribute to it financially they're paying other people to do their dirty
wetworks for them and then feeling civilized
and so we should not wrongly assume that we are more civilized than we are
and that there is not a shit ton of malice or even just
having accepted that that's the nature of the world and you know
rationalized ladder climbing in politics we also shouldn't assume
that every time that there is something that
doesn't make sense that it is highly coordinated malice because
coordination is actually fairly hard and very often it is just incompetence
and or the nature of the incentive systems
so assuming any of those things means you aren't thinking
if you're assuming it's probably ignorance you aren't thinking and you
aren't paying attention you're bringing your own bias into it if you're
assuming that the authorities are probably well
intentioned or they're probably not you are not thinking
and so this is what i want people to notice in their bias is
what things tend to bother them there are a lot of people where if it comes from
an authoritative claim they're just bothered off the bat or if it sounds
conspiratorial they're bothered off the bat this is not good sense making
or there's something that's a rule of thumb like you just mentioned that they
take as if it was almost absolute like they apply it kind of
feverishly what i'm wanting is for people it's like ecclesiasties a time to
kill and a time to heal and to sow and to reap and there's a time for every
epistemic tool like there's a place where they all
apply and so what you want to do is go into a situation and say maybe malice
is happening here maybe simply incentives and
politics are maybe incompetence is maybe it's actually being handled
brilliantly and my overall assessment of why something handled brilliantly is
wrong i don't know and i don't know just because it's an
authority or just because it's a wealthy person or whatever
or just because it is part of trump or you know the people who are against
trump if trump happens to like hydroxychloroquine
no one should automatically like hydroxychloroquine more or less because
trump happened to say it because the fact that he happened to say it has
nothing to fucking do with whether it works or not
and obviously trump didn't just pull hydroxychloroquine out of thin air some
doctors and scientists told him some data about that now
so we should actually look at the data on that very closely and carefully
um during the obama administration and all the administration since nixon
washington dc primarily ran what they called the benign china hypothesis
china is not trying to become a world empire and you know
free trade with them and blah blah blah and
you know we started hearing trump china china china china and
people being upset that there he was wanting to do certain kinds of
tariffs or trade war type things whatever but being concerned about what
the uh chinese geopolitical agendas were
he was right he was actually right the benign china hypothesis was gibberish
if you read the hundred-year war uh and you look at the activities of
chinese communist party there's absolutely global agendas it would be
silly to think otherwise and he wasn't right out of nowhere
he was right because bannon and others happened to give him
insight there and it happened to resonate with
that as just kind of a dealmaker kind of guy when he sat across from them
he probably had the sense of like oh fuck it feels like
these guys are playing some pretty serious game that
i some some go game that i don't feel well set up for
now he's been wrong about a gazillion things
and so again wanting to over norm that he's wrong and stupid nevel about
everything or right and the savior on everything is not thinking
now of course it's fine if i'm trying to sense make there might be some people
who are right often enough that i look to them as sources of higher
signal lower noise upfront but i still check and there might be other people
that even though they've been right a couple times i assume it's probably low
signal enough that i generally don't check but i can't
generalize on that in consequential areas
so hydroxychloroquine i'm going to use this because
this is a very good example of where sense making is tricky
where it's consequential
so hydroxychloroquine is a anti-malarial primarily but it also has
antiviral properties has been used as an antiviral and is used in rheumatology
heavily for rheumatic conditions it's a drug that's been used for many decades
very heavily since vietnam the united states military has put most
u.s soldiers on it before they deploy to areas that have
malaria as a malarial prophylaxis so before they go to
every week for the first four years of my life because they live in every place
yeah exactly and so we have a pretty enormous amount of data
on the long-term effects and the safety and the whatever of hydroxychloroquine
is it a totally benign drug no it's not vitamin c
it can absolutely affect hearts this thing called the qt interval
it's contraindicated with some meds in some conditions
but do we at least understand the contraindications in the general
safety profile well especially as a old generic drug
that has been around forever in combination with all the other drugs
and has a generally pretty good safety profile relative to advanced
covid infections yes do we have randomized control
trials that show that it's effective placebo can you know
double-blind placebo controlled multi-location type of thing no
those are fucking slow those take a long time to do
now those are awesome like randomized control trials are totally a good
sense-making tool an epistemic tool but there are a bunch of people who have
been taught that it is the only tool that exists to make sense
the pharmacology which is utter nonsense that means that those people
are not actually making good sense of the world we're thinking they are
they've been drilled in this kind of uh over-norming on one tool because it
happens to be a lovely tool when we can do it and it also happens to be the one
that the FDA wants and so it also happens to be the one
that you better take if you want a maximum security position to have your
malpractice not get you in trouble so this is another source of
bias on it right what is the maximally defensible position
is also a major thing okay
by the time the randomized control trials are done
heaps of people will be dead and ICUs will be overwhelmed in case fatality rate
will have spiked precipitously so should we give people drugs that
might be more dangerous and not effective just based on um pendulum
dowsing no but are there ways of making sense of
something to enough degree to affect some kind of action
yes so with regard to hydroxychloroquine i'll use this as an example
there were randomized control trials for it in SARS SARS-CoV-1
right that's meaningful it's a different virus
this is a novel virus but there's a lot of similarities in mechanisms
there were randomized control trials for it and other viruses including other
coronaviruses there have been in vitro trials
on that are very effective on this one on SARS-CoV-2
and there are a lot of non randomized control trials but open label trials
ones in china ones in south korea ones in France the one in new york but then
heaps of doctors that are using it that
are not nothing right they're not placebo controlled
but they're not nothing now there are some things that just
placebos don't really affect right placebos don't do a good job of
healing broken bones um and so we don't need placebo
controls for things that don't really produce placebo effects
and so placebos don't kill viruses now do placebos modulate your immune system
to some degree sure right but is there an amount of effectiveness that
placebos have on viral conditions statistically so you can remove that
statistical artifact and then be able to still look at is there
effect beyond the statistical artifact so that's like a way of
saying hey we can actually kind of make sense of this here
factoring placebo considerations even if we're not doing the placebo control
trial um so we brought a group of doctors
together uh group of MDs to work on doing a literature review of
hydroxychloroquine and by itself and in conjunction with zinc and
azithromycin and doxycycline and other things like that
and we looked at the mechanistic trials the in vitra trials the animal trials
the current open label trials previous ones and we were looking at preponderance
of data and looking at relative benefit to risk in different
populations that's actually trying to do sense making
with all of the available data factoring the consequence of action and
inaction now i don't get malpractice lawsuits for inaction in the same way i
get them for action so that ends up being a source of bias and a cya you
know cover your ass kind of way that is different than just
trying to sense make how do i save the most lives
and so i know doctors many of them who i've spoke with in the last few days
who gave themselves prescriptions of hydroxychloroquine for themselves and
their family and said this is absolutely what i would do with myself and my
family based on all the literature but i'm not allowed to prescribe it at my
hospital because the hospital said we would be fired for prescribing it
because for outpatient treatment because of those concerns
that hospital policy i believe is gruesomely negligent in life-saving
now are we suggesting that people drink fishbowl cleaner
obviously not are we suggesting that people prescribe shit to themselves
no that you don't look at heart conditions and comorbidities no of
course not what we're saying is should prescribing physicians who've taken a
Hippocratic oath and who are scientifically literate people
be given emergency authorization to be able to prescribe as they see fit
based on the current literature and preponderance of data for life-saving
purposes yeah i think that's a good emergency
authorization um whether or not worried about getting
fired or malpractice things so that they can actually be focused on doing the
right thing here now again with regard to hydroxychloroquine
there's pretty good evidence that in late stage infection it doesn't help very
much but there are very few antivirals
that help in late stage infection in the entire corpus of medicine
and the general rule of thumb with infection as a whole is treat early
rather than late because once it gets bad it's much much harder but especially
with viruses is that only in the very beginning do you have meaningful
chance so a lot of people know if you get shingles
or if you get herpes a cycle of air can help if you get to it within 24 hours
at most 48 hours after that will do almost nothing in that time it does a lot
if you're in late stage aids the cocktail the antiviral cocktail doesn't help
that much if you're in very early stage it will prevent disease progression
so if you do a randomized control trial for hydroxychloroquine
or even the open label trials or FDA provisional
emergency approval for late stage as an antiviral when pretty much no
antivirals work late stage and then you assume what that means about the drug
writ large and factoring for early stage that would just be silly
that would be going against the preponderance of knowledge we have
about viral mechanisms and antivirals writ large
so the randomized control trials should be for early stage
right we're just kind of akin to like how we've been testing people we've only
been testing predominantly have been testing the very sick
rather than random sampling and so we don't really have a good idea of what
the denominator is correct so we do need background
random testing for epidemiological forecasting and being able to think
about herd immunity and inoculating with less
virulent forms of the virus and other things like that
but stand on this one for a moment so one should we wait for randomized
control trials to be able to make sense of something
no we should look at the preponderance of all of the data the risk
and the reward think about different populations of risk sensitivity
and comorbidities and whatever differently and be able to actually apply
all of the sense-making we have to the scenario
and know that the sense-making we would do if we had all the time in the world
is different than the sense-making we would do when there is consequence
in action which is why I said we have to have the right relationship to certainty
and uncertainty on the basis to come to it factoring the
consequentiality of action and inaction
now would we like to do randomized control trials to get more knowledge of
course should we be doing them late stage only
well if we want let's say I wanted to and I'm not ascribing malice where it is
very likely ignorance but if I wanted to do an information warfare
tactic to prove that Trump was wrong and an idiot
or to make a generic drug like hydroxychloroquine that nobody can make
much money on seeming effective so some patented drug can make a lot of money
or whatever if I wanted to do that I would set up a late
stage trial that showed that it wasn't effective and then overgeneralize those
results across the board and I would also set up a late stage
trial where the placebo is vitamin c which one of the major studies is doing
right now where vitamin c is widely known to be an effective antiviral
and then I get plausible deniability that I'm doing good science because it
comes from a prestigious university when what I'm really doing is info warfare
to an advance an agenda so now we start to get into
I struggled through watching this David Ike thing the other day
it was very painful there was extraordinarily little signal in it
not none but very very little conspiratorial stuff
that said
so Hong Kong had almost nobody died because of good response
and South Korea didn't respond quite as quickly but they respond well
still very few deaths okay well they're littler
places islands whatever well Germany's not an island it's not a little place
and their CFR is extremely low Czech Republic extremely though
fucking vietnam poor poor relative country doing great
well some of those asian ones had SARS so they were prepared
Czech Republic didn't Germany didn't um those are both landlocked they aren't
islands those are you know democracies not dictatorships
could we just not have responded better well we allowed 430 000 people to fly
from China since the thing happened to the United States
because border closing is xenophobic no it's not
we're closing the border to viruses that happen to be on people from wherever
the fuck they came from close the border to them coming from a
european country if that's where they're coming from
so this isn't now a place similarly where if somebody jumps to
the problem is xenophobia or racism they're not sense-making again
we should absolutely fucking shut borders during pandemics
where viral transmission is like physically transmitted
you should shut borders between counties within states where there's very
highly different distributions of it within the counties to be able to
prevent excessive spread just like you or we're stopping the
transmission between people and people even within the same city right
um so is it possible that all of the profound getting
everything wrong that we have done the WHO until a few weeks ago telling
people not to wear masks and PPE and whatever
that that's all just stupidity and incompetence well
that would be impressive it would be impressive is it possible that there are
some agendas where if things get worse they do better
well if the EU that's already under a lot of tension
gets more tension because some countries get fucked in other countries
that could help them aren't helping them because they only have enough to help
themselves they kind of breaks EU apart so that the EU can't bring in the
eastern european countries because russia wants the Baltic states would Russia
have the goal to do information warfare kinds of tactics to get the Baltic
states back i don't have to say they are doing this to say
everything in the precedent of unrestricted warfare in the history of
how these things happen says that they would of course have that orientation
is the way that china would be trying to do the belt and road initiative
take advantage of the fact that they're the only supplier of PPE and on the
other side of this and the groups will sign the bottom line
on things that have fine print that they wouldn't have otherwise if they're
going to die at the plague and you know and similarly if there are groups that
want increased surveillance capacity so this way should we trust
the authorities carte blanche no that would be silly
should we assume that they're all corrupt and controlled by reptilians no
that would be silly should we actually try to do
sense-making on each specific thing itself rather than do this over
generalized thing that unfortunately we can't do in this particular world
of cognitive offloading yes that's what we have to do
so with hydroxychloroquine we can see okay late stage versus early stage
is this really a placebo or is this not a placebo
it randomized control trials are desirable are they the only thing
mechanistic studies other viruses what can you tell from another virus to a
novel virus what degree of certainty would be
needed based on the consequentiality these are all
examples and there's like a dozen more I haven't gotten to of epistemics you
would want to think through to know how to make sense of this
and that you should favorite ways like there's
Bayesian decision theory like those different
ways to kind of make sense of things with probability and
yeah do you have favorite tools that you like to use
I'm upset at the idea of favorite tools
each of them it's like I'm going to build a house with a screwdriver screwdrivers
are awesome tools that you come back to often
all of them and for the things they're good at
so network theory and graph theory are the best things for the
thing that they do and probability and statistics and different statistical
tools mathematics in the domain that it's for computer
modeling agent-based modeling deep you know machine deep learning on
large data sets first principles thinking in the
place where first principles thinking applies Bayesian analytics where that
applies you know crowdsourcing versus expert
sourcing when do we use induction and deduction
and abduction favorite tool intellectually is as
silly as favorite tool to try and fix a car build a house
yeah I like wrenches to fix a car awesome
they talk to screwdrivers and they suck for welding
and so if someone actually wants to be able to fix a car you got to have a lot
of tools know how to use them and know which one to use for which situation
and if someone wants to make sense of the world same thing and if that seems
like too much then you should just accept the idea you probably won't
understand the nature of the reality you live in and be able to make good choices
yeah so well within that it kind of like it
help I mean it brings up people's biases of like
wanting certainty and wanting
yeah both positivity and certainty come up for
in that just like oh can't you just explain it to me in Canada I'll just be
okay it's been taught over and over again as like
an okay response to the world well this is the psychology of a child
that wants a parent to be able to depend upon
yeah um and it's actually interesting I don't want
to over norm here I don't want to do bad sense make an over norm topic that is
super complex but I will draw a parallel that has at least some
truth value the way people related to their parents
as kids often reflects itself somewhat in the
bias they have towards authorities later
their parents and teachers and whatever other authorities in childhood
so the people that did better in school and did better with their parents and
kind of did well with the standard model more often than the other
crew will tend to think that the standard model is
well and think that the current authorities are probably trustworthy and
good and the people that didn't do well at those things
and didn't have trustworthy authorities are more likely to
have that generalized sense right that's not an absolute it can come from lots of
other things later life events but those are interesting things to look at
and it's also interesting where it's like I want someone to just reassure me
that everything will be okay how old is the psychology having
that thought I don't know what's going on and I
feel scared how old is that okay so now we need to do therapy
for inner child trauma stuff that is going to hijack our adult brain being
able to make sense of the world and that will make us susceptible to other
people being able to influence us more than they should
yeah yeah dangerous gurus and dangerous authorities and whatever start to come
into is they can prey upon that
yeah and I think one of the root causes of so many of our
our interdependent crises right now is that kind of avoidance of
that inner work avoidance of it being even okay to talk about those things
you know I mean it seems like there's a trend
towards you know being okay with therapy or coaching
as kind of like a therapy like tool but people are becoming more
yeah it's just it's less stigmatized than it once was
well as people realize that their effective choice making requires
effective understanding about both the nature of the world and what the effect
of a particular choice or injunction is going to be
then wanting to sense make clearly becomes a very high
goal and once they realize that a lot of the bad sense making comes from
psychological predispositions biases that come from those places
then psychological work actually becomes part of sense making
so you know as much as I might want to learn math or statistics or
Bayesian analysis I might also want to be able to do
bias assessment and be able to see where those biases arise from and
clear them. Yeah so this moment that we're in is
an opening for a healing at a lot of different levels
and one of those is I'm finding as people are in stressed
situations some of their kind of unaddressed trauma
is arising and I think similarly kind of like our unaddressed root causes of
you know what's creating the ecological crisis and
and climate change and everything yeah there's an opening right now for us to
see right like the the true meaning of apocalypse is
unveiling of a greater truth that was and that was unapparent before that
moment happened so yeah curious to hear what you
think of kind of all of that in sense making and in this moment
I'm gonna share something that I have to share a dialectic of things for it to
make sense
so where people notice that there is a psychological process that seems more
like a child than an adult psychological process I want to be
reassured I want to be comforted I don't know what's going on I want to
know that an authority's taking care of it or can tell me what's true
anything that they do from there will not help
if they're trying to act on the world if they're sharing information or whatever
so the only thing they can do from there is actually respond to
the psych address their own psychology until they come to a more empowered
place and then from a more empowered place try to sense make the world and
then act from clear sense making don't act from those places
um so I really want to see people showing up in a adult
way but the dialectic with that is you can't just snap your fingers and get
there because you want to there's work that it takes if the if there are
unresolved child trauma type things that keep hijacking you into that state
pretending that that's not the case and saying oh yes I feel very calm and
centered and I'm speaking like an adult I'm freaking out inside whatever
like then you're just schisming yourself
and so I want to see people showing up as an adult
and that means I want to see them seeing where they aren't and doing what it
takes to actually get there rather than pretend and where they aren't there I
don't want them to have shame about it but I also don't want them acting on the
world from that place I want them acting on themselves
and then I want them acting on the world when they're in the right place to act
on the world
I want us supporting each other in this if you see somebody
sharing information and trying to act on the world from a place that doesn't
seem actually clear that might be propagating
problems then lovingly try to support them to
recenter uh neither add to it nor attack them
because that's not going to help right just try to lovingly help them recenter
and be open to when others do that with you in fact ask for it
seeking the counsel of people who you consider wise counsel
is a sign of wisdom itself
now with regard to traumas coming up to heal right now
yes and this is another thing so I want people to show up
as adults and that takes whatever it takes right so people if people are at
home and they have extra free time maybe this is the time they can be doing
Skype therapy sessions and they can be reading the things and doing the
meditation and doing the journaling that they've wanted to do that'd be great
we it's either a solitary confinement or an ashram
right like can be this great mental health crisis where
we get a huge amount of benzo addictions that just ruin everything
for a long time or a uh emergence into people going deeper
into their own wholeness together and with each other
uh now we want to work on which of those it is for
ourselves and with our communities and with the world as best we can
the same with the educational crisis this can be the generation of kids that
all got no education for some time and had upset parents traumatizing the
fuck out of them at in a small place or where we actually
reinvent schooling in a much better way in education
because we need to so in all these ways the same with healthcare the same with
the food security system the same with our risk prevention system the same
with macroeconomics it can either get much worse
or we can use this catalyst to make things much better to be able to do the
larger macro things we have to be in the right place to be
capacitated to do that so we work on that first and then the other and it's
somewhat you know ongoing they back and forth as needed
in addition to i would like people to show up as adults where it is
possible being able to show up in a way that is
calm and clear and grounded and not biasing towards seeing things as better
or worse than they are but very clearly and then biasing towards how to make
things better effectively the people who can do that or the
people who will lead the solutions and other people will look to
but you can't pretend you got to do what it takes to actually have that
happen and this image of that coal pressurizes into
diamonds by pressure by intensive pressure right or the the steel
becomes hard through the temperature of the forging
process and the banging on it right so as there's increased pressure
we can either have it fracture us or turn the coal into diamond where we
become clearer and more crystalline and precise and
to have that as a frame that as the pressure gets more i actually
go slower clearer more grounded just even as an intention can be helpful
yeah that's really beautiful um
yeah i forget his name bio i forget about this last name he says that times
are urgent slow down
um yeah it's it's really important and counterintuitive and
you know um i think yeah just overall kind of this
this appetite for bias and really understanding it
is um yeah a powerful outcome of this time as we're all
trying to ground in the healthiest way possible
us special forces has this uh statement and there's a lot of versions of this
perennially but uh slow is smooth and smooth is
fast and it's not saying go slow when urgent
actions needed it's saying go fast but mistakes aren't fast
mistakes end up being super super slow doing doing like
you're trying to clean the kitchen so fast before guests come and you break
glasses and now you got to fucking take the time to clean it up and it's way
slower than had you moved a little bit slower so you don't want to break
shit right you don't want to spread misinformation you
don't want to act on this information so you got to go slow enough to go smooth
where each step is actually a right step and gets to build on right steps
which is actually the very fastest thing you can possibly do
so i'm actually encouraging people to go fast but actually fasts
which means clear smooth right yeah
yeah
wonderful we're we're approaching the end of our time here
we feel um we covered a lot of principles and and biases and
just a lot of insight is there anything else you would offer one thing we're
asking people is are there any vocabulary terms that people can
insert into their you know daily or weekly use that would
enable them to kind of kind of upgrade their their ability to make sense of
the world there's certain things that you
unfortunately though this is not absolutely the case the community of
practice that in general looks at critical thinking and logical
fallacies and they're the ones that look
at bias the most or very very frequently in terms of cognitive bias
that whole field in my opinion admits a certain bias
which is kind of funny which is that it is
biasing towards analysis over synthesis so we want to make sure that it's not
having any wrong ideas and it rejects wrong ideas
but it's not necessarily making sure that the very partial reductionist ideas
are being put together in good overarching frameworks
which is the synthesis side so it uh there is a need for synthetic
thought and creative thought as well as very analytic thought
and so the the tools of critical thinking generally help you with the
analytic thought more and so those are necessary but
they're not sufficient and there are places where there are
rules of thumb that are not true they're rules of thumb so
like the Occam's razor right sometimes the thing that is true actually
is more complicated than you know the hypothesis than something else
so it's just a general kind of razor just for those who don't know is like the
the simplest solution to something with the less
variables is more likely to be true yeah and and we might say that statistically
that is often the case but it also even depends upon
the scenario like the simple economic models are always really wrong
and the simple biological models are always really wrong because the
causation is actually complex so really depends on the domain so
in terms of terms i think people just going and
looking up epistemology and reading the wikipedia page or the oxford philosophy
page and just kind of having a basic sense is good
looking up and then if you want to do the wikipedia rabbit hole thing
so it'll if it mentions Bayesian analysis take it take a little trip down
there and maybe go watch a couple youtube videos on
Bayesian analysis and on network theory on graph theory on statistics on
learning basics things about statistics on
as you're hearing the terms epidemiology and virology and immunology so much
maybe just read the wikipedia page to start like do i know what a virus is do
i actually know what RNA is what's the difference between RNA and DNA do i
i'm hearing PCR and serological and immunological do i know what the words
mean how about i just look up the words that i'm
hearing especially before i use them yeah um that and i don't have to read a
textbook let's read a wikipedia page to at least have a beginning sense which
will actually help humble you because you'll realize that there was much more
that you didn't even know that you didn't know about
and then you'll probably as you know more actually be more humble in your
presentation than as you knew less and just repeated a word
so okay in terms of words i would suggest every word that you're hearing
that seems important that you're tempted to say again
look it up first yeah awesome yeah and kind of we ask every
i guess i'm sure to come up with an activity i feel like that could be a
good one is starting with epistemology go down a
rabbit hole kind of see where you go and see what you learn
any other kind of guide posts along the way as people are going down that
journey that it can should consider in terms of
doing good sense making not just starting with the epistemology page but
starting with anything on covid you're reading or looking at
make a list of all the terms that you don't know what they mean
fully and go read about them and then follow those
rabbit holes
super valuable and just a super simple thing we are creating the
information ecology for each other the epistemic commons for each other and
just like it's not good to throw trash on the ground and pollute because
shared space in the effect it's not good to put trash information out
that pollutes the information ecology so before you share something
you remember there was this this early greek that
held his thumb up to the moon closed one eye and said
at arm's length my thumb exactly blocks out the moon
therefore the moon is the size of my thumb and my palm can block out the sun
therefore the sun must be the size of my palm
and i don't know if that's a true story it's a story that is told in philosophy
sometimes and if you didn't know that depth
perception was a thing that affected size it's a rational
argument right where the axiom is that distance
doesn't affect relative perception of size right it's not understanding the
nature of a visual cone it's a rational argument that's gibberish
very easy to have rational arguments that are gibberish because they have wrong
axioms or are missing something it's entirely possible
that you read something that makes sense to you
because there's a rational argument and it makes sense
everywhere that the virus has been bad their
5g was recently installed and everywhere there's 5g the virus is bad
oh and 5g just got pushed through oh shit
well go fact check that first just look at a map of all the places that 5g
is and then look at a place map of the places that
the virus is and see if the claim made is true before you share it
because it's not in that particular case
and so just because something sounds compelling and it seems maybe plausible
upon first blush doesn't mean that it's true
and
but if you put it out even if you say what do you guys think of this
because you didn't want to do the hard work of making sense of it lots of
other people who don't want to do the hard work of making sense of it will be
compelled the way that you were and it starts to affect background thought
and you're actually polluting the information ecology you're throwing
styrofoam that your intellectual styrofoam into the ocean right
and so just don't do that um and at least do enough research to see that
it's if something is probably not grounded and then if you don't know how
to go further then do an adequate preface i looked into this here's what i
could find here's what i couldn't find i'm really trying to figure this out
does anyone have good data on such and such and then tag the people that you
think are probably the people who might be able to figure it out
right start smaller instead of polluting a whole
wider landscape yeah yeah i think that makes a lot of sense
and just like i think people yeah going to like primary source you know just
being having an appetite for doing our own research
i think so many people have become accustomed to just giving information
from other people who've already done the synthesis
and kind of going back to a couple points ago you were saying there's a lot
of a lot of kind of analysis oriented tools and not as many synthesis
tools or rules of thumb or or yeah work in that realm how can people kind of
balance that out for themselves so this thing that is often
attributed and quoted to einstein talking about imagination
being as important or more important than intellect and creativity and
those types of thinking or intuition right
so there was this process that einstein had
where he would be working on the math on the chalk board or on the paper
until he hit a diminishing return and he just wasn't making progress
and then he would take a break and he'd go puff his
pipe and look at the clouds and kind of zone out or play his violin
kind of zone out and then at a certain point in the zoning out an idea would
pop and then he'd go back with that idea to the white
board and work on it
so now i'm going to say a metaphor for what's happening
neurologically that we don't know is actually how neurology works but
and so i'm specifying that this is not a absolute mechanistic statement it's a
metaphor so that there is this kind of left
hemispheric more serial more analytic process
and then there is a more right hemispheric more parallel
more synthetic process and the corpus callosum has a largely
inhibitory or shunting process between those and that the
analytic process actually has to shut off for a little while for the synthetic
process so the analytic is this axioms these data these logical
transforms this because this because this therefore this
syllogistically right and the other one is a pattern analysis of look for
everything like this and then uh aha that seems to come
out of nowhere what may i think of his intuition but it didn't come out of
nowhere it's just that process doesn't happen
consciously in the same way because actually be on the bit bandwidth of the
conscious mind and that that then can give a new
insight but we don't take it as absolute truth we then have to plug it back
into the other process and see how it works but then once you hit diminishing
return there go back to this one and i think it was wigner
might have been teller but i think it was wigner who about the
physicists the great physicists who develop modern physics said
we all knew that in terms of raw horsepower von Neumann was the smartest
like he could just figure shit out he could do the math faster than any of us
is obvious but for all of his cleverness
Einstein still was the one with the deepest insights
and some reason for that that wasn't just straight clock speed
it was something else right um so i would say there is the study
read fact check and then also go let yourself have that in mind don't
distract onto the laundry list or whatever and then meditate
look at the cloud zone out and then see what ideas come and journal those down
and then go back right let yourself kind of have both of those processes
and then find the facts as best you can and then
also step back and consciously try to put them together
what kind of overarching picture or narratives or whatever might make sense
but be careful because it might not be a simple narrative it might be lots of
overlapping ones right but try to see would this overarching
kind of frame make sense of lots of these and then say well if that was
if this narrative was true what else would be true
and go look to see is that they're not what would falsify or verify
this narrative or this hypothesis or kind of overarching structural frame
so yeah those are some things
that's really helpful what other offerings or
ways can people continue to engage with you
i think you shared these there were these couple videos we did with rebel wisdom
they called them the war on sense making uh it was
basically we're here we're sharing tools of sense making there we were more
sharing tools of propaganda they're commonly used in the media landscape
that mess up your sense making to be able to recognize them so you won't be
wrongly affected by them the intention of those videos was to
kind of inoculate people against bad sense making
those are worth checking out and uh then if if you want
follow me on facebook i don't post public stuff very often but i if i do i
post it there and podcasts and other stuff some of it
historically is on civilization emerging dot com but it's
not very updated um facebook's probably the best place
i find that the the earnestness and the curiosity
comes from something that you could think of as a spiritual impulse
there is like actually a reverence for reality that wants to understand it
there is a respect for and uh yeah there's a respect for the
integrity of reality and a reverence that wants to and it's almost like
if you have a lover and you really want to love them well
you want to know their childhood stories and what they love in their favorite
color flower and their favorite songs and whatever so that you can actually
love them well and it doesn't mean that you'll ever fully
know them you shouldn't ever think that but that you want to know them better
as an expression of the love that's there and so
and that's not the only thing you want you don't just want to know them you
also want to have union with them you also want to serve them right
well the same is true of the reality writ large where you want to
seek to understand it not that you will ever understand it completely but the
desire to understand more is a kind of cognitive or intellectual
closeness or intimacy with reality it's a sign of a certain respect and
reverence and love and there's something just
profoundly beautiful in that and it's also and that's where it's
motivated by what you just call pure desire to know or pure learning
but where it's motivated by the desire to make a difference in the world i
would like these people not to be dying i'd like to have a solution that
doesn't create an authoritarian state because i care about freedoms
that then also is i want to understand reality enough to be effective
motivated by my love for people for nature for
reality and my desire to serve so the basis of where
the energy to do the work comes from is actually love
and the deep the more you deepen your love and care the more energy you will
have to do the work that it takes to have that love and care be active and
manifest in serving that which is loved and cared
that's beautiful thank you um yeah i've been talking with a couple
people lately that like what is the the contagion
of love you know that we can kind of match this moment with
as so many are feeling so much fear um
and i love yeah the the idea that that love can
we get reverence can we get you know more and more understanding and
curiosity and um yeah it's it's kind of an antidote to
kind of like the fear and shutdown that a lot of people are in right now it's
like a a lot of the um yeah the curiosity and
an inventational tone of this all uh is a really lovely antibody
so there is a little thing i'd like to offer
here so something a good philosopher friend of mine shared with me
that was very profound is um
fear is not the opposite of love um fear is a reaction to love
it is sourced in it i can only be afraid
of something being harmed that i don't want to have be harmed that i care
about and so when people are totally apathetic
ready to commit suicide don't feel fear around dying don't feel fear around
hurting other people whatever because there is no love or care that is
binding them still if i and let's say i i don't feel
any fear over something being destroyed i don't care about i'm like fuck it let
it burn down so the fear is a response to
something i love and care about where i'm thinking about it getting harmed in
the future i'm afraid of going crazy i it's
because i actually love life and my own ability to be
saying and to connect and contribute and to take care of my family and to
experience whatever it is right like there's actually a value
a reverence on that now the fear might be a unconscious response
i'm not consciously saying i would like to get afraid now so it's an unconscious
response and it might be a disempowered or disempowering response
but it still derives its energy from the depth of what is cared about
so i can do a conscious and empowering response instead where i say oh i care
about this thing so instead of focusing on automatically unconsciously what the
bad outcome is going to be and feeling like i can't do anything so i just get
afraid what is the good outcome i would like and what can i do
about it so i get empowered in that so i move the
fearful to careful full of care right and act from there
anger also comes from love sadness also does the apathy would just be like
fuck it i'm not angry i'm not and so they might all be unconscious
i'm not choosing to feel that they might all be disempowering or empowering
but you can find conscious and empowering where the anger becomes more
like passion and the sadness becomes more like depth of
appreciation and gratitude and fear becomes more like
carefulness and proactivity but any of those emotions don't think of
them as bad think of them as signals of something that is cared about
and then trace it back to what is it that i actually love and care about
and then what is it that i want to have happened and how can i actually be
empowered towards it beautiful yeah i had a realization a
couple months ago instead of washing away fear seeing
you know sitting on the side of a river seeing it as a stepping stone
and the other side of the river being bravery
and seeing it as yeah the logical response but i love it interwoven
with love yeah and that fearful careful
play on words this is very effective thank you so much for your time and for
all of this wisdom yeah really looking forward to
seeing the conversation that it incites in our trim tab trainees
and yeah thank you also for all the work that you're doing in this moment
we appreciate you thank you for making this series and for
having me here and i'm very excited to see what comes from the people going
through all of these and how they're sense making and solution
capacities increase and what they can do with that
all right thank you
