We actually have to fundamentally upgrade our worldview in a way that is commensurate
in science and includes the transcend science.
Hey folks, Mark Devine coming at you with the Unveiled Mind podcast.
Welcome back.
Thanks for joining me this week and we have a really, really cool show for you this week.
Before I get going and introduce my really cool guest, friend and super brain Daniel
Smokinberger, let me remind you that nobody can find this podcast if you don't go radio
on iTunes.
My dream is that when people go and they search for Joe Rogan or Tim Ferriss, Unveiled Mind
podcast pops up and everyone says, whoa, check that out.
It's got 6,000 five-star reviews, we better watch that.
Go radio on iTunes if you have the time and if you're not on an email list, then you might
be missing out.
Go to UnveiledMind.com slash podcast and just drop your name on an email list and then you'll
see that we send you all sorts of cool things and we don't spam you very often, but once
in a while we do.
At any rate, that's a different issue.
So Daniel, super cool to see you again, my friend.
Wow, welcome.
So Daniel, I'm going to do the best I can with a short introduction and then we'll let
Daniel speak for himself, which is the whole point of this podcast by the way.
So Daniel, born in Colorado, lived many, many different places and now settled in, believe
it or not, InstaNews, California, right down the road from us.
Daniel is a deep thinker.
He's like a human big brain computer.
He's the founder of the Emergence Project, which is a think tank to take a systems view
of the world and to see if we can bring some new thinking to solve some problems that are
hitherto unsolvable or intractable, is the word you used.
Also on the board of the Center for Integral Wisdom, where I met him, with Ken Wilbur,
and a few other notable integral theorists, and I'm trying to kind of evolve the source
code for spirituality, which is fascinating work.
And now more recently, the co-founder of the Neurohacker Collective.
So we're going to talk about all of those things today and probably more.
Daniel, super cool to see you again, and thanks for coming.
Thanks for having me.
Really good to see you.
Yeah, you as well.
So, you know, like I mentioned a little while ago, your work is very interesting and inspiring,
and every time we talk, like I leave a conversation feeling like not only do I have a little bit
more knowledge, but like for some reason, a couple more connections have been made.
Like my consciousness, just by the expansiveness of the conversation, has actually grown a
little bit.
I think that's fascinating.
Like, your brain doesn't work the same way.
I keep saying that your brain doesn't work the same way as most people's.
How did you evolve as a human being?
Like where did Daniel come from?
Like besides the DNA part and the mother's womb part, where did you come from?
What were your influences and what helped you become who you are today?
Well, when you talk about connecting different areas and a kind of interconnected worldview,
being able to do transdisciplinary and kind of interdisciplinary work, I had a really
fortunate early head start in that area, which is that I was homeschooled growing up.
And my parents were kind of educational theorists, and they wanted to run an experiment, and
the experiment...
You were the experiment of one, right?
Exactly.
N equals one, yeah.
And the experiment was, if you give a kid no curriculum at all, and expose them to as
many topics as possible, see what they're interested in, and facilitate the interest,
see what happens.
Is that like unschooling?
Is that where they come from?
Something is similar to that now.
It didn't exist when I was growing up.
So when I was a kid, I didn't have a certain amount of math, social studies, English, right?
I never...
I actually still have illegible handwriting, because I didn't do all the letters, I never
learned state capitals.
Can you string a sentence together?
I'm pretty sure you can.
I can string a sentence together.
But there were just areas that I wasn't called towards, but I was fascinated by all the sciences.
And one of the neat things was, because there weren't subject divisions, I didn't even
have the concept...
You didn't have to verticalize them in compartmentalism, like a normal student.
So physics and chemistry and biology, and astrophysics explaining how the atoms got
created that are in our body within the kind of biophysics of how human organisms were.
It was all interconnected.
Right.
And it was all interconnected also with the philosophic systems that gave rise to why
does universe work that way?
And so growing up, that was...
So were you thinking about those things as like a seventh grader or ninth grader or something?
Much earlier, because one of the other parts of my early education was activism.
No kidding.
And so it was like all the philosophic traditions, all the sciences and all the areas of activism.
That was the braid of my early experience.
And so activism was animal rights work, environmental work, social justice work.
And so I got to see kind of the worst parts of the world and the most extreme unnecessary
kinds of suffering.
Were your parents traveling around a lot?
Were you being traipsed around the world?
To do this act of this work?
Some of that, but we didn't have to go that far to find factory farms.
And then as I got a little bit older, I did go do some international frontline work,
but getting to start to really dive into the metrics of ocean acidification and biodiversity
loss and climate change and species extinction and the causes for those things.
One of the things that was really devastating for me early was because I was working across
a lot of areas.
I would see that there was a specific area that we'd be working on the certain organizations.
The first one that really hit me was an elephant poaching project.
And the solution to decrease the poaching at that particular area was putting up bigger
fences around the preserves to keep the poachers out and increase sentencing for poaching.
Which after a huge amount of work, it finally worked.
And the elephant poaching did go down in that particular preserve.
But the problem was the poverty of the people that had no solution other than poaching,
the mindsets of people towards seeing animals as commodities, the economic system that created
poverty in the first place, none of that had changed.
So the same poaching groups moved to start hunting the white rhino in the mountain gorilla.
Because I was working on enough issues, I got to see that lateral displacement.
Yeah, the problem just got squeezed into another domain.
And so if you care about elephants, it was a success.
If you care about quality of life comprehensively, it was a failure.
And then as I started to look at the whole picture, I got to see that almost all of the
good work we were trying to do in the for-benefit areas, or in the non-profit, or in the government
areas, mostly just displaced issues.
And the underlying causes continued to get worse.
And so that's where I was also getting to take a systems-theoretic perspective, which
is understanding not just individual areas of science, but understanding universe, how
do whole systems work, interdisciplinary, and start applying it to activism and saying,
what would it take to actually prevent the impending problems, solve the underlying basis
of the existing ones, and create fundamentally better world structures?
Right.
Fascinating.
So you're sitting on boards with world leaders and, you know, triple PhDs.
Do you have any formal education in yourself besides your homeschooling?
Like, did you go to get an MD or a PhD or anything like that, like in the formal system?
Kind of.
Kind of.
Most of the education that I have that's relevant didn't come through traditional training.
And even the traditional academic training I did was very avant-garde kind of small schools
that had programs I was interested in.
So I did undergrad in math and physics at a small school called the Mauritius University,
where they were actually doing physics work that I was really interested in.
Yeah, exactly.
But they were doing very interesting work at the intersection of physics and consciousness.
How does consciousness and physics, what is it, you know, how do they interact?
And then graduate degrees for me were in, never did my dissertation, did my PhD, except
dissertation in psychology.
Yeah.
But again, I didn't bother because I was just, I was interested in the learning.
I have a similar story.
I have an ABD in PhD in leadership that I never finished, because when I went to Iraq, I looked
at the whole, I had some distance and I looked at it and said, this isn't relevant.
Not worth me finishing.
Yeah.
Interesting.
Yeah, that makes sense.
OK.
So before I, I want to get into the emergence project and some of your work there, but where
did you come across the integral theory and Ken Wilbur and start to marry those ideas
and merge those ideas into your thinking processes?
So some of the most influential topics for me growing up were systems science, systems
theory. And so this was the work of Fritschof Capra and, you know, all of the previous general
systems dynamics, cybernetics, information theory kind of people, and then also complexity
theory. So the work of Stuart Kaufman, Santa Fe Institute, that kind of work, which is
actually an upgrade to science itself, right, which is when we're not just studying small
variable systems where you can isolate a variable and control and you're studying very large
variable systems where you can't isolate them, what is the right methodology for complex
systems? And so I was very interested in not just understanding specific domains, but increasing
the capability of understanding anything and then being able to have better lateral thinking,
how do we cross apply what we know in any area to other areas if it's cross applicable
because they're underlying kind of generalized principles or metastructures. That's where
I got into integral theory was looking at what are all the upgraded ways of knowing,
right, epistemologies that can potentially lead to novel valuable insights in any area
and that can lead to better processes for, you know, coming to understand a topic.
Okay. And so that led, I think, if I'm following your thinking and your own growth to the
emergence project, which is about taking from, you know, all this disparate systems and
complex on the knowledge around these things and then trying to distill practical solutions,
right there, or solutions that would potentially have a more systemic impact as opposed to
isolated impact. So tell us about the emergence of project and how that came about in your
work there. So when I saw the displacement that happened, right, from trying to solve
certain issues where we didn't address the interconnectivity and we didn't address the
underlying causes deeply enough, that would say we, you mean we as a civilization. Correct.
And that'll generally be the we that is big way. Yeah. But I also saw that the many of the core
metrics regarding the integrity of the biosphere and our ability to keep existing on this planet
we're continuing to get worse, despite the collective work of all positive intended projects.
And getting worse heading towards points of irreversibility of existential risk, right, our
species not being able to continue on a planet where we damage the life support systems too
far.
You've made a comment to me a couple months ago where you said that something like you believe
that throughout all human history, we're at the point of time where we have the greatest
existential threat to our existence as a human race. By far. By far. Well, think about it,
nuclear weapons were the first existential technology that we got. Because if we're killing
people with rocks or spears or guns, you can't destroy all people, right? You can't fundamentally
destroy the biosphere, the technology. One side wins, right, which means after population is still
potentially there. Exactly. Interesting. And you can't with axes cut down all of the old growth
forests in the world, right? You can't with line fishing overfished the oceans to the point of
oceanic kind of collapse or and so our increased population, but mostly our increased technology,
right, addressing and technology increasing means increased power. So if we move from an axe to
a D nine or slash and burn of forests that can take down an acre a second or dredge nets that
can pull out 90% of the large fish species in the ocean in the last 100 years or or nuclear
technologies, the level of technology we have has made our ignorance of our interconnectedness
with each other and with the biosphere no longer in, you know, tenable is magnified. Yeah. Magnified
it to the place of being existential, right, where basically we either have to fundamentally
change how we apply power or we stop existing soon. So just because technology has advanced
rapidly or accelerated doesn't mean thinking systems or moral structures. Correct. So in other
words, the race hasn't evolved to keep up with technology. This is Einstein's famous quote that
it's become so evident that our technologies far surpassed our humanity. One of the problems there
is that science itself such a powerful system for understanding the physical world physical
universe and it's a it is a applied philosophy, right, which is it's a way of going about
understanding which has to do with scientific method, observation, hypothesis. But science is
based on the idea that what is real is observable, measurable third person stuff, which means that
consciousness, which is first person, experienceable, non measurable stuff is not real just by definition.
It's outside of the domain of what science can address. Science can look at neural correlates of
if someone says they're experiencing a state, what is the EEG pattern. But if you look at the
EEG pattern of someone, you still have no idea what it's actually like to be them. Right. And so
what that created was a split between ethics, which is concerned about the subjective experience,
and science, which is our ability to have increasing mastery over the physical world. And so we've had
a ramping of technology from a system, right, technologies applied science, but a system that
has no compass, a moral compass in terms of ethics, or what it's not just ignorant of it, it's a
if we if we take physicalism, the idea, which is kind of the predominant
philosophic system upon which science is usually based or derived, the idea that what's fundamentally
real is physical stuff. And so consciousness is either not real at all, or it's a epiphenomena
of neural networks and brains, but that couldn't then be causal, it couldn't affect physics,
right, couldn't affect brains and bodies. If we take that idea, not only is science
unaware of ethics, it says there are fundamentally no ethical systems that could be true. That's been
the kind of philosophic stance of the uncommencerability of science and, you know, any kind of consciousness
oriented study. So when we have the system that's creating all the power and determining how we
create our physical built world, that not only doesn't have a compass, but says no compasses are
actually meaningful, then the compass ends up being economics, which is directing all the science
and research, and the underlying philosophy behind how capitalism works is a, you know,
neo-Darwinian kind of idea that is actually, it's not an adequate idea for the level of technology
we have. And we can see that from all of the major crises we have. This is why the Center for
Interferential Wisdom work is important, is we actually have to fundamentally upgrade
our worldview in a way that is commensurate with science, and includes but transcend science,
and can make ethics and science intercommensurate. So we can actually have a formalized kind of
ethics and existentialism that gets to be a basis for not just saying, how does stuff work, but also
what should be. Right. I love that. And, you know, most people are going, huh? Because we have, we
still have the fundamental problem. It's nice to have an upgrade of understanding, but if the people
who are at the ground level doing the work and executing tactics and strategies, even if you
understand it, if you don't, if you haven't evolved yourself to where you own it, right? What I mean
by that is you feel it, you experience it, you know, you've elevated yourself to where you,
this is much more than this concept. And I think that's the challenge, like you could have someone
who believes something, but then go, they go and act a completely different way because their
patterns and their emotionality and everything is stuck in a different stage of development.
So where I'm going with this is it's nice to have the emergence project and new thinking,
it's nice to have the center for inner wisdom and new thinking, but that doesn't mean it's going to
change a single human being's consciousness or evolve them unless they're actively involved in
those organizations. So how do we fill that gap? How do we evolve, how do we evolve human
consciousness at a global scale so that at least some tipping point, you know, that Wilbert always
talks about, there's 10%, it's just a thing, he says he just pulls the number out of thin air,
but how can we evolve consciousness? You know, I have theories about that it, you know, through
unbeatable mind training that it requires active work, because I've learned that through my martial
arts and Navy SEAL and yoga traditions that we've got to take responsibility for our evolving
ourselves through training and practices like breath and meditation and concentration and
right, right, you know, engaging with human beings in common understanding or in perspective
taking most types of things. So what say a few about this massive subject? Well, when we ask how
do we make a fundamentally better world? And we also ask how do we upgrade human consciousness,
human experience and patterns of behavior? They're the same question. Because when we look at ocean
acidification, it's caused by human action, right? When we look at overfishing and population issues
and violence issues, these are all caused by human action. And human action is caused by
all of our determinants of human behavior. Right. And so if we want to, but the okay, let me stop
there because we're going to keep probing here. I get so if new knowledge comes down and says,
okay, these systems, the systemic thinking says, okay, now we can't, we can't fish the oceans like
we have, because it's destroying the ocean, we can't chop down the rainforest the way we have.
And so, you know, whoever the intelligent body of governmental organization at the time,
whether it's the United States, the United Nations says, okay, you can't do that anymore.
It's illegal. Yeah, that's not going to work, right? Because that's the old 21st century top
down approach has already failed. And so what we're looking at is how do we facilitate
self organizing, self governance, right? How do we facilitate a bottom up evolution
of understanding consciousness and better predisposition of behavior. So if you have enlightened
law, no matter how enlightened the people were that developed it, and then you try and impose it
by force on people who don't understand it, want to agree with it, then you get dissent.
Back to the authoritarianism. And you have authoritarianism, exactly.
And so the question is. Or Donald Trump's wall, you know, along the Mexican border.
I wouldn't say that was enlightened law to begin with. But exactly. So if we look at the
elephant tusk kind of scenario, what would it take to have no one want to have the elephant tusks?
And that means economic solutions where nobody was in the poverty that needed that. It means
mindset shifts and no one was buying it because both they understood. Right. And so that we look
at this involves changes in macroeconomics. It involves changes in education and worldview,
like deeper changes, deeper structural change. But we have the situation where the elephant
is worth more dead than alive. In fact, economically, it's not worth anything alive on
anyone's balance sheet. That's amazing. But dead, those tusks are worth a meaningful amount.
And the whale dead is a million dollars on a Japanese fishing boat.
But alive in the ocean is not worth anything to anyone, even if it's serving a role in
keeping the whole planet, its children and its family. But the commons in the common has
a balance sheet that we are okay just stealing from that's actually core to the whole idea of
how we do capitalism. Right. And so that's a linear approach. There's no systemic accounting
to the way we handle economics. When we're basically stealing from the commons and the
next internalizing our waste there, but there's a very small number of us, the earth can support
it. And there's a large number with a large level of ability to mine fish. And most experts say
that number was about a billion people. Well, pre-industrial revolution before we had the
ability to start extracting from the savings accounts of the planet was half a billion.
Half a billion. Okay. And then our population boom after that was based on unrenewable extraction
of savings accounts. And that's been only 150 years. Yeah. 1815 was when we hit a billion people
for the first time. 200 years. Yeah. And so there's how do we evolve human consciousness? Well,
there's things that we need to do in each sector. There's evolving human worldview.
There's evolving the social systems themselves. Imagine if economics was such that the incentive
of every agent economically was perfectly aligned with the well-being of every other agent and of
the commons. We had a different kind of economic measurement system, metric system, where you
couldn't externalize harm somewhere else in the form of pollution that's going into the air or to
the water or killing and commoditizing something. But the omnipositive metrics of systemic benefit
to everyone were how you profited. There's a fundamentally different system. It's not
communism or socialism or capitalism. It's systems that we are just getting the tooling ability to
do that we never had. But then you're actually having economics be a tool of evolution of
consciousness and mass, right? Yeah. All the social systems. Same with we have to fundamentally
upgrade the infrastructure that ends up affecting not only the planet, but how it affects human
consciousness. But there's also things at an individual level and your work is focused there.
Yeah. And one of the things that there's a lot of fear about in the world, even amongst people who
are having these conversations is that we run out of time and that we can't get there or we won't
get there without a major collapse. Like a systemic collapse either in food production or all the above.
You know, it could be any one of five or six different trigger points. You know, it could be
influenza flu or zycovirus or nuclear war between Russia and the United States or
and I mean collapse of the ocean, whatever. What is your view on that? Do you think we're
past the point of a return or whether we have the ability to pull ourselves out of this or is
it just a race against time and who knows? James Lovelock is a guy who geobiologists who
developed the guy hypothesis. The idea that the earth is actually an adaptive system can actually
self-regulate and adapt. He's been looking at biosphere changes across maybe a longer period
of time and with more data than almost anyone. And in 2008, he said we had passed the tipping
points for major biosphere damage that we had maybe 50 years before civilization collapsed.
Without radical change. If you mean if we went along. He just said we've passed the tipping
points, regardless of what happened in the future. Right. And then in 2012, he was asked,
do you still agree with that? And he said it's going faster than I had modeled.
Now, when he was kind of probed a little bit deeper and he holds a view that's harder than
some other people's views. But he said, if we did everything technologically right right now,
we could shift it, but there's no indication that we have the right economic or political or
individual will to do that. Because we don't need to just emit a little bit less CO2 this year
than last year. We need to emit less than none right away, meaning we're getting into active
sequestering, which technologically we actually have the technology to do. The only reason why
coal is cheaper in some places is because all of the cost is externalized to the environment.
In the form of the CO2 and the mercury and the mountaintop removal mining, if you actually had
to pay for the cost of leaving the commons neutral, the cost of coal would go up four orders of
magnitude. And solar would have reached grid parity the moment it was a minute.
Interesting. Yeah.
And so this is where you actually have to shift things like macroeconomics to be able to shift
technologies within it. Now, we were already fortunately at the point that the technology
of gotten efficient enough, they're going to take over anyways. Do I believe it is too late? No.
Do I believe that it might be too late? Yes.
I think that the big wild card that what was his name? Love, Lovelace?
Lovelock.
Lovelock could not foresee was artificial intelligence and the ability of AI systems
and like nanobots and the convergence of all these accelerating technologies
to like radically shift it in an accelerating pace in the opposite direction. For instance,
I get all these alerts from my friend Peter Diamandis about what's new breaking technologies
and stuff like that. And oh, by the way, the biggest obstacle to the deployment of these
technologies is our own government, our own United States government and of course,
European as well. So a lot of these things are still kind of in the laboratory or being tested
in third world countries where they don't have the regulations. But they've got a nanobot that
can extract carbon dioxide from the ocean and replace it with oxygen. And so we deploy,
I don't know how you deploy it, but you deploy these little nanobots, it cleans the ocean up.
It's theoretically possible with the right amount of investment and we could do that.
And so if you have 100 of these key new emerging technologies which are powered by
an artificial system and nanotechnology is possible that we could
dramatically alter the equation. Well, this is the deal with...
That's the utopian view, I guess. I like to have the mindset that that's possible.
It opens up possibilities. So exponential technology, right? Technology where the tools
create the ability to build more and bigger tools faster and specifically we see that with
computing because computing helps give us the knowledge to know how to do more computing.
And so you get these exponential curves. So Diamandis and Kurzweil and Singularity University
are focused on all of the exponential curves in any kind of technology. That increased...
And it's something that's unique to get about exponential growth as opposed to any other
kind of growth is it means that you have so much more growth per each year once you get to those
inflection points where we're at than we had through the longest periods of time that our
adaptation cycles have to increase rapidly or they can't even begin to understand it and that
our intuitions and best practices from the past become obsolete faster and faster.
So this is a big deal, right? And those exponential technologies can both solve major problems and
cause major problems because it's just like we were mentioning nuclear was an exponential.
It was a major technology. It was the first one that was existential. If we used it wrong,
we could actually take ourselves out as a species. We have a lot of existential tech now,
with biotech and nanotech. We have life-ending applications, but we also have life-healing
applications, which is why we do have to rebuild infrastructure from scratch using the best
technologies but applied for the best things, which means no more externalization of harm
anywhere, which means a worldview shift where we recognize it on this little bitty biosphere
as powerful as we are. There is no place called away where we can put trash or where we can mine
unconscionably or where we can war and it's just okay because it's away.
Do you think that shift at the scale that we're talking about will only happen when humans
are augmented with artificial intelligence? No. That's one possibility, not necessary. We already
see people who have in your World-Centric Warrior program, right? We see people with a
World-Centric worldview who recognize that it's impossible for the liver to advantage itself
meaningfully at the expense of a kidney in an interconnected body where the kidneys die and
liver dies. Well, it's actually impossible for any of us to advantage ourselves meaningfully at
the expense of part of the biosphere that we're all interdependent with. When we start getting
how interconnected it is, we stop focusing on competitive advantage and start focusing on systemic
advantage. We don't need AI to do that. We can see that all the people who actually pay the most
attention to how systems work already get there. Then it's how do we facilitate the evolution
of a World-Centric worldview and then corresponding economic systems that can then implement the
infrastructural systems that are World-Centric benefit, right? It's a world-level balance sheet
we're optimizing for rather than optimizing for individual balance sheets at the cost of the
world balance sheet. I think it's ironic that the same set of trends that led to us getting to this,
you know, what you call existential crisis has also allowed the race to for the first time have a
World-Centric, a potential to have a World-Centric point of view. And so mass transport, all this
stuff, mass transportation, global shipping, and the internet all arose in the last 40 years.
40 years. We're talking about earlier how 200 years ago population was 500 million and now it's
seven and a half billion. 200 years, you know, in this duration of the human race, obviously that's
just a flick of an eyeball. And in the last 40 years we've gone from local to global, right,
which is one reason there's such a push back against globalization right now with all the,
you know, local thinking and tribalism, which never went away. But I guess my point is that
the internet, right, the internet of things, the internet of people, cross-border collaboration,
the ability for you and I to get an airplane and be an Istanbul tomorrow,
it's stunning the change that that's brought to the human race. And what we've seen, and you know,
from my practices in yoga and martial arts, you know, I've seen in teaching Navy Seals yoga,
I've seen a dramatic shift in the last 10 years even in the languaging and the type of people
who I'm training and their level of awareness. I'm actually starting to now train seal candidates
who are world-centric when they come to me. Or as soon as we start having the conversation, check,
I can tell that they're there, right, whereas seven or eight years ago, you know, if I mentioned
the word yoga, the eyes would start crossing, right. And so my sense is that it's happening
already. And that's the, you know, the human spirit or human consciousness compulsion to evolve
itself. Well, I think it got stuck, right. And then all of a sudden with the internet and the
opening up of global travel and all this stuff and the conversation, now it's firing out and
expanding. And the systems that have been created in the 21st century are obviously not capable of
holding that together. So we're in one of the most challenging and scary and risky periods of
history for a lot of reasons. And opportune. And opportune, right. So if you look at
any kind of technology, you can go with old technology, right, you can use a hammer to build
houses. You can also use a hammer to beat somebody, right. Like any technology can have applications
because it's an extension of our ability, right. And we can do wonderful or shitty things, right.
We used to say in the seals, you know, the guns don't kill people, people kill people. Yeah.
Just a tool. And I'm not saying that the technology is value agnostic. Some technology does
intrinsically move things in particular directions. But the foundational kinds of technological
capability are just going to empower human choice. And then the question is what's conditioning the
basis for how choice is made. And so as we get exponential technology, it's that much more
powerful, that much quicker, where we're also that much less used to how to use it. We have the
ability for much better and much worse potentials with it at the same time. Right. And so we see
right now some metrics in the world that are getting exponentially worse, like we talked about,
we see others that are getting exponentially better. And Diamond is famously talks about the
things that are getting exponentially better as a result of positive application of tech. Right.
We live in the most abundant period of human history. Right. Yet you turn on the network news
and it seems like the world's falling apart. Well, or if you really look at the biospheric
effects of the way we have been using technology and infrastructure, right. And so if things are
getting exponentially better and worse at the same time, it means the current system is destabilizing.
Right. And we are moving towards either the end of that system and a drop down, which is some
of the catastrophic possibilities, or the emergence of a fundamentally higher order system.
Because what's getting better are the capabilities, the parts that if we repurpose them with a new
whole, a new worldview, a new set of macro structures become not just a kind of evolutionary
shift on a gradient, right, but an actual discrete jump up. And we're right at the
brink of the ability for a discrete shift in evolution. Are you ready to start or to reboot
your journey toward personal mastery? If so, I'd like to invite you to join me at the fifth annual
Unbeatable Mind retreat in San Diego, California on December 2nd to 4th.
For three action packed days, we're going to be learning and growing from leading wellness,
fitness and leadership experts such as Ben Greenfield, Jesse Itler, Rob Wolf and Jimmy Chin,
among others. The Unbeatable Mind team and I will also work with you on creating an action plan
to help set you on the path for achieving breakthroughs in areas such as your health,
fitness, relationships, business, finances and more. You'll also have a chance to learn
new skills to refine your physical and mental training with boot camp workouts,
Kokoro Yoga, breath empowerment and other activities, including a charity wad benefiting the
Christopher Reeve and our own Courage Foundation. Now last year's event was sold out, so don't
wait to register if this excites you. Make 2017 your best year ever by a long shot
and join me at the Unbeatable Mind retreat. For more information,
go to www.retreat.unbeatablemind.com. That's www.retreat.unbeatablemind.com. Hooyah!
The general trend throughout human history is the holarctic evolution. Transcend and include
what came before and that's the vision that you're talking about. But you see these glorious
moments in history where that didn't work, right? Atlantis didn't work. The island tribe,
the names escaping me that just disappeared from the face of the earth, didn't work.
Population, like, they consumed themselves out of existence. And so I guess, you know, I'm just
kind of reaffirming our point is like, it could go in either direction. I hate, I'm not trying
to be the negative nanny here, but I'm trying to provide some balance to, you know, to where
we're going with this conversation is, in my opinion, right, and then you share this because
of your work, it's not acceptable for the global population to sit back and wait for us to solve
it. Correct. It's not acceptable. It has to be everybody all in. Correct. Right? We all have
to step up and do our sheep, dogs, skins and, you know, act world-centrically and start making
different decisions because the or else is too scary or too, I guess, apocalyptic to even
know that, right? You look at the work you're doing and how many people you have trained
to be more effective and more capable at so many things. And nobody in childhood said,
all right, we're training you to be part of the solution, but your life brought you to that.
Correct. You look at what Elon is doing and, you know, take a single person who's saying,
I'm just going to take responsibility for climate change and that's not being completely
having a stand only on one planet. You look at what, and he wasn't trained for that. It was just
something happened to start to step up to take more responsibility and more agency
for a larger collective whole. It's actually important that just like all ancient traditions,
when people to think about their own eminent death, to really use their time here well,
it's important to think about the real possibility of eminent collapse because the idea that you can
just focus on your little life and have a definition of success for you that isn't a
definition of success for everybody, it's a misnomer. That concept is no longer relevant.
So we've got to shake people up out of that point of view because that's still the prevailing
wisdom. I just get up and go to work as long as I mind my own business and, you know, all this stuff
that I see and hear about is just, you know, it's always been there. I hear that all the time. It's
always been, there's always been war. There's always been doomsday. And this time, I believe,
is different. It is. There haven't always been seven billion people. There hasn't always been
an ocean mostly fished out at the end of the ability to do it. We haven't always had exponential
technologies to empower bad decisions if we make them. So it is different. And it's also different
because we haven't had the exponential technologies to make better solutions possible. We have the
ability now, like, technological automation is happening, robotic automation. So either we get
to automate the shittiest jobs and help everyone step up, create fundamentally better kinds of
economic systems, or automate the shittiest jobs, concentrate that wealth at the top even more,
and have even greater economic disparity, right? It's going to happen. Which way do we steer it?
We have, we never had the ability to inventory all the world's resources.
Now with the internet of things and ubiquitous sensors, we can actually create a real time
balance sheet of the commons, know all of the material resources available, inventory all the
areas that we need to allocate resource to, and be able to look at how to best allocate all the
world's resources. We should assign a blockchain code to every single resource in the known world.
So we never had blockchain for, right? But we have the ability to do things like that.
Data science, the internet, the internet of things has given us the ability to do things
that Karl Marx or Adam Smith could have never thought about. Which means that the foundational
axioms have to be rethought because they're obsolete now. Right. A knowing full well that talking about
it and thinking about it in print tanks is only part of the solution. What's Daniel doing these
days that through the Neurohacker network to, or collected to, to be part of a tactical solution?
Yeah. Well, there's this classic question of, are individuals conditioned by the world they're
born into, which we know is a part of the truth. So do we want to work on making better social
systems, you know, infrastructure, social structure to condition people better statistically,
which is the answer is yes. Right. Communism and the democratic platform mostly focus there.
Or do individuals self-direct to various degrees and then create the comments, right?
Create the built world. And so we want to empower individual agency and capitalism and
the Republican platform will focus it. They're both true. They're both true. They're
interfacing and there's no dichotomy between those. We want to make better collective environments and
we want to make more agentic humans, right? We want to make environments that condition
individuals better and individuals that are more resilient to any environment. Right.
So it's not an either or. It's a both. It's not exactly to emerge in a more healthy manner.
And so on the individual side, like your work is focused on how do we evolve people who have more
emotional resilience, more impulse control, more mental toughness, more so they can make
better decisions, even in the face of hard environments, right? Your whole world was the
hardest environments that existed. And how do we still make really good decisions? Neurohacker
collective is focused on that from the side of you of inventorying all of the technologies.
And this is both processes like things that you that you teach, whether breath processes,
meditation, psychotherapeutic, you know, training and also physical technologies.
We're talking about an individual level, not a system.
Correct. Okay. And so we look at also the technology side of everything from
transcranial stimulation to genomic solutions to biochemical solutions to using technology
to meditate better, like a genome feedback and saying, how can we use our accelerating
technology to evolve ourselves individually, faster, better, more comprehensively?
Okay. So and you're and with my virtue of the name Neurohacker and being a collective,
it sounds to me like you're starting that journey by trying to enhance
neurological processing power. Yeah. And so now we're getting into the field,
the emergence field of new atropics. Atropics are one of the tropics is one of one of the
categories that we work in. And so when we say Neurohacker, what we're talking about is
how do we understand how the brain and nervous system and the whole physiology that it lives
within, how do they work in relationship with consciousness better? So we're really looking
at hacking the mind-brain interface, right? So first and third quadrant using the
will bearing a QAL system. Yeah, the two upper quadrants primarily, right?
Upper left, upper right. And the goal there is everything from whether it's increasing
cognitive capabilities, like short term memory, speed of memory, long term memory,
digit span, right? Also increasing focus, attention span, processing, analytic capabilities,
synthetic capabilities, creative, intuitive, right? How do we increase those kinds of cognitive
capabilities by understanding the neurologic hardware that mediates those capabilities and
then being able to say, how can we help up regulate the homeostatic capacity, the robustness
of those physiologic pathways so they can actually mediate those capabilities better?
So let me use it on Bill Mein in layman's terms. In the subjectives realm, we're going to use
something like a meditative practice, let's say a concentration practice, and that practice is
going to create some neuroplastic shifts in my brain structure, which are going to allow me to
focus better. And over time, maybe an epigenetic shift in me, which is going to make it a permanent
stage-stage conditional change. And what you're saying is to augment that, let's take a look at
the whole systemic organization of what's going on in the brain biology system. And there's potentially
some methodologies or hacks, even though I have an issue with that word. There's some ways to what
you turn up regulate, to change, to evolve, to improve it. And so that together, the first and
the third quadrant, the objective and the subjective are supporting each other in a mutually
upward spiral of virtuous growth. Yeah, and just to speak to it, we have an issue with many
interpretations of the word hack as well. When you think about hacking big brother,
in which the hacker ethos largely did, we're not trying to say that nature is big brother and we're
trying to beat it, right? We have a very different stance. That doesn't work very well. Nature always wins.
How do we understand and participate with? But one of the other aspects of kind of the hacker ethos
was that it took a lot more work to program the security system than it did to figure out how
to break into it, right? It was also largely how do we identify ways of getting some new behavior
out of the system that we hadn't known was possible before, where we have the least amount of input
creating the most amount of output. And so we're focused on increased efficiency and efficacy
from what had been what had been possible before. But so when you're doing your focus meditation,
for instance, and we look at what's happening neurologically, we can see that there are certain
brainwave states that are involved. And then we can say, well, we can actually measure your
brainwaves, feed that back to you with a kind of biofeedback and train you how to meditate faster.
We can realize that part of your focus is being mediated by certain neurotransmitters,
acetylcholine is doing parts of it, glutamate is doing other parts of it, catecholamines are
doing other parts. And we can say, can we upregulate the body and brain's ability to both produce
and regulate those chemistries, not just upregulate them where they're fixed, right? But upregulate
your body's own regulatory capacity. So teaching your body to fish, just not throwing them.
Yeah. I mean, it's when you're working out your upregulating capacity, right? It's not just that
that muscles on all the time, but it has the ability to be more on when engaged. So let's use,
you use the bodybuilding kind of analogy with me. So let's use that analogy to help people
understand how a newer tropic is working on the brain like a HCH or some supplementation
for a bodybuilder who's working. Yeah. So if a bodybuilder was just taking creatine without
working out, they're not going to get increased muscle growth, you know, or if they're taking just
branched chain or just protein. But if they are working out enough that their dietary intake
of those nutrients is actually the limiting factor, and then they increase the bandwidth
of the rate limiting factor, then the whole system can move further forward. So it's a synergy between
how much stimulus is happening to the muscle and how much nutrients are available to repair it and
the detox capability and the sleep, right? And the hormones that are involved in metabolism,
catabolism, anabolism, right? So it's a right synergy of those things coming together and saying
where are the limiting factors in being able to upregulate those? And so that's true for
muscle development, it's true for cognitive capability, it's true for meditation, it's true
for a lot of things. And so if someone were to take no tropics, say we're going to increase some
aspect of neurochemical function, but then not actually practice using their mind
in any disciplined kinds of ways or for any meaningful activity, you're going to get a
limited effect. And I mean, anyone can notice they can take caffeine or Adderall and have an effect.
They can similarly not take anything and focus and, you know, study more, learn more, meditate
more and have an effect. But if you combine those things, you can have meaningful synergies of effects.
Fascinating. So meditation, they're meant to be done together. The practices and the
supplementation through neuro tropics is what creates the magic. Just taking the neuro tropic
might help an executive be more focused in a meeting, right? Maybe help them stay on track,
you know, access the flow state. But what we're talking about in your mission is really to help
use these tools and complement with or in coordination or concert with well known and
immersion practices and things like, you know, what Peak Brain Institute is doing with biofeedback
to really evolve the brain consciousness system. Well, and the reason that if, you know, if you
go to our site, you have a look and you'll see that what's available right now to the public is
a very comprehensive kind of no tropic cognitive enhancement, nutraceutical. There's a lot of
other technologies we're working on. It's just if they're actually addressing anything in a more
medical direction, there's a lot of science and a lot of things where we can get them out.
And you got to start somewhere. And so this was a way that we could start providing value.
So you have an initial product in the market, that's called qualia.
Right. But we're also working very deeply on transcranial stimulation technologies,
on microbiomics solutions, on many things. But what's cool about a no tropic,
really well formulated one, and we, you know, had looked at the whole field of no tropics and a lot
of depth. And there's some things that were good, but there was nothing that did what we really
wanted to see happen, which was again, a kind of comprehensive whole systems, not approached to just
certain neurotransmitters or certain receptor sites or certain transporter proteins, but
all of the things that are meaningfully involved in rate limiting in cognitive capacity upregulation
in a way that doesn't produce down regulation or dependence, because rather than doing an
external override of an internal regulatory system, we're actually supporting the internal
regulatory systems. So you're saying a lot of the nitropics on the market are
nitropics and brand name only or just, or they're so limited in their scope that they
might have a negative effect? Well, let's, let's say we take people using off-label smart drugs,
like Adderall or, I mean, there's so many. Adderall are considered a no tropic.
No, no tropic generally means something that increases some aspect of cognitive function
beyond someone's normal baseline without negative side effect, which is why it's kind of this like
magically wonderful term to the degree we can achieve it. Smart drug typically means some
pharmaceutical that was for narcolepsy or ADD or some other purpose that's then being used for
off-label purposes. And it can increase some aspect of cognitive function, but it's probably
going to have side effects. And those are, those are, that's a chemical, right? That's not a
natural occurring substance. Well, nitropics can be chemicals or naturally occurring substances.
We're not so much focused here on whether we extracted it from a plant or whether we synthesized
it. We're focused on what is the actual effect that it has in physiology. So your qualia, does it
have both synthetic and natural ingredients? Okay. In general, we're oriented towards naturally
derived things because we have a whole evolutionary history with them. There's a lot of synergistic
compounds that are there, but there are times where there are synthetic compounds that we've
developed that have really wonderful properties that are very intercomensurate with human biology
and don't have any indication of meaningful side effects and actually have a lot of, you know,
neural protection, positive kind of upregulation. So we're, for instance, so the primary family of
chemicals that we think of when we think about nitropics are the racitams. Paracitam was the
first one, then there's many other racitams, and they primarily upregulate the uptake of acetylcholine.
They do a number of things, but the upregulation of the NMDA receptor sites, uptake of acetylcholine
and the postsynaptic neuron, that's their primary thing. And then ampikines primarily
upregulate glutamate uptake on the ampikine receptors. I'm not in my head pretending that I
know what you're talking about. So these are basically categories of chemicals that increase
some aspect of neurotransmission. And we've got on some of these 50 years of significant data
showing that they're extremely well tolerated and that in addition to actually upregulating
some aspects of human experience that are very meaningful, they've actually got physiologic
benefits as well, right? Neuroprotective against oxidative damage in the brain, against glutamate
excitotoxicity, against different things like that. So again, we are technologists, we embrace
technology, we just want to see right use of it. So we believe that natural chemicals can be very
toxic to you, right? Hemlock is natural. And there are synthetic chemicals that used rightly
can be beneficial. So our idea is that there is nothing not natural. If it exists in universe,
it is part of universe. And nature is the whole thing. So what we're interested in is do we
understand what nature is doing well enough that any interventions that we have are aligned with
its homeostatic capability rather than not? Interesting. So this two-part question,
because I want to, you know, this idea of creating a substance that can, you know,
hack in and help us improve our cognition and our focus and our concentration and all these other
things, like the list of benefits that you list for quality on your website are almost
on to get to be true. But then what's most important is the list of the ingredients and how
they act together is stunning in scope and breadth. And you put it all out there for all your
competitors to see. Why do you do that? So we deeply embrace the open source ethos. And so
our goal is to actually make the best technologies that can meaningfully enhance people's lives
available to everybody. Interesting. So right now, for instance, our product is expensive. It's
expensive because the cost to us is ridiculously expensive. We're working on getting the price
down with economy of scale, but how much we control the parts per million of any kind of
pollutant that's in there is way outside of traditional industry standards. The way we
control for form, purity, you know, so many things. And so it's just that and the total
number of grams of product, the exoticness of the ingredients, our goal was, if we're not
trying to say we need to have something that can be $40 in price, like I'm just unconstrained,
what's the best thing we can actually do? And so your quality is the Lamborghini of
new tropics at this point. And we're continuously studying and evolving and refining the process
where, you know, in both internal preclinical trials and in clinical trials and in more complex
forms of trial that go beyond what a clinical can do. But our goal was we want this to be
available to everyone. We're making it available as the highest quality we can, you know, as
affordably as we can. And if anyone else can do a better job, we want them to. And our unique value
proposition isn't that we kept knowledge, it's useful secret, it's that we actually do a good
job at executing on what we've learned and we're continuing to learn and iterate. So I love, by
the way, that some of the most successful social entrepreneurs you invoke Elon Musk names, you
know, he's got godlike status in our community. Embrace this shared open source. You know,
he's giving his battery technology to the world because he wants people to improve upon it because
he knows it's going to be a virtuous loop back to his totally his thinking. That's fascinating.
And, you know, our goal is to continue to advance our own novel science, but also to
synthesize all the great science that's happening anywhere. So we've got partners at many different
universities that have some of the best neuroscience departments in the world and also
in private sector at many different companies. So it's like part of why we call it a collective
is our goal is not just creating but also curating the very best technologies for anything,
whether we're talking about sleep, anxiety, pain, cognitive, anything that's at the mind,
brain interface, and making them available to people because it's very hard for most people to
be able to ascertain if something's actually going to be good or not. And then of the thousand
things that can affect cognition or anxiety or sleep that all have some clinical support,
which one's most relevant to them based on what's actually going on in their underlying
regulatory process. So we're, you know, we're actually working on building a kind of AI assessment
and recommendation engine that can then take all of the technologies and knowing what pathways
they work with and gaining more and more data about individuals, customize recommendations to
put people on the front end of- So personalize Neutropics. Like personalize nutrition, that's a
huge emergent field as well. Personalize Neurotech. Neurotech. So it'll go beyond Neutropics into
anything Neurotech. No kidding. Yeah. Fascinating. So before I move on from
qualia, is there a place, because I just want to disclose, folks, that I've been trying this
product. I think it's fantastic. Definitely, you know, it's been about three months now, I think,
right? Yeah. And I'm definitely experiencing some positive benefits from it. And so I intend to
continue using it. I'm not a big supplementation. I most people know I'm kind of very much,
you know, warrior-esque in that, yeah, I don't like a lot of gadgets and I don't like to have to
take a lot of things because they run out and then you have to worry about, I don't know, I have to
go buy another set or whatever. And it's expensive. But if there's one thing that I won't do without
now, it's become the qualia. I can let my fish oil run out and I can let my, you know, my multivitamins
run out. But I don't want to let the qualia run out. That's extraordinary, right? For me to kind
of get to that point where I'm like, wow, this is cool. So I wanted to put that out there that I
do endorse this product. I think it's fantastic. So where can people find out about it? And then I
want to move on, you know, so it doesn't sound like a product bitch here. But I think people,
my community needs to know about this. Like, there's a few things that are cutting edge
that I think are really cool. This is one of them. My ampoule is another I've already talked about.
No foods, non bread, bread is another one. That's going to, you know, potential to change like
major things at any rate. Yeah. What is it? Is it qualia.com or neurohacker?
Neurohacker.com. Neurohacker.com. Yeah. So if you go to neurohacker.com, you can read about the
formulation or kind of approach to science about the product. And you can also see on the ethos page
some description of the future things that we'll be bringing up. But the site is mostly focused on
qualia right now, since that's the main public offering. And as we continue to have more offerings,
they'll be on the same site. Awesome. So what's next for you? Like, what's the next piece of the
puzzle for you? With neurohacker? Well, with, let's start with neurohacker and then for Daniel,
what's emerging for you? So the next thing that we're doing from a kind of technology
product point of view with, with neurohacker is making customized versions of qualia, which we
did originally, we just can't do that at scale very well, because it was based on blood labs and
genome assessment and etc. So we're building the underlying technology to actually do more customized
stats at scale for that study. Yes. And before we need the world-centric warrior version,
we will for hardcore athletes and warriors and a generalized up regulation of cognitive
capacity is very different than optimizations for certain purposes, where if you're in a battle
like environment, you might not want empathy to be upregulated, you might not be as interested in
certain functions. Minimize the oxytocin component. So realistically, if someone is wanting upregulated
capability to do art versus to code versus to do athletics, they're not identical.
Really? And then in different physiologies, they're not going to be identical. And so
the next version that we're working on is where there's just a handful of different versions
for different purposes and different physiologic phenotypes. Next after that is we are working
on the ability for people to actually upload labs. So blood labs, genetics, motion tracker,
sleep tracker, any kind of biometric, as well as psychometric assessments to gain a better picture
of what's going on with them and then be able to have customized recommendations based on that.
And then we're also working on, like I said, moving into these other technology verticals
and other purposes, like sleep and pain. Would you come out with actual technical products, like
apps and like, what was the name of the thing that I put on my head? Virtual reality. Not VR,
but like the, it was a brain interface device, the early versions of it. Help me out, what do I
call that? You mean, oh, the Muse. Yeah. So we are working on hardware tech and software tech.
Software is like, say someone's in an AR VR environment, and we actually can develop software
that helps brain training. So we are working in that space. We're also working in hardware tech for
neuro tech that's outside of the biochemical space, right? So you've got biochemical and
biologic microbiomic solutions, as well as other kinds of hardware tech. So we're working in all
those spaces, both in terms of seeing things that partners are doing that we really like, helping
them and then curating their technologies, as well as developing novel technology. So you don't
have to develop all yourself. You're going to take the best of breed and integrate with it. And this
is a model that we actually really believe in. Is there a platform approach to this that's evolving?
Are you going to become, do you think Neurohacker Collector could become a platform that other
technologies can plug into? But rather than, you know, just people search through so many things
and still not know what's going to be most relevant, where it's, you know, just Amazon with stars,
the ability to have a recommendation engine that is based on deep understanding of the
underlying mechanics that they're trying to affect and personalized info about them is what we're
working on. Okay. And how about yourself personally? Like, where are you heading? What's next for you?
I mean, you're going to end up back at the big picture systemic because you're so passionate
about it or stay down in the company weed level. They work together. We actually initiated Neurohacker
kind of out of the emergence project to address one part of evolving the human condition, which is
are there basically predispositions for anxiety that are just at the software level, just
psychological trauma? Yeah, there are. And you address those to the right kinds of psychotherapeutic
processes. But are there predispositions for anxiety that are physiologic and that have
to be addressed physiologically or predispositions for psychopathy, right, for low empathy or for
increased violence? Yeah, they're physiologic predispositions for states of suffering and
states of shitty behavior. And so we wanted to work on the physiology side of predisposing,
being able to support healthier, more well integrated, happier, more capable, positively
capable humans. That obviously then works in conjunction with training, right, mind, brain,
body training, and works in conjunction with the collective areas of social systems and infrastructure.
And so Neurohacker is actually directly a part of that larger goal, which is how do we support
evolved humans that are capable of being agents of change.
Right. Terrific. Wow. Well, I stand by as well as the Unveiled Mind community to support you in
your efforts. And probably the simplest way we'll do that is to support qualia and then offer ourselves
up as research lab rats. And I offer my services to you to help out in any way I can. That's
extremely important. And like I said, we all got to step up our game and be sheepdogs. And
if everyone, you know, if everyone who was capable, I'm not talking about, you know, if you're in
Syria and surviving right now, or if you're too young to really, but if everyone in the Western
world and the East, who was capable, just took some, you know, one small action every day, yeah,
to evolve themselves and to make the world more of a world centric place and shift very quickly,
things would shift, you know, and just to say in return, we built this for you, right, for groups
like yours that are working on evolving themselves to have more capability to do a better job at
the things that they're doing that are hopefully progressively more and more large, big picture
focused and meaningful. And then it's how do we take people that are doing great work and give them
more and more tools to do better and better. Right. Right. Awesome. Well, thank you so much for
doing what you do. Likewise. And thank you so much. All right, folks, you heard it. Wow. Daniel,
Neurohacker Collective Emergence Project, we will have you back again. Or to it. And continue
this conversation. If that conversation didn't open your mind a little bit, then that should tell
you something. If it puts you to sleep, that should tell you something too. I'm going to have to go
back and listen to this myself. So I'm really excited about the possibilities here. So anyways,
back to the practical. Go do your training now. So go box, breathe, integrate this conversation,
make some journal notes and ask yourself how can you evolve yourself today? And what's your
training plan look like over the five months? Physically, mentally, emotionally, and intuition
spiritually? Keep it simple, but do the work day in and day out. And you will evolve. And then if
you want to participate in this conversation, you go check out Daniel's work at Neurohacker.com
and E-U-R-O-H-A-C-K-E-R.com. And actually, you'll see my bio somewhere on their website,
yeah, I think, as a collective member part of the board. I'm seven, eight of nine, right? So seven,
seven of nine was hot. I want to go measure, but I'm eight of nine, I think, right?
That's something like that. All right, folks, train hard, stay safe, stay focused. See you next time.
Oh, yeah, of course you're by now.
