Studying, working on for years, this is like maybe five years ago when we met, four or
five years ago when we met.
I knew you were thinking about sense making and rebuilding civilizations and I'm curious,
you know, I've had the pleasure of just kind of being around you for years.
What's the best way to tell probably a new audience about your work?
I feel like, yeah, I'm wondering, I'm wondering your favorite way to explain that.
I know that I have a favorite way to explain it, but I'll jump in if I'll give my perspective,
but I'd love to hear what if you have a shot.
A brief narrative from the beginning was homeschooled growing up, so I got to kind of
make my own curriculum, which was fortunate, and a lot of it had to do with activism.
My mom was big into activism, so I got into environmental work and animal rights work
and social justice issues young, and my dad was into lots of various of science and engineering
and philosophy, so I was getting to have that grade of topics.
As I was exploring activism, one of the things that I found was how profoundly interconnected
the problems were and how the solutions weren't adequately addressing them, and this started
showing up all over the place.
I got in terms of looking at why are the ecological issues advancing and not getting better despite
the huge amount of effort happening in the nonprofit space and government and for-benefit
space.
What is fundamentally inadequate about the nature of the solution?
I remember being 13, working on helping some project that was in Kenya protecting elephants
from poaching in an area that was already protected that the poachers could get in, and so I was
13, so it was just in the U.S. like going door-to-door raising money and writing letters.
The people who were there on the ground were having their life threatened by the poaching
groups.
The solution was bigger fences around the preserve so poachers couldn't get in and legislation
in the country for harsher sentencing for poachers, and the solution after a couple
of years of blood, sweat, and tears finally worked, but it didn't address the poverty
of the people that were poaching and the fact that they were in parts of the world where
25,000 kids are starving to death a day.
It didn't address black markets on animal products, it didn't address mindsets towards
animals, it didn't address a macro-economy that creates poverty at scale and ships it
to the third world, it didn't address any of those issues, so the same poaching groups
moved and started hunting both the mountain gorilla and the white rhino more than they
had been, both of which were more endangered, and I got to see this because I wasn't just
looking at one issue, I was working with enough groups that I got to see that those were connected,
and so the tremendously hard and well-motivated work solved one problem, but actually moved
the underlying problem space to show up in areas that were even more sensitive.
And that was really devastating because the only kind of hope that I had to deal with
the devastation of the nature of the problems was that something could be done about it,
and so fortunately I was also studying not just all the different areas of science that
I could, but system science and Bucky Fuller's work and Kappa's work and kind of how do all
the things fit together, and so I started looking at activism from that lens and saying,
how can we understand the nature of the problems well enough that we can come up with solutions
that solve that problem, but also don't externalize harm elsewhere?
And that required starting to get into economics and the nature of why does this perverse incentive
arise and what would it take to internalize perverse incentive and externality and the
nature of governance systems and culture and basically civilization writ large?
So then that led to saying, okay, well, there's a lot of things that we can say are getting
better.
You can listen to Hans Rosling or Steven Pinker and pick things that are getting better, but
you can also look at most environmentalists or people studying existential risk and look
at things getting worse and both are the case.
There are some metrics getting better, there are some getting worse, that's a destabilization
of the overall space, but the things that are getting worse are leading to catastrophic
tipping points that will break the substrate that allows the things that are getting better
to matter.
So I started forecasting, how long do we have on the various things and started reading
Limits of Growth by Club of Rome and all of the different kind of forecasts as well as
studying Civilizational Collapse Theory, Tainter and Baudrillard and things like that, because
it becomes pretty clear when you study history that all of the great empires that lived for
hundreds or thousands of years don't still exist, whether it's...
I'm curious, how old are you when you're diving into this inquiry?
It's just so fascinating that you're so interested and have the dedication to dive into this.
When does this occur in your life?
I mean, this kind of the thread of my whole life, just progressively deeper insight
of the prospects. You know, if you spend time talking with kids, where you
listen and then actually give them space for the questions to emerge,
the dedication is there. I do nature walks with kids and they want to ask around about
how do trees suck up water and how does the light thing work and how do all the animals and
everything interact and very deep questions. They want to know why the sky is blue,
which actually requires understanding things about optics and about astronomy and about the sun,
about astrophysics, as well as the nature of consciousness. What is the subjective experience
of blue? And school just doesn't do a great job of actually facilitating that curiosity.
And so if we force people to be interested in shit they aren't interested in and don't
facilitate their interest in the things they're actually interested in, we kind of break their
interest and they want to use some hypernormal stimuli. So I was just fortunate that the things
that were interesting to me I got to pay attention to and I think anyone that gets to continue to
pay attention to the things they're interested in learns, but they also double down on their own
interest. So the things I'm describing now were a lot of my kind of teenage focus.
And so I started looking at forecasting and civilizational collapse models,
anything from environmental collapse, from overfishing and peak resource utilization,
to pollution issues, to climate type issues, as well as what are the things that lead to
large-scale war and infrastructure collapse and those types of things. And that led to recognizing
that as our technology exponentiates and the power of our choices exponentiate, but our
quality of choice-making is not getting commensurately better to the power of our choice-making,
we're having more and more different escalation pathways to catastrophic risk globally.
And higher and higher probability of them where if we try to think about like biotech risks or
nanotech risks or AI mediated risk or large-scale war grid collapse, if we tried to solve any of
them on their own, they're almost all impossible to solve and there's too many of them. So I started
thinking about what is driving all of them? Why are humans coordinating at scale in a way that uses
our technological power in ways that either directly through conflict theory cause problems, war,
and, you know, war and exploitation that is known, or through mistake theory cause problems,
unintended externalities. And a lot of it is that, right? Like I don't think the people when they were
making Facebook knew that it would destroy the entire information ecology, but it did. So that's
the kind of information-theoretic issue. So we started thinking about is there a some set of
underlying dynamics that give rise to how humans are coordinating that are what gives rise to all
these problems, the generator functions of them. And to just start to think about like perverse
incentive as long as military industrial complex is one of the largest blocks of the global economy
and war is profitable and you have the capacity for the supply side to manufacture artificial
demand. Can you have a for-profit military industrial complex that the entire global economy
depends upon and lasting peace in a supply and demand equation? Well, no. So we have to deal
with perverse incentive there. That's one example. We can see it in healthcare and we can see it in
mining and we can see it everywhere. And so you start looking at is the nature of the incentive
system. The economic system where 50 to 100 trillion dollars a day of human activity moves,
but is either directly causing harm or indirectly causing externality.
Could we shift that in a way with that incentive system? What was in the incentive of an individual
or a corporation or a nation was in the well aligned with the well-being of the whole better?
Right? So these are the questions I was asking in a study, the Austrian school and straight kind
of laissez-faire approaches or socialist approaches or Marxist approaches or like techno-optimist
automate everything approaches. And I got to see that there were strengths and weaknesses of a lot
of them and none of them were actually adequate to the space. So put together some research groups
that were working on understanding the space, the generator functions of catastrophic risk well
enough to say, is there a categorical set of solutions to the underlying dynamics of how
humanity coordinates effectively that is the kernel of a new civilization model?
And that when we study civilizational decay of what made Rome fall and Egypt in the Aztecs
and the Mayans and the etc. that if we understand the dynamics that give rise to civilizational
collapse, can we have something that really addresses all of those dynamics and addresses
all of the escalation pathways to the catastrophic risks we can see? So it sounds like
almost correct me if I'm wrong, but maybe a simple way to put that is
if you were to redesign civilization from scratch, how would you do it? It's almost
the frame of like, well everything that we've done has these strengths and weaknesses. What would
we do if we do it again from scratch? Is that kind of where you're coming from here?
This is a valuable question and it's an insufficient question and I spent a lot of time
as young asking it without recognizing
the enactment problem. So we actually get there in factoring that that seems that all the people
are conditioned currently who are in power in a way that would resist that and it seems to be not
in the immediate best interest of the game theoretic environment. So yes, it's an important
thought experiment. If we were going to redesign civilization from scratch, how would we think
the best run planet would run? A most enlightened planet would be. Then we have in the current
scenario, what is actually a viable path there? And to some degree, you reverse engineer from the
idea of a future state to some degree forward engineer, how can we be vectoring in the right
direction and increasing our capacity to continue to vector in the right direction?
So what I'm hearing is great thought experiment.
Hey Google lights on.
That's not, Eugene, do you mind meeting yourself?
Although it's a great thought experiment, change doesn't start. We can't just hit a button and
then and then redesign. You're saying, cool, great thought experience to have that vision
to think about what is that beautiful thing. And
changes, changes evolution, changes, it's messy, right? To actually get to that vision,
we actually have to start with where we are.
Yeah. So where are we? And where do we,
where do you see us actually being able to go from where we are?
So I'll try to bridge this to some of what Wade was talking about. He's talking about the unraveling
of the American
empire. I think we can look at, and I don't claim to be representing his
views accurately here, but just kind of piggyback on some of the thoughts.
We can look at the United States system and say, is it undergoing civilizational decay in the way
that led to the breakdown of previous civilizations? And what would the signs of that be? What kind of
things can we look for? We can also look at the global system that the world has actually
run on since World War II, that has been US based. And it's very important to look at these together.
From the US perspective, we can, you know, one just kind of quick insightful thing is that
throughout history, democracies or republics, systems of participatory governance that we're
at scale, not like small tribal scales, never made it to 300 years. They have a fairly short
life cycle. All empires died, but some of the dynastic ones made it a thousand years. And the
ones that were more participatory governance systems lasted less long. The US is at around
250 years, depending upon exactly the start date you pick. So this is the time cycle factoring
history of the adequate decay of a republic. And to understand why, there's a bunch of reasons
why. And I won't get into all of them, but the people who are willing to fight a revolutionary war
to make something happen, right? If they lived in the direct experience of tyranny of government
and where they were willing to die rather than let themselves be governed in a way that felt
tyrannical, then they're also willing to do the extraordinarily hard work of participatory
governance, which means show up at the town hall, not let just let somebody else make the decisions,
read all the papers, be actively informed about what's going on so that you can participate in
governance because you have the direct experience of how terrible not being involved in your own
governance is. But as time goes on and several generations pass and that just becomes a myth
that no one has any embodied experience of, and there's like mortgages to pay and stuff on TV
and shit to do, I don't even want to go to jury duty, let alone be really actively informed and
engaged in participatory governance. So if the people stop checking the state and it's no longer
truly governance of foreign by the people, then the state stops being able to do what it's supposed
to do, which is check the predatory aspects of the market. I'll just make this frame because
that's an important frame. So I love it. One way of thinking about all of the problems in the world
is that they're all coordination problems, that it's patterns of human behavior at scale that
cause them, and it needs to be different patterns of human behavior at scale to solve them. And so
how do we get lots of people to coordinate their behavior when they want different things and they
have different understandings of the world and different worldviews in ways that lead to
better solutions for the individual groups and the whole overall. It's a hard thing when the
Churchill said about democracy and the Founding Fathers here said something similar, that democracy
is the single worst form of government ever created, saved for all the other forms. What they meant
is the idea of governance, that you get a lot of different people to actually participate together
is just a really hard proposition. And it's why if you look at human history until like the thing
we call civilization only started 10, 13,000 years ago, but we have 200 or 300,000 years of
sapien existence of people that were genetically and neurologically similar to us. And those groups
never got beyond give or take what's called the Dunmer number, 150 people in a tribe. And it's like,
why was that such a hard upper bound? Why did for hundreds of thousands of years humans never make
groups bigger than that? And it's actually like the simplest way I think of it is it had to do
with limits of coordination, communication and coordination. If the tribe has to make a decision
that's very consequential to move or not, or to change some deep aspect of how they do things,
up to about that size, everyone can participate in a tribal council and all have a say in what
the rest of their life is going to be subject to. But as soon as you start getting more people than
that, everyone can't actually have a say because you can't just you can't have time to listen to
a thousand people, right? It would take a month to make a decision on anything and no one would
even have the work memory to hold it. And so then I'm have to rep pick representatives to make
choices on my behalf. Now my life is subject to choices that I don't have a say and no,
I'd rather Cleveland make my own smaller group and be more self determined. And so the Dunmer
number was a limit of how and up to that size, I could talk to everyone and get their sense
so I didn't just have like an anonymous, the right or the left over there that I could just
have a pejorative straw man version of I had people that I knew intimately. So
that's almost all of evolutionary history. Now, when the tribe would get as big as it could get,
then it would cleave and some of the people would move somewhere else, lots of migration
happened till eventually population keeps growing, we've migrated everywhere that we can now population
keeps growing and tribal warfare becomes pressed, right? Because now we're competing for scarce
resource. Now there's a basis to have tribes unify against larger external tribes and we call that
kind of the beginning of civilization, which means it was in a war game theoretic kind of context.
And so now we unify together and try to create government structures for these larger numbers
of people because we have to. And so there's binding energy to hold the cleaving energy
associated with an enemy hypothesis. So when I think of coordination,
it feels like it's so related to connection. And if you want to get further, maybe empathy,
right? When people don't have a sense of each other or where they're at or what the pain and
problem is, people don't really care. Like, you know, if you know I really care about something,
Daniel, and you might be like, oh, you should meet this person and I could change my life.
Right? You might give me 10 minutes, you might give me an hour, you might help. But
it feels like it starts, that coordination starts with some sort of connection.
Yeah, that came up for me. So I want to do it. It's a nice field.
I mean, there definitely needs to be some fealty. And it's a nice idea that it emerges from empathy.
It doesn't have to emerge from empathy. It can emerge from a shared enemy, which it often does.
And so then there's fealty to each other, not because we necessarily care about each other,
but because we care about ourself and our sub in group, and we feel that we have to be bound
with them against whoever the help group is. But yeah, the Dunbar number was partly a limit on
how many relationships I could deeply track. And I'm willing to make certain sacrifices of what I
want most for people I really know and love and I've known forever and I see every day and they
know me. It's much harder to make sacrifices for anonymous people that I have no idea who they are
that are somewhere else. And so as you get beyond that, you have to have a shared religion or
patriotism or some kind of group identity that everyone gets to be part of so that they identify
with each other through shared group identity. We can see that in the U.S. that is broke down where
there's very little sense of what it means to be a U.S. citizen that everyone's on the same page with
that really creates binding energy. There's much more of a sense of what it means to be on the
left or the right. It has so much enmity towards each other that the thing as a whole doesn't have
something like shared nationalism or patriotism and that's part of the issue.
I guess so fundamentally, do humans just need pain or an enemy to really come together
and coordinate in a larger way at scale?
It's a good question and I think I'll better be able to answer it if we go back to the train
that was on about coordination. So if we look at all of the issues we want to solve as coordination
issues because we say well no, climate change is not a coordination issue. It's a straightforward
environmental issue. We've got to do certain things with the transportation and the energy sector
or whatever. No, it's a coordination issue because you have to have enough people that have a shared
worldview around what is true, what is real, what the problem is that they can come up with adequate
solutions and that a major chunk of humanity isn't fighting against them to keep it from happening
because they have a different worldview or different assessment.
And let's say that your solution involves whatever some kind of carbon tax or something that
countries have to agree to. Agreement without enforcement ends up being a very tricky thing
and how do you do enforcement internationally with superpowers that have nukes? So let's say
that the US and Europe were to agree to some kind of taxation policy which decreased their
near-term GDP growth but was good for the environment long-term and we'd all say well
that makes sense but then let's say China doesn't and we have a concern about China seeking to be a
global dominant empire and if we can't enforce them to because does that what enforcement mechanisms
are we going to use that don't create war then does that just basically and that increased GDP
they have relative to everyone else equals increased globalization and military powers
are we just ceding the control of the world to China like that's a very real set of theory of
trade-off considerations so your assessment of climate change can't be separate from your assessment
of geopolitics and underlying economics and so we don't assess the problems in a deep enough
interconnected enough way to come up with good solutions and we don't have enough
uh shared sense making that enough of the world wants to do the same things right so we can
say what do you mean by what do you mean by sense making what's what's that mean
is actually real is climate change at all right so if you talk to some environmentalists like
very good ones like lovelock it's not only real but it's already too late there's nothing we can do
about it and uh the earth will become uninhabitable uh other people say it's a very serious thing it's
on its way to that but we still have time there are other people that think that it's a real thing
but it's not that serious the earth changes will migrate and there are other people that think it's
utter hoax right sense making have we been able to make sense of the world that we live in well
enough to inform what we think are right choices so when we think about democracy what we're talking
about is a collective choice making system how do we not just make choice me as an individual
in my family or an individual economic actor choosing to buy or sell something
but we're going to share roads we're going to share defense we're going to decide that it does
make sense to start that war or not so in autocracy we just basically the power is ceded to whoever
it is that's going to make that choice but in the participatory governance we're supposed to
participate to do collective choice making the basis of choice making collective choice
making is collective sense making about what we think is actually happening and sense making
about what we think the effect of a particular and injunction might be and meaning making what
do we think is important that we're in service to and communication our ability to converse
effectively enough with each other that we can get on the same page about this so that we can
do collective choice making so choice making has as its antecedents sense making
its prerequisite sense making meaning making and communication and just to jump into sense making
you're reminding me of thinking of an ecology right and and there's usually a keystone species
of that you could kind of like point out and be like for example in columbia the jaguar the jaguars
health is great the amazon's good if it's if it's not amazon's bad right it's a very simple way so
if we think of sense making as as a term you you mentioned earlier which is beautiful an
information ecology or you take this information ecology and make sense of it how is is there
something as simple as a keystone species where you could just be like yeah we're we're
that the health of our sense making right now it's it's fundamentally on the decline it's not
healthy um is there is there something that we can point out that or many things that we can
point out where we're like guys our sense making ability is often and in this model you described
it's it's almost like the reminds me of the the story of the the princess in the peak right this
she's she's sleeping on a pea she's so sensitive that if a pea is under her bed it affects her
right and so there's this
almost a butterfly effect a better better approach of if this is off
right how can we show people that this is off or that it's not i think that would
should be a helpful place for us to start
so i appreciate that as i'm sharing things individual things i'm saying are sparking
interest and you're wanting to go down those avenues what i also noticed that about six strands
open which would actually be necessary to close to do a good job of this
and i apologize that part of looking at things in a more interconnected way means the chunk size is
a little harder and that's the important thing for people to understand is that you can't fit a good
assessment of anything into a tweet or into a short news bite so an attention span forgive me i'm a
million when attention spans are down you become a worse sense maker for sure because you you have
to compress the complexity of reality into something that will fit into the tiny attention
and so actually expanding attention to be able to hold multiple views multiple epistemologies all
of the relevant things so that you can then come up with a solution that's actually adequate is is
requisite so i i have heard that is there a butterfly effect to affect sense making
let me try to close a couple of loops that maybe we'll bring it together
so we want to improve human coordination we want to improve our sense making where we all
are better at having the capability of doing assessment of what is actually true base reality
and you can see in the u.s right now hydroxychloroquine is a wonder drug it's an utter false
farce that actually kills more people if they use it masks really help masks make it worse
systemic racism is the most critical issue in the nation systemic racism isn't even a thing in
police violence when statistically corrected is worse for white people uh on and on right
china is trying to become a globally dominant empire is very close or they're not like there's
maximally polarized views around just base reality because these aren't these aren't values
these are is this is something true right so clearly we're not doing a good job but collective
sense making um so when we say we want to get collective coordination we want to get our ability
for for everyone to actually know what is true empirically well for us to be able to identify
what values we're trying to serve and be able to hear the value someone else is trying to serve
and say is are there better strategies that can serve these simultaneously maybe i care about the
environment here maybe you care about your kids being able to get good jobs and there's a particular
proposition that's crafted in a way where if it goes through your kids get good jobs and the
environment's fucked and vice versa so i have to pretend like i don't care about kids getting
good jobs you have to pretend like you don't care about the environment because the proposition is
based on that theory of trade-offs and i've now collapsed my values into a strategy to achieve
them but if i said wait wait i care about this you care about that is there a better proposition
we can come up with for what could achieve both of them so we separate the value from the strategy
to achieve it you can see that it almost seems mind-boggling bogglingly ridiculous that we have
a democracy where you vote on a proposition where you weren't involved in crafting what is a good
proposition so some special interest group that has a very narrow interest puts forward a proposition
and markets it to a group of people where it's directly beneficial to them and this is why almost
every proposition gets about half the vote yes and half the vote no which also means that it inherently
polarizes the population which is why democracies die younger one of the main reasons is it's actually
very hard to get lots of people to coordinate it's very easy to have one person rule or a small
number of people rule and if you're creating a voting system where the people aren't doing good
proposition creation first it is necessarily polarizing because the thing that you're voting
for seems like it's actively trying to harm what is meaningful and sacred to me and vice versa so
since the beginning of the thing we call civilization very few total people have
lived in democracies or republics almost everybody has lived in feudalism or autocracy of some kind
democracies have emerged just a few times in rare little pockets and when they've emerged
they have emerged following periods of cultural enlightenments this is a really key insight the
cultural enlightenment because it's going to come to your butterfly effect yeah cultural
so the Athenian democracy with all of its flaws still a movement in the direction of more participatory
governance emerged out of a kind of greek enlightenment that valued everyone's ability
to do better sense making so let's really value education and the development of the individual
so everyone should learn history and formal logic and grammar and rhetoric and etc so they can all
actually make sense of base reality on their own and make good choices and then they all also need
the Socratic method which means that they can argue any point they can take other people's
perspective well and you can see how profoundly broken down that capacity and that value in
orientation currently is if you have a bunch of people that can make sense of reality directly
on their own not listen to what some authority said and decide which of the authorities they
listen to but direct empirical capacity and then they can take each other's perspective those
people can have a conversation that will end up resulting in some ability for effective compromise
and movement forward but if the capacity for sense making conversation breaks down
then the basis that gave rise to the democracy republic being able to emerge breaks down
and so we can see that in the us the us came out of the european enlightenment where there
was this kind of renaissance idea of you don't just have to be a specialist at one thing you can
have a deep background in lots of things science we can actually empirically all get a good
based understanding of reality and the hegelian dialectic will always seek for any thesis an
antithesis and then a higher order synthesis can we take multiple perspectives and try to find higher
order reconciliation that the underlying public education and fourth estate or news that are
required for people to all be developed in their capacity to make sense of the world and participate
in governance and to know what's going on have went through enough institutional decay that nobody
really has a sense of what's going on or to the degree they do they are outraged and certain
about things that half the population thinks that they're desperately wrong about right that they're
outraged and certain about so we can look at this as the collapse of the american empire because you
don't have the ability for a real republic because you don't have participatory governments because
the prerequisites aren't there so look at it in a bigger way which is we can and this will then
wrap up we can look at the breakdown of the the first ever globalized world order that has been
since world war two because of course empires got larger as time went on and there was a game
theoretic competition for more size british empire was not quite a world ruling empire but after
world war two it was the first time that we could never have a war again between the major empires
we always had war between major empires but they never had a new they never had utterly catastrophic
tech that made a war that no one could win and so after world war two we had to do something
unprecedented and say how do we never have a war between the major parties again and so we said
well we have to be so economically interdependent that it's never advantageous to bomb each other
because it is better to coordinate with each other and so let's do globalization and have
supply chains that interconnect us in such a way that we don't survive without import and export
well in a way that made sense right and we had proxy wars but we didn't have major wars from
then until now but it also created one global civilization really because none of the nations
really can operate on their own a global civilization mediated by globalism that is profoundly fragile
where breakdown you know a virus in one part of the world can become a virus in the entire world
can start breaking down supply chains breaking down social fabric within countries between
countries and so covid was just a big enough thing to show the systemic fragility and the
systemic fragility that's been cascading is really like the second and third order effects are really
just starting to show up and we'll continue for some time and obviously when we look at the
social tension that has that arose with george floyd it was a long-term issue but after a tremendous
amount of unemployment of course there's going to be more likelihood for violence in the street
is when people's fundamental needs aren't met you always get more willingness for violence
and so even that was one of the secondary effects of covid type effects so what we're
experiencing right now also is that the globalized world order that the kind of breton woods
agreements put in place are breaking down or almost totally broke US has pulled out of NATO
at WHO decreased the U.N. and the major empires the the the biggest countries in the world
are doing cyber attacks on each other and espionage and they know it so it's not
following peacetime agreements it's basically unconventional war rather than conventional
kinetic war but it can all right hang tight everyone so we have a breakdown of the global
order and we have a breakdown of the country and uh was leading the global order kind of
simultaneously and then there was a very big question of so what happens now uh do we have
increasing chaos in like population reduction catastrophic risk at large do we have china
moving through uh actually increasing their coherent capacity to build trains all around the
world in ports and whatever and they run the world and what does that look like or at the end of where
the the US has decayed to can we reboot something like a meaningful participatory governance
if you want to reboot it you have to drive a cultural enlightenment that is the prerequisite
this is the butterfly is the the high value on everyone's capacity to do much better sense making
and much higher quality conversations so they can participate i think this is the exact conversation
i want you and wade to to kind of discuss and digest and that was um
that was beautiful um thank you um yeah do you how are you feeling do you want to take a
take a breath how about we all take a breath and then we'll we'll come back with wade
sure okay great i i think we're it's almost like you've opened the connection of of where both of
you really really fit in together and i think now the audience gets both of you really well
where you're coming from um and i'm excited
um
Really, really fit in together and I think now the audience gets both of you really well
where you're coming from and I'm excited.
Hey everyone, keep hanging out for a sec. We're trying this new thing where we beam a zoom call
into the inside of the bio alchemist pyramid here. We'll get it straightened out in just a moment.
Really, really fit in together and I think now the audience gets both of you really well
where you're coming from and I'm excited.
Thanks everyone, I hope you've enjoyed our talk today and I'll see you tonight.
Really, really fitting together and I think now the audience gets both of you really well
where you're coming from and I'm excited to bring us all together and see what emerges.
All of us. Thank you to you for being here. It feels like such a poignant conversation this time.
And what I find interesting about the two of you is that you guys are pointing at,
I think something very similar and you're stumbling on it in two different ways.
You're coming at it from two different angles. Wade, cultural anthropologist, storyteller,
and you wrote this article, you've shared with me and it's so pretty expensive,
just you just feel like something had to be said? Yeah, I mean I just was going to say that you
you introduced me to Daniel when we first connected and I just loved listening to him and
when I was just listening to your conversation it struck me that just how important it is to
know history. I was just reading earlier today one of the classic books about Vietnam by Stanley
Karnoff and you just see how those men, you know, Robert McNamara and you know,
Dean Rusk and Johnson and all their kind of various advisors, the scores of them,
were just stumbling around in that void doing what they tried to do and it's almost agonizing to
be reading the contemporary accounts of their decision-making in 1963 to four to five,
knowing what was going to be the result and the kind of analysis that Daniel just did,
taking us through the patterns of history, you know, he quoted Churchill and another one of,
I think Churchill is saying, I think it was Churchill who said that, you know, if you don't
study history you'll never, you know, you'll, it'll, you're condemned to repeat the same mistakes
over and over and over again and, you know, in my little analysis of COVID thing, what made it,
I suppose, unique and certainly what caused it to hit a nerve is just a point of view, you know,
the kind of the anthropological lens that I was thinking of this less as a story of medicine
than of culture and, but, but Daniel takes us to a whole another level of depth, right, and,
and, and it raises the issue of how astonishing the important knowledge of history is for anyone who,
who has the audacity to think that they can lead us or lead anyone, right, and, and when you,
it's not trivial, you know, that George Patton knew classical warfare of, of the Greeks and the
metropolitan, you know, the Mediterranean zone, it's not an accident that, that Churchill won the
Nobel Prize for literature and wrote more books than most contemporary politicians have read,
and when you think of the most horrifying aspect of many horrifying aspects of the, of the current
administration in Washington, it was, you know, the word ignorant is, is, really means without
knowledge, lack of gnosis, right, and, and when you have a president who literally doesn't know
when World War II began, you know, who doesn't know the most fundamental aspects of history,
who, who has never read anything, who famously doesn't read, and then when you, you contrast that
to what we just heard from Daniel, you know, unraveling the threads of history, the mystic
connections of history that have brought us to where we are, it just, my overwhelming
impression listening to him is just how important, how vital a knowledge of history is in the moment,
and certainly for those who, who have the gumption and, and the audacity to believe that they have
the right to lead the rest of us. And interesting as you're saying that, I was thinking about what
you were speaking of, of is this Asian century, will it be Chinese led, and
Xi Jinping is a very serious scholar of history, political theory, philosophy, military history.
My understanding is actually a very serious translator and scholar of all of the kind of
classic Chinese works, and that when he came to power, the people who were in high positions
of the CCP all had to have a pretty high degree of background and training in the 36 stratagems
and the art of war and the warring states region, and, and you can imagine if the US Senate and
Congress all had to have the whole kind of history of Western philosophy and the canon,
and the Napoleonic Wars and Alexander the Great and etc, it'd be a, it'd be a different story and
kind of the founding fathers did, right? And this is one of the institutional things is that
when you, when you're trying to emerge, you have to work really hard, but there's a way of kind of
getting fat when you are the dominant empire and you have forgotten the problems and very hard work
of staying actively educated and engaged doesn't seem immediately eminently necessary. And that's
one of the things that leads to decay. I think that's so true. I mean, you know, the famous
clip by Kennedy when he welcomed all of Nobel laureates to the White House and he said there
wasn't as much intellectual firepower in that room since the last time Thomas Jefferson dined
alone. And I think that's so true. I mean, I, you know, there's a, there's an understandable but
a kind of a disturbing American almost embrace of ignorance, you know, there's a, you know, if you
know too much, you're sort of, you know, you're not really a man or something. There's a, there's a,
certainly we're, you know, until 9-11, the vast majority of congressmen didn't even own
passports. And one of the, one of the things that I've noticed, I used to lecture on private jet
trips for the National Geographic that would go around the world. And there were very, very expensive
trips for people. And generally the individuals who came along were really wonderful people,
very, very affluent by definition. And they had all had incredibly successful careers,
but their careers had focused on, on, you know, making the most hospital beds or something or
making the running this corporation and being a real expert on packaged meats or something like
that. But outside of that expertise, outside of golf, football, and sports, there just wasn't,
it wasn't as if a general education was deemed to be that essential to, to corporate affairs.
I mean, I used to go through this with my own father-in-law who was, who was very well read compared
to normal politicians, but he was a, and most beloved man, the most wonderful man, the greatest,
the embodiment of everything that American, a great American is in my opinion. But he was
Senate Foreign Relations Committee chairman, almost president. He was offered the vice presidency by
Richard Nixon and he turned it down. He supported Rockefeller. And, you know, yet, you know, when
he came to visit us at our fish camp in northern British Columbia, guidebook in hand, he came over
to me and said, Wade, did you know Canada was the second biggest country on earth? And, and then he
was very desperate to have a newspaper and the nearest newspaper we could get for him was a four
day old copy of the Toronto Globe and Mail. It's a bush pilot brought in and granddaddy sitting
there by the fire, very, very content with the newspaper at last. But then he quizzically,
he looks at me, pulls down the newspaper and looks up from his bifocals and said,
Wade, why is there so much news on Canada in this newspaper? And I, and those are kind of
gentle, gentle cliches and, and obviously granddaddy at that point was passed as prime. So I'm not
being, but there is, there is this, this, this, this sense that to know too much is to be
almost suspect in the United States. And I don't think that was certainly true in the
Kennedy era. Maybe they thought they knew too much in the case of someone like McNamara, but,
but certainly, you know, you know, knowledge of the world has never been a credential for political
office in the United States. I'll share a couple of thoughts on
partly how I think we got here. And it's by no means a comprehensive addressing,
because I think there's actually quite a few threats that are involved.
What makes someone particularly good in the market and what makes them comprehensively
educated about history don't necessarily overlap all that well. And doing very well in the market
means that you can influence DC to have people do your bidding and the people who are susceptible
to do that will do better and whatever. So there's a whole bunch of other reasons,
but a couple reasons that maybe are slightly less often thought about and valuable. One is,
I think the focus on in the types of knowledge that mattered coming out of World War Two made a
very drastic shift to STEM focus because of the critical role that technology played in the war.
And we can see that it was like we built the entire Manhattan project around Oppenheimer and
like a few people who had really asymmetric technological and physical insights and
Bletchley Park and, you know, a couple major things around Turing and Von Neumann that pretty
much determined the war, right? Like the bomb in the computer. And so, and then...
A synthetic rub? Yeah, that's a third example.
And Sputnik getting there first, I think there was this very real sense of,
and one way to look at World War Two was the competition between the US and the Russians
for the German scientists. And not just, you know, to Operation Paperclip here and the
Russian version of it is the famous joke that who would win the Cold War between
the USSR and USA was who got the better Nazi scientists. But like it played a significant role.
But I think there became a very heavy focus and let's focus on STEM. But George Washington said,
it should be the primary aim of this government to train every single citizen in the science
of government. And the science of government meant history, politics, game theory,
courtier dynamics, etc. Because if they didn't understand it,
those who did would run everything and it wouldn't be, it would become a kleptocracy and then an
oligarchy or some weird thing, not a democracy. So I think the civics training became very
de-emphasized. That's one part. The other part I think is very important is, and this is, so I'm
going to say something that I think is more sympathetic with the anti-intellectual movement,
because I think the anti-intellectual movement was a game-theoretic counter strategy to
intellectualism used as a political weapon. And things can be true that are not representative
of the whole truth, right? Like one of the things I see all the time is people say, well, obviously
herbs and supplements and peptides don't really work that well because there aren't that many
phase three clinical trials showing that they work and there are for farm amounts. Well,
there's no fucking money because there's no patentability on any of those things. Of course,
they'll never get phase three trials. And the phase three trials that showed that
premarin work or vioxx work didn't mean that they didn't kill massive numbers of people because
what's included in the scope of the safety analysis. And so it's true, those phase three
clinical trials are true. And if you are literate, you understand they're true, but they're not
representative, right? Because if here's the whole space of possible health interventions,
the ones that are profitable will get the most research and they represent this space. So then
the preponderance of data is an uneven distribution, right? So similarly, I can put an IPCC together and
say all of this stuff on climate change, but it doesn't represent DC still running the Benign
China hypothesis and not looking at that particular issue seriously. Bannon was actually a big part
of, you know, and Trump delivering the US from the Benign China hypothesis. So there was a way
that I see that throughout history, whenever something becomes a source of legitimate authority,
whether it's the church or academia, then there's so much power in being the one who says what is
true that then anyone who's very good at the game of power has a maximum incentive to try to capture
an influence that legitimate authority. So the legitimate authority starts getting influenced
by who's funding it and how the prestige networks work and those types of things. So then legitimate
authority in the US started to have a particular set of political biases that a lot of people in the
US didn't feel represented their interests well. And so but they couldn't argue against the IPCC
thing well, but they could feel like it was not aligned with their interests. So anti-intellectualism
since they couldn't compete at it was actually their counterweapon. I just won't engage with the
weapons that you're using that feel like they're against me. And so one of the ways I think to
actually have sense making really be able to be pervasive is that it is not weaponized for
partial political or economic agendas, that it is authentically seeking to understand the entire
space and be in the benefit of everyone as opposed to that as a virtue signal. Otherwise,
I think the anti-intellectualism becomes a natural counterweapon. Let me ask you about
SHINEC because one of the things that was interesting in the criticism of my article,
I was a number of people, Jeffrey Sachs for one, a friend of mine who founded Code Pink,
quite a liberal individual, were very critical of my last paragraph when I essentially said
we'll miss the American era if China is in control. And I cited in that the treatment of the Uighurs,
the social contracts, the social capital thing, and just the treatment of democracy, etc.
And there's this sort of thing on the left that we're now bashing China. And is that
the left being reflexively counter to whatever Trump is doing because Trump's bashing China
there for weeks shouldn't bas China. And then you parse it down and you see that Jeffrey Sachs is up
to his eyeballs in contracts with the Chinese government. And I know that in my travels around
the world, I've seen the footprint of China virtually everywhere. I mean, just if you can
build your way to dominance, that's what they're doing. I mean, the police station in Roartonga,
the opera house in Dakar, an interchange in Togo, in Lome, the capital of Togo. I mean,
obviously the belt initiative, but also great roads across the Amazon. And I've also, of course,
seen firsthand what has happened to Tibet. And there seems to be this thing as long as China
does development work, in other words, builds stuff that somehow it's okay and that they're not,
and that gets back in this whole thing where genocide is universally condemned, but
ethnicity, the destruction of people's life is not only not condemned, it's considered proper
development policy in many quarters. So what is your sense of China in the next century?
Yeah, that's such a critical question.
I don't claim to know what's in Xi Jinping's mind or what the internal plans and sensemaking
of the CCP are. And nor do I represent that whatever those are represents the actual will
of all the Chinese people outside of Beijing, which it obviously doesn't.
Let me just sort of interrupt, Dan, but you're so right in that. I mean,
there is a terrible tendency in the West to see China as this monolith, when in fact it's remarkably
diverse ethnically vast country, vast numbers of people, vast orientations and so on. I'm sorry,
go ahead. I'm not going to say that there aren't some people who have a xenophobic racist relationship
just because it seems big and scary and they don't like the big scary things where they make
it the Chinese monolith. Of course, there are some reactive non-thinking part of that.
I wouldn't say that that is much dumber than the Benign China, a hypothesis was, I would say those
are kind of equally not clear assessments. I think the Hundred Year Marathon is a particularly
interesting book around China's long term plan starting in give or take 1949 and that is kind
of tracking quite well. I think we've had a period where nobody remembers in their own
lived experience very serious war in the developed world and so they don't really
have any embodied sense that that's even a thing. So their actual sense of history is quite bad,
right? Their embodied sense is quite bad and so they don't recognize that slavery and genocide
and initiating war or an empire has been kind of the story for the whole history of civilization.
It's not just been European white slavery, it was the Ottomans and Turks enslaving Europeans,
it was people in Asia, in slavery, inter-Asian slavery, it was, you know, command she-violence
with other first tribes people like largely humans have just been kind of violent fucks for a long
time often and that's an important part of the story. So when we say the US was built on genocide
and slavery and how can it have any kind of moral value, that's a very real story and like what do
we do for reparations on genocide and slavery and the whole world was in a context of slavery and
genocide. Arguably you could say British colonialism was less violent than Dutch or Spanish or some
of the other colonialism's you go to the Congo and whatever in some ways. So this is why the
historical context is important and so then I'm going to think of China in light of that.
If I put myself in my imagining of Xi's position I'm actually quite empathetic to everything he's
doing and in some ways I can say it's the smartest thing anyone in the world is doing because there
are some critical problems that it appears he's paying attention to that no one else has even
paying earnest attention to. So I'm very empathetic to the solutions he has that doesn't mean I like
the solutions or want them to happen so just to kind of briefly frame that. Rule of law requires
monopoly of violence. If you don't have a monopoly of violence how do you enforce this rule of law
if we say you can't cut down the parks but the dudes who are cutting down the trees have bigger
guns than the police do then you can cut down the parks right. Well how do you have monopoly of
violence when individuals or small groups can make catastrophic weapons that can destroy whole
cities and whatever because exponential tech makes that possible where I can get access to
CRISPR gene drives and people in their basement can make bio weapons or you know drones with
thermite bombs that are like easy to make that can take out massive aspects of infrastructure.
This problem of I can do way more damage with an AR-15 than a knife but I can do way more damage
with a CRISPR gene drive than an AR-15 and it was very hard to make nukes I needed nation state
capacity to make nukes but I don't need nation state capacity to make drone weapons and so we have
an emerging world where decentralized or cyber weapons that can take out infrastructure we have
a place where decentralized exponential tech makes the world frail in a way that
there's no precedent in all of history for. This is why we need history and we also need
imagination right and forecasting um and so what do we do about that what do we do when
people can in their basement not just be going crazy and getting an AR-15 with a lot of clips
but they can be building CRISPR weapons. China's answer is there is no answer other than ubiquitous
surveillance you need a ubiquitous surveillance to be able to suppress a harm that is that great
and the harm of the suppression is less bad than the harm of doing that thing and uh that's actually
kind of understandable right and they're also not in the position of seeing that the the US as
having been as like innocent and rosy as a lot of people in the US do because from the outside
the predatory debt lending they've been doing all over the world for the last 20 years we were
doing for a lot longer than that they just kind of took a World Bank model copied it and made it
better um the wars that we waged whatever so I'm very empathetic to why China is doing what it's
doing and I'm actually very impressed with its ability to build high-speed trains all around the
world when we can't fix roads right um autocracy actually autocracy with no term limit so you
can do a hundred-year planning with no internal coordination cost is an amazing system to build
shit that said I think if anyone who's concerned about racism in the US doesn't look at the
Chinese treatment of the Uighur and take very seriously what is its actual view towards racial
justice like demonstrably and if the way we're dealing with it in the US is leading to increasing
division of the US which leads to the rapidity of its breakdown which is ceding the 21st century to
Chinese AI technologically empowered autocracy with that value system are we just being shortsighted
as fuck about actual racism over the next century or any other issue like that I think she also has
paid attention to civilizational collapse better because he also has a longer history right China
has a much longer history and so he knows that civilizational collapse happens because you get
overthrown externally you have internal dissent or you run out of resources so he's worked to have
a hundred-year resource acquisition plan which belt and road and and stream of pearls and whatever
are part of the sesame credit system and the iot surveillance system ensures that internal dissent
can't happen and an adequate military ensures that nobody can be overthrown them without catastrophic
risk to themselves but any people should think about how do I prevent our own people from going
through civilizational collapse so like I'm simultaneously very empathetic with and want answers
really better than those answers well and there's another there's another thing that I think that
people in the west failed to understand is just the the the reflex for order that goes back to the
whole Confucian ideology and you realize what China has actually endured over the last 150 years
not just the humiliation leading to the box of rebellion but you know the great leap forward
which led to 48 million people dying of starvation the chaos of the cultural revolution
what 35 million people dying in the civil war and world war two I mean I mean it's no wonder that
Chinese citizenry is perfectly happy with the stability of the social credit system is invoking
I mean the polls say that Chinese people like it because they just want order predictability
I wouldn't say I could trust those polls because of the credit system there's a self-reinforcing
dynamic of course my sense is from what I have heard of people who have lived and spent a lot
of time throughout various regions of China is that the further you get in actual miles outside of
Beijing the less kind of CCP standard narrative people hold and it's large enough that as powerful
as the CCP is it still can't unify one point whatever it is five eight billion people we
think the number is probably a lot higher than the reported number all that well like that's
that's a hard thing to do and this actually one of my concerns is I think the benign China hypothesis
of like no China's just trying to grow its people they're not trying to become a world empire don't
worry about it is completely dreadful but also Chinese are the great bad guys is the only thing
that could unify by all of China against the west right because the people who are there like Louis
Vuitton and they like Silicon Valley and they like Hollywood but they won't if the message they keep
hearing is that Americans don't like the Chinese I really want to separate the view of the Chinese
from a particular regime well and there's a whole issue of face and you know which comes to
show the motherland with the motherland and no that's fascinating I you should write a book about
this
well listen this has been really wonderful both of you guys I've got a lot of action for some family
stuff on Labor Day weekend but I really want to keep in touch with you man I've really enjoyed
both this dialogue and and our previous one on the phone so it's an honor to be with you man
thank you so much for the way thank you for your time thank you for honoring us with your presence
and attention and thank you for your work great thanks Satya genuinely genuinely appreciate it
okay Daniel thank you bye bye great and we'll put this on appreciate it
I'm gonna turn my video on and
can we turn my video on I would love to thank everyone
great wow Daniel Wade thank you so much
we here at Playa Alchemist really believe that was
your viewing points your messages the work that you guys have been spending
your lifetimes really being together
is just so important to give voice to in this moment
thank you for giving voice to it thank you for doing it thank you for being it
thank you for coming together here in this multiverse of virtual virtual virtual pyramid
of Burning Man I want to take a moment and thank the entire team that brought this together
I want to thank the builders the build crew as you can imagine
through that build this pyramid it was a little different than the one that built last year's pyramid
I was completely amazed with what they were able to create if you're in the pyramid and you give us
some emoji love that'd be amazing I want to take thank the co-founders of this channel
right everyone thank you thank you very much thank you from all space VR thank you for from
this particular burner I'm speaking to you right now Katie thank you by Alchemist Genevieve Drew
Yunji wow thanks for being here this has been a week of giving to know you guys to
really kind of be in the trenches with y'all so we're gonna have this one again you're
reminding me of what Burning Man's all about there's still plenty more there's still plenty
more to explore I don't think that's one of the good things about this uh thank you all for that
sunday is that we don't have to spend all our time tearing down camp give us some time and attention
so uh so it's my hope that there's going to be some Burning Man for you to taste tomorrow
and the next day like a mini doc until we're able to come back together in the dust thanks
everyone for being here uh this has been amazing I was coming into this burn and I oh thanks everyone
make some friends uh this was one of my most so thank you all but it's been really tremendous
