I'm Fredo Holtz and I welcome you to the Perspectives podcast with my today's guest Daniel Schmartenberger.
He has done work in functional medicine and biotech in education and in human development
and advised private and public sector leaders on how to address complex scenarios across the number of fields.
His central interest is long term civilization design and I'm super excited to hear more about his perspectives.
Hey everyone, I'm really excited to launch my first episode of my first ever podcast
and I couldn't be happier to have my guest today, who is Daniel Schmartenberger.
Very easy for me to say his name because it's a German version, probably more difficult for Americans.
I'm actually very excited that you're my first guest Daniel because I remember our first encounter in San Diego one and a half years ago.
We just talked about it and this was one of the most inspiring conversations that I've had in the last years
and it was mostly because of your different way to think about the world
and the things that you care about and that you're driven by to change in this world
and so I'm really excited to explore more of your perspective today
and be able to pick your brain and hopefully share some value with other people in the audience.
So thanks for being with us.
It's an honor to get to be on your first podcast.
So actually I want to start in right away with we already mapped out some topics or the most interesting topics
and one thing that immediately stood out to me was the topic of perspectives and perspective seeking.
So Daniel, I have a very personal question as well.
What's your perspective seeking approach?
Like how do you come to believe what you're believing right now?
Well, the reason that this came up as we were starting to dialogue was you said that you were thinking of calling the podcast perspectives.
It feels valuable since that's a deep central theme to what you want to do here to actually explore that topic itself.
So if you don't mind me switching roles for a minute, why did you want to do a podcast on perspectives?
Oh, I love that.
So personally, because I just go by feeling and I remember this feeling very distinctively.
I've talked oftentimes, I've shared your content oftentimes with people.
Your podcast on forward thinkers is probably one of the podcasts I shared the most in the past.
I get this trickling feeling of excitement when I hear something that I feel is growing me, is challenging me, is expanding my perspective
because it's changing my experience, how I interact with my environment.
And I feel it in a way where I feel more positive about the way I engage with my environment.
And that's why I'm so excited to hear different perspectives.
And also in that process, I'm learning with every new perspective that I hear, that I experience.
I realize something that is, I consider my personal path of consciousness is I'm realizing that it's not only me.
My perspective is not the only relevant one, it's not the only right one.
The more I experience that, I feel the healthier, I live the happier I am.
And so that's why I care so much about perspectives and exploring perspectives.
Yeah.
Well, the fact that you say you feel happier as you're exposed to more perspectives,
even if they're ones that might invalidate previous views you had or at least show the inadequacy of them is a really healthy psychological orientation.
Because if every time you realize that your previous best understanding of the world was really inadequate, you feel badly,
then it will end up having you want to do confirmation bias and look for things that confirm what you currently think.
And that's going to limit the scope of obviously what you can understand about reality and how effective you can be in acting on it.
So there's kind of a, there's an epistemic drive, right?
Pistemology meaning how do we go about knowing stuff?
There's an epistemic drive that can have its own incentive where there is a, like you mentioned,
like a joy or enliveness just from coming to understand something better.
And when that becomes stronger than whatever kind of fragile identity structure wants to be seen as already having it figured out,
then the rate of learning obviously goes up quite a lot.
And so I'm happy for us to start by exploring the topic of perspective because we would be whatever other topic we were exploring,
we'd be exploring it through perspectives.
So it's valuable to look at the process by which we look right perspective,
even though the word is from optical science is looking at the world.
And the key kind of insight, the first insight is that when I'm looking at something and I have a perspective on it,
it's not what I'm seeing is not actually the thing.
Because if I went to the other side, I would see something else.
And if I zoomed in with a microscope or if I looked in the ultraviolet spectrum or with a radio telescope or I would see something else, right?
So I'm getting a perspective.
I'm getting some bandwidth of light bouncing off of one side of something with some error or whatever coming in a certain resolution into my eyes.
And so one very valuable insight is that perspective in the process of perceiving something inherently reduces the total information of the thing.
So my perspective on something is never actually the thing, right?
And I need to take many, many different perspectives to even start to get a sense.
So of course, if I'm looking at a building from the west side or the east side or the north side or from an aerial view or inside one room or inside another room,
they're all true and they're all partial.
And if I tried to hold it as if, well, which one is it?
That would make no sense because it's not a 2D object, right?
It's this very complex 3D object with internal structure.
And so they're all true.
They're all partial.
And but if I'm trying to collapse a complex 3D thing to 2D, right, to a single perspective that I can take a picture of, it's just going to be wrong.
It'll have some truth value in it.
But to the degree that I think it's adequate, it'll be, it'll be a whole dimension wrong,
which is infinitely wrong, right?
There's a whole infinity of another dimension missing.
And we do this with our perspective on social topics or other people or the nature of reality all the time.
And so then even if I take all of the pictures and I say, OK, I'm going to take as many pictures as I can.
And of course, I can never show that I took every perspective on it.
Maybe I didn't get under the table and have a look at what it may be a kid sees in their view of the house.
Their main memory might be that view from under the table when they think of the house, right?
Or whatever, I missed the aerial view.
So that's one thing is that you can never show closure over the perspective space.
I won't say never.
For the most part, in reality, you can never show closure over the perspective space.
And then even if I take a lot of the pictures, that's a pretty good representation.
I put them as a collage in 2D.
That's still not what the house looks like because it's still not 2D.
So then I could sew them together into a video and I take a video tour of the house, right?
Well, I still don't see the whole thing at once, but I added another dimension back in now, which is time, right?
The video is showing over time.
So I have 2D and then I have the connection of all these 2D images through the flow of time.
And now I'm back at the right kind of dimensionality and so I can get a sense of more adequate kind of sense.
So when I was fairly young, I noticed that when people were arguing about political topics or philosophic topics,
that there was usually a dialectical kind of thing going on where there was some truth value and some inadequacy to explain all of the other truth values.
But they were seeing the west side of the house or the east side and they were overemphasizing the parts that felt most real and meaningful to them based on the perspective of the reality they had.
And so how to be able to seek to see through the other perspectives and then speak higher, not higher perspective because you don't get a perspective, right?
How do you seek a higher trans perspective synthesis?
This is something that like, this is philosophy 101, right?
This is the Hegelian dialectic.
What is it?
Take a particular view on something and postulate it and you have a thesis and then find something that seems like almost the exact opposite view, but that some people believe in and you have an anti thesis.
Those will usually be at a similar level of complexity, right?
Similar number.
If I tried to express the view under maximum information compression, it'd be similar-ish.
And so this can look like the debates that you see around capitalism and communism or similarly around the Democratic or Republican or generally left or right kind of political platforms,
which can often be thought of as having to do with more emphasis on the collective and the whole or more emphasis on the individual, right?
Rights and responsibilities, various things like that.
But they actually don't- it's not that there is kind of a gradient with zero and negative and positive numbers and you find the right place between rights and responsibilities.
It's that there's actually perpendicular axes and that you can increase rights and responsibilities at the same time, but it's in a higher dimensional space, right?
You can have to get that higher dimensionality, right?
Otherwise, people will default to thinking the thing that they really care about is being automatically threatened, right?
Their perspective also encodes a value.
There is something that they value within that thing, that perspective.
And then they might kind of vehemently oppose or not want to hear another perspective because it seems like if that one is held as true, it's this one is true or that one is true.
And if that one's held as true, then it will invalidate the value here as opposed to the synthesis is actually a higher order of complexity.
Under maximum compression of the good statement of it, there would be more total bits required.
And it'll end up including the true parts of each of these and how they relate, what the nature of the feedback cycles for the higher perspective.
So thesis, antithesis, synthesis, but the synthesis is not of the same type, right?
It is a includes and transcends type function.
Now, I must say there's a lot of people who hate Hegelian dialectics because particularly there's a lot of kind of a empirically or paparian oriented people
because a dialectic has been abused as a tool for manipulation.
But it's like every tool can be weaponized, right?
So the fact that I can beat somebody to death with a hammer doesn't mean a hammer has no legitimate purpose and that we should always be aware of everyone with hammers.
Pick any tool in my house and I could make a weapon out of it if you wanted, right?
And similarly, pick any intellectual tool and I can make a weapon out of it.
I can use the principles of critical thinking as a way to just be an asshole and tell everyone that they're in logical fallacy all the time.
So Hegelian dialectic has been weaponized to say, okay, what is the conclusion I want the other person to come to, whether it's true or not for my own game theoretic purposes?
I'll phrase that as a synthesis and then I will reverse engineer a thesis and an antithesis, both of which will have little errors hidden, but I'll use principles of rhetoric and I'll frame it up.
There's some truth here, there's some truth here and the synthesis is obviously true.
So that weapon has been used all the time, but that doesn't tool is not actually valid.
So it has to do with what is the intent and the capacity of the use of the intellectual tool.
Now, the last part there is it's not always thesis and antithesis.
It might be lots of different perspectives, right?
There might be lots of different insights around a thing going on.
And how do we factor all of those to be able to inform both our understanding of the world and where we have collective choice making to engage in?
Because whether we build a utility or a road isn't an individual choice only, it's like those are things that we engage in.
And so whether we do that through a democratic process or a meritocratic process or whatever, all of our social systems are systems for how do we collectively figure out how to coordinate things bigger than individuals can do on their own.
And that does involve coordinating how we're sense making the world and coordinating what we think is valuable.
And my ability to actually perceive what is valuable to you and how you're making sense of the world without it seeming like a threat to my own.
And then be able to see are there higher order frames that can take what you value and what I value and what you're seeing is true and what I'm seeing is true.
Correct the distortions either of us have and be able to offer better insights forward than had been there previously.
I really like I really like that take. And specifically two things that I'd like to summarize that stood out to me is I think on the first, the first statement that every perspective has truth in some in some part.
And the second that the partiality of it that it's always just true as a part of a bigger picture, or it's one, one, one truth that is a part of a bigger picture.
And I think this, this, the more we try to force or reduce this partiality and say like, okay, no, my truth is the only truth or is the is the, the, the biggest part, the most relevant part and reduce the dimensionality and say, okay, there's like, it can only be my truth or your truth.
I think then that that's a good over a good transition to talk about sense making right because once we've established that is like, hey, every perspective has truth, right. And it's a part of a bigger picture.
Now it's about what you said in your last sentence is okay, wait a second, how can we make more sense of that. Because if all perspectives are relevant.
We need to understand all these perspectives, and we need to listen, and we need to find consensus to make sure that we can proceed and progress and, and develop into a higher, higher stage of human consciousness as well or consensus.
So what's your take on on sense making the status we are in right now as a society on a global level and and what do you see as the most relevant parts right now to to focus on big topic.
So there's some tools we need to construct together first.
So when we're talking about the partiality or the believe completeness of a view. There's a very deep topic that comes up which is a person's relationship with the known, the unknown and the unknowable.
And because a lot of people who have the sense that their view is pretty complete, don't have a very deep relationship with the unknowable, and with the extent of the category that is the unknown unknowns, right.
And so they don't realize that everything they know is can be represented in a finite number of bits and usually a relatively small finite number of bits and the totality of reality via Tarski's theorem or Gertl's theorem or whatever is fundamentally infinite.
And so they know no fraction, right, mathematically represented fraction.
And so you know nothing basically as a fraction of all that is and and so this leads to certainty bias.
And this is one of the things I became grubious of early because as someone who is very interested in learning when I was pretty young I would learn things and get excited and then I realized that I knew more about a topic than some people around me and then I get over certain that I understood the topic.
And then I would learn more and I'd be like oh shit there's like whole universes around this I didn't even know I was unaware of right like when people start learning math and the most advanced thing they've ever heard about when they're a kid is calculus.
They don't know the whole universe or shit beyond calculus that they aren't factoring so by the time they're in eighth grade they think they're getting pretty close to knowing all of math right and and that's the case in most any field including understanding reality which includes new fields all the time.
And so one of the things that happened for me was I started getting really embarrassed about the things that I had been sure about that then I became completely clear we're wrong.
And not wanting to do that thing a bunch right and that started to temper the relationship to premature certainty.
And
And then I found it very interesting to study history and look at how many things that humans believed so fervently that they would die in war for the belief where they would kill other humans for the belief that all seem ludicrous to us now like pretty much all of it.
And how easy it is for us to see where previous people were wrong about what they were certain of that had the genetically same brains as us.
And how easy it is for us to sense that someone else is completely wrong about something that they're very deeply certain of but that nobody can actually think of a single belief that they currently hold that they think they're wrong about.
And yet they're probably wrong about almost everything.
And then that's a really disastrous human condition.
Because those wrong beliefs inform action.
And so if I'm continuously navigating on a map that's not true I'll be driving into cliffs and shit right like it's important that I calibrate my map especially as I want to do more significant action.
For most people it doesn't matter that much because the scope of what they're trying to do allows their ignorance to not be hitting them in the face all the time.
Now it's very easy to overcompensate in the other direction and to say okay anytime that anyone has ever been certain it was unwarranted.
And there are actually no absolute truth therefore there's no even relative higher truth claim everything is just perspective.
And anyone who claims that something has more validity is somewhere between immature and an imperialist.
And that's kind of the direction that a lot of the postmodern movement of thinking went right.
But this is also gibberish because we will be acting in the world and we'll be acting on some information and it's not equally good information and some things make rocket ships work and some things don't make rocket ships work.
And we can be pretty empirically clear about whether a technology works based on our understanding of it or not.
And if we have to treat a viral condition or make decisions regarding policy or whatever it actually really fucking matters that we are getting things right regarding this right.
And so this is what we've tried to develop things like the scientific method in the various domains of science and those types of epistemic tools for.
But we also start to get quickly into the place that the way we think about science formally is a method that can be applied to the domain of things that are both measurable and repeatable.
Well, there are things that are real that are not measurable like every experience you've ever had.
I can measure what's happening in your brain in some very narrow dimension.
It's pretty hard to do an fMRI and a QEEG and whatever on you at the same time because they're in effecting each other and all of that still only gives me a tiny bit of the total insight right.
But I can't measure your experience.
I can't do a third person process on first person.
And there's also lots of real stuff that is measurable but not repeatable like all novel phenomena.
And so then I can try and do statistics and then that's not quite science.
So we start to realize that science is necessary but not sufficient to understand the nature of reality.
So then the question is what are the right methods, what are the right epistemics to go about coming up with the confidence margin and what confidence do I need to inform what kind of action based on how consequential the action is and based on how consequential non-acting is.
And so this is now getting us into sense making.
But I can't sense make well if I have a bias towards wanting more certainty than I really have the right foundation for or I have a bias towards being uncomfortable with any certainty and wanting to continue to dwell within uncertainty and multi perspective process without actually integrating them.
And so this is an interesting place where like emotional biases and existential and identity biases end up affecting cognitive biases.
And yet perspective taking is connected to all of it which is why I really like the name of the podcast and why I thought it's an interesting topic is
When I'm doing repeatability in science, that's actually a perspective process.
I'm wanting to make sure that this particular thing that I'm holding as objective is true across all of these perspectives that hold the same context.
That it's not subjective or intersubjective, it's subjective.
Obviously science doesn't give me how to do governance because governance has a lot of first person and second person stuff, like mostly all of it.
But it's informed by third person.
So there I have to do perspective seeking of like what it's so easy, like in the US right now, especially politically, it's so easy to take a whole group of people on the other side of the political spectrum and just throw them all out as bad and dumb.
And both sides do it kind of equally well.
And without even being able to empathize with why they seem bad and dumb to the other side or why the other side could actually see anything that way.
Now when you ask what are the source of the problems, this is one of the source of the problems.
And this creates radically inefficient government, this creates war, this creates poor coordination and poor shared sense making this creates super inefficiently utilized resource.
It's also why the divorce rate is so high and why people have shitty relationships at the micro level.
When I used to do relationship counseling with people, one of the things which was everyone should be a relationship counselor for a little while in your life because
there's so much people when you watch other people doing it is so obvious and so dreadful and then you realize that you did that and then you're ashamed to ever do that again in a house.
But typically this pattern that I would see again and again was that the couple would sit down and in her version of the story, it's so clear how things would be better if he did stuff differently.
She's tried all the things that she can try and she can't make it better, which is why she's frustrated and she's there because obviously he has to and in his version of the story things would be better if she did stuff differently.
And this is why they're on their path to divorce and all that can do because they're not perspective taking, right?
So I started, all that can do is make them resent each other and feel powerless and then to the extent that they feel powerless and the other person has to change, trying to control the other person is the best thing they could possibly do.
And this is actually another important point when you wanted to start coming back to the world is if we can't sense make even what the experience of the people closest to us is and can't resolve those conflicts,
we're so not qualified to be able to help Israel and Palestine and the US and China or like it's important to realize that those personal experiences are a training ground to get very basic capacities because the larger issues are still just human issues multiplied by a lot of scale.
And so one of the things I started doing was to just speed it up because I was tired of the process where she would tell her side of the story and he'd be shaking his head the whole time and he still wouldn't get it and then he'd tell his side of the story and she'd be crying, feeling so unseen and misunderstood and whatever.
And so I just stopped them in the beginning and be like, look, I know you both know your own side of the story, so I don't want you to tell it to me.
I want you to tell the other person side of the story from the beginning, right?
So husband, tell me why she's upset, what she perceives, what she would like to be different.
Before you do, I want you to tell me how good you think you're going to do with this?
Like how well do you think you probably understand it?
And now I do the same thing.
And what was interesting was they never did a good job.
If they did, they wouldn't have those problems.
But they always thought they would do a better job than they did.
So not only did they do a bad job of understanding each other, but they didn't even realize how badly they didn't understand each other, right?
Because it was an unknown, unknown class that they weren't even recognizing.
But I think it all comes down to the topic of certainty then.
Where it's like how certain I am in what I believe to be true and how open, and then at the other side, how open am I to look at things that are outside of what I believe to be true to change what I believe to be true?
Well, certainty is an important part, which is why I brought it up.
One can have certainty that what I think has some value without having certainty that it's close to complete.
And this is why it's so important to recognize the unknown, unknown class, not just the shit that I know that I'm unaware of, but that there might be shit that I am not even imagining that changes my sense making completely.
But the most difficult part I struggle with is, okay, what you mentioned before is I perceive humans to be mostly relative thinkers.
It's like, okay, I have this thing that I compare myself or my view or my idea to.
And so now, okay, I'm looking at the unknown, I'm looking at all the potential things that could be there, will be there.
And now, as you said before, it feels infinite.
And how do I compare my limited understanding to something that is infinitely hard to understand for me?
Like this part, I constantly struggle with them and you said, okay, sense making a part of that is certainty.
Like how do I ever can say, I was like, oh, I'm that and this certain about this and this view point or this and this action?
Like how do you approach that?
Yeah, so this is great because you just entered the domain of religion.
Which is what types of certainty can we have or not in the domain of what we would call the infinite or total reality or something like that.
And you can see with regard to the certainty bias that there's a lot of people who feel absolutely certain that they know the nature of ultimate reality all the way to how the universe was created and how it will end and what God's name.
You're that certain about all that shit.
And then you see another, what I would say is a more mature relationship to that same impulse, which the mystics in all of the religions talked about the great unknowable, but that they can have some sensed relationship with.
And so the first verse of the Tao Te Ching, you think about this like, okay, so Lao Tzu is going to take all of his wisdom,
write it down in this set of verses, the very first verse says, the Tao that is knowable is not the eternal Tao.
What's your interpretation of that?
Well, the knowable is finite.
And so what he's doing is the knowledge that's knowable is not the eternal knowledge, the Tao that is nameable, that is finite is not the whole thing.
So then the nameable, the finitely describable is the beginning of the great confusion.
Right.
So a lot of people reflect on that and they get that.
Okay, so I'm never going to actually have complete understanding of ultimate reality.
But then the next part to get is that he still then went on to do a bunch more verses wrote a whole book of words that were not useless.
Right.
Which is don't think that you have absolute certainty of the whole but don't think that it's not worth gaining relatively increased insight also.
But nevertheless, it's difficult to.
I don't feel like we start at that point of we know nothing and we can relatively increase our knowledge.
I feel it's more like we we feel like we know 40%.
And with every experience we decrease that percentage by realizing Oh, actually, maybe I didn't know that much.
So I feel these are two different.
Yeah.
Experiences.
This is that Dunning Kruger curve.
Right.
And so there's this beautiful process that as we go on learning more in life, we both know actually more and have less total certainty and recognize what a tinier percentage it is.
And those people are ultimately more trustworthy.
And more curious and more open minded probably and more empathic.
And I mean, I find it interesting because when I look at that, I feel all these sub parts that we can look at is like.
Oh, I want to listen.
I want to be a good listener.
I want to be a trustworthy honest like all these things are kind of results of that that process.
At least that's how it seems to me.
So this this was an interesting thing.
I was thinking about a moment ago.
So in the field of developmental psychology where you're looking at like Piaget's work and on how children develop through different discrete stages where they don't have language and then they do and they don't have abstract reasoning.
There's no reason to think that the development of human capacity stops around 18 or puberty or whatever.
That's it.
What are the higher stages of development that humans can continue to go to is this whole very interesting field of psychology, developmental psych.
And it kind of is also what all of the religions and philosophical and self development traditions focused on, which is what does the what does the development of a human being.
What are the upper bounds of its potential?
What is actually a meaningful human life and and what are the practices and processes to get there?
And whether you're looking at like the ethical line of development, someone increasing their kind of ethical awareness, nuanced capacity or their cognitive or their domain understanding or their interpersonal or their whatever.
In the literature on developmental psych, all of the higher stages of development of any of those lines had a lot of correspondence with perspective taking that as people were able to take more perspectives, they did better in terms of higher stages of especially interpersonal and complex type of things.
There's a colleague in the integral world and his name is Clint fuse.
And he did a dissertation that he was telling me about a few years ago they found very interesting because he was looking at all this literature deeply on higher stages of human development what you might call growth in consciousness or enlightenment or abstract kind of terms like that.
And looking for what things seem to statistically correlate the most across the literature and he found the slight refinement which was that it wasn't perspective taking as a capacity it was perspective seeking as an orientation.
That was kind of the generator function of the development the development was arising from an impulse to seek more perspectives.
Whereas someone might have the capacity to do it but not actually do it very much because there isn't the innate kind of seeking.
And so how to actually notice that impulse in you and how to deepen it and then also notice what makes you turn it off and double down on your own perspective and work with that will end up being a generator function of taking a lot more perspectives
and seeing a lot more of the world right as I see the world through a lot more lens they get a lot more fucking insight because something I saw as a kid was I was like I would see this.
I would see a mechanical engineer looking at the world and realizing he was seeing a totally different world and I was seeing he was looking like everywhere he was looking was how stuff was designed and what types of screws and levers and the mechanics and the and then like a hairstylist was seeing a totally
different world seeing should I never paid attention to and a physicist and a chemist and a biologist and I'm like I'm not seeing the world I'm seeing what my relevance filter show me is relevant that I even know to fucking look for and I didn't see the the types of screws and levers on everything
but now that I do the whole world on putting up any insights about everything that's active seeking right but it's also growth in cognitive insights.
It's also increased humility for sure.
Recognizing holy shit that I just was missing universes.
And still I am.
And then it's also the ability to do much better leadership and governance because I know that the other people aren't seeing the same world.
And yet their worlds are valuable.
And I think that last part is the most important part is that their views valuable in that that I think is a very relevant topic also now applying that more to to the actual real world situation we're in right now.
How can we apply this thought process more to the world we live in right now how can we establish systems that that it like involve more of that sense making that deeper sense making but also that developing into higher stages of consciousness how
What's your take on that.
Let's say that I'm listening to try to hear the signal in someone as opposed to instantly negatively react to the noise or what I perceived to be the noise.
First what that thing I just said will fix your relationships more than almost anything else.
Which is if when your partner or your family member your friend is saying something if you're listening to try to actually hear what's true.
In their experience first and then where you would refine or add or disagree later like everything will go better.
And because they think it's true and if you relationship is can we actually relate.
And if I'm just going into where they're wrong I'm not relating which is why the nature of my response and will break the relationship.
Now if I'm listening for what's true and what someone saying that doesn't mean that what they're saying isn't also flawed and maybe even catastrophically flawed.
But I'll at least understand how to relate with it better.
So if we look at you were mentioning you know we're in the middle of this kind of covid global pandemic and then the systemic fragility we were already in before that and the fractured information ecology and political divides and tribalism and whatever.
And then how those things have been playing out and getting worse under this pressure.
So let's say you take a topic that's very divisive like conspiracy theories.
And.
Typically the moment the topic comes up people have already made up their mind and instantly cleaved like they don't need to hear anymore they're like.
This tin foil hat wearing motherfucker is a danger to society how do we shut them up and have them not kill everyone with the plague.
And.
Or.
Someone just starts to hear about conspiracy and they're like yeah I probably will believe this.
I'm probably interested in this whoever talks about this are probably my people right.
And what's interesting is there's like an intuitive resonance like that and it doesn't mean every conspiracy theorist agrees with everything that any particular person says.
But so as I over generalize to just kind of make a point and then we can add the nuance back you can see that there's that's a very strongly polarizing thing where then there is basically no perspective seeking across that divide usually that happens.
Well.
If you ask.
In abstract.
So asking an abstract helpful because we'll remove all the emotional tension of this situation.
So conspiracies have have some people shared information with some other people to coordinate for some activity that they don't share widely with everyone for their own personal gain throughout history does that a thing that happens.
Of course that's a fucking thing that happens happens all the time.
It's the it's all of what you can call like political strategy.
And.
So then do some people get very good at intentionally lying and misinforming.
You were a poker player right a bluff is it is a done that done that before.
Yeah.
And so you were intentionally mastering the art of misinformation disinformation for a game theoretic advantage right.
And the soccer player does it when they fake to go this way and then they actually go this way or they're like in any game theoretic scenario truth about reality equals adapt equals competitive advantage so you want to throw the other guy off.
So if I'm a politician or if I'm running a business and trying to corner the market or whatever it is I'll try to create both with hold my true information and create some false information so I can advance.
So depending on depending on the goal of the.
The defined goal right if your goal is your personal events then maybe yes but if your goal is to actually make the society like flourish then.
Well that's what I said.
In a kind of theoretic scenario we're not about a coordination game right but a zero some type game.
Yeah.
So then truth becomes one of the weapons becomes one of the things that we fight the battle with.
Holding information trade secrets patents classified information and then disinforming right propaganda whatever.
Well you don't have to study history very much to see that you can see the entire lens of the history of the world through that lens and it's a very insightful lens and.
And Sun Sue was talking thousands of years ago about how to conspire effectively right and how to break conspiracies effectively and Machiavelli was talking about it and so the idea that that's not a thing is just silly.
That said lots of the conspiracy theories that said such and such is going to happen by this date never fucking happen.
And so they're like objectively clearly wrong.
And so to kind of generally bias towards or away from that as a whole class is silly if you can't think of it as a class in that way.
So but let's just say that we do and we or we're looking at the people who do so.
There's a I've never actually seen an information ecology and news ecology more fucked up than I'm seeing right now.
With regard to covid because you've got like it's not even just the popular news it's even science journals right it's the UK saying oh we're going to stay open and do herd immunity and then like a couple days later oh fuck actually everyone's going to die because the
Imperial College just said this thing and so we're actually going to lock down for 18 months and then oh no we over corrected and that we're going to and so the the range even of within the scientific literature of ideas and guesses about it is orders of magnitude off.
And partly that's because it's a novel virus and partly it's because things like epidemiology are actually complex.
And this one where you have a long contagious asymptomatic period is particularly complex to try to forecast like the unknown unknowns are quite high.
So similarly any one who has a kind of sense in them of mistrust of the state and state type authorities and they think that any state action that is going to decrease their freedom is probably some deep state conspiratorial cabal that is trying to remove everyone's freedoms and
they're going to just automatically tend to react to certain news in their news feed more than others right this is where the confirmation bias thing comes in.
And since most people when they read news they aren't reading science journals they're reading news that maybe discusses something in science and they don't go check the science journal themselves.
They decide at a feeling level this feels true.
They don't even realize they're doing it right because they didn't go through and look at the science journal look at all the journals on the topic find the experts who disagree find why they disagree look at the methodology and see is is the conclusion
epistemically grounded there's like see I knew the thing wasn't real or see I knew it was going to kill everyone where really it's just hitting a predisposition that's resonant and then they're going with that resonance.
And
but it goes in both ways right so there are the other side that just generally tends to think that there is this thing called legitimate authority and legitimate experts and that science is real and science has the answers in it and that there are these things called science deniers and
they might be anti climate changers or anti vaxxers or whatever and they're all dangerous and they're all problems and we just need to like trust the scientific authorities and they'll tell us what to do.
And.
That's also kind of like a like an emotional disposition more than it is a very well analyzed position right.
And they're both silly.
They both have a little bit of truth to and they're both silly right and it's important to see the truth because otherwise.
You won't understand a lot of why the world thinks what it is and you won't be able to be effective if you don't understand why people think what they think.
And you'll also be getting it wrong if you don't understand the partial truth so if I if I'm to say okay.
There's a group of people for whom if anything comes from a major.
Authoritative scientific institution they assume it's part of the great conspiracy.
And it's the standard model bias and whatever.
Let's just silly right like there's a lot of stuff that comes out of major universities that empirically works like we tested and it makes better computers like it fucking works there's no question it's a real thing.
And.
And then on the other side the idea that there's this perfect beautiful thing called the peer review in the halls of academia that just does the perfect epistemics and there's no ego or bias or the finances that influence the nature of what's being researched don't play a role at all.
That's just silly right and there's so much stuff now where we have seen people that are actively falsifying and fucking up their research or even where they're not doing that.
But like somebody put something that is gibberish on purpose and to peer review and it gets published in an article in a place like nature and people peer review stuff based on.
The politics of who is going to who they need to get on the good side of for their own career advancement and.
And then even things like okay well even if something isn't wrong the things that are getting funded or the things that somebody wants to fund because I see that there will be an ROI on that and there might be other things.
That would be more true and more relevant that will never get funded because there's no ROI so then we say the preponderance of data shows such and such.
But it was the preponderance of data all in this one little area of the whole picture based on incentives so it's misinforming even if it's all true right.
So then we have to say like does the fact that science needs funded and is done by people with egos and with politics involved does that fuck up the epistemics of it yeah of course it does.
And it doesn't completely fuck it up so ultimately for me.
I actually go into the science.
Article I look at the methodology I look at if the methodology makes sense I try to look at all of the literature and try to do kind of structured literature review then I try to find.
Experts in the field who disagree and see if I can find out why they disagree take the perspectives and I can start to make sense of it right so.
Are are the people who say just trust the institutions are they right no the WHO got this wrong from the beginning again and again like they like it's almost a perfect record of getting things wrong.
And many of the main universities that were doing epidemiological models were like that they're pretty bad and so we should just trust the authorities as just silly that's just not paying attention.
On the other hand.
And you know we can see the WHO and the Gates Foundation in places like that doing randomized control trials on antivirals for use in the intensive case.
Which is once people are in hospitals when in the entire field of medicine antivirals almost only work immediately after exposure not once you already have a severe illness.
And so it's like that doesn't even why would they why would anyone even do that trial that doesn't even make sense.
I mean yes you might want to see it act if like by surprise it helps late stage people to be cool but also include early stage which is where there's really only any chance.
But if you do late stage and then say it doesn't work and generalize it as if the early stage.
Maybe you're just really being kind of dull and not paying attention to the entire body of antiviral knowledge.
Or maybe.
Or maybe you want to show that the Trump was an idiot and do us do an information warfare piece that attacks hydroxychloroquine or maybe because you're a Democrat or supporter or just hate him or whatever it is.
Or maybe you have a drug that you really like and the generic drugs that nobody's going to make any money on it would be better to show are ineffective.
Now are people that fucked up.
Yeah yeah like that kind of information warfare is a real thing.
And so it's important to know that the information we're being exposed to has agendas attached to it.
And the agendas are not always the ones they say they are the agendas are usually complex.
So now then the other side that says the entire thing is nonsense.
This is basically a flu.
Nobody's really dying.
That's also just gibberish and all you have to do is call some ICU doctors in New York and ask about their experience or in Italy and you'll never fucking say that again.
Which I did you know early on it was talking to them working with them.
And so how was that like how was that what did they say.
They were describing seeing disease progression that was unlike anything that they had seen before the whole ground glass opacities in the long the rate at which people would degrade and break down the complete failure of ventilation to do what they would normally think it to do in
pneumonia is you know they were very boggled by the pathology it wasn't it didn't follow anything that they could make sense of it all and then they were also completely fucking devastated just putting people on intubation and taking them off dead all day.
And having to go in without PPE and without adequate PPE and having to like yeah it's a trip because if the doctors are nurses who decide to go work.
Mostly would quarantine themselves at a hotel and someone just staying in their car whatever they don't want to go back by their family and possibly kill their family but that also means that they know that they might be leaving their children parentless because they don't want to leave these people dying like it's intense.
And they're massive disrespect to that whole thing when you just say the whole thing was a farce because you didn't even do the research deep enough to try to figure it out.
Now.
That side though that says the whole thing is a farce because.
Of just some control agenda are there control agendas yes of course there are.
And the thing isn't a farce and it is being utilized opportunistically the whole don't ever let a crisis good don't let a good crisis go to waste.
Well if.
If I'm playing the market when the market has more volatility if I'm one of the better players that has more insight I'm going to do a lot better than when the market doesn't have volatility.
And so a few people have made a shit ton of money in the last couple months when almost everybody lost a lot of money like the movement of trillions of dollars that basically concentrated.
And so if I'm a major financial player in the hedge fund world or whatever and I have intelligence briefings it tells me this thing is jumped out of Wuhan and it's going to fuck the world up whenever.
Could I with all of my money and connections try to talk to the CDC and the WHO and the president whatever and get them to do a better job of handling this well I could.
I probably could succeed at that but I'm not going to because that's not my job and I'm not motivated to do that my fiduciary responsibility to shareholders anyways is to maximize profit I'm about to.
Short this market completely sell the stocks at the top and then buy shit back up at the bottom for you know a fraction of what it was worth a couple months ago and will be worth again very soon.
Now in the same way that market volatility creates the opportunity for more power grabs it also creates the opportunity to increase volatility in the world creates an opportunity for more political power grabs.
And so before this happened China was trying to advance the Belt and Road Initiative and Russia was trying to get Eastern Europe back into deeper alliance with it and.
Couple different forces in the US were pretty focused on fighting each other for the US power grab and so then when this situation comes they just keep doing the thing they were doing just using the increased volatility of trillions of dollars of stimulus money and who can get it in and shit like that.
But that also then ends up influencing media narratives and even what science is getting funded and so.
And so then we look at things like contact tracing.
Okay well we have to do diagnostics so that we can stop the spread of the disease but then if someone tests positive we want to know everyone that they've interacted with.
So that we can go test them as well because otherwise you'll have you know a single person who's asymptomatic can re-infect the whole world.
So we're going to empower some kind of phone based app to do contact tracing.
Should people be concerned about that from a civil liberties surveillance point of view absolutely like that's a really terrible thing that shouldn't happen in that way.
And it's a really valuable thing and these are both true right like I think we need contact tracing.
And I don't want high tech surveillance that will never be removed afterwards because if you look I mean I'll speak to the US here because I know it better.
When an emergency happens we will usually put in a provisional emergency act to deal a wartime type act but we don't repeal it after the fucking things over hardly ever because one power players have got more power they don't tend to give it back right.
They don't have to and everybody else who customizes moves on and Kardashians or whatever.
And so the FISA Act or the Patriot Act or the Homeland Security Act or the like those don't there's don't roll away.
Okay so after 9 11 and we realize they didn't really have weapons of mass destruction do we roll those acts back.
No.
And so is that this type of situation again but where we even start getting into wanting to breach people's biomedical security and be able to determine whether they can travel or not based on whether they have antibodies or vaccinated or I think that's really dangerous.
And I think we need to do contact tracing.
Now I think we low tech contact tracing just like we did with epidemics throughout all of history where you just ask people who did you come in contact with.
And I think there are certain forms of contact tracing technologically that are much safer.
And I think there are ways to put force expires in them right but this is where it's like if you hear let's say you're kind of left oriented and you hear the guys who are saying this is just a big hoax and they just want to surveil us.
They're partly right.
Now what they're saying as is actually very dangerous and pernicious and problematic but they're also kind of partly right.
Which is.
Are there agendas that are seeking to advance the asymmetric power they already have in the situation and we should watch out for it.
Yes of course.
And typically when you see that power follows a power law distribution right you'll have a few people who have most of the power and then progressively less.
The people who got here didn't get it by sharing their power.
Like that's not that's not how that happened.
They got it by winning a game theory again and again and again and again and getting good at doing that thing right.
So typically those who have more power asymmetric power in a power law distribution.
Use their asymmetric power to protect and get more asymmetry of power like that's the generator function.
And they're fighting against other people who are also trying to do it.
So you know is it going to be Zuckerberg or is it going to be Xi Jinping who gets the Metcalf law one ring to rule them all that creates the digital currency that is the new reserve currency for the world.
So then you can even have the plausible deniability of saying well I have to do this otherwise the other guy is going to do the thing right.
Now that still looks like those with the most power using that radical asymmetric power to concentrate more power.
Does that tend to be in the good of everyone. No.
Will we give one example where it seems to be in the good of everyone as the source of selling point the sugar that makes the medicine go down. Sure.
So this is when we talk about perspective seeking and the faulty confidence.
I only see faulty confidence in kind of mainstream narratives because mostly they live at too low a complexity level to make adequate sense of reality.
But I mean with increased understanding of complexity automatically I feel your level of confidence goes down because the moment you start reaching a level of complexity of understanding how many potential factors go into it.
You understand how many factors you don't even have a proper clue about. Yes.
Now you are to become.
So there is a mayor of a California city who contacted me today and it was so refreshing.
It was one of the few politicians that didn't elicit upset emotions in me.
So she was lovely and she said like I don't even know what I don't know about this topic. I don't even know what questions to ask. I don't know how to think about it.
I don't want to waste your time but you know like I want to make sense of it. And I'm like I'm so glad that you're the mayor.
Because someone who seems earnestly like they really care and really wants to do the right thing and knows that they don't know and is seeking to find the right source of input can be trusted with leadership.
In the doubt etching again.
You can almost read it. You can read it as a book of religion or a book of leadership or a book of political philosophy and they're all true.
But you can read as a book of leadership and it kind of has this gist that says the person who wants to lead everybody should run away from.
And that's the kind of like those who get asymmetric power because they pursued the fuck out of it who use it to keep pursuing the fuck out of it right.
But those who really don't want to lead and everyone pushes them to lead because everyone trusts them so much. You can probably trust them right.
So there is some relationship to the certainty and uncertainty thing in that as well.
So let's say for instance we look at the epidemiology when we open back up is it going to spike again are we going to get herd immunity.
I'll give you just the tiniest example of some elements of the complexity that I'm paying attention to.
So the binary narrative of this is basically airborne AIDS and is just going to keep killing everyone until we get a vaccine or or it was overblown hype and we're already over it and we should just release the restrictions are both just so silly.
And yet what is actually true is pretty complex. So when you look at how hard an area gets hit what are the factors. Well how many cases arrived there originally before it was known is going to be a factor.
What was the viral load of those cases was it a light viral load or a serious viral load and what was the were they super spreaders or not in terms of what type of interaction are they getting into.
What was the population density and the population dynamics what were the background demographics in terms of age and mixing across ages and comorbidities.
Was it an area that had high environmental pollution of the types that would already create long problems.
Did they have previous vaccinations because there's some indication that those who got flu vaccines last year got more serious covid and that some people who got vaccinations of other types in the third world it might actually be slightly protected against covid.
There's some indication that people who got one of the coronaviruses last year actually the normal four strains of coronavirus actually are getting covid worse so the antibodies are not only not protective but priming a cytokine storm so then we would have to ask did that area have a previous bad
coronavirus as part of its flu season.
What types of interventions to the area put in place how early did it put those interventions in place what are the cultural dynamics regarding hygiene and closeness of contact and things like that that would already be part of.
You know mitigating the differences it's a lot of variables and all of a lot of those variables are like a tiny change in an exponent makes a pretty big difference over a little period of time.
So a lot of those are exponent variables or near thresholds.
Now we didn't even get into mutations yet.
But could it be that some of the areas that are hit much harder than others actually correspond to more and less virulent mutations.
Yes that that is not well enough known yet but is we'll know it soon right being tracked.
And so if you look at one area that seems now then we also even say well but how many people are actually infected well what tests are we doing.
Yeah that's that's the part I want to ask you about actually about the testing.
Yeah so if we're only testing sick people and then trying to estimate of course we have we have no background idea.
And then if we're trying to test other places what are the other places that actually give us relevant background information because if the people are coming out and interacting they might already be a higher risk population and the people who aren't coming out and interacting.
Right so it's like how do you get appropriate sample that's one question.
Then what are the false negatives and false positives of the type of test methodology that I'm using.
And if I'm using amino assays.
Am I we have some evidence coming out of China that about 30% of the people who have the disease were really pretty sure they had the disease like they had the symptomology and PCR show that they had the disease about 30% of them don't produce antibodies.
So that's not even about a false negative false negative means when they're producing antibodies the test doesn't pick it up.
This is that they just aren't even doing it right.
We also know that let's say that you you got coronavirus today got SARS-CoV-2 today you wouldn't be producing antibodies for some period of time.
We'll call it 10 days because it's got to go through the mucosal system into the blood the blood's got to produce enough antibodies that test picks it up.
So we wouldn't even call that a false negative yet because it's not it's not that the antibodies in the blood and the test just isn't sensitive enough it's that it's too early in the disease progression but you might be infectious that entire time.
Then there's some question if some of the original tests that got released had a bunch of false positives because they actually were reacted with antibodies from the previous coronaviruses that people have been exposed to.
And so some of the things about oh much higher background rate and so that we're already closer to saturation.
Then we have to say well does saturation mean anything even because is immunity being conferred.
We don't know if immunity is being conferred right now.
So all ideas on herd immunity are premature this point.
You can date whatever date this is that we're talking because are there people who got COVID got better.
And had it again.
Yes a lot like five to 10% of people in the Hubei province and in South Korea in Japan.
Now do we know that it's the same strain as opposed to one strain and another strain we don't know.
Amino assays won't even tell you that right most of the types of amino acids.
Do we know that they fully got rid of it and then they got it again exogenously versus their viral load just went down and then resurged without ever having fully got rid of it.
We don't know the answer to those things right.
Now when people say oh well this will can when you you have the antibodies so of course you're immune.
No there are there are viruses that you'll produce antibodies to that don't produce immunity and there are some viruses where the second time you get it as much worse like dengue fever right.
And obviously with Ebola or HIV or Hep C our answer wasn't herd immunity right our answer was fucking thought the suppression of it.
And so it tends to be that herd immunity will be our answer for respiratory things that are very hard to suppress because they're fucking respiratory things and that are part of the evolutionary background that we've been exposed to.
But if it's novel right meaning we didn't co-evolve with this thing then how long will it take to produce effective antibodies is a very like unknown question.
And so you could even get to where you have a saturation of the population and then now you could also have a situation where.
Someone produces antibodies and you can't think of everyone the same like like we said about 30% of the people weren't producing meaningful number of antibodies.
And so it might be that some people do produce an antibody response that can further some immunity and some don't and that you might have a Gaussian distribution or some other kind of distribution across the population.
You might also have that there was one Chinese study that showed that older people were producing about 5x 3 to 5x more antibodies and younger people which would be opposite of what we'd want to see it could so that could actually mean that it is priming an immune response that is of the more cytokine storm type that makes it worse.
There are ways we could figure this out but it hasn't happened yet.
And now also as it's mutating are we going to have a worse round to follow up like happened with 1918 Spanish flu.
Well we won't be able to know perfectly but we can look at the nature of how it's mutating so far which regions have good error correction in them etc and start to make some good forecasts.
But I would say there's still massive unknowns in there.
Then what happens when SARS-CoV-2 and influenza hit at the same time in this next flu season?
We don't know.
And so the right answer is this is a pretty complex multifactorial thing.
And whether people get immunity or not and whether the immunity lasts for two years or only two months and whether the immunity will be effective against meaningful mutations or not and whether it's mutating or not and whether it's the same for the whole population or only for parts of the population and whether it primes a worse secondary response.
And if we came up with a vaccine because we saw that the influenza vaccine that people did last year it looks like produced about a 25% more severe response than people who got COVID because it was shunting the immune function in a particular direction.
Might we actually make a vaccine for this that doesn't protect against the mutation and actually primes them to be worse that are already more lethal ones.
There's a lot of pretty important fucking unknowns.
So what you want to do is list them all right and then say what kind of research do we need to do to figure these things out and how do we coordinate the international research efforts and how do we make sure the methodology is appropriate.
And how do we coordinate a global exit strategy.
Because there really are no national exit strategies right if herd immunity is a thing maybe there's a national exit strategy.
But otherwise we do no country gets to return to normal if it doesn't get an open trade and travel backup.
And given that only one person who's asymptomatic has to have it to retrigger the whole fucking thing.
This is a uniquely interconnecting for the whole world situation.
And we know that what works in Vienna isn't going to be the solution for India and Bangladesh just because of cost per capita.
And yet a solution that doesn't work for India and Bangladesh keeps Vienna unsafe or unable to open sake.
So we need a global exit strategy and we can think about that like what are the various types of exit herd immunity would be one what we got to answer the questions to see is that even a thing.
Right. And if it's not a thing right now can we make it a thing can we make it to where are the things that we can do to help prime people's immune system to have better immune responses.
Right. What about vaccination. Similarly we haven't succeeded at vaccines for the four corona viruses that have been around forever.
There's a lot of viruses that took us a very long time to find effective vaccines and things like the flu that mutate a lot.
Don't work for the ongoing mutation. So does that mean that this is a new thing that we just have forever and have to take new vaccines for forever.
So with the unknowns there then we say well maybe we'll just the end the end state is suppression.
We just have to diagnose everyone and contact trace to just fully suppress it the way we would Ebola.
It's really hard with something that is asymptomatic for possibly weeks or months or forever and some people and yet they're infectious.
Like that's kind of uniquely terrible as far as contagion goes and how are you going to really contact trace and diagnose everyone in Bangladesh.
Like that's a pretty serious technological rollout per capita dollar wise.
So then we start saying well that we get some amount of that has to happen.
We definitely want to suppress where we can.
But also the herd immunity answer affects that.
Now animals are getting it. We live with the animals.
If the animals can store it do we ever get to full suppression if it's zoonotic and can keep passing back now and our cats and dogs and shit are getting it.
Well that's that's a whole that there's more variables right.
So then we get into the management. Well how do we treat it. Can we make it to where it really is only as bad as the flu early stage antiviral makes it not that bad.
Well the exit strategy those are like clusters of exit strategies and they some are better than others but only if they're true and in order to be true there's shit we have to figure out.
So what we need is a coordinated approach for the entire world to come up with an exit strategy.
Great as easy as that.
Well no we've got a couple more parts we have to make sure that our exit strategy will also be good for follow up mutation rounds that could occur and follow up pandemics because we're in a situation where that's could be a thing again anytime right and they could be more lethal this we were lucky that this one wasn't more lethal than it was.
So we have to also be creating ongoing pandemic infrastructure.
We also have to make sure that we aren't making the world worse by the nature of our solution so that we don't create radically fucked up autocracies and surveillance states and increase surveillance capitalism and decrease people's health privacy or do rushed vaccines where we didn't do long term safety studies that fuck stuff up.
So we all we have to solve the problem set up infrastructure for the next rounds of the problem.
Make sure we don't make shit worse at minimum and then hopefully also set up more competent responses for other types of catastrophes which are also impending and deal with the second and third order effects that have already started from this right we already have had a breakdown in the food supply because of this right so.
India Northern Africa Southeast Asia but also in the United States the animal husbandry calling huge numbers of chickens and pork and whatever because they can't be sold because they're sold to fast food restaurants and then people starving in other areas these are supply chain intelligence breakdown issues for.
Two billion people's food supply just got fucked up.
And the US China tensions in terms of superpower war just radically increased in geopolitical tensions in the EU and whatever so we also have to solve those issues and prevent the worst escalations from happening.
Now thinking about it through the lens of militarism right increased conflict escalation between state actors or just increasing violence within states from non state actors of people who feel really like their government is suppressing them are really upset or whatever.
So thinking through the lens of conflict escalation and violence escalation is a type of perspective to take right and then within that taking a uniquely Chinese perspective or a Russian perspective or US perspective or an EU or a particular country are also going to give very different insights.
Taking the perspective of finance or economics or supply chains or the global south and poverty or the info ecology and journalism or all of those or cyber warfare or medicine or what life is like inside the ICU to actually be able to sense make it well enough to come up with solutions all of those are perspectives that have to be well understood.
Do you have the feeling that current governments do that or to what degree do you think they do that.
Well so governments have government agencies that are designed to look at different things right they have agencies that look at logistics and supply chains and look at national security threats of different types and look at.
Regulation of news and various things to the question is how well do they do it and to call governments a class and unify across them would be silly because it's a pretty radical distribution between how well some do it and others.
As a function of lots of things partly as a function of.
How small the country is and how homogeneous the population and the kind of GDP per capita of it and historical things and how established the culture is.
All of those things all augment the nature of the government and what kinds of wars and overhauls and shit did it go through it.
So we could do that by a country by country basis but.
The big countries.
Like China does a very good job of coordinating all of the stuff.
But I can't say they do a good job of coordinating it for the interest of the world.
They do a good job I can't even say they do a good job of coordinating it for the interest of China.
This and I won't say China does a good job I'll say the CCP does a very good job of coordinating lots of functions in a top down way probably the best job in the world right now.
And they do it in a way that is good for the CCP and its vision of China.
The US completely suck shit at it.
The US is.
The US is.
You know it's it's undergone such intensive institutional decay.
And democracies typically last two to three hundred years we're coming up on two hundred and fifty years.
You know that this looks like what an empire about to fall looks like where it's so divided amongst itself that it's not paying attention to the outside world adequately.
So China is advancing the Belt and Road Initiative in terms of being able to be on the other side of this issue and bring PPE and medical supplies to other places in the world.
And we can't even fucking figure out how to deal with it for ourselves and get PPE to our own hospital workers.
And inside the US you have a very strong kind of like.
Establishment versus Trump insurgency thing that are fighting for the power capture in the US because the power is so big.
And while they're doing it not being geopolitically strategic enough.
Or doing a good job of actually tending to the people or the crisis or whatever.
Yeah we could talk about different places but.
And what do you think would be the most relevant things to tackle right now to improve that or the best.
Yeah parts to put energy towards the.
Clarify that question for me.
So if you observe OK.
Like America is doing a terrible job at that right now.
What do you think would be the things to prioritize right now.
Like what do you think would be the energy well most spent on or how would you approach.
If you would be the president of the United States how would you approach it.
OK I want to make sure I understand the question right.
What are the most important things to respond to covid as the president of the United States.
Or how could we actually correct US governance and reverse the institutional decay.
So it does it would naturally have the capacity to do a good job with anything.
I was the first part was more around the covid response.
But I would like to lead into a general structure of a governance.
Some things I'd like to see the US doing.
I would like to see the US.
Working with all of its international allies to lead a global exit strategy.
And that identifies the various types of exits that might be.
And coordinates the world's scientific research happening at all the different institutions.
Towards making sure that they're not duplicating similar research.
They're not withholding the research or not having it synthesized in a central place.
There aren't critical topics that are getting under addressed and white space being left.
So I would have a international coalition.
Effort.
Towards global exit strategy.
It would identify.
What the types of exits could be and what needs to be known to figure those out.
And then be coordinating the research towards that.
That's one thing in the meantime.
That alliance effort would also work with.
All of the groups all the countries that want to ally which is not just European allies but Japan and South Korea and Singapore and Vietnam and other countries that.
Did a better job of this than we did and went through SARS-CoV-1 and other things and like they just have the shit more figured out than we do.
And you know most of the countries I just mentioned are wealthy countries and like high tech countries.
So to not include Japan and South Korea and Singapore and an alliance effort would just be silly especially given.
Their relationship with China and ours and the tensions and whatever.
And an alliance effort to get PPE medical supply and support to.
All of the countries that are later than us in the curve.
And information to them.
And particularly many of the poor countries because there is no solution that isn't a solution for everybody on this thing.
And if.
China is the major exporter of solutions that's going to result in a particular kind of world order.
And this has nothing to do with the Chinese people or Chinese history or Chinese culture.
But the current.
Government.
That uses.
Radically technologically advanced autocracy.
Is.
Just not the type of global governance we want for the world.
Right.
We want to suppress that wherever it happens in the US and China and wherever.
Which is also why I'm saying this needs to be an alliance effort so that nobody gets to do the power grab.
But the US is in.
The best position to lead it if it really did the good thing that it could do.
Right.
I would definitely like to see.
The internal.
I would like to see some major effort towards protecting the upcoming elections.
And be able to show that.
Be able to create confidence across the both parties and across everyone that the election was not going to be manipulated rigged or stolen.
And create the kinds of process and transparency to do that.
It's a long discussion of how to do that.
But it so obviously needs done.
And then with that secured really work for.
Not narrative politics stuff but bipartisan cooperation towards.
Pandemic solution.
There's a lot of things that the US.
So I think that the US needs to roll out.
Very high tech PCR diagnostics pretty ubiquitously.
So that we can see it very early stage with very high sensitivity.
And be able to both isolate and start treating right away so the economy can open back up without spreading the pandemic factor again.
It should be investing very heavily in early stage treatment so that when people do get it they don't have to wind up in the ICU.
With serious illness.
So a lot of early stage treatment research.
They should prioritize existing drugs not new drugs.
So hydroxychloroquine was actually a right thing to look at and ivermectin and methylene blue and PDE inhibitors and a bunch of the ones that are have been around for a long time.
A new drug.
We have no long term safety data on so it might not kill you or do some like this is one of the interesting things is we will look for some signs of safety will look at liver enzymes and a few things but we don't know what stuff to look for.
Right there's a lot of different types of drugs.
This is one of the interesting things is we will look for some signs of safety will look at liver enzymes and a few things but we don't know what stuff to look for.
Right there's a lot of biometrics you could track in a body.
So under a pandemic you might be tempted to rush the normal process but rushing the normal process on a new thing where we have no long term safety data is very different than.
Drugs that have been around for 20 or 50 or 70 years we have a shit ton of safety data and all we're trying to find is new application.
Right I'm totally happier to rush a new application of a known safety profile.
I want to rush new drugs less and I want to rush vaccines even less because unlike small molecule drugs vaccines are intended to have permanent effects.
And so I really want to make sure they're the right permanent effects right if they're intending to modulate the immune system.
Lastingly then of all the drugs that you want to do long term safety studies on vaccines the most important.
And so yes ubiquitous diagnostics contact tracing I would like to see them doing employing 100,000 people which people need employed anyways to do contact tracing.
That don't require everyone activating their Bluetooth or the things like that that open up hacking and intelligence community issues and surveillance of different types.
I would.
I would like to see the distribution of medical supplies and PPE and resources like that happen at a federal level.
They don't have to override state sovereignty and control the states to support the states with supply chain capacities that our federal government has historically done.
I'd like to see that and obviously the economic stimulus needs handled quite differently.
I actually want to lead over to second and third order effects of COVID and the responses because I really appreciate your insights into the interconnectedness of different topics and how things on a global scale as well are connected but also through sectors.
So how do you perceive or what do you perceive as the most relevant second and third tier order effects of COVID.
Now that you've mentioned financial I think that's probably going to be one of the areas that are going to be really really affected by it.
Well there's super obvious ones and then there's ones that are a little bit less obvious and then there's ones that we don't know what is going to happen.
So one pretty obvious pretty bad when we mentioned was the food supply.
When you try to stop travel to stop a virus you can also break supply chains and in this case you break supply chain of pesticides for areas that do monocropped agriculture and depend upon those and that's the only way they can control the locusts.
And you end up getting these massive numbers of locusts throughout Northern Africa and parts of the Middle East that destroy all the crops and under quarantine not letting farmers and distributors and whatever be able to work.
So food is rotting in the fields and similarly so many of the major agricultural producers of potatoes chicken pork eggs whatever are used to selling to a small number of vendors they sell to McDonald's and the McDonald's as a distribution
throughout its network and people aren't going to McDonald's the people still need the food they just they're not getting a McDonald's McDonald's isn't doing it and the and the farms aren't or the agricultural manufacturers won't call them farms aren't set up to get it directly to people.
So they're just like in the US they're calling millions of animals just killing the animals and throwing throwing them out burying potatoes and food and whatever.
Wow there are millions of people with no access to food.
You know you've got hundreds of millions of people who have very bad food security and India right now a bunch of people starving in Sub-Saharan Africa you have people in refugee camps who can't leave who don't have food.
But even in the US and El Paso you have these miles long lines of cars waiting for food and so can violence happen because of that pretty quickly.
That could kill a lot more people than COVID ever would have killed.
So that's a very serious issue.
Now that's a second order effect right.
Can the violence lead to war can the war escalate as larger third order effects.
Yeah and you know when you start to look at existing political tensions and where high technological military power is.
You know one of the ones I'm most concerned about is India.
Because if millions or tens or hundreds of millions of people stop having access to food.
Do they just die peacefully or do they start to go into resource wars.
If they go into resource wars how does it cleave will probably along existing tension lines.
Might that look like Muslim Hindu lines especially in northern parts of India could that lead to an India Pakistan war right like these are nuclear equipped countries so that's one example but there's a lot of those types of examples.
We also have breakdown in the supply chains of medical equipment and medicines.
That's a pretty huge deal.
We have the I the true idea that dollars are dirty right the cash is actually a vector for disease transmission of a disease that lives on surfaces.
And to increase the impetus that was already there by a number of actors towards a digital currency.
A digital currency is a massive fucking power play.
Because let's say we look at the digital currency that China has been working to roll out.
As much as you would think that there are issues with something like we chat or whatever that is a very state engaged company it still has some degree of autonomy as a company.
But this is basically a digital currency issued by the Chinese Communist Party directly which means that.
Like there's anonymity and cash right nobody actually knows where I spend my cash.
With a digital currency it is a perfected financial surveillance apparatus to know exactly how much money I have where it is which accounts I move it to when everything else right.
So of course governments want that right like a lot of governments would want that to make sure tax evasion isn't happening and whatever.
And if you really trusted your government to be totally awesome you might be okay with that but this whole power corrupts absolute power corrupts absolutely thing keeps fucking stuff up.
And so then there is a we know that people don't want a bunch of different currencies and what is the world reserve currency so then we also start looking at the the oil price shocks right.
And seeing oil get down to a negative price is this unprecedented thing.
But besides the fact that that's a huge deal and what does it mean and goes negative when there's not enough storage to store the existing oil.
So then is that going to lead to somebody realizing that there's an opportunity to create a lot more oil storage as a financial opportunity.
Yes, does that mean that with the price dropping and more oil storage we might actually have climate change going the worst direction because of starting to have cheap oil open up whole new oil markets and demand start to increase another is yeah totally.
What does it mean in terms of militarism well we know that when the price of oil drops almost nothing.
Only the companies with the most money on hand can survive for very long right so Saudi Arabia will do fine for a while and Russia will do fine for a while is basically major wealthy state sponsored oil producers but a lot of smaller states and private companies will start collapsing.
And so then is that just a radical concentration of power again.
Yeah probably.
And then what type of geopolitical tensions does that create because let's say that some smaller country loses their economic capability they can't take care of their people but they still have a military.
Well it's a bad position to have your economics go to shit and still have a military because then you have to deal with it somehow right.
So these types of geopolitical things that we're talking about here there's a lot of them and you can see that then increasing the price of oil we start looking at and that was that was related to the situation there was already systemic fragility but that was because of a decrease in demand for oil and then the war over increasing the supply and whatever.
Now we could look at that moving in the direction of affecting climate change or in the direction of affecting geopolitical tensions towards war or financial concentration right this like it branches pretty fast.
Then we have all the shit like the increase in domestic abuse happening.
Like really kind of gruesome spousal and child abuse because there's a lot of fucked up people in the world and a lot of the way that people survive is by avoiding their family.
And under this situation where they can to get increasing those types of violence so then what happens also when like the people in New York or in Italy know everybody knows a lot of people that died so you have like generational trauma like happened with a great depression or war or whatever so then what are the lasting societal effects of that lasting societal effects of.
You know of existential fear and of kind of more ubiquitous trauma what happens to the generation of kids who all lose a pretty meaningful period of school time.
Lots of lots of things like this the domestic elections in the US are not secure at this point cannot be considered secure when trillions of dollars of new money just get made up like what is that.
And.
And I don't think anyone thinks those will be really rightly distributed to everyone right.
And but unlike in 2008 they didn't all go to the big bank usual brokers they went to some new brokers that seem to be more associated with the kind of current insurgency that's in the White House.
Rather than the establishment forces so you also see like competition at the very top of global and US finance in a way that's different so what how do those shocks ripple out.
We could go into any of those you want but this just giving examples of starting to think about what second and third order and cascading effects look like and what cascading effects on systemic fragility looks like because if you had where all the countries.
Didn't need import or export right they had fully domestic economies well it wouldn't be quite the same thing.
When you have globalized supply chains where every single country in the world depends upon six continent type supply chains and where you have tensions all over the place and you have very powerful weapons associated with the tensions and you have.
Technologies that radically concentrate power like digital Metcalf law type stuff and so we're dealing with and you know I would say if it wasn't coronavirus something else would have done the same thing.
It could have easily been like the fires that happened in Australia that were partly related to the climate that was dry and hot that dry hot thing.
Similarly hitting India and driving food death there for that reason could have led to this whole thing or was happening in the Amazon that could break the hydrological pump and affect the rainfall for North America basically we just needed something big enough to start to set off the systemic fragilities.
Systemic abilities haven't always been there because it's unique to globalization.
It's unique to.
You know up until World War two we didn't have technology big enough to fuck up everything like we tried to fuck up everything like you look at Genghis Khan and Alexander the Great and the Romans like we would use our technology to fuck shit up.
For personal gain and but how much stuff we could destroy was limited by how powerful we were World War two was when we were like oh we actually have the power to make the whole place uninhabitable.
Well in evolutionary time that's just like a minute ago.
And we made this entire world system the whole Bretton Woods world the World Bank and the UN and everything to make sure we never used that power right that we didn't use the nukes again.
But nukes are super hard to make.
Right you're enriching uranium is super hard to do you can monitor it from satellites the uranium doesn't exist in that many places.
And so when you have two superpowers and one catastrophe weapon you can do mutually assured destruction and make sure nobody uses it.
But when you start getting to drone weapons and AI control drone weapons and bioweapons and all of the other kind of exponential tech media weapons that are not that hard to make.
And you have a world today where you've got dozens of catastrophe weapons held by many dozens of actors that can't even all be monitored.
You can't do mutually assured destruction on that.
And when Bretton Woods happened we weren't near the planetary limits of growth we hadn't already taken most of the fish out of the ocean or fucked up the coral or got close to the tipping points on the Amazon or any of those types of things.
So we could just say let's just debt based finance ourselves out of this by printing so much fucking money and exploiting whatever we need to to print so much money that we don't have to fight because we just keep having so much positive some growth you don't get to do that forever.
So we really are at a tipping point where we've reached planetary boundaries and that creates its own fragility.
We have these globalized supply chains where collapse anywhere can create collapse in other places.
We saw a little fucking problem in Wuhan and the whole world is affected right so radically interconnected world and where too many people have two bigger weapons.
And not just the kinetic weapons but even the effect on everyone psyche of technologies like Facebook and Google that either we've become powerful enough relative to the now smallness of our world and our own developmental innate capacities that we either figure out how to use that power much much much better or we blow ourselves up with it.
So that's the omni loose lose scenario you've been talking about around that in the end if you keep enforcing the win lose scenarios of one one party trying to advance at the cost of the other it's just eventually going to lead to us destroying the place we live in basically.
Yeah.
And that's why it needs to change.
Yeah there is a.
You know that kind of.
Win lose game theory not only.
Like the first thing is that historically it actually worked like we actually could kill the other guys and get the riverfront property that they had and that was awesome right and then they stopped competing with us for for hunting and whatever.
But it wasn't just that it worked it was obligate because if we just wanted to be peaceful but they're going out killing other tribes and taking their shit.
Then we have to militarize ourselves to defend ourselves or we lose by default as soon as anyone militarizes which is why some of the more peaceful cultures just got slaughtered by the warring cultures.
And the effective warring cultures taught each other to war better and you get this up regulation of war capacity where anybody comes out with a new weapon and everybody has to create counter weapons and new better weapons right so you get this.
But ultimately that's an exponential curve that drives an exponential curve and it's all externalizing harm on a finite common space.
And so we've been in a place where like that has worked what has worked and has even been obligate.
As a mode itself will now create the self termination.
And so we need.
A fundamentally different approach than civilization has ever done or or been able to implement previously.
Which requires to understand or to be able to to understand that equilibrium right because if you if you don't if you don't look at that time scale then you're just going to still see that that win scenario for you.
Right.
And you know one of the interesting things the whole.
Think globally act locally.
Ideas.
Most people are doing the opposite of that without realizing it where they're thinking about how to protect their own job and how to get a bonus and get ahead and.
Advance in their social circle and whatever it is like the thing about some pretty local shit right.
But they're buying stuff that comes from supply chains that happened run by warlords and on six continents backed up by militaries and pursuing dollars that are basically contracts backed up by militaries that and that support militaries.
So there and they're buying their food that comes from the factory farms that both create swine flues and bird flues and pandemics and create massive slaughter in the environment and they don't even realize but they're causing it.
So it's like who's causing it.
Well I am good.
I'm acting globally in really atrocious ways for my local optimization and not even knowing it.
What do you do.
What do you do currently to bring to raise more awareness regarding that or what's your current mission.
So.
I had a series of processes in my life of realizing that things that I cared about and wanted to solve were connected to other things that I didn't know that I cared about but that also had to be solved until it came to.
If I try to stop these animals from being poached by putting bigger fences but the poachers are still broke and have the same mindset they go poach some other animal that might even be more endangered right like how in order to really address it.
We have to actually address not only the interconnectedness but what are the driving functions underneath it.
And I also went through the process of trying to like assuming at first naively that there were approaches already in place that were probably good or adequate that started with activism you know in the kind of NGO world and then kind of looking at the maybe
the UN NGO world and then seeing if maybe there were economic solutions if the Austrian school or the anarcho capitalists have figured it out or if the Scandinavian model could apply or the.
Permaculture for the whole world or whatever right like and it was clear that they all had some good partial insights but it could run the fail cases of why no this this actually isn't a solution for this whole problem set.
So I kept trying to understand the nature of the problems better to be able to see what would an adequate solution look like or a set of solutions and.
And the question like a central question is always very orienting is what is most needed for civilization and life to thrive that is not being tended to currently.
And that both is looking that requires a clear sense of what's needed right it requires what understanding the current problems and the future risk spaces and both what isn't addressed and what the highest leverage types of things are in that stack.
I would say that there's kind of three primary horizons in my current focus.
There's what you can think of as the near term stuff which is that there's a bunch of catastrophic risks that if they happen we won't be able to reverse and they'll just suck so bad we must do everything we can to have them not happen and they're currently eminent or.
Have high enough probability that the probability needs radically lowered.
And that even though they're being driven by underlying systems are being driven by perverse incentive within the nature of how our.
Market and government systems interact and they're being driven by poor sense making and political power games whatever we're not going to be able to fix those underlying systems fast enough we just have to solve these things.
Kind of directly and so there's a whole set of ecological things that are actually pretty near tipping points where without fixing the underlying systems that generate the problem we just have to keep them from happening.
We need to keep large scale war from happening we need to pay attention to the very large scale refugee issues that could happen in the next little while there's some grid stability grid collapse stuff right there's a handful things like that.
There's also certain kinds of power consolidation that if they happen will probably never get out of and they're really bad so we need to keep some of those things.
So this is the like triage bucket it's a pretty big bucket right like any one of those pretty big thing but it's how do we identify all the ways that humanity could go off the rails near term.
And so there's a kind of risk assessment to be able to see what the escalation pathways to various kinds of irreversible risk are and say how do we close those.
There's a another thing that has to be happening simultaneous business slightly longer arc which is institutional change how do we work with the existing institutions to be able to have them be more oriented in effective directions.
So how can we make certain perverse incentives within markets less incentivized what could we do to make fucked up things more expensive.
And what could we do to make things it would be really good more profitable right can we change the topology of the incentive landscape or still incentive seeking capitalism would insert different things.
And within governments can we do things that force higher kinds of transparency and accountability that decrease the corruption and kind of self dealing in crony capitalism and regulatory capture.
Well it turns out that there is quite a lot that can be done in those spaces.
And for reasons that will take more time than we have today I will say that the very best we could do in that still won't be long term adequate that the underlying axioms the underlying structures of those systems aren't right.
But the new systems that we would want to build from scratch will take quite a while.
And so we have to do this vectoring these systems in the right direction because of the systems that still are in the world right we've got 50 or 100 trillion dollars that trades hands every day and so that's a lot of total activity.
We have to start vectoring that thing in the right direction as we work on new economic systems it might not be measured in single fungible currencies.
So that's the second category is kind of existing institutional change.
Third one is build new new civilization systems from scratch that are reverse engineered from defining the problems well enough.
So we identify all the catastrophic risks that could happen especially as we have increasing technological power and that power means the ability to do good shit and fucked up stuff but the fucked up stuff kind of ruins the whole thing.
So one war ruins everybody's ability who died to do poetry and art and all of the other things right.
So there is an entropic orientation right there's an asymmetry that makes entropy easier just easier to break shit than it is to build it and so.
So if we identify well what are all of the ways all the kind of catastrophic nexus central risks what are the things that lead us to making those things happen what are the system dynamics and the incentives and the whatever so we call those the generator functions of existential risk.
And then rather than try to solve this one and this one and this one separately can we actually solve those generator functions categorically which would solve every instance in the class as a new instantiation of a civilization colonel can we have a situation where.
The architecture of the economics has removed perverse incentive fundamentally so it's removed the evolutionary niche for sociopathic behavior right made it where that just that doesn't ever pay.
Or corruption through the right kinds of transparency and accounting and justice and whatever.
So that's been a focus of mine for a bunch of years because if we couldn't get that that totally recalibrated my sense of the whole possibility space and so.
I was fortunate to have some really incredible people colleagues work together for quite some years on that and came to yes it is actually possible there are solutions.
If we ask the question how do we make a world that's antifragile civilized antifragile in the presence of having exponential technology kind of available to everybody decentralized exponential technology.
Factoring the way that humans are right so the kinds of beings that we have been and how we have been stewards of power can that many of us have that much power and have the thing be antifragile.
It's a tough problem right it was not.
And but we did end up coming up with yes there is actually a field of solutions they don't look like any of the systems we've tried so far which makes sense right they don't look like nation state based liberal democracy or communism or socially they look like some kind of deeply reimagined premises but.
And so there's work happening to build those types of systems prototype them refine them to then be strange attractors of a new model.
And the idea would be and the fundamental basis of them is much higher collective intelligence that leads to better resource utilization and but because of that also leads to better innovation which also leads to them being able to.
Offer things to the world that the rest of the world needs so that engenders healthy relationship rather than enmity and being able to defend themselves without needing to go offensive and various things.
So then what we would expect is that if there's a radically more effective civilization system that other places would want to implement it and so you start to get an adoption based on a new attractive basin right.
But that'll take a few generations.
Somebody told me the story.
I have no idea if anybody ever thought this was true or not but the idea makes sense that in the exodus story when the people were leaving Egypt and they took 40 years to do like a one month long walk.
What was that about the metaphor was that they needed a couple generations of people to die off of the slave mentality to be fully gone before starting a new civilization that wasn't still slaves or the children of slaves.
And so there were some people that had enough wisdom to say oh these people are probably actually not going to be able to let that go.
And so we're going to like keep developing new people and that at least as a metaphor there's this idea of that there's a transition between one system and a new system and that transition requires some generational shift usually.
So that's why the that's why the second category the work with the current institutions to vector in the right direction because we're going to need them for a while.
So I would say the things that I'm interested in kind of span those three categories.
And then I said in the beginning I want to keep it rather to 75 minutes but I could ask you questions without end I think that showcasing why we had a three hour conversation back then in the restaurant as well.
As a if you would have to like is there a message that you would like to share that you feel that you feel passionate about or to the audience that you think you would like to leave as a last statement.
I can't say that this is the most important thing I could say but it's just the first thing that came to mind it was actually from a conversation I was having with a friend right before we got on the call.
So we were talking about dialectic earlier. So here's one dialectic that is kind of interesting.
So one of the traits of sociopathy is not feeling a whole category of negative emotions right not feeling remorse or guilt or shame and you do something that hurts people which is why your sociopath or a psychopath or something in that cluster B kind of category.
And so it's interesting that if people don't feel certain kinds of negative emotions they can cause lots more harm to other people right because they don't feel them vicariously.
And this also tends to be why people who are oriented that way this is part of the story there's also innate power seeking tend to be in so much more positions of power is because they people who don't want to harm anyone usually don't want to make the kinds of decisions
necessary to win at power games where they don't just feel great that they beat out the competition that means lots of people can't feed their kids and got laid off and but you know they got a yacht or the war advanced or whatever.
Now there's a lot of spiritual and philosophic and worldview ideas that make us a little bit like a sociopath their ways of numbing out pain.
And whether it's you know always wanting to look on the positive side of everything and look for the kind of silver lining where it's actually a denial of pain it's not wanting to be with the reality of it.
You see this when like someone is grieving the loss of someone close to them and they're fucking hurt and the other person just can't be with it and they instantly say well the good side is you know it's like shut the fuck up it's not the wrong thing to be saying right now.
But there's a lot of people who feel the pain of the world or who feel authentic fear or concern at these types of risks I'm talking about and then they just get crippled.
Right because they feel kind of overwhelmed with uncertainty and fear and sadness and despair and anger and whatever.
And so if it's the case that the people who see the world in a way that actually has them connect to the harms of others less that that empowers them more and those who are connected to the harms of the world more disempowered then the world will continue to be run by sociopaths.
And or people who at least have some world views that make them sociopath like and that's a very bad equation right so we need to get on the other side of that thesis anti thesis thing and say.
How can I be how can I have a real assessment of the problems of the world or a real assessment of the risks of the world a real assessment of my own uncertainty and actually be more empowered.
To act in service of the whole and courageously and in service of what I love then before.
And it's a different kind of power right it's not the power of how do I.
Be an apex predator and not care when everyone else is just a prey animal that dies it's a how do I have the power to be a steward of the whole.
That's possible it's not common but I would say it's both possible and it's the necessary new baseline state we need to not blow ourselves up with the amount of power we have.
And so if people can think about is the way that I'm thinking about this.
Increasing my sense of empowerment and increasing my sense of empathy and responsibility for the whole simultaneously.
If it is not increasing both of them keep rethinking about until you find a way that does.
Which is to me similar to if you expand like I feel every human is thinking about themselves.
And for me that is expanding that sense of self or the things that we care about.
And so if I try like if I only see myself and everything else I don't really care about then I advance myself at the cost of everything around me.
But if I if that understanding of self at that level of consciousness is entailing everything around me as well.
And I understand that I'm part of a system and and I do the best of the system is doing the best.
Then now I care.
And then I take responsibility for the whole rather than just for a virtual line that I drew in the sand.
Is that me is that along the lines of what you meant meant.
Well you made one step but I want to go another step.
Okay.
So the step that you made is more intelligent and thoughtful reciprocal altruism.
Reciprocal altruism is I do better when the system does better and the system other people so I'll help them because it's good for me.
Rather than all fuck them because I get ahead I'll find ways that I can where I help them I get ahead but I'm still doing it for me.
I'm still ultimately coming from a place of focused on you know with what's in it for me.
I'm kind of this miserable needy thing that just needs to keep getting shit from the world needs to keep getting stuff and recognition and attention and whatever the fuck it is.
And I will do things that are nice to the degree it gives me shit.
Like that's a starting place that at least can make people less dreadful fucks to begin with.
But you don't actually achieve anything like meaningful happiness as long as you're still focused on what's in it for me because you're still affirming a self that's empty.
Right it's there is some sense of a it's a misunderstanding of self that is some sense that needs a bunch of shit.
What you keep getting is more of that sense of self which means no matter how much shit that you get whether it's achievement or recognition or whatever that same kind of sense is there.
Which is very different than the kind of desire that comes from a place of wholeness and and then connectedness to the world and then a recognition of the intrinsic meaningfulness of others lives not because supporting them will make your life better but just because their life actually matters to you.
Because you actually give a shit for no selfish reason.
And like you can do this thought experiment.
Okay let's say that it was true that when I die I became a guardian angel or I had that possibility.
Right I'm not saying that's true it's a thought experiment.
So let's say I had that.
And I don't have to do anything if I want to just chill in heaven and listen to music I can do that.
But I have the opportunity to affect people's lives in a positive way sometimes but they'll never know it I can divert the the ball in the road where the kid doesn't get hit by the car.
This question comes do I ever do that.
Do I ever bother having the kid not get hit by the car because I'm not going to get shit from it.
Right well no I will get something I'll get feeling better about myself.
Well that already has the emptiness of like I don't feel good about myself.
And I have to do something like that.
No when that mom is crying watching her baby get hit and I feel it.
Not because I need something or whatever but because I can resonate with that.
Her experience is as deep to universe as mine is.
I'm not the only focal point.
And if I and if I can and I can think about that kid's life and I can think about the whole universe experiencing itself through this kid in this in these unique ways and falling in love for the first time and when he becomes a parent and whatever and I'm like that's just actually beautiful and I want to be in service to that for no obvious reason for me at all.
I think the switch where people start to have a sense of wholeness that doesn't need a bunch of stuff from other people in the world.
And then can from that place of wholeness actually show up to other people because you care about them not because you want to get something out of doing something for them.
That's when life starts to me.
I find that a very very very nice and interesting thought it was interesting when you said when you describe it I was thinking OK but this sense of self then isn't really.
There's not the separation anymore.
It's like if you if you relate and if you empathize and if you feel then it's not like you experience them it's more like it's kind of the same.
So now go back and read any scripture of the world and see that it was talking about that right love thy neighbor as thyself not as much as the fuck does that mean right.
And or that the naming is the beginning of the ten thousand things and the doubt a chain because it's it's in a OK I'm the separate dude over here I'm Daniel you're you were not.
Really I'm Daniel I'm this is me this isn't me this isn't me is that OK so who the fuck am I without the planet I'm not the planet who am I without the planet I'm fucking nothing.
Who am I without the atmosphere I'm nothing who am I without the plants that make the atmosphere I'm nothing I have to take for granted that the thing that I call me depends on all this other stuff I have to take that for granted to say this is me but I don't exist without all of it.
So the idea of me is just actually an ontologically ill formed idea.
Like it's just a philosophically bad concept.
I am an emergent property of this universe and of course there's some autonomy but you try to make me as autonomous in the middle of outer space with nothing and I don't fucking do that right.
But but then there is a case to say like if you are understanding of me is all encumbering.
Then you want me still to do well.
Yeah right like it's just a different it's just not Daniel anymore but it's like everything.
And then that is the Bodhisattva impulse or the Christic impulse or the where the impulse to really serve life comes from it comes from actually like where the service impulse at first it comes from some like fear of hell or desire to please some nasty God or projecting.
The desire for parental approval on the rest of the world or whatever like all that child consciousness nonsense.
And then it's even wanting to like respect myself and I have these values and I want to be the kind of person I respect okay that's fine those are steps they all serve a role.
But beyond that.
Like when you read Rumi or you read Hafez or you read Saint Francis they were just fucking in love with the beauty of the world.
They just loved the birds and the trees and the every they they saw the beauty of it and they were just fucking in love with it and the desire to serve that what you're in love with is just a naturally arising thing.
That sounds awesome.
And this is now an active perspective and perception is like when people do mushrooms when they do psilocybin one of the really interesting things is you can do a big dose of mushrooms where you're really fucking tripping right and you're seeing colors that aren't there and shapes whatever.
But when you're on a smaller dose but you're clearly altered.
One of the neat experiences is you go outside and you look at a tree and you start crying because it's so beautiful and you sit there for an hour just looking at the tree and you feel like you could look at it for eternity and never see the tree fully because it's so intricate and amazing and beautiful.
And then at a certain point you ask yourself.
I've walked by this tree a million times and never noticed it.
Why is it so much more beautiful now you're like the tree's not purple it's still the same color it still looks like the same shape if I describe it.
I would use the same why is it so much more fucking beautiful.
Oh I'm actually noticing it for the first time.
Because I'm not so busy with this emptiness sense that is trying to go get full and agendas and thinking about people and laundry lists and whatever that I'm actually just being present with it and it's just actually that beautiful.
And there's this neuro inhibitory function of certain brain regions that involve narrative that distracts us where there's increased attention of consciousness in the sensory processes where if your senses if you really get to be with your senses which is again why Buddhist and Taoist and other techniques talk about really dropping into the senses.
Is because when you can have your attention really with it the world's fucking beautiful.
I think when you get that all violence the basis for all the violence is gone.
I think that's probably one of the best ways to to end this the world is fucking beautiful.
Yeah.
And arising from that sense of the beauty is the desire to protect it and to serve it and add to it.
The artistic impulse is the desire to add to it right a lot of the humanitarian impulses the desire to protect it and serve it but they all arise out of seeing it.
Recognizing.
Awesome.
I'm really happy we took we took this turn in the end and that you shared that Daniel I really truly appreciate your investment of time and sharing so many of your perspectives and experiences and thoughts.
So yeah very very happy to have you.
This was really fun and yeah we could have talked about more things if if this ends up being interesting to the people that you share it with and we want to talk about more things in the future we can.
I'd love that.
I will share some of my favorite other pieces from you because you you should like you you create content you are on other podcasts.
So that if someone is interested you can follow down in the rabbit hole as so have I and there's more content to catch up on and also besides that is there a specific channel or way people can follow you or or reach out to you in case there are some interesting surgeries.
Was as problematic and fucked up a tool as it is I actually do post up on Facebook sometimes.
Facebook is actually probably the best place for stuff I put up a blog a few years ago civilization emerging dot com I don't add to it very often but there's some old stuff there.
Awesome.
Okay.
Again thanks for for being on the pod and yeah we talk soon.
Be well great being with you.
Yeah.
