Welcome to the Futurists with Ben Rody and Alex Leitman.
Today our special guest is Daniel Schmacktenberger, who is the Director of Research for the Neurohacker
Collective.
I love the name Neurohacker Collective.
The idea is, as far as we'll hear today, to bring together some of the best science
and insights into how to make humans smarter and how to do a variety of things.
So let me first introduce my co-host, Ben Rody, to say hello to Ben, and also Daniel,
thank you so much for joining us.
I'm so delighted to be here, thanks for having me.
And I want to say too that this is a special show because it's our first show that we're
doing while Ben is in a hurricane, so in Costa Rica, and I'm in Santa Monica.
And Ben, neither rain nor snow, not that he'd have that much snow, but he does live on
a mountain, neither rain nor snow nor dark of night will keep Ben Rody from doing the
Futurist show.
It must be something I picked up as a mailman, and I think it's interesting, and we spent
the last 30 minutes trying to get the technology here, so I think the running joke right now
is how many Futurists does it take to be able to record a damn show?
Yes.
And so we're also pre-recording this show.
It's 7.45 p.m. for me because Daniel is a vampire, has a vampire schedule, so I'm excited
to hear about that at some point, and I read in your bio about your vampire schedule and
it says, so as long as you're able to meet Daniel halfway, we'll get a lot out of it.
So here we are meeting the vampire at night, and I'm excited to bite into this topic.
So first question, we know about, Daniel, what is biohacking, and then within biohacking,
what is neurohacking?
So biohacking and neurohacking are both kind of amorphous and emerging terms.
Biohacking has been very popularized with bulletproof and Dave Asprey and Tim Ferriss
and people like that helping its emergence, and it very much relates to performance enhancement
through any methodology.
It relates to kind of integrative medicine and wellness, but from a slightly different
perspective of rather than working on the disease model side of it, what can we do on
the fundamental wellness support and enhancement side of it, which has some crossover with
prevention on the disease side, and there's some kind of idea with regard to hacking that
it is a other than establishment approach to how to do this.
So biohacking is not emerging out of pharma and FDA sanctioned kind of science, it's emerging
out of citizen science, out of piecing together science from different places for kind of
grander hypotheses out of the fields of elite sports and performance enhancement and all
like that.
And neurohacking correspondingly is, you could think of it as a subset of biohacking or you
could think of it in kind of a Venn diagram.
The way we think about neurohacking is really being able to hack the mind-brain interface
to be able to optimize people's cognitive and psychological well-being and capabilities.
So how do we enhance human experience and enhance human capacity cognitively, psychologically,
through both physiological and psychological techniques and processes?
Daniel, what would, what do you think are the biggest six messages to date of biohacking
or neurohacking?
Oh, I like this question.
Well, it's a good question.
I think since these are kind of newer spaces in the way that they are emerging, some of
their success is that they are actually emerging spaces where people are finding solutions
to kind of elite performance that didn't exist in the medical world, that some of the knowledge
that had been in very niche worlds is becoming more popularly available and that in kind
of the overlap with the integrative medicine world, people are finding solutions to better
health that they had not found elsewhere.
And I would say in better health and well-being, I would say that there are some good successes
across a number of different verticals, whether we're talking about athletics and weight
and fitness or sleep optimization or cognitive optimization.
I think there's actually a number of meaningful things that have happened in all those spaces.
Well, I'd like to tell our audience one stat in case you're thinking, oh, this is kind of
cute.
It's nice.
It's just having fun.
This folks, this is deadly serious.
You know when the last time, I bet Daniel knows this, the last time that the FDA approved
a drug for Alzheimer's, do you know when that was?
I'm going to say no for everybody.
Okay.
It was 2003.
It was 13 years ago.
So here we have the group of people with Alzheimer's.
It's one of the fastest growing populations in the world and it's exploding.
And we have not been, we haven't approved a drug.
Now this show takes place post Donald Trump being elected president of the United States
and I think one of his most interesting proposals is that he says there are 4,000 drugs awaiting
approval at the FDA and he wants to accelerate that.
So what I see is that there's a tremendous pent up demand for a better, faster, cheaper,
more effective, less industrial, less orthodox way of approaching health and achievement
of human potential.
So Daniel, what do you think that we're doing wrong and what do we need to be doing better
as a society and what role does this neurohacking and the neurohacker collective play in this?
That's a lot of big questions.
I want to just kind of speak to the drug discovery and approval process and the regulatory processes
for a moment.
I think we do need to take a major step forward in how we do medicine and how we do wellness.
But it is getting to take an evolutionary step that is standing on the shoulders of previous
successes rather than things that didn't make any sense.
When you think about the history of the FDA, we have the FDA really gaining a lot of necessary
traction after thalidomide when a drug that did work for morning sickness and pregnancy
got moved forward too quickly and caused meaningful birth defects.
So there's this question of if you have delayed causation and very meaningful side effects,
how much of a longitudinal study do you need to do?
How big of a group needs studied on to know if there are rare but very serious effects?
So these are not trivial issues.
And so there is a purpose for appropriate methodology that we very much respect and I would say
the current system has a number of limitations.
When we're looking at, for instance, animal trials, there's a number of places where the
data we're getting from animal trials really doesn't cross over into human biology well
enough and it's both scientifically and ethically not the best of how we can do it moving forward
as we start to get into personalized medicine and wanting to be able to address an individual
person's health uniquely differently based on their genome, based on their whole history
of life and exposure, their microbiome, than we would someone else.
Clinical trials aren't an adequate way to know how to do that because we're not going
to be looking at one drug intervention.
We're going to be looking at some weighted combination of a number of different things
that might have never been used in exactly that ratio for exactly this person before.
So getting into N equals 1 optimization is a totally different kind of science and being
able to do more decentralized science synthesize what we know across so many spaces and include
citizen science.
And I think these are all parts of some of the next steps of scientific evolution that
have to happen.
Great.
So if this is the future of medicine, what does this look like?
I think the biggest thing that I would speak to regarding the future of medicine, because
there's going to be evolutions in diagnostic technologies, evolutions in therapeutic technologies
both on the surgical acute medicine and on the chronic health side, as well as evolutions
in neurohacking, biohacking for elite optimization and for radical life extension.
There's going to be technological solutions in all those areas.
The thing that I think is most significant is how it all fits together, which is a fundamentally
upgraded model for understanding what health and wellness and biological resilience is
and understanding what illness is, how illness happens in a more complex and complete way
that doesn't have autoimmune diseases and neurodegen and so many cancers under explained,
but actually can have detailed and personalized explanations for these things that lead to
cause level solutions.
And so if we want to dive in a little bit deeper, I can talk about what I think and what we're
working on as an emerging adequate model for understanding health optimization and disease
prevention reversal.
I would love that.
I just want to make a quick comment, because some people in our audience will not have
heard the phrase or term, citizen science.
So citizen science is this emerging area that actually returns us to some of the golden
ages of science when people were at home experimenting in their own laboratories, you know, the discovery
of oxygen happening at home, laboratory, et cetera.
I chaired a conference on citizen science, the rise of the citizen scientist in 2010
at Harvard.
That was the first international conference on the topic.
And one of my favorite examples is people discovering stars and galaxies, galaxy zoo,
you know, sort of an open source way of classifying things and also folding at home, going and
using people's spare computing power to do basically go and doing protein experiments
and analysis that would take large numbers of people and cost tens of millions of dollars
to do, but volunteers can do it.
And also a woman went to Burger King once who is a chemist, and they're giving away
all these free colored glasses, and she took one at home, crushed it, and then she found
that it was toxic.
And so with all the scientists and all the regulatory agencies, one person who wasn't
the right person in the right place at the right time saved millions of people from being
exposed to toxins.
And I would just give one more example of why citizen science is vital.
Right now, there's a big debate about Trump's appointment of Myron Ebel, I think, to be
the new head of the Environmental Protection Agency transition.
And people are saying, oh my God, we're going to reduce protections.
The fact is that the EPA only tracks 13 chemicals, and fracking has been used for 150,000 wells
or more, and it has 500 chemicals.
So I don't see the federal government, I think this is a great metric we can look at.
The federal government, with all of its power and money and four trillion a year, is only
tracking 13 chemicals out of 500, but many of those others ones are toxic.
So citizen science is one of the most important movements to protect our health and to come
up with new innovations that we have.
So I appreciate your bringing that up.
And now we can go back to what Neurohacker Collective is doing, and I can't wait to hear.
And in the health and medicine and human biology space in particular, the rise of quantified
self, so all the different kind of tracking devices and wearables where we can track heart
rate variability or GSR or so many things, and the rise of app software for tracking
cognitive metrics, psychometrics, people's ability to test their own well-being and even
hardware for people to test glucose more regularly or ketones or anything at home.
And there's a huge trend in these kinds of decentralized medical technologies and wellness
technologies emerging.
This doesn't give us traditional placebo-controlled clinical randomized research, but it does
give us meaningful data over very huge data sets that we can do statistical analysis on
as that data starts to be shared in meaningful and structured ways.
So I think one of the reasons that we have this rise of citizen science is that we have
so much more access to actually scientific tools, decentralized scientific tools, and
then access to information processing that we didn't have previously in the form of like
you're mentioning advanced computational capabilities to do protein folding.
And one of the things, for instance, that our companies working on right now is an app
that can synthesize biometrics and psychometrics from many different sources into one platform
and then not only look at those biometrics with regard to where the number's at on a
reference range, but where all the numbers are at in relationship to each other, factoring
all the complex causation that's known about.
Wow, I'm just, I'm listening to, so when I listen to you talk, I notice the way that
your brain works, that like I'm imagining being inside of your brain and the way that
you speak is so, like, yes, it's so technical and it's so academic.
And I remember I'm thinking about reading your bio and one of your bios that I really
liked was you said, I didn't have to unlearn all the stuff that basically everybody's
taught through the current education system and that you were raised on Buckminster Fuller
and just all these amazing great minds.
And so I'm just, I'm appreciating that in you.
And so I don't want to change the subject if Alex has another question about this and
I do want to get into this because I ordered some of your, I got on the monthly plan because
my friend Daniel Raphael highly recommended it and he said it changes life forever.
And so, so I'm looking forward to getting my first shipment and so I have, I have more
questions about that but I would like to hear about your just the way that you see the world
like, like how do you see the future and how do you create the future that maybe most people,
most people's brains don't work like this.
We could have a conversation sometime on the future of education.
I, I did have this unique, fortunate childhood where my parents were educational theorists
and they wanted to run an educational experiment and this was before the term unschooling,
which has kind of evolved since then, which was raising us without any curriculum at all
but exposing us to everything that they could expose us to in terms of different topics.
This is what we're doing with our kids.
Awesome.
And then yeah, they were just seeing where there were areas of interest and seeing how
to facilitate them.
So I didn't, you know, I didn't learn whole areas of spelling grammar, American history
that one would normally learn have eligible handwriting, but I did get to dive much more
deeply into the sciences and into activism and into many world philosophies than one
would otherwise have the opportunity to do.
And because I didn't have subject divisions, I didn't think of the world in compartmentalized
ways or conversation would move between neuroscience and then looking at what's actually happening
at an atomic level, so astrophysics to complexity science for how to put it together for deeper
underlying, you know, philosophy around reductionism and mind-brain interaction.
That was just one conversation called, how do we go about adequately understanding the
nature of reality?
And so when what that means in terms of overarching perspective is whether we're talking about
social issues or environmental issues or human biology issues, one of the core things that
I think that we are not doing adequately currently is understanding all the various areas of
interconnectedness and layers of cause and effect.
So when we're dealing with climate change and we're talking about carbon taxes or whatever
kind of approaches for climate change that don't get to fundamentally what all really
has to happen to address not emitting greenhouse gases and sequestering them adequately.
And so you look at why is sequestration decreased of what are all the ways that we cause deforestation,
damage to, you know, any kind of photosynthesis on land, on in water, dead zones and oceans.
And you think about all of the different kinds of agricultural fluence and industrial fluence
that are involved, the economic drivers of it, the underlying economic drivers underneath
the energy economy and an adequate solution involves a lot of things.
And so we mostly do kind of a symptomatic approach that doesn't deal with the whole
causal taxonomy.
And that's the same in medicine.
And so this is actually very interesting when we talk about why the systems have to evolve
is when we have a for profit medical system where ultimately patients are customers and
the, you know, maximizing the lifetime value of patients means maximizing lifetime value
of customers, which is something that when you're doing the numbers of running a business
as an automatic kind of calculation, if we can figure out how to address symptoms, there's
obviously more duration in that profit stream than preventing things from happening at all
or quick cures are.
So it's like, where do the R&D budgets even go?
There's where there is fiscal incentive for the wrong things where you have some of the
most powerful organizations in the world have their own ongoing existence and the health
well being of everyone not aligned.
And, you know, from an economic perspective, it's not their fault as organizations.
It's a structural issue where you can say theory of markets really shouldn't apply to medicine.
They have shareholders to please and all this.
So now you were mentioning ways that people at home will be able to monitor their own blood
sugar and their own health and like devices that will tell you what's in your food.
So what's the, you know, I've seen a lot of different devices that do a lot of different
things, but what's the most comprehensive device that if I had one device that would do everything,
is this has this been invented?
Is it being invented?
I think I saw a Kickstarter campaign of a device that looked like it was going to do this.
So like read your palm or like took a reading from some skin on your palm or something.
And like, well, no, this is one of the really big X prizes right now is for the tricorder devices
and the tricorder medical devices are both for being able to do, you know, medical diagnostics
in rural places where you don't otherwise have access to formal medical diagnostics,
but it's also for at home diagnosis and assessment.
The, the one that I think is probably most promising so far is the gene radar technology.
It's at least one of the best ones that I need to go and group from nano bios and have developed,
which has the ability to look at pathogens specifically with better accuracy than PCR
analysis, but without needing to draw blood just on the drop of blood.
And that and then they'll be able to move beyond pathogens, most likely the key is moving from
needing chemical reagents to study the blood to actually being able to study the blood on a chip.
So you can study many more things accurately with much less blood and much less turnaround
time and processing involved. I think there are metabolomic solutions for sweat for urine,
et cetera, that can move from chemical reagents to processing on chips that are emerging,
that are going to be really transformational. And one of the areas that I personally have
a lot of belief in that's in the very early stages is laser interferometry for being able to
actually just bind beams of light into the, you know, through the scan into the blood.
And then based on the chemistry of the blood, you get different diffraction patterns. You can
read the diffraction patterns. And as we learn the diffraction patterns of more molecules,
we could theoretically get the ability to assess almost everything that's happening in the blood
in real time. And you can start to imagine what it means to have continuous data on an individual
person processing in real time on the cloud, where we can really separate and across a huge
number of biometrics where we can really separate correlation and causation because we can see which
things change first. And so we can get big data on a single person and then also across many people
and start to get very early predictive analysis for things and start moving towards really customized
personalized medicine. It makes sound like it's like it's instrumental overkill,
but Daniel makes a very good point. I asked this question, I have a bunch of questions
that I like to ask people that nobody ever gets right. And one of them I ask is,
how many chemical reactions are happening in your body? You can pick whatever period of time,
but if I say per second, nobody ever gets it. Like some people say 10, some people say 100,
but the real answer is basically there are a trillion chemical reactions per second.
Yeah, it's, you know, we don't know how to estimate this appropriately. And every time we think we do,
we have another discovery not that long after where it goes up by some orders of magnitude,
but a trillion metabolic functions per second per cell is a current reasonable estimate.
And then when you start thinking about, you know, time synchrony across those,
and then when you start thinking about subchemical, right, information processing,
that might be happening. It's a lot of information. And that's one of the things
that really we have to understand about human physiology is that it's a self organizing complex
system. And complex systems and complicated systems are very different. Complicated systems
like a circuit board are not self organizing, they are designed from the outside, they're
not fundamentally adaptive, and they don't have causal closure over all of the input, output,
feedback loops. So self organizing systems are a very unique thing and understanding them actually
requires a different kind of scientific approach where you can't remove the variables, understand
them in isolation, put them back together and think you understand it well, because the variables,
because of combinatorics, they actually do different things in relationships than they do
separately. And the synergy ends up being like, like the cell respirates, even though no molecules
that make up the cell respirate on their own, it's a synergistic emergent property of that
order of complexity. And so a reductionist approach will give you partial but fundamentally
inadequate information. So when we look at neurodegeneration or any of the kind of complex
diseases, part of it is that we can't split the body up into neurology and oncology and
gastroenterology. And because gastroenterology, we can see gut brain access stuff, microbiome
disorders that are causing neurologic issues, the system is too interconnected to be separated
that way. There are bottom up processes controlled by genetics and top down processes controlled by
neuroendocrine process and conectomics that interact with each other to create these very
dynamic nonlinear equilibriums. We have to kind of understand how all those things work and how
all the different variables operate differently in relationship. And so this is why complexity
science is really necessary for understanding biosystems well. And then when you start thinking
about not just biosystems, but bio psycho environmental systems, where your body is
affecting your psychology, but your psychology is affecting your body in turn through kind of
psycho neuro immunological interactions, and your environment is affecting you and vice versa,
to really understand those needs a different framework for understanding complex causation.
And that's actually what I think is at the core of the future of medicine is, and it's where we
take incurable diseases, where we don't actually understand the cause. And it's because the cause
is not the same thing every time the cause can be very different things for this. So two different
people's MS doesn't necessarily have the same cause, we can find statistical correlations of
specific pathogens like Borrelia burg de ferris, which has some correlation in light
of Mattman's work or certain funguses that have correlation or certain neurotoxins either heavy
metals or organophosphates, or certain genetics or certain kind of nutritional deficiencies.
But the reason that none of them are one for one correlations is because there's a number of
different deviations from homeostasis that can lead to the kinds of pathophysiology and causal
cascades that lead to those tissues and systems having those kinds of disorders. And so we need
an adequate map of how multifactorial complex causal cascades work to then be able to do
differential diagnosis across them to find out exactly what weighted combination of which
factors are involved for which people and then being able to customize both medicine and optimization
for them. Okay, so paint me a picture. What does this look like? Like let's say there's somebody
at their house, they want to figure out what's my health look like and or what caused my MS
and what can I do about it? And so like what what does this machine do? This gene machine,
like what does it do? How do they use it and how does it like paint a picture for us that just
creates like that would create the value proposition that would make us say, oh, I get it, that makes
sense. Okay, so what I'm talking about right now is actually diagnostics, complex system
diagnostics and interpretation based on modeling and based on understanding more complexly causation
in where the causation is not obvious. So causation with a gunshot is obvious, right? There are
certain things where we have very clear causation, then we know how to how to treat it. But when
we're dealing with very delayed causation where some some cause happens and the effect doesn't
happen any obvious way for a long time, that's actually tricky. Or when there are multiple causes
that actually all kind of have a confluence together into an emergent set of phenomena,
that's tricky. Or when something has a cause in one system and then is affecting a different system
or different set of tissues, those require a different understanding of how cause and effect
works. And so I would say like this, think about in order to give you the value prop,
actually need to explain the model a little bit and then it'll make sense. So think about
what our bodies are as these complex adaptive systems, these regulatory systems, they're
basically regulating your temperature and your pH and the levels of so many different
biomarkers and processes. So it's a homeostatic regulatory dynamic regulatory system where
all the different regulatory axes are interacting with each other to make this adaptive system.
And then we can define illness and decreased health in terms of you can think about aging
and decreased health as decreased resilience of the homeostatic system, decreased regulatory
capacity because either there is less range that can be regulated over or less ability to move
disequilibrous movements out of homeostasis back in the homeostasis quicker. And so one of the
things we want to do is to support the underlying homeostatic, not the homeostasis of the system,
the levels of where things are, what your cholesterol levels are. This is less interesting
than supporting the homeostatic capacity of the system to self-regulate so many things in dynamic
equilibrium with each other in relationship to what's actually happening in the environment.
So we want to, and this is, you know, this is how do we support things like cellular energy and,
you know, the ATP production process, how do we support things like autophagy and all of the,
all of the aspects of just how homeostasis happens systemically. And this is kind of,
we can think about as prevention of illness and supporting life extension.
And then we can also think about illness as wherever there's some deviations from homeostasis
that exceed the homeostatic capacity of the system to stay within physiologic ranges.
And then the result is pathophysiology, changed physiologic function that starts
to create pathology. And so when we think about it that way, we say, okay, so before
someone gets a particular autoimmune disease, we can see that certain inflammatory markers
elevate. So we can say inflammation caused it, but something caused the inflammation.
Something caused the hormone imbalance, whatever, those are intermediary markers,
so they're part of a causal cascade, but they're never going to be the tier one
deviation from homeostasis because they're messenger molecules. And so you have to say,
you know, what was their initial stimulus and the initial tier one deviation from homeostasis
for any complex system is always going to be some overarching behavior of the system
or some interface of the system with its environment that's not aligned with what its
regulatory system can process. And so if we say an interaction with the environment, we mean,
if the system, if the body takes in too much of something that it can't process, we call that
toxicity or pathogenicity, or if it takes in not enough of something, we call it deficiency,
these are tier one deviations, or if the system doesn't exercise enough or doesn't sleep enough or
you know, bad posture, those are overarching behaviors of the system that are not aligned with
again, what its homeostatic systems evolved to be able to process and work with. So we can
actually formally identify all of the tier one causes and then we can sub-taxonomize everything
that happens, all the toxins, all the pathogens, all the nutrient deficiencies, all the genetic
disorders, etc. And then we can look at all the causal cascades. And then this gives us the ability
to say these are the things we're looking to do diagnostics. We want to look at both what's
happening at a causal cascade level, inflammatory markers, hormones, etc., and at an initial cause
level, pathogenicity, toxicity, deficiency, etc. Can you still hear me? Yeah, you're doing great.
And then, so this starts to give us a basis for both wellness optimization, prevention,
and then when someone has a specific illness, being able to identify specifically what's going on
and how to reverse those deviations from homeostasis, while non-specifically, generally
increasing system resilience and robustness. So what would that mean from a, you know,
visualize a practical point of view? It means if you actually think about how many different kinds
of medical assessment we have, and just even if I'm even just talking about blood markers and not
looking at electrophysiology or anything else, between all of the rheumatologic assessment and
toxicologic assessment and metabolomics and, you know, all the omics, right? Transcriptomics,
genetics, etc., right now, it's a tremendous amount of blood from different labs that has
to be drawn with a lot of cost and, you know, accuracy issues on many of them. If you start
thinking about what it would mean to be able to get all of that data, and oftentimes you think,
well, that data is not relevant for the kind of condition I have. That's one of the things that
we find that is not the case is that the system is so much more interconnected that in sometimes why
we're saying it's an idiopathic illness, meaning we don't understand, you know, why it's happening,
is because we're not looking at the right types of causes, non-obvious causes. So we want to be able
to look at all of the different things that could be part of a causal cascade that leads to what's
going on and then be able to do data analysis across the whole thing. So imagine in the future
that we start getting the ability to do diagnostics much less expensively, much more easily across
many more biometrics, more accurately, and then be able to interpret what those mean across this
kind of complex causation model. And then the machine you're talking about is actually an AI system,
not like a sentient AI, but a combinatorial AI that can process, you know, a tremendous amount
of data against a causal ontology that's ever-evolving and actually, you know, be able to help doctors,
physicians, you know, whomever identify specifically what's going on in terms of the pathological
cascades and in terms of the kinds of things that could be the upline causes of those pathological
cascades and then be able to reference for every pathway that's involved what the best
current therapeutic technologies are and then what the right order of operations
and the right synergy of those technologies are to actually be able to address what's going on for
someone. Well, that sounds like the most complicated thing I've ever heard in my life.
Dr. House at Scale. So I'm glad you're working on this instead of me.
So what a really good diagnostician does is they do this, they factor
thinking through causation more complexly. It's just it's beyond what any individual human can do
and we want it to be widely available. And so that can be done through technology.
Yeah, that's great. Do you consider yourself a human?
Or do you consider yourself technology?
I think that's a false dichotomy.
You can be both. Okay, so talking about causation, one of the things that I've explored is
illness happening in the body as a sign, right? We've all the stories of somebody gets cancer
and then they quit their job and go live their life purpose and then forget about the cancer.
Cancer goes into remission and it's kind of like it was a wake-up call, right?
So and I know that a part of your genius cross contextualizing your genius
is you've got the scientific background and then you've also got the shamanic background
and the philosophy. And so what are your thoughts on the difference between biomarkers and chemicals
and the environment creating an illness and the mind, the psychosomatic reasons that
the markers in our dreams that are here to wake us up or remind us to pay attention to
our body? What are your thoughts on all that?
Well, let's talk about the environment and the psyche because they're both very interesting
things that are not well enough addressed and how we think of medicine usually. So on the environment
side, if we have agricultural processes where the deplete topsoil and deplete trace minerals
and topsoil, so no matter what people are eating and if they're eating well, they are getting decreased
trace mineral density from an evolutionary environment, factoring the trace minerals in the
soil, factoring the microbiome in the soil, factoring the hybridized seeds, so many things.
Real quick, just on this topic, do GMOs contribute to loss of the nutrients?
And what do you think about that, just as a quick aside?
I wouldn't address it as a whole category. I would say we could get into each one, but
yes, that is a real potential. And it's not just GMOs, even hybridizing crops
effects. As we're breeding for more sugar or more fruiting, we're also breeding for less
of some things. It might have been very relevant parts of our evolutionary
relationship with those plants, but as you look at having something like mineral and microbiome
deficiency ubiquitously in mass, or then you look at environmental toxicity, everything from the
environment of inside my house, where my paint and my flooring all have high VOC output, volatile
organic compound output, where most of those VOCs are either carcinogens or neurotoxins or
endocrine disruptors. And then you go outside, and whether we're talking about from coal plants or
from cars, or from so many sources, the ubiquitous kinds of environmental toxicity, where we can run
mother's breast milk, run toxicology on the United States and find hundreds of distinct
petrochemicals in mother's breast milk. And you think about what's happening to the babies that
are evolving in that. And that's not just people who live in the center of industrial zones, that's
everybody. And so when you think about a world where the way we've done infrastructure has
deficiency and toxicity, and because of things like MRSA and pesticide resistant and fungicide
resistant bugs, weird mutated pathogens in mass, can you, this becomes a deep question,
can you have optimized people in a highly damaged biosphere? And no, right? So the future of medicine
has to be the future of everything too. It's good. And so we haven't even spoke to the psychology
side yet, which is individual, but it's also systemic. If you have a macro economy where
people are fundamentally stressed out about money and surviving, and you're asking what's
the effect of psychology and stress on health, it's significant, right? There's so many kinds of
degenerative disease. So as part of the future of health care, a better macroeconomic system
has to be. If you have a macroeconomic system, you know, political systems that cause war,
war is not good for health. And neither is in neither is industrial process that causes
environmental externality, because there is no externality on a tiny biosphere floating
throughout our space where everything is interconnected with everything else. And so
ultimately the future of medicine, what we're talking about is the future of human wellness,
is that we are fundamentally interconnected with everything else happening on the biosphere and
any place where we're externalizing harm, it's not really external. We just aren't calculating
the cause and effect of it. So we can talk about the future of medicine from the point of view of
working just on individuals, even if they're within an environment that is actually a cause of
pathology itself, but we have to then go beyond that and say, how do we have the environment?
The mac, you know, individual homes and then also macro environments be a cause for regeneration
rather than for ill health. And it really does involve nothing less than fundamental redesign
of civilization from scratch, from a infrastructure level and a political socioeconomic level.
And that's exactly what we're doing at Rise. That's it. That's good. That's good. Okay, so
I know we don't, I know we don't. Do people's brains and bodies and imbalances and hormones,
neurochemistry, et cetera, affect their psyches? Absolutely. Do imbalances and people's psyches
from the way they allocate meaning and what they focus on and their definition of success and
identity, does that affect their physiology? Absolutely. Can we reduce mind to brain?
It's very problematic to try. But it's kind of a given within the way we think about science,
because science is a philosophic system. It's a method of knowing, right? It's an epistemology,
but it's based on measuring stuff. So it can only understand measurable third person stuff.
And consciousness is not independently measurable third person stuff. It's first person stuff.
And so it's fundamentally outside the domain of science. So all science can do is measure the
neural correlates of consciousness. What is someone's EEG doing when they describe their
experiencing something? But that might be a neural correlate. And there's a lot that we need to say
about how to even infer properly. But that's not first person experience, right? And so we
have a deeper philosophic conversation around, ultimately, what is the nature of the real? Does
physicality emerge from consciousness? Does consciousness emerge from complex neural networks?
Do they co-arise in some kind of structured panpsychism? But what we can say without getting
into all that right now is that people can do different things psychologically that affect
their health. And the placebo study is a classic example, right? The placebo is thinking they're
going to get well and feeling correspondingly less worried and more hopeful, and then getting some
degree of improvement symptomologically or pathophysiologically. And then you're like,
but if the body's trying to optimize health all the time, why wouldn't it have done that anyways?
And it's because the chemicals that mediate feeling. That's a great question.
Yeah, but it's because if you feel shitty, anxious, angry, whatever, that emotion is neurochemically
and hormonally mediated. And what just happens to be very interesting is that most of those
emotions are sympathetically mediated, which actually does not support the regenerative
processes of the body. And when someone relaxes, feels more hopeful and then feels better,
that can support parasympathetic nervous system engagement and physiologic regeneration. And
there's there's a lot of actual physiologic pathways that are involved in people's emotional
and cognitive experience. And so this is why I would say psychology by itself is not adequate
because someone can have physiologic disorders that they're not going to psychotherapy away
or meditate away. And medicine by itself is not adequate because the complexity of the information
processing that's happening inside of someone's consciousness is not reducible to gross neuro
chemicals. Great answer. Great answer. Did we lose Alex? Alex? Hey there, buddy. We lost him.
Anyway, you and I are still here. And I'm in a Costa Rica hurricane. He's on a landline in Santa
Monica. So my question to you. So I know we've got to go here in a few minutes. I want to hear,
I want to hear two things. I want to hear quickly about your, your sleep habits. I, I, I thought
about and I tried a long time ago to do polyphasic sleep. It sounds like that's not quite what you're
doing. You just have a, is it just a backward sleep cycle? Yeah, this is nothing particularly
interesting. There are kind of sleep hacking techniques like polyphasic that some people
do that I have done in the past. But I have since the earliest I can remember in childhood
been nocturnally oriented. And while I have forced that schedule into a diurnal schedule for
world purposes a number of times, it always is more natural for me to be on a nocturnal schedule.
And my, my actual clarity of thinking and productivity and all like that is best during
the quietest hours. And so I, it seems that there, some of it just might be preference,
but it also seems that there might be some groups of people who for whatever reasons
have different circadian rhythms. Wow. That's so cool. I mean, I, I've thought about this and
you know, especially when I was looking at a polyphasic sleep, like there's nobody texting you,
calling you, messaging you, like my phone's blowing up the whole, the whole day when I'm
the whole during the day, right? And so at night, you just get the focus and,
and work your magic without the distractions. This is why I love it. I have actually been here
the whole time. I, we are using a new system and I couldn't find the unmute button. So I finally
found it. Daniel, I had a question for you. Yeah. How can, how can I get smarter?
Well, smarter is a word I would want to dive into a little bit, whether you mean
increase short-term memory or long-term memory or speed of memory or focus or attention or more
knowledge or all every way that I can get smarter by every measure. I want to do that.
Yeah. So this is, this is the neurohacking space, right? And so there are chemical approaches.
The whole field of no tropics and brain nutrients and smart drugs are all about exactly this, how
to be able to hack biochemistry and neurochemistry for affecting cognition, either as a whole or
very specific cognitive processes. There's also, you know, TDCS, TMS, different forms of, you know,
transcranial stimulation that people use, transcranial lasers, try and hyperclock ATP in
particular regions of their brain. There are microbiome solutions to kind of increase
normal healthy neurotransmitter output that might be decreased in their gut. So there's a lot of like,
I would say biochemical solutions. There are future solutions that are not available yet,
but in process, that are things like, you know, CRISPR genomic solutions that actually
change genetic predispositions towards brain function. There's obviously brain, computer
interface technologies in process. And this is all kinds of things on the physiologic side.
And then on the information processing kind of on the software side,
there's a lot one can do there. So I would say
the more one learns about any domain and consciously thinks about the cross applicability of that,
like why is this domain the way that it is? Thinking through everything else you know,
it does this commensurate with the rest of my knowledge, making an interconnected database
where you don't have arbitrary subject delineations, apply what you know from thermodynamics to
biologic systems and gain interesting insights, right, from different kinds of systems. And then
the larger just net database of knowledge you have and the more interconnected that
knowledge set is, the more kind of insights you will have for lateral application to any new
topic that comes when you think about even if I don't know this topic, well, I know a lot about
universe surrounding that topic that can have cross applicability. And then also frameworks
for thinking. So studying systems thinking and things like integral methodology and complexity
and critical thinking, where one actually has better abilities to vet if things are true or not
quickly, to know all the perspectives necessary to assess a particular situation well and then
how to synthesize those perspectives, the, you know, actually studying epistemology, studying the
processes of thinking and knowing is very useful. Wow. Cool. So now with your, thank you very much.
Now I didn't say there the basics are make sure you sleep enough because you'll lose
cognitive ability very quickly. If you're not sleeping enough, make sure that you eat well,
make sure that you exercise, make sure that your blood sugar is stable. All of the basics
of a healthy physiology so that you actually have healthy brain and information processing.
Make sure that you, you know, meditation and the right kinds of psychotherapy and life that you
can actually focus well. And that you have a brain that is not over anxious or overstressed out.
You know, these, these are all different things. So, you know, what we're actually working to do
at Neurohacker Collective is kind of vet all of the different types of neuro technology that can
help cognitive optimization. And on the physiologic side and on the learning and, you know, psychological
side, vet all of the processes, techniques, technologies and say which ones move what kinds of
metrics for what kinds of people involving what kinds of pathways. And then once vetting those,
how do we synthesize all of those partial answers to be able to then make available the,
the best of human knowledge with progressively more personalization and customization
to each person. So, you know, to just make it kind of simple, say someone was asking,
asking about how to become smarter is a very broad thing. We could kind of dive into specific
subsets, but for illustration purposes, say someone wants to address anxiety.
Well, how much of their anxiety is physiogenic and how much is psychogenic? And then of the
psychogenic stuff, if someone was not anxious as a kid and then they had kind of acute adult trauma
that led to PTSD or someone that was always anxious from kind of early childhood attachment
theoretic structures, even though those are both psychogenic, they, they actually don't lend themselves
equally well to the same kinds of psychotherapy. And on the physiogenic side, anxiety from a gut
brain access disorder that needs microbiome processing or from mild head injury or from a
genetic methylation disorder or from excitotoxicity from neurotoxins. Like again, those are all real
causes of pathology and they need addressed differently. So, we can just say like, I've
got a hammer, so everybody is a nail. Everyone should do breathing techniques. So, they should
all do vipassana or they should all take a benzodiazepine and we'll get some effect.
Everybody on a bell curve, if you want to put everybody on the front end of a customized bell
curve, we have to be able to assess what are all the things that could be involved and what
they're looking for. How do we assess what's actually going on for them and see where the
greatest lift is going to occur? Okay, so now, so your product, qualia, is that how you say it?
Yeah. I'm so excited to get my first shipment. How does this, how does this actually affect the
brain and what, like, what are some things that people notice when they first start taking it?
Like, what are some things that I have to look forward to?
So, qualia is the first product that neurohacker collective as an organization has
made available recently, brought to the market. We have many other products in the kind of
biochemical, nutraceutical space that are in development, not currently on the market,
including more personalized versions of qualia. And then also things in other areas of neurotech.
But this was something that we was able to address a specific need we were interested in, which is
when you see that there are something like $15 billion a year in energy drink sales
and something like estimated $5 billion last year in off-label,
Adderall sales for people using it as a smart drug, so many other smart drugs like that,
and this kind of exponential rise of desire for increased productivity in a world where
people feel both more demand and more things competing for their attention and damaging their
focus. And you either have kind of some vitamin herbal solutions that don't really do anything
obvious for people, or you have things like some of these, you know, either excessive amounts of
stimulant or off-label pharmaceuticals that can do something, but oftentimes it's a very
partial result with pretty meaningful side effects. We wanted to see can we actually increase
elements of cognitive capacity neurochemically in a way that had a much more broad set of
cognitive benefits, where we were not just increasing focus through a dopamine or
joint process, but we were addressing attention span and concentration and speed of memory and
verbal fluency and digit span, and you know, all of the different sub aspects of cognitive
capability along with the emotional traits that need to come along, like emotional resilience and
you know, the kind of drive necessary to follow through and not procrastinate. So we were looking
at kind of cognitively modeling. When people want to take, when people are seeking cognitive
enhancement, what are they really seeking, and they're seeking the ability to go into
creative productive flow states where their full cognitive capacity is available,
more readily being able to go into those states. So we modeled what are those states from a
cognitive point of view, and then we looked at what are all of the physiologic systems that
mediate each of those functions that we know of, and what can we do to support and enhance
the function of those underlying systems. And so qualia was, you know, a number of years of
refinement and development specifically intended to do that, to support the underlying systems
that mediate those kind of creative productive flow states and to do so in a way that is not
only causing some immediate effect, but it's also in the, it's supporting the body's own
regulatory processes rather than overriding them so that rather than leading to dependency,
it's leading to increased system resilience even after someone stops using it.
Great. Cool. It must feel really good to having been working on this for so long to have it
complete and people benefiting from it already. I've heard a lot about it.
What are some of the other things that you're working on that we can look forward to?
If you can talk about it.
The next handful of things that are likely able to come out are going to be
more personalized versions of qualia where people are, you know, seeking a similar goal, right?
They're seeking increased cognitive clarity and availability to create great work,
you know, while having good states of human experience, but being able to address more
different kinds of physiology types. So we're working on customization, which doing that at
scale is tricky, but we're getting close. And we're also working on support for
other goals like sleep and calmness and fun, weirder things like meditation and lucid dreaming
support. Oh yeah. Cool. Let's do that. I'll take one of those too. Thank you.
Yeah. I mean, we have to separate what is interesting scientifically and what is doable
from a regulatory process. So, you know, there's a tremendous body of data supporting psychedelic
assisted psychotherapy is actually being uniquely capable of addressing certain kinds of issues
more quickly than anything else. And it's very silly that we still have the regulatory process
around it. We do it is not good law, but obviously we have to work in what we can do both from a
scientific and regulatory point of view. Daniel, I wish we could talk longer. This is almost all
the time we have. I have one more question for you. Yeah. We end each show in a similar way.
We asked our guests to give our listeners three things that they can do related to the show. So
in your case, what are three ways that people can improve their intelligence, their health,
or their ability to engage in citizen science, perhaps one of each?
Okay. So a good way to improve your health and intelligence that this is not going to be novel,
but hopefully if we've developed any rapport over the conversation, I can add to what one
knows about it is sleep well and enough. It's the more we study sleep, the more
profound its effects on cognition and physiology are memory consolidation is almost exclusively
happening during slow wave sleep, delta sleep. And if someone's not getting enough
slow wave sleep, not only are there physiologic effects and the body does so much of its
antioxidant and anti-implementation and etc worked in, but memory consolidation is very limited.
How much is enough sleep? How do we know? This is genetically different for different people
and then even for the same people, if they have things going on with their physiology or how much
they're working out or what their stress loads are, it'll all be different. For most people,
this is in the eight hours of uninterrupted sleep that's ideal. Some people need less than that and
if someone has something going on with their physiology or they're under a lot of strain,
working out very hard, they might need more than that. Age is a factor, but a way that you can know
is that you wake up feeling refreshed and have good energy throughout the day.
And if you have to wake up to an alarm still tired and are tired throughout the day,
then there might be other things going on as well, but
we would like to see the people not waking up to an alarm tired. And then especially
stimulants like caffeine are not universally bad for people. There's actually good research
showing that in many cases they're healthy and longevity supporting, but using stimulants in
place of sleep is bad for you. And this is what makes adrenal burnout. And so here's one thing
I would say for intelligence and psychological well-being and health and everything is
reprioritized sleep. So that's one. Two, there are so many things I could say here, but
study how to learn. I would say read a book on systems theory, read some stuff on complexity,
read some things on epistemology, play with integral philosophy, and see if I would say
for every hour invested in learning how to learn, then everything else that you're learning is working
through better frameworks. And it has a over time exponential positive. So I'll call that number
two. Okay. And also for integral philosophy, do you recommend Ken Wilbur as the guy, the go-to guy?
That's the starting point. And this is not that someone's necessarily going to be called to
all of it or agree with all of it. Ken did a major synthesis work. The quadrants came from
Jurgen Habermas. The Holons came from Arthur Kessler. Developmental psychology came from
Colberg and Graves and so many people. So he identified really good metathories or meaningful,
at least insightful metathories and brought a number of them together to be able to look at
things like human development. And so it's an insightful place to look at a number of
meaningful metathories together. And a brief history of everything is a good lay introduction
to it. And then one can go further in different places. And there will be some stuff that sounds
kind of mystical pseudoscience. And that's okay. I would again, just look at the underlying
philosophic structures. And maybe number three. Now, I will say if someone is learning how to
learn, but they're not actually learning content, it won't work. You also then have to be learning
content, like whatever field you're passionate about, study them more, allocate more of your life
to studying them. And then as you're studying them, you actually get an example of applying those
thinking models. And so it's the combination of those that makes a huge difference. And then number
three, I would say, and, you know, just a straight kind of plug for what we're doing.
Go check out the website. Yeah, I mean, if quality calls to you, then by all means,
check it out. And either way, there's a lot of information on neurohacker.com and every day,
more is getting up there about how cognition works and the chemistry that affects it. And
over the next little while we're planning on robusting that to be a very meaningful
knowledge source for people. So awesome. Cool. So if you're if you're able to,
so I'm pulling up a bunch of new tabs on my on my desktop as you're throwing out all these examples
of things to study, if you were to recommend one book like your all time favorite book that
just blew you away, that was also consumable for the average person, what would that be?
It's an impossible question. Pick a book, any book.
It's like asking what my favorite nutrient is where you can dive nutrient deficiency across
so many different nutrients. I don't think it's that serious.
But the first book that popped to mind is critical path by Buck, Mr. Fuller.
Oh, great. Okay. Cool.
All right. I'm gonna get it on my Kindle. So thank you very much, Daniel Schmockdenberger of the
Neurohacker Collective. This is our show. And Ben, I admire your courage going ahead with the show,
even with a hurricane, the very first landfall of a hurricane on Costa Rica since 1851.
So this is a historic show. And I think it's very fun that we've done it.
I've really enjoyed this. I learned a lot of people listening.
We'll get something tremendous out of it. Thank you both. Good night.
Thank you, everybody. Have a good one.
