Hello, and welcome to the Psychology Podcast with Dr. Scott Barry Coffman, where we give
you insights into the mind, brain, behavior, and creativity.
Each episode will feature a new guest who will stimulate your mind and give you a greater
understanding of yourself, others, and the world we live in.
Hopefully, we'll also provide a glimpse into human possibility.
Thanks for listening and enjoy the podcast!
Daniel, it's so great to have you on the show today.
I'm happy to be here.
Thanks for having me.
A lot of things we can talk about.
You're a very, very interesting guy, which is why I wanted to get you on this show.
I knew there was lots of areas that we could discuss.
I'd like to first start talking a little bit about your childhood, because you had a very
interesting educational path.
Isn't that right?
Or a different educational path?
Different and interesting.
Yeah, both.
Yeah, tell me a little bit about it and how you saw the education system.
Yeah, I didn't know much about the education system, because I wasn't exposed to it.
I was home taught growing up, and I went to public school for a very brief period of few
times as an experiment and a few different private schools, but the vast majority of
my childhood education was home schooled.
The reason was my parents were kind of educational philosophers and were interested to see what
would happen if a kid didn't have any fixed curriculum and was just exposed to all the
things they could be exposed to, and then their interests were facilitated.
So it was a very kind of constructivist idea.
So that was it.
I didn't have a certain amount of social studies and geography and math and handwriting
in English.
It really was just a facilitation of questions and fascination and interest.
So the few times that I did go to school, there were obviously gaps in knowledge that
everyone else was learning.
Like, I had never shown much interest growing up in American history and understanding states
and capitals and that kind of thing.
There were areas where I was telling things that were well outside of the scope of anything
that would normally be touched in school.
And so it didn't translate very well.
It was, of course, wonderful about it, was I got to not only go very deep in the areas
that I had innate interest, but my actual interest in life itself was fostered by having
the interesting topics supported and not being forced to focus on stuff that was uninteresting.
Yes, it sounds like you are a pretty curious person and you got a chance to actually run
with that as opposed to being held back by that.
Yeah, the term curious person and child are synonymous.
That's a good point.
That's a good point.
You do see individual differences, though, in curiosity and maybe that is partly environmental
supportive and as well as, I think, genetics do play a role in terms of dopamine production
and their genes that code for dopamine.
But I think that that's a good point.
In a lot of ways, from an evolutionary perspective, you need curiosity, right?
You need to adapt.
I mean, if you have a child who's not going to explore their environment at all, the child
will not be able to adapt at all.
What do you study in college?
I study the math, physics, philosophy and undergrad, psychology, more philosophy in
graduate school, but then getting into ecology, biology, medicine, complex systems.
Most of that wasn't in a formal academic situation.
It was in independent studies and research environments.
For instance, medicine was working with some different diagnostic laboratories, working
with medical doctors and clinics on complex cases and working to try and find insights
that were outside of the scope of what we currently had insights on.
What was the college you went to?
Undergrad was the Marish University.
In what?
Marish University.
Where's that located?
It's in Iowa, Fairfield, Iowa.
It was a very unique school that was focused on studying the sciences with a deeper thought
process around subject-object relationship.
Cool.
When did you start to think about putting together this neurohacker collective?
How did that come about?
Neurohacker is a relatively recent project.
We started it about three years ago.
I have gotten into integrative medicine and diagnostic medicine, therapeutic medicine,
especially for cases that both alphathic and integrative medicine didn't have adequate
solutions yet, partially because of my own diagnosed illnesses that didn't have adequate
solutions that I had to work on and some of which had neurodegenerative components.
I got deep into understanding how neuroregulatory systems work, how dysfunction works.
Because there weren't any adequate solutions offered anywhere, of course, the only meaningful
option was to see if novel insights can be generated by approaching it in a different
way.
I started applying cybernetic theory.
How do the bottom-up and top-down regulatory systems in the human organism work and whole
systems in complexity theory?
How do all of the different omics and all of the different body systems interact and
have cascade effects and et cetera?
It ended up leading to a set of hypotheses about how health works, how aging works and
how illness works, and then how illness in a case like mine could have worked led to
me being able to do some kind of unique research diagnostics, find things out that traditional
medicine had not, that led to me actually being able to treat and reverse the conditions
I had that were reverse autoimmune antibodies, reverse things that are not usually medically
thought of as reversible, which led to me then doing that with a lot of other people
who had worked with various integrative doctors who had also what are traditionally deemed
as uncurable cases and getting to see that we could reliably reverse different kinds
of pathology.
Then this was very meaningful and that we could address not only physical pathology,
but meaningfully affect people's cognitive and psychological function because with chronic
disease, with autoimmune and neurodegenerate, people's cognitive capacity and their emotional
status is always effective and it's effective in ways that have to be supported for them
to be able to do what it takes to actually do the rest of the treatments, to have the
focus drive, et cetera, to do generally a meaningful amount of work.
That's what really led into an integrative approach to the future of psychopharmacology,
urban or immunology psychiatry, and then starting to look at not just addressing issues to come
up to baseline, but also could we enhance baseline?
This is kind of the intersection with biologic transhumanism.
Can we do fundamental biooptimization?
That then intersected with the other think tank work I had been doing while I was working
in complex systems, which is how do we support the major transitions and civilization writ
that need to happen for environmental sustainability, for major macro issues that we're addressing,
and there's economic shifts, there's governance shifts, there's infrastructure and technology
shifts that have to happen, but there's also recognizing that all of the major issues that
we're wanting to address are human behavior mediated, and all of the new capacities we're
wanting to bring about are also going to be human behavior mediated, so then looking at
the human physiological and psychological predispositions for more omni-considerate
or shittier behavior, and what can we do to be able to predispose on the physiology side,
predispose human hardware towards increased complexity of thinking, perspective taking
capacity and perspective synthesis capacity, emotional resilience, et cetera, all the things
that would decrease the predisposition for harm externalizing behavior and increase the
predisposition and capacity for omni-considerate behavior. What do you think are some of the
aspects of human nature that get in the way of compassion and kindness? What are some of the
biggest blocks? It's going to be a very deep question that we're probably going to go into
a meaningful rabbit hole if we do, because the topic of human nature versus how that nature
is expressed is a very deep one. What is human nature? If by that we mean genetics, who cares,
because genetic expression ends up changing it radically, our genetics largely predispose
neuroplasticity so we can be radically mimetic creatures. If by nature we mean that, which is
inexorably unchangeable, well that whole concept is nonsense in a genetic engineering world.
One of the things I love about CRISPR, even though I actually don't think we're nearly as close to
being able to utilize CRISPR safely as we think we are, but one of the things I love about it as
a thought experiment is as soon as we are now realistically thinking about being able to change
the genome, our whole idea of nature has to change conceptually. It's a great thought experiment to
say well, even if we did evolve to have inexorable competitive or whatever traits, now do we want
to keep those or not? When you have that level of exponential tech where you can change the
connectome, change the genome, the level of existentialism and ethics to say what is a
desirable set of traits becomes for fun, right? You have to address it and of course science
doesn't do desirable, right? It does what is not what evolves historically. So how do we actually
make a scientifically commensurate ethics and existentialism as part of the core of our work?
But if I was to just fast forward over all of the subtleties of it and say what do I think are the
aspects of human nature that are inexorably problematic? I would say none. I think there's a
lot of aspects of human nature that lead to problems when the right conditioning is there,
but I think other sets of conditioning lead to fundamentally different expressions of that same
nature. And so there is a propensity for human agency or the impulse to self-actualize if that is
growing up in the context of zero sum games and finite games from a game theoretic perspective
that can look like lack of empathy, pathological competition, selfishness. If you're growing up
in the context and you're neuroplastically wiring in the context of positive sum games where
winning doesn't require others losing, which then requires numbing to the pain of others losing,
i.e. shutting off empathy. And in infinite games where you are not winning to win but you're
winning to keep playing, right? What does it mean to keep playing so you can't externalize harm?
When you change the game's theoretic constructs, I think the fundamental impulse to agency,
self-expression and actualization and the fundamental impulse to communion, connecting
with others, can be simultaneously optimized without any fundamental dichotomy. So the problems
are at a game theoretic level, which means an economic, worldview, memetic, structural level,
not a, which in effect, of course, genetic expression, but are not fundamentally at a
genetic expression level. Sure. I definitely hear what you're saying, and as you know, I'm a big fan
of Abraham Hamaslow's thinking, and you just use the term self-actualization. And you know,
when he talked about is man fundamentally good or bad, he says he thinks we're neutral. And you
know, it just depends on what are the sort of conditions that are getting what needs met and
what needs not met. So I do like to think of it from a needs perspective. It looks like you kind
of would agree with that sort of perspective of neutrality in a way, or what part of the human
condition to want to highlight. I think that saying neutral is fair, meaning we can have an
environment, say we go to some part of North Africa where female genital mutilation is ubiquitous,
or we go to the dark ages for burning women as witches was ubiquitous, we can now look at that
from outside or retrospective as a like ubiquitous insanity, right, of the whole population. They
were like infected with a psychopathologic set of means. When we look today at the fact that
we externalize harm to the environment with almost every single action we do, and we still think
that war is a reasonable solution to differences, and we step over homeless people where we go get
more shit, future generations will see us as ubiquitously insane, psychopathologic, memetically.
I'm sure of that. Yeah. And yet, of course, when anyone's in there, ubiquitous psychopathology,
it's just called normal. So we obviously have the possibility for a level of terrible shit,
like scientifically optimized torture that no other animal had. We also have the capacity for
levels of insight and rapture and charity and selflessness and other animals. I mean, we're
where these just radical potential capacities, but I wouldn't say we're neutral because universe
is neutral. The nature of evolution itself is that it selects for more orderly complexity that has
new emergent properties, and it doesn't select for the opposite. There is a macro-tilos directionality
to evolution that goes from non-life to life, from prokaryote to eukaryote, from plant to
neurology, from reptilian, mammalian, et cetera. So life isn't neutral. Change is moving in an
orderly complexity direction. And with humans right now, look, we're at this very interesting
place where we can actually understand that because of our capacity for abstraction and choose to
participate with it, and our technological capacity is big enough that if we don't, we'll
self-destruct. And so we're at a very unique point right now at the beginning of the escape
philosophy on exponential tech, where we have existential tech, right? Nuke was the beginning,
but now it's becoming decentralized existential tech. So we will either have the negative traits
that we have had for a long time self-destruct us, or we will emerge into fundamentally net
positive traits, because it's the only way to make it through. So this is cool. So we do have
existential tech, and you're in a lot of ways developing the opposite of that. What do you
call that? What's the opposite of existential tech? Technology that enhances us in a way that
makes us more pro-social and cooperative. What is that called? You could call it omniconsider tech.
Omniconsideration is a term that you could apply at different scales. When we're thinking about
working in human biology, medicine, well-being, omniconsideration would mean what are all the
pathways that are affected by this chemical or this therapy other than the ones that we're intentionally
affecting, which are usually what we call side effects? And how can we be considered across
the entire system, including what will the effects be in the future? Are we down-regulating an
internal regulatory system, or are we up-regulating its capacity? So omniconsiderate at the level of
human physiology would be just factoring all the externalities progressively better. Omniconsiderate
at the level of the environment would be factoring all the externalities of what affects the whole
supply chain, the environment, right? Omniconsiderate at the top level is recognizing that we are not
really separate parts that can think of our own advantage and disadvantage and win-lose game
separately, but we inner-effect each other powerfully enough, and we inner-effect the biosphere
powerfully enough that we are all really emergent properties of the biosphere, emergent properties
of the whole. So we have to think about the balance sheet of the whole thing, right, of
civilization and the whole. How do we support that? That's omniconsideration applied to tech and
choice-making writ large. We had Dan Siegel on this podcast where we had a very similar conversation
about the interconnectedness of all life forms, but the thing is, I mean, it must be frustrating.
You must be frustrated. I mean, you see something, you kind of see a truth that I think you're
quite right. I think a lot of people take this view as well. I think a lot of Buddhists take that
view and kind of see that, but there's so much in the world of people that refuse to see that view.
I mean, the American politics right now is, you know, one example of this polarization seems to be
hot right now, you know, for lack of a better word. And so it must be really frustrating. And
what do you think we can do to convince people on the level of which they will be receptive to it?
How can we have them see that?
For me, my question is slightly differently. American politics isn't just dysfunctional and
sproken, right? It was breaking for some time. And last election, we got to see the Republican
Party not put forward good qualified candidates. The Democratic Party take people's favorite
candidate and not support them and support someone who is highly unfavored. We got to see
the two party system as a whole breakdown. Like it was the beauty of what happened was
what only a few people were really acutely aware of. Almost everybody became acutely aware of,
which is that it is a no longer adequate system for how we do governance. And so we see this kind
of increasing chaos there, not just in the US, but with Brexit, with issues in Korea, with issues in
Russia, like around the world, we can see a movement towards nationalism because of problems
with globalism, but also problems with nationalism. Like we didn't have 7 billion people ever, right?
We only hit a billion people in 1815 for the first time after 2.5 million people. And we didn't have
this level of technology per capita, the world as much resource per capita. So we're in a fundamentally
different scenario than we've ever been. And we needed different kind of decision making and
different kind of economics. And it would take us a while to get into it. But in the next 15 years,
30% of all jobs will become obsolete from technological automation. That will be a complete
failure of capitalism unless we do something like a basic income. Because not only, you won't be able
to move people to other jobs because AI will be automating other jobs. So you've got guys like
Elon, who are famous capitalists saying go to basic income, which is not capitalism. And it's
also not long term sustainable. The critiques of it are also warranted. It's on the path to something
that is not Marxist, socialist, capitalist, but fundamentally new stuff that's mediated by new
technological capacities we didn't have in previous levels of economic theory. So I don't think it's
just about motivating people to see something different because the thing that we need to move
to hasn't been seal, right? It's emerging. It's about now actually developing what solutions for
a ongoingly viable civilization in the presence of the technological power we have, what that
actually looks like, and then building that so its demonstrated success creates an exodus from
the failing system to a viable system. I mean, there is a, in terms of the seeing aspect and
seeing different perspectives, I mean something more fundamental. And that's just seeing the value
of not being selfish. There is this innate human tendency that to be selfish. And I mean,
I hear you talking and I hear someone who's making abstract arguments that are not
implication of you and only you. But people, I just see a lot everywhere. I see people who
are making decisions solely based on them and only them. And that's obviously problematic for them
in the long run and the rest of the planet. But it's hard to convince people of that because of
these strong ego protection drives. You noticed that as a kid, they might think about them and
only them. And then maybe as a parent, they think about them and their kids, right? As someone who
stepped deeply into a religious organization, they think about them and their people, whatever
their religious group is, if they become nationalists in the deep way as a citizen, they think about
them and their people as a citizenship or as a race. So this movement from egocentric to ethnocentric
to, right, there's identity of who we are connected to that expands. And the direction of evolution
is more inclusivity than to world-centric and cosmos-centric. How do we recognize more that
we're interconnected with and include that in our circle of care and choice-making? I think the
key thing to recognize right now is, and this is a hard one, but civilization, the main ways that
we have done civilization so far are coming to an end and fundamentally new systems will emerge
if we are to continue making it. If you talk to people who are studying coral and ocean
acidification, dead zones in the ocean, ocean temperature rays, etc., they'll say we have a
very short number of years to make the oceans cooler than they currently are because we're
actually dying slowly at the current temperature and we depend on them, new existing, tidal
flanked them that supports the atmosphere. The same is true across so many, you know,
15 years to 30% of the jobs gone. That means a switch off of capitalism in a very short time
frame where climate change is not a Chinese issue or an Indian issue or a US issue. It is a
human on earth issue and more than human, right? It's like a mammal on earth issue.
So is nuclear disarmament. So are the threats of exponential tech. We've never had a time in the
history of the world where all of our issues were interconnected, global, and existential.
You had like Gandhi dealing with an Indian issue. You had people leaving Britain to go find some
new land to start America. There's no new land to go find somewhere else. You can't leave the
problem and you can't say somebody else can continue to be problematic like any country
continuing in the wrong direction with species extinction or climate change strategies is enough
to take us over the tipping point. So we're at this unique place where our global interconnectedness
and power is such that we either all collectively identify that we're in this together on this
tiny little bitty spaceship called earth floating through this vast cosmos and we upregulate how
we do everything to have no externalities to be omnipositive or we all don't make it together.
Basically, when lose games are over, because we are too big for the playing field, what it takes
to beat the other guy actually destroys the whole playing field. So now we move into either
or lose those games, but it's one of those two, when win or lose lose.
Yeah. In order to have that perspective, you really have to take the long perspective beyond
you have to be able to imagine the planet and care about the planet beyond your very puny 80
years max if you're lucky or 100 years in max perspective. You have to think about beyond
that and I don't think a lot of people really are thinking beyond that.
If you look at the fact that we're looking at geoengineering, which could have radical
consequences to our atmosphere in the world for many generations because we are so desperate about
temperature change in the next few years, the issue with coral is being addressed in the next
five years. It's not eight years. The issue with everyone losing their current jobs is the next 15
years. This is if people have children, before their children grow up, they won't be growing up
into a world anything like the one they grew up in. So you actually don't need very long range
thinking. You just need to pull the ostrich head out of the sand, actually have a look and say,
stop. What does it actually take to close the gap between the trajectory we're on and the one
we need to be into? No, that's fair. There are certainly our issues that we need to be awakened
to within right now. I definitely take that point. We talk about eutropics and define that.
That's going to be a new term to a lot of our listeners, so I don't want to just throw that
word out there. Can you explain what that word means and what people are doing in that space?
Sure. Neutropic is a term that was defined with the development of a molecule called
paracetam. It's the beginning of the research in this area really deeply, which means a chemical
that can enhance some aspect of cognitive capability beyond normal baseline without
meaningfully negative side effects. It's a rough definition, but that's still generally how it's
used. So some aspect of cognitive enhancement could mean short-term memory or working memory
or long-term memory or focus or concentration or creativity or analysis or synthesis or some
of those things, and hopefully more of them. Beyond baseline means not just taking someone who
has brain fog and getting them back to normal capacity, which say someone has a deficiency
of some key nutrient the brain needs. Supplementing those brain nutrients could get someone back up
to baseline, but it's not going to get them beyond baseline because that's part of the
evolutionary environment that evolved to baseline. These are going to be things that are modulating,
some aspect of normal physiology. Typically, when you modify normal physiology,
there is some trade-off effect that occurs where you get some negative somewhere else.
So the idea that you can enhance something beyond baseline and not have a meaningful negative is
this kind of like magical unicorn idea, but it actually seems to be demonstrating itself as
true in a number of areas. And this is in contradiction to both, let's say, brain nutrients
that would just bring you back up to baseline if you were deficient or other forms of medicine
that would bring you back up to baseline if there's some pathophysiology, or say you're
dealing with anti-implementation of brain or inflammation or whatever, or some smart drugs
that can increase some aspect of function beyond baseline but have meaningful consequences,
methamphetamine, Adderall, et cetera. And depending upon someone's physiology,
these have the ability to modify dopamine, modify acetylcholine, whatever it is,
depending upon what kind of drug it is. But typically, those single drug synthetic mechanisms,
they work through some process that overrides the way the body naturally produced that chemical,
that transmitter, which means if you use them long-term, you can get downregulation
and dependence, any addiction. And oftentimes, they're modifying one chemical in a way where
that chemical is getting kind of fixed based on an external stimulus, so you're less adaptive.
And that chemical that was in a dynamic set of ratios with a bunch of other chemicals,
the other chemicals aren't also being affected. So, in other words, you'll get a narrow set of
positive effects. It's only going to affect some aspects of the cognitive function. You can get
side effects and downregulation. So, notropics are the exploration into how to upregulate things
ideally, lastingly, at minimum, without lasting negatives.
Do we have data on the long-term effects of trying notropics, like over the lifespan?
Some. We have caracitam. Starting that field was started, you know, was studied in the early
60s. And so, we now have people who've had multi-year and multi-decade use. And we have
different kinds of both performative tests, as well as, you know, brain scans, blood chemistry,
many other caracitams, many other amputines, different categories of notropics have longer
term data. But we haven't been able to study this field, as well as we would study normal
things in medicine, because our kind of Western modern model for medicine is a disease-based
model, where if there is a disease, we're looking at treating the disease and we get a lot of funding
because we'll be able to get FDA approval and then, you know, sell a drug. So, for enhancement,
where you're not treating a disease, you're not going to be able to get FDA approval. You're not
going to be able to sell it as a drug. And there's a whole set of, like, our whole process of studies
factors, what we call risk-benefit ratio, where you're willing to have some risk in the study,
because there is a disease that if you don't treat, there's a risk of keeping it. And so,
how do we do risk-benefit ratio for enhancement? It's a totally new topic, but it's a topic that's
being explored everywhere in transhumanism right now, brain chip interplants, implants,
you know, gene therapy, etc. And the tropics are one of those fields. So, there's a lot of
quantified self-data, kind of like the early people in steroids who made a lot of mistakes,
but then actually learned a lot about endocrinology that the endocrinologist couldn't learn that
had advanced the field of endocrinology and now made, you know, we have SARMs today that have
the same positive effect with the tiny fraction of the negative effects of the early anabolic
steroids that came about through that kind of citizen science testing, of course, at the cost
to some of the people. No tropics has had a similar curve. And so, we have data, but the data is not
as deep, long-term and robust as we would like it to be and it will be. Yeah, I've been reading a
lot of blogs from people who have been, who are treating themselves as human giddy pigs and trying
lots of things. I have to say, I have to thank you for introducing me to the whole idea of
neutropics. It's a fascinating world and it really has inspired me, I would say, to really
understand what, you know, there clearly are some neutropics that are more well studied than others.
That's for sure. And I don't think they're all in an equal footing. I don't think you would say
they are at all. Now, you created something called qualia, right? This was very well researched. So,
you put together 40 ingredients, is that right? That are synergistic with each other. Yeah,
the current version of qualia has 42 ingredients, but we ran many, many, many different iterations
and versions. So, what's the difference between neutropics and what are called smart drugs,
the difference between neutropics and SSRIs? For instance, what are the difference between those?
So, just to be explicit about something is probably obvious. So, medical disclaimer part,
nothing that we're sharing here is medical advice. I'm not a medical doctor.
Thank you for saying that. Your podcast and me and Neurohacker aren't giving medical advice, etc.
So, this is just general information and anything that one wants to explore regarding medicine,
they should go check with a qualified profession. On that front, SSRIs are
actually a FDA-approved medicine for treating certain diagnosed illnesses, primarily psychiatric
and some other illnesses. And they are one category of psychiatric med. There's other meds that
modify serotonin in nearly opposite ways, SSRIs and tricyclics do different things. There's
dopamine modifying, GABA modifying, etc., kind of things in the field of psychiatry,
psychoparmacology. Smart drugs is a term that generally means a pharmaceutical that is being
used for an off-label purpose, meaning a doctor didn't give somebody a drug for this purpose,
but an off-label purpose for enhancing some aspect of cognitive function. And these will
usually either be narcolepsy drugs that are going to promote wakefulness, the eugeroics,
medaffin-L, armadaffin-L, those kinds of things. They will be sometimes anti-alsimers,
anti-parkinsons kinds of things, al-dopa, and donepazil, things like that. Or psychiatric meds,
well-butrin, aterol, deprenil. And some of these can actually be balancing for certain
people's physiology, depending upon what's out of balance. But most of the time, these will
serve some kind of psychostimulatory role in a way that will lead to long-term instability. And
the risk benefit is deemed worthwhile in the current field of medicine because it's addressing
some real dysfunction for somebody. But in general, I don't recommend much in the way of smart drugs.
And it doesn't mean that there's no positive application of them, but I recommend people
be highly educated before exploring and then explore conservatively.
I appreciate that. What I'm trying to understand is how is the difference between, like, your
qualia, your neutropics in general, they do affect and they do target neurotransmitters.
They do target, like, dopamine production, serotonin production. That's exactly what
SSRIs will target serotonin production. How is that different?
So let's take a look at dopamine, for instance.
It's my favorite. It's my favorite molecule.
Yeah. It is a favorite for everybody. The dopamine opioid axis, right, the kind of
pain, pleasure, reward circuit axis, is one of the deepest evolutionary biology axes in
nervous systems for knowing what to avoid and what to go towards.
And so major aspects of how pain, pleasure, dynamics work, et cetera, are there.
Most OCD addiction is a dysregulation of that system. It's a profoundly deep system,
even if someone also has serotonin or GABA or other things to address.
So dopamine is the first of the catecholamine. So it converts to norepinephrine and then to
epinephrine. And those are all kind of stimulatory neurotransmitters. Dopamine has a lot to do with
focus, attention, concentration, also pattern analysis and pattern recognition,
patternicity. It's why if it's successive, you can get false pattern recognition,
if you think of it as schizophrenia. Applihania.
Yeah. And if it's deficient, you'll have lack of drive, lack of motivation,
as well as inability to recognize patterns adequately. So underperformance, it's not
more or less that we're interested in. It is the adaptiveness, right? It's how the dopamine
process can self-regulate well, because when you're trying to relax and fall asleep, you don't want
to have dopamine pinging, you want it to be able to chill. And when you're trying to concentrate,
you want your body to be able to up-regulate. So one thing is rather than give someone
a dopamine agonist that is going to elevate dopamine kind of no matter what,
we would like to be able to give precursors and then the conversion factors on those precursors
and other things that support your body's dopamine-ergic processes so that it can do its own.
Basically, you think about the body as an internal and endogenous regulatory system.
How do we support that regulatory system to self-regulate better? So with dopamine,
dopamine is you have an essential amino acid phenylalanine that gets converted to tyrosine,
it gets converted to acetyl tyrosine, it gets converted to L-dopa, it gets converted to dopamine,
it then has to travel across a synapse, where it's broken down by chemicals like MAOB,
and then it has to get up-taken in the post-synaptic dopamine receptors. And there's differential
uptake in the D1, D2, D3 receptors that affect how it processes. And it can also be broken down
by hydroxylase and tenorapinephrine, et cetera. So if someone doesn't have enough phenylalanine,
enough tyrosine, if they don't have enough of the phosphorylated version of B6 that helps convert
or vitamin C or copper that helps convert amino acids into L-dopa and then into dopamine,
if their MAOB levels are excessively high or they have hydroxylase is high, these are all
going to lead to imbalances in their own regulatory systems. So we were looking at common regulatory
difficulties and how to be able to support the system to have increased regulatory robustness.
And so therefore, you're less likely to see gross side effects.
Yeah. So think about, when I was talking about the amino acids, the vitamins and minerals that
were necessary as cofactors, plus the synaptic transmission, plus the receptor site modulation,
we're looking at multiple steps across a whole pathway and we're seeing where the rate limiting
effects and how can we support those. And but then that's just dopamine, right? And so
increased concentration without increased working memory ends up being pretty lame.
And so increased working memory is mostly not dopamine law supported, right? It's mostly
mediated by acetylcholine and other transmitters. And the Compti. Yeah. Well, so that now we're
looking at enzymes again. And so if we're wanting to increase short-term and long-term and working
memory and intensity of focusing concentration, but also the capacity for task switching,
what we kind of modeled from a cognitive science perspective, what are all the things we're wanting
to affect that are what people call the synergy of those things are these cognitively available
creative productive flow states. If you look at that, what are the underlying physiologic pathways
that mediate those? And then how do we support those pathways? Then let's look at synergies between
them. Sounds like a fair approach. Well, I do wonder though, okay, someone listening to this
could just be like, well, like, how are you, why are you, why do you have so much confidence?
You were not formally trained. You're not, you could imagine a doctor listening to this and
just immediately dismissing this whole thing and saying, well, look, I might even listen to this
because he didn't even go through med school. What do you say to, you know, so I was like,
why are you so confident in what you're saying? Well, having a lot of respect for
what we consider better methods of interdisciplinary education than traditional
specialist education usually does. We also have a lot of respect for people that
the cutting edge of their specialties and have formally trained in it. So, you know,
this wasn't developed in isolation. This development was working with many doctors,
but we were working in integrated facilities running pre and post blood labs. And we actually
started with, you know, having some medical directors that wanted to play with us and
particularly with patients, they were having a hard time with them. We said, we, so again,
risk benefit made sense to them because they were having a hard time with them.
Said, we think we've got an approach that could help. And so we were customizing chemistry based
on looking at their genome, their clinical chemistry, their clinical intake, et cetera,
and then getting to see really profound shifts, not just in subjective reporting, but in those
same biometrics being tested again. And so then that, that's actually where we started in the
formulation process and then started to say, well, what things are pretty common across
most people who have similar desires or symptomology that we could
before getting into personalized medicine be able to meaningfully affect scale.
So those doctors were contributing to the insight of, you know, how we did formulation.
And then we've had a number of PhD neuroscientists of different disciplines, neuro chemists,
computation, neuroscientists, et cetera, look at what we're doing, give us feedback on it,
a number of different kinds of doctors, psychiatrists and integrative MDs and et cetera,
look at it and give us feedback on it. Many doctors just find what we were doing,
start using it in their clinics and contact us and saying, you know, here are the effects we're
seeing in patients that were very positive. So we're actually just starting to put together a
program to kind of like harvest this data better, how we can do some distributed science.
And of course, once we came to a place that we felt good with our own internal testing on
formulation, which had many rounds, we did a formal safety data sheet we had, you know,
so which looked at all of the research meta analysis structure review on all the ingredients
and dose and et cetera. And we had pharmacists look at it, doctors look at it,
HD neuro chemists look at it, et cetera. And I went through, you know, I don't take anything
at face value, right? So I mean, I looked every research, every single one of the ingredients,
and I like spent like a day on each one goes like, because that one's very potent. It's very potent.
So racitams, starting with paracetam, and then there's many other racitams and
or acetam being paracetam, do different things, but their primary effect is up regulating acetyl
choline uptake in the NMDA complex. So they are learning the helps with learning and memory
learning memory, working memory, but also sensory motor nerve capacity. And so they are
allosteric modulators of the NMDA complex. And then which racitam will have differential
effects on GAVA receptors or dopamine receptors, et cetera. So racitams are really the first kind
of major area of natropics that people get into when anyone gets a natropic. And then because
they're affecting the postsynaptic neurons uptake of acetyl choline, then they'll usually start
stacking them with some choline donors, maybe some acetyl group donors, and then maybe some
things to help the acetyl choline get across the synapse, like acetyl choline esterase inhibitors.
And so, you know, that's how you can kind of start to stack the pathway for acetyl choline.
The next major category that people really kind of commonly get into with natropics that are very
meaningful are ampicins, which are glutamate uptake on the postsynaptic neuron, so modulators of the
ampicomplex. And upregulating the glutamate uptake increases the speed of synaptic transmission,
but also decreases excitotoxicity from excessive levels of glutamate and the stain in the synapse.
So nupept. Nupept has ampicine-like and racitam-like properties at the same time, meaning that it
upregulates both glutamate and acetyl choline uptake in the postsynaptic neuron, which is quite
unique, and racitam also does both of those, but nupept does it more potently. And so, there's
research showing it as being neuroprotective, because it is specifically protecting neurons
from excitotoxicity damage, while typically you could decrease excitotoxicity from glutamate by
just scavenging glutamate, and you can use things like oxaloacetate to do that, but then you're
decreasing the speed of glutamate or agitransmission. So nupept does this unique thing, where it
decreases excitotoxicity while increasing glutamate or agitransmission, or at least supporting it.
So nupept is a very interesting molecule from the standpoint of being both neuroprotective
and increasing a number of interesting dimensions of learning, attention, and then one of the big
kind of holy grails of space is working memory. Yeah, I see a big, in terms of holy grail,
in terms of the future of this, it's obviously personalizing dosage, because there's individual
differences in genetics that help regulate neurotransmitter production and how environment
reactions. So I'm sure you're working on that area, right? So we are, and being able to have
integrative doctors, psychiatrists, neurologists, general practitioners, get support in better
and better methodologies for assessing brain chemistry, and not just brain chemistry, but
endocrinology, physiologic chemistry, et cetera, and then putting all that together,
and then being able to work to balance and optimize it. That's hugely important, and it's
an area that we are working in and working with some small number of doctors dependent prototype
methodologies, but also working on structures that could be brought more widely. But there's also
things that could happen that are not doctor or therapist mediated. So imagine a portal where
someone can take cognitive assessments online, using best in class online cognitive assessment
that has been correlated to best in class and personal assessment and shows high accuracy,
and also online psychometric assessments, so that people can see how their pattern recognition,
their work memory, but also structured subjective insights into their, you know,
psychological state, predisposition, et cetera, and they could track that in time.
Then imagine that they could load up into that same portal, and this is not a pretty secure
portal, and they control their information, so it's not being used by anybody in the company
for reasons they don't want. If they could upload their motion tracker data, their quantified self,
their sleep tracker data, and then maybe even if they go get medical blood data, QEG data,
and then the system doesn't just look at each one of the psychometrics and biometrics on their
own in relationship to a reference range, but starts looking at what is that whole complex of data
with all the other pieces. Tell us that it's synergistically more than the separate pieces,
right? Yeah, you can imagine like a Fitbit for this that like tracks this stuff throughout the day.
Absolutely. So we are looking at the intersection of quantified self data harvesting, better actual
biometric diagnostics, and better psychometric diagnostics, and then the synthesis of all that
knowledge to then be able to customize protocols both at the level of medical protocols where
doctors can use it and at the level of just direct to consumer wellness protocols. Now,
for that, imagine a version of quality that is fully customized where we get to take all this
data from someone and then customize which chemicals and which amounts are in there.
That requires a robotically automated compounding pharmacy that can make a custom formulation
from a bunch of powders based on an AI generation of their specific formulation based on the
biometric data. That's complex to do. It's a dream of ours. We want to get there and be able to do
it. And we've definitely worked on how to do that, but it's not right around the corner yet.
But maybe in our lifetime. Oh, much sooner than that.
Are you familiar with Nodesix Experience Machine full philosophical experiment?
No. He has this thought experiment. Imagine if we could hook you up to a machine and it gives you
whatever is desirable or pleasurable anytime you want. It turns out most people would not want
that because they want to... The will is something about the human will about suffering and overcoming
suffering that makes us human, that gives us a sense of meaning in life. Ultimately, the kind
of vision you have for this world, which I share and I think is really quite admirable,
will have to go beyond Neutropics. It's only part of a whole system of cultural changes,
of personal changes as well that is willed. Let's just roughly break down four categories
that we can look at this in terms of that are not reducible to each other, but are all under
effect. Sounds good. Let's think about human physiology, which includes our EEG pattern,
computational neuroscience stuff, our neurochemistry or endocrinology, our microbiome,
genetic expression, just all of the things that affect what you can think of as the human hardware.
So there are human hardware predispositions for... If you just think about consciousness
running on that hardware, then empathy runs on certain neural networks utilizing certain
neurochemistry, etc. That can be up or down regulated. It can be down regulated by head trauma,
by microbiome imbalances, by toxicity. It can also be upgraded by a number of things.
So let's think about the human hardware predispositions and capacities. Let's think about
human software being our value systems, our worldview, our understanding of self, our understanding of
other. Now, they're not hardware software as totally distinct categories like they are in
computers because, of course, they are dynamically inter-effecting each other continuously in real
time. The neuroplasticity where your thoughts are affecting physiology and your physiology is
predisposing thoughts. It is a completely intimate link between them, but we can still roughly think
of those categories. So on the software side, we have education, we have media, we have psychology,
we have personal development, psychotherapy, etc. On the hardware side, we have not just medicine,
but the future of well-being optimization. And those are both at the level of the individual.
Then at the level of beyond the individual, the level of the collective,
kind of the hardware of the collective is infrastructure. How we meet our physical needs
in relation to the planet, water, energy, agriculture, transportation, manufacturing,
mismanagement. And then the software of the collective is the agreement fields that run
over that is social structures, economics, governance, language. Ultimately, the hardware
and software of the individual and the collective all have to be upgraded for this kind of phase
shift that humanity is entering into and upgraded towards omnipositivity, meaning that each of those
four have things that affect human experience and human behavior. The environment, the lower
right infrastructure that the built world and natural world environment affect human experience
and affect human behavior. So do the social agreement fields, culture, economics, etc.
Economics, what we incentivize very directly affects human behavior. What we have status
allocated to, etc. Our definition of success in the individual kind of human software
and our physiology. So we would say no, tropics are just the first part we're getting into of
human physiology, which is just one of these areas. And all of them are necessary, but only
all of them together make sufficient. Yeah, I appreciate you outlining those for that topology.
There are things we can do software-wise that can show the same effects on biology and physiology
as the neotropics. In some cases, meditation can get you in a state of mind. So there's different
roots, perhaps, to this upgrade. There's not just a single root. And there are multiple roots that
can get you the same place, perhaps. Sometimes same place and sometimes different, but related,
but highly synergistic places when they come together. Oh, sure. Yeah, for sure. And that's the
beauty of self-organizing systems. And I mean, that's the whole point of systems, right, is that
you want to get to a point where they're all integrated and that the entropy is minimized.
Well, you were just talking about whole systems and self-organization. Yeah.
And why understanding how whole systems works leads to a perspective that emphasizes synthesis
of all of the meaningful modalities. Correct. One of the concepts that we have to get over
that is kind of reductionism in the negative sense rather than positive elements of the word
is kind of looking for single-bullet, silver-bullet solutions, a single molecule that's going to
fix this whole thing. Well, it wasn't a single molecule that was off, right? It was a whole
cascade of systemic effects that were off. And so is it human hardware or is it human software
or is it the environment? Well, it's usually all of them, right, in some kind of complex. So the
question becomes, if someone's physiology is off, out of balance, it can lead to their psychology
being out of balance, which can lead to their physiology being more out of balance than you get
a vicious cycle. You can also get virtuous cycles of creating lift in any of the areas,
making it easier for better behavior and function in those areas, creating more lift.
So our interest is how do we stop negative feedback cycles and how do we promote virtuous
cycles, positive feedback cycles between body, mind, relationship, environment, right, between
all of those inner effects and complexes? And how do we meaningfully synthesize and support
all of the modalities that are actually effective? No, that sounds like a great goal.
I mean, you have our thoughts, you know, like cognitive behavioral therapy affects
the way we frame things, the way we make meaningful experiences affects
our cortisol production, it affects, you know, our negative reactions. So we, in all these
different, they're bi-directional, you know, all these different ways. Daniel, thank you so much
for your generosity and sharing with me today. And I do wish you all the best in your endeavors.
Likewise, it was a blast. Thank you.
Thanks for listening to the Psychology Podcast with Dr. Scott Barry Kaufman.
I hope you found this episode just as thought-provoking and interesting as I did.
If you'd like to read the show notes for this episode or hear past episodes,
you can visit thepsychologypodcast.com.
you
