So please welcome Daniel Schmachtenberger.
So Daniel, if we just fast forward to 2020, 2030, 2040, 2050, just really go into the future.
What would an ideal hospital look like?
I think in this open space a lot of ideas were being brought up about that yesterday as well.
I think everybody has a clear sense that the environmental design and environmental psychology of the space is a huge part of it.
The airflow, the lighting, both natural lighting and the right spectrum and the right amount of lumens.
And really paying attention to the way the environment is affecting the health and the experience of the people in the space.
So the actual design of the infrastructure of the building itself.
I think the nature of the amount of time and also the amount of time that the providers get to spend with people.
And also their training for the quality of time and how they spend it.
I think there's a lot of things we know about the tech that we want to see in terms of both much higher quality and less invasive diagnostics.
And there's a lot of diagnostic tech that by some of those dates will be online that isn't now that will make a huge difference.
The kind of dream of Theranos that they didn't really have the tech for.
There is tech that will achieve things like that.
There's a company called GeneRadar coming out of a company called Nanobiosim that I think will probably make huge progress in that time.
And other tech like it where instead of needing reagents to be able to do blood labs we can simply do a chip based amplification.
And so a single drop of blood can be able to measure every biometric.
And if you imagine not having the cost associated then just run every biometric every time on everyone.
Run big data analysis on an individual person longitudinally over their life plus on lots of people.
And that's not just in the hospital that can be decentralized so that we start finding early disease indicators and being able to prevent most things.
So I think there's a bunch of examples of better diagnostics and machine learning that can augment the human doctor and healthcare provider capacity.
So that the healthcare provider can be much more focused on actually connecting to people and taking in the kind of diagnostic info that humans are uniquely good at.
That machines don't do as good a job at which is less biometric specified and more being able to get the gestalt of the person that lets you even know what to look for and how to interpret it.
So there's a lot of things like this that we could talk about.
One of them was mentioned yesterday that I just feel like bringing up is the idea that the hospital would feel more like a sacred place like a temple of some sort seems to be at the heart.
If we put that at the heart of the consideration a lot of other things make more sense.
And when you talk about heart based medicine obviously we want a medicine that is really excellent in terms of operations.
And we want a medicine that's really excellent in terms of the actual science and the technology of it.
But what's motivating all of it is the sacredness of human life and human experience and wanting to be able to support people to have the highest quality experience and the highest quality capacity to offer what it is to offer while they're here.
And so that every one in the healthcare space remembers and continuously that that's actually why they're there and the entire design is around supporting that experience.
You know you were talking about experiences where people died in your care and where they died in ways that were really beautiful versus painful based on the nature of the care.
So if you think about a hospital as a place where people will be born and people will die and people will be brought back from death and people will have the chance to have a totally different life trajectory based on the care they get.
Like the sacredness of life is more on the altar there than maybe anywhere else.
And I would like to see something where the doctors and nurses go through a ritual before they actually enter every time, not that becomes a dogma.
Because the moment that there is an intrinsically recognized Dharma that becomes a protocol becomes a dogma then obviously it just becomes performative life,
and then you either do the performative thing or just reject it, but if someone actually kind of reconnected to the most beautiful experiences they had in medicine,
the most heart wrenching experiences, why they were there, what the Hippocratic Oath was, and why they're there, the way that would affect the quality of the interactions.
And not just from the point of view that the patient's experience would be better but also the actual quality of the care would make a tremendous difference.
So we could talk about a lot of things based on specifically what we at this date might be available on those different timelines,
what things we could do retrofitting existing hospitals versus where we'd need to build them from the ground up,
what things where we're still thinking of a hospital versus where we start to think about decentralizing healthcare into all of life.
So that's a start.
Wonderful. Thank you. So many open questions. You were putting the temple in the center.
So maybe let's start at the center.
I believe what you're describing is that the subjective experience of a true dedication, of a true interest of the healthcare provider,
so rather than being busy with themselves but actually truly caring about the person they're under in their care,
that subjective experience will improve the quality of care, not only in terms of making less mistakes.
I realized this the first time when I learned to make all these prescriptions, and so here you go, and here's another one, and here's another one, and here's another one, and you're just describing.
And then I realized suddenly my kids were in hospital, and I sat there and said, okay, all right, now my kids are in hospital, next one, next one.
And they went, hmm, do I really want that?
Such an important moment to realize that when I see children and I make prescription based on what their disease is,
or I make a prescription for somebody that I have a personal, direct relation with, it's somehow, there's a moment of, hmm, there.
So the quality, I completely agree that the quality of care, when we talk about patient safety, a big topic today,
if we talk about patient safety, we improve the way that healthcare providers show up, this will improve the quality of care,
it will improve the safety of the patient, but it will also improve patient satisfaction, and so there's a subjective experience on the other side.
So what could you see as steps taken, well, now let's start with the end in mind.
What would you see in, you know, 2030, 40, 50, what might be the way that, what might describe or constitute the relation between a healthcare provider and a patient?
So you mentioned less mistakes.
I think getting rid of all of the avoidable iotrogenic illness is, it would take a few things,
increased presence on the part of the doctors and pharmacists and nurses is going to make a huge difference to that.
It's not only that though, it's also the medical training up front, it's also removing the financialization of medicine
that ends up influencing the training and the intensive structures of the doctors,
as long as the hospital has to have the doctors seeing more people per day or in private practice,
you have to see more people per day, the mistakes are just going to go up.
So some of it can be addressed at the bottom-up level of things individual doctors can do,
some of it really has to be addressed at the top-down level of the major top-down institutions that are affecting medicine
and optimizing for something other than quality of care.
And if we have trillions of dollars a year optimizing for things other than quality of care,
compared to the relatively small level of a few doctors, it's actually an asymmetric warfare against health.
As long as at a federal level we want to optimize GDP and we think about GDP as a sign of the success of the country,
sick people are better for GDP than healthy people are in a narrow point of view in terms of medicine.
And obviously this is the same for a pharmaceutical company's incentive or things like that.
If we could just prevent medicine by making healthy people, we would obviously have the best system of healthcare
and it would totally tank GDP from both a pharmaceutical and hospital revenue point of view,
as well as from the revenue of food, drug, etc. companies that make more money off addiction.
So there's systemic factors as well as kind of individual practitioner factors
that have to be addressed to remove mitrogenic disease.
And then as you're mentioning, the increased presence of a practitioner with a person
who is in one of the most disturbing positions people can be in where the quality of their life
or their loved one's life is like up in the air and they don't have the technical expertise to know how it's going to go.
And so they're trusting a stranger with the most precious thing to them.
Actually feeling the care and the presence and the attention of that stranger is going to make a huge difference
where even if the thing is uncurable, the actual experience of someone is a terminal value
in and of itself independent of how that translates to objective outcomes.
And it will translate to objective outcomes both in terms of increased diagnostic insight
on the part of the practitioner and a psychologically better state
and less stress on the part of the patient is going to help their healing process.
So, I mean, this is just kind of recapping why heart-based medicine matters, right?
And then, I don't think any of that answered your question.
What would constitute the relation between the healthcare provider and the patient?
So, you mentioned quality of care and we started at kind of avoiding mistakes,
but we made just as we look at disease on a systemic level, we look at mistakes.
In terms of heart-based medicine, we want to look at kind of shift the attention a little bit away from disease towards health.
So, on that systemic level, we may want to ask what is quality of care when we shift it towards the positive outcome,
towards the potential and how might that be a constituent of the relationship between...
So, let me do a long-range version of this.
I'm not going to try and specify the timeline.
It will generally be, hopefully, trending in this direction if it's on the right path.
So, let's say we look at the trend of technological automation to automate things that we can proceduralize.
That will affect some things in medicine and hopefully it will because that would be great.
There are some things that machines can do as well or better and it won't affect other things
and if it does, that would be a bummer because they do it less well.
But outside of medicine, most of the jobs that people like the least
are some of the ones that are most available to technological automation
because the more procedural something is, the easier it is to automate.
The more procedural it is, also, the less creativity and learning is involved.
It means we have the less intrinsic motive for a human to feel like they can self-actualize there.
And so, as we progress to more technological automation and more categories,
we also start to change a lot of the underlying assumptions within market theory
that we need people to do the jobs so we need to make it to where the people need the jobs.
Well, when we don't need people to do a lot of the jobs,
then we can also start to create more of commonwealth resources that take care of people's needs
to have a system that is more focused on the intrinsic incentive of people than the extrinsic incentive.
When you have to get people to do shitty labor stuff, you have to extrinsically incent them.
When more of that's automated, then we get to facilitate what is actually intrinsically interesting
and meaningful for people, and it's not just playing video games all the time,
if they get to be facilitated to recognize that their short time here can actually mean something.
And I think the things that people will most want to do have to do with connection, creativity, and healing.
And so, I think there will be a lot more people in the healing professions.
And I think as we think less and less in terms of how do I think of this as a way to financially support myself
and more in terms of if finances were already supported, what would I want to do?
A lot of people want to do things that involve connecting with other people
in ways that contribute to the quality of their life.
And that's everything from like music therapy and art therapy and psychospiritual practice
to training people's physical bodies and like that.
So, I think the role of the doctor will become largely decentralized to a lot of other things
that are promoting well-being more than just dealing with the after effects of not promoting well-being.
And similarly to when we say removing nitrogenic disease requires not just change on the doctor part,
but also the structural incentives that lead to nitrogenic disease.
If we want to obsolete as much of medicine as possible, we have to look at what the upstream causes of the problems are.
So, obviously if we don't just look at healthcare, but we look at the embedding environment of things that affect people's health
and we're pumping billions of tons of glyphosate and other pesticides and herbicides
and petrochemical toxins into the atmosphere and into people's food supply and water supply continuously
and embedding them into manufacturing process in the carpet and the paint
and where all of our environments are actually toxic to the way we genetically evolved.
We genetically evolved to an environment that didn't have organophosphates and neonicotinoids.
Being able to change those things also obsolete so much of the things that are upstream contributing to so much of the chronic complex illness.
Then you start to think about the changes in agriculture to actually re-mineralize topsoils
and affect the microbiome of the topsoils and the quality of the food that's coming out
and again we have to ask can we have healthy people in a society where almost everyone is stressed out
due to macroeconomic pressures and due to sociopolitical instability continuously.
So, there's still going to be situations where no matter how well we design it
somebody falls and hits their head and we have to deal with that
or something that we haven't been able to tend to comes up
but most of the causes of illness are actually structurally induced at scale
in ways that are affecting everyone and you actually can't even avoid currently.
So, I'm answering the question about the relationship between the practitioner
partly saying most of the things practitioners are currently looking at
I would like to not exist at all because we're dealing with them upstream
both by doing health promotion and by stopping the things that are doing health degradation.
So, that's the first part. Then we can get into what the when disease is manifesting
and we need to deal with it what that looks like but we would like to most of you shrink that category.
Thank you. So, before we go we will definitely need to talk about the wider picture of health care or healthy life
and the question of how might we and if we were to be able to redesign the health care system
and just completely kind of clean the table start out of the box what could it look like
and those will be questions that we would need to answer and let's come back to those.
So, if you allow let's stay a little bit longer with the environment
that is kind of closer to us right now before we redesign everything.
So, when I look at the relation between the health care provider and the patient
one of the obvious changes right now and you alluded to this is the automation of health care.
So, more and more processes that you know just take knowledge
this is all the things that I learned in medical school in terms of data to be you know memorized.
All the effort it took in the initial years of my existence to go through paper cards
and finding that paper in Paris and filling out a form and ordering it from this library in Paris
and four weeks later the paper would arrive and now everything is available online
and we have search engines and text mining and we can integrate all of this and some fantastic new technologies
already collecting information and processing this information for me.
So, that's one element. So, how am I going to deal with data now?
I sometimes feel like I'm in a data crisis actually.
In the beginning it was a problem to find information now I feel like I have enough I can't process more.
So, that's a huge development and another huge development is the technological impact.
So, all the devices that we have all the techniques and technologies that we have
that actually seem like seem to have more authority than my own clinical assessment.
So, I used to you know actually do a crazy thing and examine patients you know.
Now when I examine a patient and if there's something I would have to validate my finding by some kind of technology.
So, if I feel that there's some you know something I feel the liver is a little bit larger than I would expect
and the next step would be to get an ultrasound to validate that that's the case.
It used to be that that was the finding.
So, somehow this the technology is becoming the reference point is the kind of the objective measure
and whatever we do as human beings is measured against technology.
This is worrying to me.
Do you see that you know the profession of the physician will be replaced by technology at some point?
Are we going to have a robot where I just you know like the little photo cameras that you had at stations
where you sit in you get four pictures and so I just walk into some station or some office
and then I put my finger in there take a bit of blood and maybe you take a little swab of my my epithelium in the mouth
and and there you go and two minutes later I get some report.
Is this the future of medicine?
Hopefully yes and no.
There are things that machine learning can do really better than human cognition.
There are things that human cognition do that machine learning can do at all.
Whether we get to artificial general intelligence or not obviously changes that story a bit
because then we're talking about things that are less like machines and more like other kinds of beings.
I don't think we're close to that.
So, we're just talking about machine learning and machine learning mostly that is narrow in type.
And so what I think that means is that the machine learning and the diagnostics augment
our capacity radically in good ways in the way already your stethoscope and your microscope
and your you know whatever tools your glasses you're wearing right now are augmenting your capacity
and it's just continued tools that can do that.
So, we learn new metrics, new biometrics all the time.
Parts of the body we didn't even know existed or parts of physiology or new types of proteins
and then they're like the center of everything and they're super important.
We can anticipate that that continues for a long time.
The 10 years from now Nobel Prizes will be one about like breakthrough stuff that we don't even know about right now
that will be the main stuff to look at.
And so there's no way we're testing that right now and there's no way that machine learning is paying attention to that
and yet some of it still comes through a kind of heuristic or intuitive sensibility
where you're feeling the liver and you have some sense even if the liver enzymes don't indicate it or whatever
some other test that we don't currently have does.
So, I think that the human capacity for general intelligence
which includes intuition and things beyond what we currently have metrics on
becomes increasingly important as we're able to offload more of the specialized narrow intelligence.
So then the role of the doctor, the practitioner is largely one that intermediates
between really being able to connect with the patient in a holistic, generalized, intuitive
and obviously enough cognitive knowledge to even know how to use this database way.
But then it doesn't depend exclusively on their own memory.
We already don't. We already offloaded to books.
It's just much better versions of books and papers.
And, you know, when we think about the idea of the information singularity
there can be so much information that no one can be a specialist in any topic.
There's 100,000 journal articles a year in the topic of my specialty
so already humans are irrelevant in the information ecology.
We don't really need to...
The data isn't what informs our choices.
The meaning of being able to put the data of lots of things together does
and the meaningfulness is a second or third derivative of the data
if we can have the machines not just data mine and find the articles
but also be able to make sense of what a lot of those articles together inform
as far as treatment goes.
So one of the things I want to see the technology get a lot better at doing
is being able to do the kind of processing it can
so that what you're studying is a higher order synthesis
of the information out there that you actually can keep up with.
So I see an information singularity much faster than I see a meaningfulness
which is a derivative of the information singularity
which then the doctors are going to be paying attention to
and the researchers are working on helping to make sense of factoring general intelligence.
So the fact that we will be able to use increasingly good cameras on an iPhone
to look at a skin condition, use image recognition to automatically
diagnose the thing at a distance, like that's awesome.
And there are both things that that won't do in terms of physiologic diagnosis
and in terms of the quality of connection.
And both of those are very important.
So I think we were talking the other day a little bit about how important it is
that we don't automate in ways that lead to more isolation
especially in the name of health care when isolation is one of the number one causes
of health care issues in the first place.
Thank you.
So when you talk about the availability of technology
and how this technology may kind of support our decision making
and will make it easier for us to provide meaningful health care
and we talked about the temple as in the center of the hospital, if you like.
Is there a sacred space for the human being as a healer?
A space that can structurally not be taken on by automation?
Yes.
I think it's obvious.
Again, we have to question, let's separate the topic of artificial general intelligence
or silica-based life because now we're talking about life.
And whether that is possible ever or not in terms of the theoretical possibility of it
and what the negative implications of silica-based life trying to share a biosphere
with hydrocarbon-based life might be, that's so not near, if ever, we can take that off.
And so really then we're talking about human connection
and being able to connect with someone who can actually care about you
and machines that are simply doing input-output processing.
We obviously want to extend our capacity with machines
and the health care, the center of it is actually care.
So this care, so we have the temple, we have the sacred space,
we have care as the primary ingredient of the relation between the health care provider and the patient.
Something that remains a human environment, something that remains a human capacity and quality.
So this is something that can be established already and can be promoted already in the existing health care system.
Now, you were alluding already to, well, yeah, but health care is not limited or confined
to either the consultation room or the hospital as really whenever a doctor is needed,
we're too late when we talk about health.
So we've already reached a threshold where several nonlinear processes have scaled up
and a threshold has been reached and now the disease has become symptomatic.
So we're way too far downstream.
So what we really wish to see is if we want to promote health is to address these health issues more upstream.
You already alluded to agriculture, finances, social interactions.
So what are these areas?
So if we're kind of moving from what is an ideal hospital to what is an ideal health care system,
how would that change our perspective?
What are these elements?
As we think about moving forward, we need to think about our actual evolutionary environment
in terms of what our genes were selected to actually do well in
because our future environment will be different than that, but it has to not be misaligned with that.
We've created a world in which we're actually genetically misfit in really important ways.
So we have to consider this.
When we think about the evolutionary environment of humans, the first thing is we're social primates.
And for all of our evolutionary history, we're in bands and tribes with extremely close,
high trust interaction with lots of other humans.
And we can look at how that affects via physical touch and microbiome sharing and pheromone sharing
to the actual attachment theory of it.
And it's going to go beyond any of those specific mechanisms.
That's foundational to physical and psychological health.
And so we're not just talking about how the infrastructure will work.
We're also talking about how the social structures work.
I think it's really insightful to contemplate how many people you trust as much as anyone in a tribe would have trusted everyone they knew.
Because most people don't have anyone that they feel like they know as well or knows them as well,
or they can trust as much as humans evolved being able to trust all the people they knew.
And I don't want to over-romanticize.
It's not that there weren't difficulties that were associated,
but the kind of fierce egalitarianism tribes had to have to be able to function together well.
Like in a tribe, you can't have right, left antipathy and stay together, right?
You can't have internal defection.
You actually can't even get away with lying because everyone's going to tell there's a force transparency at that small scale.
And so we actually need extraordinarily high trust environments for psychological health,
and we need psychological health for physiological health.
So that's one example.
So when we just stay with the social interaction for now,
and that's one of your favorite topics,
is how to, what is the impact of societal development on various factors?
So if in this conversation we focus on health,
what would be key societal developments that we would like to see,
again kind of time warping forwards through 2050,
what would we like to see in place in our societies that would reduce the health care,
the attention in health care facilities as we have them today?
So could we kind of address some of the problems that we see in hospitals now already upstream?
It's funny to kind of think about what examples to use because it's pretty much everything.
It's like every building material we use, almost every building material,
outgasses volatile organic compounds from petrol derivatives that are either neurotoxins, endocrine disruptors, or carcinogens.
So it's the restructuring of the entire materials economy and materials supply chain
to not be polluting the indoor and outdoor environment.
It's that the actual photic spectrum of the light that we're in is unhealthy for us
because we don't just photosynthesize vitamin D, nitric oxide, and cortisol,
and so many other things are regulated by not just the total amount of light
but specific frequencies of light and timing of light.
Like the nuclear family home structure, the nature of economies of scale moving agriculture far away,
where even if it was organic, which it generally isn't, it's old.
It's been actually undergoing entropy since being picked for a pretty long time,
which means nutrient decay, let alone lack of interaction with the soil
that not only has a kind of psychological regeneration but microbiotic effects,
like we can see that market forces move the world to a place that optimizes for market forces
and they optimize for addiction and comfort rather than health or well-being.
And I think this is a really important thing is that comfort and happiness are not the same thing.
But as soon as we, one of the effects of kind of the Enlightenment was moving into the domain of objectivism
and things we could measure, but we can actually measure metrics of comfort,
like how bouncy the shocks in a car are or whatever,
more than we can measure subjectivity, which we can't measure at all,
and it gets into existentialism of what is a meaningful human experience.
And so we start optimizing for comfort and you actually make shitty people when you optimize for comfort
because psychologically good people are people that can actually hold a certain resilience in the presence of discomfort.
So you look at the wisdom traditions that had sweat lodges and ayahuasca ceremonies
and combo ceremonies and sun dances and vision quests,
which were all actually induced really intense discomfort to be able to find a self-transcendence in the presence of it
in the same way that you don't get strong people by not lifting weights, right?
You actually have to hormetically stress the system to up-regulate its regulatory capacity.
You have to psychologically stress the emotional system to learn emotional intelligence.
And so there's so much of the in the name of comfort that is just actually making maximally intropic humans.
And the same was like supposedly market theory says people will demand real things
that are actually going to enrich the quality of their life like food and whatever.
And then that will create a basis for people to create supply and the best supply will end up getting up-regulated.
But of course as soon as we start recognizing economies of scale on the supply side
and the supply side becomes a much bigger organism than the demand side
and it is going to benefit from more profit,
now it wants to figure out how to manufacture artificial demand that wasn't there.
So then the business has the goal of maximize lifetime revenue of a customer
and I maximize lifetime revenue of a customer by driving addiction starting in childhood.
So if I can have social media and entertainment that's maximally addictive,
it figures out psychologically exactly how to have the right type of dings to get you back on
and make you feel miserable if you don't have it and do the same thing with food and etc.
Then we can have the plausible deniability, I'm providing what people want.
Yes, after you drove addiction, in them using asymmetric information and narratives
and technology warfare to drive that addiction,
but this does not create healthy or happy people or a good society.
So you actually have to change the whole nature of perverse incentive and market dynamics
where at large to be producing goods and services
that are actually supporting the health and well-being and integrity of people in society.
The redesign is pretty much everything.
So if I just put this into a pediatrician's kind of way, making it simple,
then what I understand from you is that the entire concept of healthcare as a service
that is being paid for including all the products that are part of this service
or come along with this service is not in line with the concept of health as you're describing it.
So all of this works as long as we have disease.
So if we have a problem to be solved, if we have a disease and we give it a name
and we give it a label, that allows us then to say,
if you have that disease then you need this kind of diagnostics
and therefore you need these sort of machines and therefore you need these sort of treatments.
Congratulations, you're sincerely, thank you very much.
So that is one aspect.
And the other is when we actually want health rather than the absence of disease,
then all of this is a misfit.
So whatever we have constructed in terms of healthcare system trying to overcome disease
as a system is not useful if we're actually turning our focus towards health.
It's funny, even if we just think about disease diagnosis,
I think most of the actual diseases that we have diagnostics for are made up, they're fictions.
So obviously ADHD is a fiction that is just making childhood a disease
and that is take kids, have parents pay no attention to them.
If you think about what the fuck school is, the way that we have it structured,
it's these little people don't make money yet.
And so they are possibly future assets in the financial system,
but right now they're liabilities or debts on the future system.
We want the least number of productive class people to monitor the most of them possible.
So one teacher to 30 of them, typically a low paid person
because someone that could do something more profitable, we'd rather them generating more profit,
to get them to the point where they're part of the productive class.
And as soon as they're too old to be the productive class,
and again we want to ship them off somewhere where one low paid person takes care of lots of them.
So we start with that and a school system that doesn't facilitate their interest in anything,
forces them to be interested in totally uninteresting shit,
breaks their interest in life as a result, so then they want to play video games
and watch porn or whatever and then we say that's the way that's what human nature is.
It's only human nature after we broke it, right?
So then we medicate that as a disease because that's also a super profitable thing to do
and then that creates the beginning of an nitrogenic cascade
where the ritalin, the side effects of the ritalin are going to need an SSRI later
and then are going to need a benzo.
And then that person's fucked for life, but the profitability is quite high
in terms of lifetime revenue because if I drive, rather than helping people be healthy,
if I override their system in a way that's going to cause ongoing addiction,
because they can't get off that benzo because they're going to have rolling panic attacks
if they do way worse than their anxiety initially ever was,
but the side effects of that are another drug that we also sell,
that's just called an upsell or a cross sell, which is just good business.
So like obviously ADHD is a bullshit disease.
Most psychiatric diagnoses, it would be way more useful to think about it differently.
But also like every complex chronic disease, they're bullshit diseases.
In terms of rheumatoid arthritis, we call it a disease or MS or Alzheimer's.
They don't have the same cause.
If I see 10 different people with MS and I actually found out what's going on
because right now we don't know what's going on at all,
so the disease just allows us to know what symptomatic drugs
or a million drugs we're going to do, but we can't cure any of them.
But if I want to say what's actually going on, the pathoediology is different in every case
because they're multifactorial and they're not the same set of factors.
And so the fact that there's a cluster of biomarkers and a cluster of symptoms
that I can make a disease title for to then know what drug to prescribe
and insurance can do that thing doesn't mean that that tells me anything about the pathophysiology of it.
So even insofar as I'm thinking about the disease, I see MS, I don't know shit when I hear MS.
All I know is okay, so there's some kind of autoimmune neurodegenerative stuff going on.
This system was exposed to some things that created dysregulation, deviations from homeodynamics
that probably led to more susceptibility to more dysregulation
that eventually reached a threshold that had symptomology
where there was probably pathophysiology going on for years or decades ahead of time.
And for this person with MS, it was a mold exposure 30 years ago
that left mycotoxins that changed cytokine profiles and whatever
that then 10 years later they had a micro-TBI from a car accident
and then a divorce stress that threw them over and now it's MS.
And in somebody else, it was a tick-borne Lyme exposure and then some food poisoning in Guatemala
and some glyphosate and then some other emotional stressor.
So to actually be able to cure it, I need to know that stuff which the title MS doesn't give me.
So not only do we want to move to health promotion, like we want to even think about disease in a reasonable way.
That is so interesting.
It's so interesting because the way we do studies, at least when I look at the studies that
this is the classic type of clinical studies, what we see is that there are basically two observations.
So there's a starting point and an end point and then we assume that there's a linear association between the two.
And it seems that as we are learning more, as there's more insight
into how we might be able to calculate non-linear associations
and we're recognizing that probably a lot of what is happening during this time of observation in a classic clinical trial,
what we observe there is very much dependent on what happened before this trial
and all the things that you're actually describing.
And the heterogeneity that is real is not usually captured in the kind of typical table one in a paper
saying what is the distribution of sex and gender and ethnicity.
So this is way, way more complex than that.
And we haven't even started to come to grips with the complexity of what the regulatory mechanisms are before we start to observe something.
So a lot of what I hear from you is that a lot of the science that we look at,
so that a lot of clinical science is based on a syndromic diagnosis.
So we're saying that this patient group shares a certain set of signs and symptoms
and if it's that, then we give it a name and that's a useful thing to give it a name.
So we have a working hypothesis and can talk about it.
But along the line of this process of discovering what is actually going on,
we are kind of taking this diagnosis as something set,
as something that exists as an entity rather than a working hypothesis.
So then we start to developing drugs to fix a problem,
so to fix the signs and symptoms,
which is a good idea for those who do have the signs and symptoms,
so it's at least very promising if you do suffer of MS as the example you gave.
If there are solutions to the problem that I experienced with the signs and symptoms,
that's a useful thing, but we could recognize that this is like a painkiller,
rather than something that really addresses the cause of disease.
So what might be the steps for us?
What would be the structural approach to take in the future,
so that we're actually turning our direction and really drill down to the cause of disease
rather than trying to fix signs and symptoms?
And don't get me wrong,
symptomatic medicine and palliative care
and ameliorating some of the advancement of pathology like this awesome.
Novocaine is one of the best inventions ever,
dentistry totally sucked before Novocaine,
so that's not addressing something at a causal level,
but it's awesome, right?
But we can do so much better,
and there's a place where,
okay, so let's say I'm looking at the relationship between the regulatory bodies,
so in the U.S. the FDA in particular, other bodies,
AMA and whatever, but let's look at the FDA for,
is this a treatment that can actually,
a doctor can give to treat a disease, right?
So the disease has been recognized,
the treatment has been recognized,
and otherwise a doctor is not allowed to use it,
insurance won't cover it, whatever, right?
So we look at what it takes to get the regulatory status,
which also means then that it will get trained to new people in medical school.
Well, so phase three clinical trials are going to cost a billion dollars,
most of a billion dollars,
but now factoring all the things that don't make it through,
matriculating that, right, a billion dollars,
and so the only way to ever be able to recoup that money
is if I can patent the thing,
because otherwise someone else who's just competing on cost of goods
and they didn't put the billion dollars up is just going to beat me,
and so if I'm looking at patentable stuff,
then I look at the regulatory dynamics around patenting,
I can only patent synthetic molecules,
and that means that the things I'm looking at
are not part of how your body worked when it was healthy
and are not part of the evolutionary environments
that made humans in the first place at all ever.
So what's the chance we're going to be able to do health promotion
was weird synthetic molecules
that were never part of the original picture
because the intersection of the regulatory landscape and IP law
and the financialization of the research
make it to where we can't even study the right stuff.
So let's say I looked at when the same person with the same genome
didn't have cancer and they were super healthy
and now that they have cancer what was different in their body
or before the autoimmune disease,
and I see that there are certain cell types
and certain peptides that are much more prevalent
that are less prevalent and I'd start to think about
types of biological, endogenous medicine I could do.
I can't even research most of that
because I'll never be able to patent it
which means there's no money for the research
to ever be able to get it through clinical approval.
So basically the epistemology that looks for one drug,
I mean one disease, a set of symptoms, one drug,
it's totally dumb epistemology,
but there is no incentive to be able to try
and do better complex epistemology
from a finance regulatory point of view.
So the epistemics are actually straightforward,
which is acute causation, acute singular causation is straightforward.
You got a physical injury that was an acute injury,
we're going to sew it up, don't do that thing again, right?
Or you had an acute infectious exposure,
we're going to give you the antibiotic for it.
Even that starts getting questionable
because did everyone who was exposed get the same thing
and do you actually have underlying immune weakness?
And is the antibiotic actually necessary
and are you breeding antibiotic resistance
in the whole population by using it unnecessarily?
There's questions there, but let's just say
there are times where that's true in acute thing,
but most disease does not have a single cause
and the causes, so they're multifactorial,
they're different for different people
and many of them are radically time delayed.
And so to actually be able to do curative work,
we've actually got to be able to assess
how the regulatory systems of the body are doing
and what the deviations to homeodynamics
that the person has been exposed to are,
find the unique set, be able to specially reverse that unique set
and generally support the homeodynamic systems of the body.
It's a totally different way of thinking about medicine.
So you're talking about, in a way,
you're talking about personalized medicine, precision medicine,
terms that have been used in different ways,
but let's say n equals one medicine.
Part of how research is done right now
is to understand what is going on in a single case
by looking at similar cases and comparing them
and trying to understand the pattern.
So what we do, the approach to research,
is to kind of look at the disease from the outside
and recognize patterns of disease that are similar
in a group of people that we observe.
That is essentially different to the disease experience
of the person who had this threshold,
this multifactorial threshold experience.
So it's basically the way we conduct research today
is completely missing the point.
It's not useless.
Clinical trials aren't totally useless
being able to do variable isolation
and seeing what that variable does
across the distribution of all the other variables
gives us an insight.
So when we do a clinical trial on a drug
compared to a placebo and we're trying to see
is there some effect beyond the placebo
and we see there is versus there isn't,
there is indicates that there is some mechanism that's occurring.
That's kind of all it tells us, that there is some mechanism.
But the fact that there's a Gaussian distribution
of the response curve where some people have great responses
and some maybe have terrible responses
is a result of lots of other things that are going on
that we don't recognize where they just get put under a bell curve
and it would be much more interesting
if we could start to figure that stuff out.
Well you can't do that with looking,
with variable isolation on a large population.
So now when I move all the way to n equals one
where I'm looking at a population of one
and look at all the variables
and look at how they make sense together.
Now I've got to use complexity science.
I've got to use much more advanced kind of statistical modeling.
But there are ways of simplifying it
because we know that if I just try to do the brute force computation
there are things we can't measure, right?
So I can put a QEG on you
but I can't see subcortical structures.
There's no good way to see that in real time.
There's lots of proteins we can't measure.
And there's shit that we just don't even know
that we don't know about yet
and there's a huge part of it.
And if I try to run optimization on it,
it's not computable.
These are NP hard problems.
But I can collapse that entire space
to ways of thinking about it that make sense,
which is, is the system not getting enough of something it needs?
Is it getting too much of something to be able to process well?
Like this is kind of Chinese medicine,
Ayurvedic medicine basics, but that we can modernize.
So is it not getting enough of something?
Is it not getting enough exercise, rest,
love, affection, sunlight, micronutrients, macronutrients?
So let's say we look at micronutrients.
We need to think about subclinical deficiency
as opposed to clinical deficiency.
So most people don't have scurvy, right?
That's awesome that they don't have scurvy.
But if we look at optimal vitamin C
and then we look at scurvy, there's a pretty big range in here
that is don't yet have scurvy but that is suboptimal.
So we'd call that subclinical deficiency
where being able to augment those levels would make a difference.
Now, because I've got so many micronutrients to look at,
if I just try to control that one variable
and look at decreased all-cause mortality or whatever,
it's going to be really hard to tell
because that one thing also needs bioflavonoid synergistically
to work and is going to interact like there's so many other things going on.
So if I start to look overarkingly at
are we providing good nutrition
and is this person absorbing and assimilating it
and dealing with subclinical deficiency?
Also toxicity.
So until we have re-engineered our supply chains,
do I want to look at the exposure people have
to heavy metals, to VOCs, to mycotoxins,
also to infections that are subclinical,
meaning they're not creating acute medical symptomology,
but this is not a normal part of a human microbiome.
And when we look at an HPILORY or an HPV or an EBV
that we know have statistical correlations with diseases
that are chronic infections, there's a gazillion other things that do.
Functional medicine and kind of functional infectious explorative medicine
are starting to pioneer this more than general medicine,
but this is too much of something that the body shouldn't have.
We can do stuff about that.
So there's a way of taking this entire search space,
an optimization space, and having some kind of heuristic diagnostics
that are able to do a lot of the work more simply.
We can also think about the primary regulatory mechanisms of the body
and how to look at the robustness of them,
which indicates everything that's going on.
So I want to be able to look not just at the homeostatic state,
is your vitamin D, your heart rate, your cholesterol within a level.
I want to look at the homeodynamic capacity that when I stress it,
how far out does it go and how quickly does it come back?
Because if we don't just want to define disease,
we want to define health in a way we can measure.
If we want to start to think about the objectivity of it,
then I would define health as related to the robustness
of the homeodynamic regulatory mechanisms.
How much stress the being can be exposed to without going into pathophysiology,
without deviating from the homeodynamics.
So that's a different set of tests.
We need to stress test stuff, right?
And so I would like to see more of those things.
Then we can define disease as some of those homeodynamic markers
are actually out of range and pathophysiology is occurring.
Aging is not yet disease.
They're in range, but there's less robustness,
which means more susceptibility to disease,
meaning smaller stresses can cause larger strain.
And so then the kind of anti-aging preventative health promotion work
is just increasing the robustness of the regulatory mechanism.
So we both want to measure and think about the body's regulatory dynamics
and how to promote those generally,
as well as look at the specific causes of pathology
and how to reverse them specifically.
Beautiful. Thank you.
So when we...
You're talking about homeodynamic systems.
So basically the regulations,
all the different regulatory processes going on within a body
that maintain some sort of range of what we perceive within the realm of ease
rather than disease, which is probably then at the outliers of the Bell's curve.
So when we look at these regulatory mechanisms within a system,
we still assume that body is a closed system.
And I wonder from what you said before
whether that's actually an assumption we should take,
or whether we should also look at a perspective that assumes that this body
has probably some mechanisms that run within,
but probably also it is at least susceptible to
or interfering with mechanisms that are around that body.
Okay, so let's look at layers of holisticness
or comprehensivity and consideration.
So we can't just do the vertical slices
called neurology, gastroenterology, rheumatology, oncology,
because most of the complex things occur across those.
If we look at gut brain axis dynamics,
that's gastroenterology, neurology, immunology, rheumatology,
all mixed together where no specialist is going to see the thing.
So we have to look at the interaction of all the body systems.
We also have to look at the horizontal slices,
the omics of it's not just what's happening at the genomic level
and the epigenetic and the proteomic,
but also how the top-down, connectomic stuff and neuroendocrine stuff
is affecting the bottom-up stuff.
So we want to think about all the body systems together.
But then it's not just the body systems of the individual,
it's the body and mind, psyche, emotion, spirit of the individual.
So we want to be thinking about how all of those interact.
But then it's not just the individuals, the individual interacting
with the greater world and universe they're part of,
both physically and psychologically, metaphysically.
So physically, I find the person has mycotoxins
and I send them home to a house that still has mold in it.
Like obviously we have to address the physical environment they're in.
Or we know very clearly that the lifestyle of people
is going to be affected by the lifestyle of the people
they're spending a lot of time around more than almost anything else.
So the person has illnesses associated with obesity
and I send them home to an environment and a community
in which the health habits of everyone suck
are self-reinforcing and would be ostracizing
if they did something different or were the person really lonely
and loneliness we know drives addiction.
So I've got to think about the physiological and psychological interactions
of the being with their environment and what's necessary.
So when we think about an integrative or a holistic medicine
or healthcare, it has to affect it all the way.
So to what degree is a sense of isolation or separation a cause of disease?
Whether it's the subjective experience of feeling separated?
Is that a statement you could go along with
that the sense of separation is a sense that I may create
but it is an illusionary sense,
whilst there is nothing but an interconnectedness.
So as soon as I perceive myself as separate from that one interconnectedness
this is a cause of disease?
When you say that the disconnection is a losery,
well that is true on some levels.
It's also switching the burden to the individual perception
where maybe they actually have social dynamics
that really are ostracizing or really don't have real connection.
Of course insofar as I'm talking to the individual
I want to help them figure out how they can take more agency to change their life
but insofar as I'm thinking about how to change systems
I want to say how do we make systems that support individuals more?
That's kind of the classically right and left perspective.
Individual or collective focus you have to do both
and pay attention to the virtuous cycle between them.
When you look at work of people like Gabor Mat
and others on attachment theory and how much the sense of isolation drives addiction
which then drives so many other things from a health perspective
I think this is huge,
but it's also like when we look at mass shooters
none of them that I'm aware of had healthy, meaningful relationships before being mass shooters.
So news goes and interviews and says they were all the neighbors
and the neighbors say the person was a loner,
they totally kept to themselves, nobody ever saw them.
Which means that person was getting to progress
in their how disenfranchised they felt, how depressed,
how misanthropic they were with nobody knowing and checking
which is also why I don't want a world that allows people
that makes it very easy for people to be isolated that much.
So if Amazon is going to come deliver the stuff at the door
and my doctor on the phone can do that
people can be progressing in their psychopathology radically
and then having access to more destructive tools than earlier humans had.
Right now AR-15s and beyond that weaponized drones.
So it's not just that the isolation is bad for the person,
it's that the isolation makes those people very dangerous to the health of the society as a whole.
And so it's actually important that as we're thinking about redesigning civilization
we're making the processes by which people get their basic resources provisioned
and needs met involved interacting with other humans in healthy, enriching ways.
Otherwise the intersection of people that are progressing in psychopathology
with decentralized catastrophic technology is a major problem for the world.
Thank you. Thank you for all your insights that you have shared with us.
It's become very clear to me that when we change,
when we direct our attention towards health and less on disease
there's no way we can limit it to an individual.
We have to think systemically.
There's no way we can limit it to the consultation room.
We have to think about the environment, the immediate environment, the social environment
and all the other major parameters that constitute health
in terms of social environments, in terms of agriculture, in terms of environmental pollution.
You only touched on the financial aspects and how markets driving the health care system
as it is at the moment have a major impact.
Thank you very much for giving us such an extraordinary broad overview.
Thank you, Daniel. Thank you.
What a great pleasure to have you here.
Daniel, come back over.
This has been a heart-based medicine production. Thanks for listening.
