Welcome to the Radical Brilliance podcast with Arjuna Arda and brilliant guests from
around the world who are contributing to the evolution of humanity.
Today's guest is Daniel Schmacktenberger who's going to talk to us about where good ideas come from.
So here's your host Arjuna Arda.
Welcome back to the Radical Brilliance podcast. Today my guest is once again Daniel Schmacktenberger.
You heard from him earlier on in this podcast series talking about how to become an agent of evolution.
Today we're going to talk about the mysterious conundrum of where do original thoughts come from.
I love to dwell upon this with many of my guests because it's such a great mystery to recognize that just as quantum physics educates us, things arise out of no thing.
Truly original things that are not just plastic imitations of something else, they arise out of nothing.
Daniel has explored this from many different angles from epistemology, to learning systems, to understanding the neuroscience, to understanding how is it possible that we can innovate.
It actually science defies it because really the only thing we know about the brain is what comes in through the senses.
So how can something arise in awareness that didn't first get there through the senses?
Equally we could ask ourselves how do we dream at night? When you dream of something you've never experienced, how did that happen?
It's very mysterious and strange.
So please enjoy this conversation with Daniel Schmackteburger, one of the most brilliant minds alive today in my experience.
He's dense and solid and real and really well educated and articulate.
Pay close attention and Daniel will guide us into the exploration of how original new ideas come into the world.
Hey Daniel, how are you? Good. Happy to be here.
Yeah, happy to be with you. You know I was reflecting upon what to talk about today and I wanted to tell you a little story which is actually my favourite story from all of the 450 interviews I did over the time leading up to Radical Brilliance.
And this is a story involved Leonard Cohen who is a mutual love of ours. One of the greatest blessings of my life was getting to know him.
So to cut a long story short, after a lot of backwards and forwards I ended up actually being able to do an interview with Leonard.
And I went to his house and we sat at his kitchen table which was extremely much more modest than where we're sitting today.
This was an upstairs apartment in the Wilshire district of LA.
You know, look, all the furniture looked like it had come from a garage sale.
So we're sitting at his quite beaten up kitchen table which has just actually had two settings on it.
The table is just small enough for two people to sit.
We started talking about ten new songs. Do you remember that album that came out in 2002 that had love in it, love itself and I am not the one who loves, it's love who seizes me.
Incredible. Usually if I buy an album there's like one amazing song that I play over and over and over again and the rest just fades away.
This album, ten new songs, every single song is like perfect.
So I started saying to Leonard Cohen, I said, Leonard, this album is just like incredible.
And his response was, oh, yeah, you know, I went, he had this kind of rye grin where half of his mouth would color.
And I said, no, no, Leonard, I mean, really, this is like, this is, this was beyond anything anyone's ever done.
And he was, oh, yeah. And this went on for quite a while. He wouldn't give in.
And the more he dismissed it as just another album, the more fervent, more zealous I got that this was almost like scriptural, you know.
So finally, after about half an hour, I won my battle with Leonard Cohen.
And he kind of relaxed humorously and said, yeah, he said, I guess, I guess you're right, something did come through on that album.
And I actually reprinted that whole dialogue in the book.
And I felt it's very significant the language he used because he didn't say I did anything.
He said something came through on that album.
And then we talked a little bit about how that album had come to be.
And he explained to me why he was so hesitant to take any responsibility for it because he said, really, I just relaxed.
I just got out of the way and literally I received.
I received things that were ready formed.
And then it was just a matter of jotting them down.
So most of that album came to him when he was at Mount Baldy Zen Center, which I think is somewhere out just east of LA.
He spent a few years as a monk there.
And during that time, fragments came to him, but they were received like gifts.
And later he went back to LA and went into the studio of his own studio and recorded everything.
So that's really the pivotal point I wanted to start from.
There's so many people.
I mean, Alex Ebert of Edward Chubb, The Magnetic Zeroes, and so many leaders in technology, people who've invented things, writers.
So many people use this language of, yes, something came through.
I didn't do it, it came through.
So I'd like to unpack with you a little bit what that's all about.
Yeah, it's a fun topic.
Yeah.
It's a topic that I have also been inspired by.
And thought about and explored and investigated a good bit.
So I have some thoughts to share with you on it.
And I'm not sure that my conclusions are right, but they are my best.
The best you've downloaded so far, right?
We'll get there.
Leonard Cohen's a great example.
Because did he experience what felt like it came through to him?
Yes.
Did it feel other than the self that he normally identifies with?
Yes.
But it came through the person, the nervous system, the vehicle that spent its whole life making and attuning itself to music.
And it does not similarly come through people who have not spent their whole life attuning themselves to music.
And specifically, it's different than what came through Mozart, who spent his life attuning himself to a different kind in a genre of music.
Right.
Which is also different than what comes through Einstein, who spent his life attuning himself to mathematics.
Who also, incidentally, talked about things coming through.
The general theory of relativity came to him when he's in the bathtub.
And yet, people who don't have a background in math and physics don't get general relativity.
Right. Totally.
And so then, as we want to explore a little bit more, what is the actual phenomena that's occurring?
In various kind of new age or spiritual schools, there's this idea of a download.
And the download might be like, that there is the Akashic records where all the knowledge and all the stuff is, or there is what Bucky Fuller called the design inspiring realm,
where there is some kind of higher knowledge source, maybe a higher self or higher beings or something.
Where I open myself to some kind of chem, radio transceivers type in and receiving something from elsewhere.
That's kind of the idea of a download, right?
Like when I'm downloading something on the internet and receiving information to my computer that was stored elsewhere previously through some kind of channel.
And incidentally, just to interject from it, there's a really good analogy about the computer, because you have to have the bandwidth,
and you've got to have a computer that can play that file, right?
If you haven't installed Adobe Flash Player 8, there's no point in downloading the file because it won't play.
So it's actually a good analogy to what we were describing about.
You have to have put in your 10,000 hours to be worthy of the download.
So there's this question of, am I refining myself to actually be able to be a radio receiver to this channel?
Or is it actually better described by something other than download?
So we'll play with this a little bit.
I actually saw, someone asked, it's a long time ago, and I might be remembering it off, but someone asked Eckhart Tolle this question and he answered it beautifully.
I believe he was sitting in the Dalai Lama at that time.
And he said something to the effect of, he said, yes, when you enter a kind of transcendental state, however you want to describe that transcendental state,
increased capacity emerges as you emerge from that state, but it's still tied to capacities you brought into the transcendental state.
So he said, when a great soccer player has a kick to make and he drops into kind of a state of presence first, he'll make the kick better than if he didn't.
But Eckhart's like, I still wouldn't make the kick well no matter how deep my presence was, and I don't think the Dalai Lama would either because our muscles aren't trained to kick.
And when Einstein would drop in, he'd come out with math, and we've never come out with math.
And it's not because we aren't entering transcendental states, it's because we aren't bringing math to those transcendental states.
And so one way to think about it, and I would say the way that I more tend to think of it, is that it's more of an uploading than a downloading process.
And I'm not going to also say that there's only one phenomena.
I'm open to the possibility, the idea that something comes from a source that is other than the, through a process that is other than the process we're normally used to in terms of conscious rational process, that there's maybe multiple different things that can be happening.
But I'll at least describe one of the most common phenomena I believe is, say we take a psychic or someone who does channeling, and let's throw out the ones who know that they're being charlatans
or the ones who are just narcissists and don't know they're being charlatans, but you know whatever.
And let's take the ones that a lot of people feel an authentic insightfulness from, and try and explore the phenomena.
In my early 20s I did this, I did these studies, because I found authentic insightfulness beyond what made obvious sense that they would have known,
and checked that they didn't have like something in their ear that was whispering the answers to that, and I'm like, what is this?
And then wanted to test it in a kind of scientific framework, and it didn't show up when I was testing it.
So I said, hey, how do you get these answers?
So I channeled the Pleiadians, or Metatron, or the Akashic records, whatever it was.
I said, okay, so do the Akashic records have knowledge about say math?
Yeah, totally, it's all there, or chemistry.
I said, great, what's the highest math you ever learned as a person?
They would say something, and then I would ask a math question that that person had never heard.
They didn't possibly know the answer, who wasn't stored in their memory banks anywhere, even unconscious memory,
but that has a very objectively true or false answer, or chemistry question, or my social security number.
And I would ask first, is this a reasonable thing to ask that channel source, and they go, sure.
And the answer was reliably wrong every time.
Yeah.
And so it's easy for a skeptic to do that, and then say it's all bunk, thrown all out.
Like, they're obviously not downloading from some source of all knowledge,
because we can ask for very discreet things, and we don't get the answer right more than statistically random.
We pretty much don't ever, if it's those types of things.
I wouldn't throw it all out. I did, when I was 20-something.
But as I explored more, I'm like, why is it then that when a person comes in and says two sentences,
the person, the psychic gets quiet, and then comes and says, you're getting a divorce right now.
And they're like, what the fuck? I'm getting a divorce. How did you know that?
And that kind of phenomena actually does happen, and we can describe it as cold reading.
But I'm saying that there's something other than conscious cold reading, right?
The way that somebody in the FBI might be trained to cold read what is your vocal pattern and intonation
and eye movement and body language actually showing.
I'm saying that our other than conscious mind can do that better than our conscious mind can, and it can be trained and developed.
Can I respond for a second?
So there's a distinction I want to run by you.
And what comes to mind right away, I just picked this arbitrarily, would be funerals.
You can, I believe, I've never done it, but I believe you can hire professional mourners for a funeral.
These, you know, 1-800-we-cry-for-money, right?
You can hire people to come to a funeral in large numbers, they're all dressed in black, and they will cry.
And they will go through the motions necessary for a good funeral.
And then you could have somebody who's been married to their spouse for 50 years genuinely bereaved.
Superficially, those things would look similar, but I think you and I would agree that the experience of genuine grieving
can't be put into the same bucket as mourners on demand, you know?
So I feel, this is, you know, my gut, my suspicion, which is often all we've got to go on,
that the world of professional channeling, however well-meaning it may be,
I don't, I just instinctively don't feel like it's the same thing as when somebody like Einstein or whoever
is just innocently going about their day and based upon their readiness, suddenly goes,
wow, where did that come from?
But they're not without any intention to be, without any language about channeling or downloading,
it's just like, wow, this thing suddenly came clear, now I've got to unpack it.
So I'm wondering if these two phenomena of people who set themselves up as channels
and these things we can hear about that happen quite spontaneously,
if they really belong in the same conversation.
Well, let's play with it, let's keep unpacking it, because I would offer that they might actually belong to a similar class of phenomena,
at least some of them.
So again, let's not take all people who charge money as a psychic in the same way,
and obviously someone might not charge money, but let's take people that we would say-
But still be identified as a, I'm a channel.
I don't care.
Let's take people who, whether they describe what they're doing as channeling or being intuitive,
they share things with people that they don't know where they got,
that people end up feeling are insightful, more than was obvious,
and that their own described process is believed as earnest, isn't just conscious cold reading.
What I think is happening is, let's say, I'm someone who's really been interested in people my whole life, since I was little,
and so I'm just watching people all the time, and I'm paying a lot of attention to people,
and my cognitive space, my intuitive space is just being filled with human dynamics a lot,
like Einstein's was physics, and like Leonard Cohen's was music, right?
I'm taking people in, and so now, when I'm watching someone,
I'm really fully with them, paying attention on a lot of channels to their voice and to their body language and to lots of things.
Now, I'm not going to remember hardly any of it.
I don't remember what you wore last time, but at some level, I was exposed to that information, right?
So there's that possibility that that information is available.
It's just not something that is consciously available on demand.
So, you come in, I'm a psychic, and you say three or four lines, and I say, okay, wait,
and I am now listening for my channel, whatever it is,
but when I'm listening for the aliens or the angels or the acoustic records or just being quiet and receptive,
and all of them, I'm shutting off, analyzing, going quiet and receptive.
The hypothesis is that there is a different kind of neural process that occurs,
where conscious thinking has to be serial, because we can really only think one thought at a time.
So we have to say, these pieces of data, these axioms, these logical steps, this conclusion.
Other than conscious mind, being able to process much more things at once can do a parallel process,
but conscious mind turning off, getting receptive, parallel process occurs,
and I just take the gestalt of everything I got from you, run it across all the things that I've been exposed to
and look for similarities, and it happens to be that there is a kind of similar pattern that pops up,
kind of not because of a serial process, but because of a parallel process.
I'm like, are you getting a divorce?
Because the eight other people that had similar things were all getting a divorce,
and I don't know where it came from, but I get an intuition in the ha that seems to have come from nowhere.
I'm saying, so the idea is maybe it comes from a download, right, from some outside source.
I'm offering it as the possibility of it in upload from deeper pattern analysis,
not as a conscious process, but as an actual process that happens when someone has a lot of domain knowledge
in a space and enters a state of increased coherence that allows a different kind of processing of that knowledge.
Got it, okay.
And so if I'm Einstein, and I'm working on the math of relativity,
and I get to a place where I'm just stuck, and then I go and I just puff my pipe and look at the clouds and blank out,
now what's happening is a different set of neural processes take all that I just input, contrast it with everything else that I had
and see if an insight comes, then I get an aha, then I go back to the chalkboard and I start working again,
so I get stuck, and then I go back and puff my pipe, and there's this back and forth between serial and parallel processing.
And I think that Einstein very intentionally did that practice because he became aware that as soon as he got to a point of diminishing returns
on the logical part, if he went and took a break, an insight would come.
Yeah, and I think we all of us, probably you and I, have had moments like that already today,
you know, where you either alone or in discussion with other people where you pursue something through the best of your faculties
and then just, and in giving up something new reveals itself.
If you're enjoying this podcast with Arjuna Arda and his radically brilliant guest,
you might also enjoy our eight week online group coaching program.
It's an opportunity to go deep and get stable in practices that enhance your own brilliance.
We only take 20 participants at a time, so in a small and intimate group, you can go through the whole radical brilliant cycle.
You'll have an accountability partner in another brilliant aspirant from somewhere around the world.
The eight week coaching program involves eight one hour webinars with Arjuna Arda and a group of other radical brilliance coaches.
You'll also receive one 30 minute coaching session with your own personal coach every week and one 90 minute coaching session with Arjuna himself.
It's the ideal opportunity to drop deep into yourself, into the source of your own creativity,
and to get support for an entire eight weeks of minding your own radical brilliance
and bringing it forth into a project or creation that can truly serve the future of humanity.
Find out more at radicalbrilliance.com and click on the programs tab.
So what I'd like to ask you is, we've set up a bit of a parallel between the world of psychics who do this reading and the world of greatness.
I would say a tiny percentage of what happens in psychics that actually seems to be the meaningful part.
So we've set up this parallel of a legitimate psychic reading or psychic or channel,
and then parallel to that is these moments of greatness that propel forward the evolution of humanity.
So I'm wondering if we could kind of now let the psychic thing go and just stay with the greatness together for a little while and just explore.
So when somebody brings something in, when something arrives fresh,
a song that doesn't sound like any other song, a technology that doesn't look like anything we've had before,
I don't know what would be a recent example, I guess actually maybe the initiation of blockchain and the understanding of blockchain is an idea.
I don't know that much. Do you know much about the origins of blockchain?
What's the guy's name? The guy who we don't know who it is?
Satoshi.
Yeah, Satoshi.
As I understand it, that wasn't really a modification of something else. It was really original thinking.
Wouldn't that be true?
There's a big question on what original thinking is.
Yeah, let's go there.
So first in terms of the parallel between those, it's just that they're both places where we can hear the term download.
And I'm offering that what is meaningful in those phenomena could be thought of as an upload.
And the psychic, we just take off all the gibberish part, we say just intuitive people who've paid attention to people.
So just like the scientists have paid attention to science, if I've paid a lot of attention to physics, I'll have a better intuition for physics.
Because my intuition is a lot more primed.
If I've paid a lot of attention to animals and the wilderness and the particular area, I'll have a better intuition when I walk around the wilderness.
If I spend my life paying attention to humans, I'll just kind of make sense of stuff faster, better, because I have a lot more pattern recognition.
So let's examine like a serial entrepreneur like, say, Steve Jobs, who, well, admittedly, I was going back to the first max,
but the icon based software on the first max actually did come out of the lab at Xerox.
But let's take, for example, the way that he reinvented the phone and saw capacities for a phone that we never, no one had associated with a telephone.
And he really conceived the first smartphone, right?
And then later the iPad, I mean, we didn't even know that the iPad is famous because he managed to popularize something no one knew they needed, right?
There was no demand for anything like that, he just created it.
So what's going on there?
I mean, we could look at multiple examples of innovators, but in a mind like that that keeps doing that over and over again,
is that simply a matter of taking a lot of input, letting it just stay in a sort of, letting it just stay in an unconscious way,
and then bing outcomes the product, or is there something else?
Can we explain everything in terms of input or uploading that is delayed and then produced, or could there be something more?
Yeah, so I would say this is an interesting and important question that I want people to hold as a question and not default to being too certain of an answer about.
Yeah.
But I'll share some thoughts about it.
One of the questions on the topic of original thinking or creative thinking is, is there such a thing as original or is it all combinatorics, right?
Taking a number of ideas and combining them in a different way.
And so you get a new result through combinatorial process, but it was still dependent upon inputs.
I would say dependent upon inputs, but not predictable from the inputs.
And that's because it's the inputs plus the synergy of those that leads to emergent properties that weren't found in those parts separately.
And so if I take a look at Ford making the car from buggies, like nobody knew they wanted a car, but we knew we wanted transportation.
We already had things with wheels.
We knew that horses were kind of limiting.
There's a lot of horseshit and whatever.
So it wasn't totally out of nowhere.
The same if I look at the computer from a typewriter, the same if I look at an iPad from a laptop, right?
It was like I'm taking some kinds of things that people find interesting and recombining ideas.
But then combining them, it's like a cell respirates, even though none of the molecules that make it up on their own respirate, you're like, well, where does the respiration come from?
Well, it doesn't come from any of the parts.
It comes from the way all the parts come together has this emergent property of life, the bunch of molecules that we don't define as life.
And so it's, I think there's something to what we call creativity that is combinatoric, but then finding the right combinatorics where the synergy emerges and the emergent property is what we call the originality or the novel.
Yeah, it's beautiful.
So let's do a quick review of some of the pivotal moments in that we know about in recorded history and let's test this out.
So maybe we can take turns.
So as far as I can see a super pivotal moment that changed not just astronomy, but a whole lot more was Copernicus, right?
So prior to Copernicus, everybody thought that the heavenly bodies went around the earth.
But the problem with that was that they were now completely chaotic.
So it postulated a God with ADD where things were going this way and that way, the up and down, left and right.
And then Copernicus postulated, wait a minute, if in fact everything was going around the sun, then we would actually, then we could actually make sense of the movement of all these bodies.
So not only did that explain astronomy, but it actually allowed us to believe in some kind of organizing principle that was coherent.
And that ushered in the Renaissance basically ushered in a huge advancement in science and architecture and everything because suddenly we could believe in a coherent universe.
So Copernicus was a pivotal moment.
It took until Galileo to prove it.
And it was pure postulation until Galileo.
So how does Copernicus stand up to ingesting bits of data, waiting outcomes, the result versus going into an empty state and something.
In other words, how does Copernicus stand up to uploading versus downloading?
Sure.
So if I, there's a couple of different elements.
There were a bunch of cultures before Copernicus in Europe that had postulated a heliocentric solar system.
And so there's definitely a question if Copernicus had actually become aware of the Eastern thought or other system style.
And there were other people that were working in related areas.
So it could be taking some ideas and advancing them.
But we could also easily imagine that he was the first person to think about that even within his frame, even if other people thought about somewhere else within his frame.
But I don't have to take a download to say I'm taking a different perspective.
This is, even by a rational process, I could say, all right, well, this model of explanation throws all these errors.
I get all these kind of incongruency.
So then I have to keep adjusting why God is crazy to do this.
And he goes, is there any other explanation?
And try on another explanation.
Well, what if instead of, it seems like the sun is going round us.
But what if we're going around the sun?
Just, I don't need to download out of nowhere to just be able to run other rational hypotheses.
And we can all do this kind of process of saying, is there another perspective I could take?
Is there another hypothesis I could generate?
Even if I've never heard that one before, I'm just going into perspective and hypothesis generation.
And then some of them will yield interesting results.
So when Einstein was thinking as a young person, like, so Galileo talked about being on a train,
going at a fixed speed and things that happen, whatever.
What if the train was going at the speed of light?
What if it was a...
Galileo?
Talked about going on a train?
Not at the speed of light, but yeah, he talked about inertial reference frames.
But not train, right?
Galileo talked about an inertial reference frame.
And so Einstein was thinking about inertial reference frames.
And then he's like, well, what would an inertial...
As a thought experiment, what would the perspective be like if I'm writing on a light beam?
If to see requires light hitting my eyes, could I actually see something if the light could never catch up to me?
So he's doing this thought experiment, but he's thinking about a reasonable thing.
He's just taking the perspective of a light beam.
So when you say where does creative thinking come from, one place it comes from is taking other perspectives.
And so taking the perspective of the sun could help Copernicus get good insights.
Taking the perspective of a light beam could help Einstein get good insights.
So that's one kind of creative tool.
You'll notice that taking the perspective of other people will help interpersonally, profoundly.
And one of the things that I really want to do most of the time in personal relationships is say,
before I talk, do I get the other person's perspective well enough that I can share it with them and they don't need to add anything?
Otherwise, why do I even want to share my perspective when it might be totally wrong?
It might be based on misunderstanding them completely.
When if I really understand where they're coming from, I might have a completely different take on what I currently hold as my perspective.
Let me ask you a question for a minute because you just spoke about innovation really arises from trying on different perspectives.
And then you contrasted that into personally with taking on the other person's perspective.
What would happen if we postulated taking on the perspective of the whole?
I think that this is important.
You can't take on the perspective of the whole.
You can only take on lots of perspectives because perspective, the definition of perspective is a frame of perception.
It's a point of view.
And so do I see this microphone right now?
Well, I see a perspective on it, but I can't see what's on this side of it.
I can't see what's underneath it.
I can't see what a microscope's perspective would see.
I can't see if I took it apart and looked at the inside.
I can't see it the way that if I zoomed out and saw it in the context of the whole room.
So am I really seeing it?
Well, I'm seeing a perspective on it.
But does that give me all the information about it?
No.
So perspectives are inherently reductions of information.
The perspective on the thing has less information than the thing itself has.
So what you're saying is if we could find a way to include multiple perspectives.
I start to get a more holistic and never complete picture.
How can we apply that to our current predicament historically and the place we are in history?
Because we know looking back that we've got five to 10,000 years of recorded history.
We know from anthropology and from archaeology that we've got way longer than that,
that we've been around somehow and that life has been around.
And even though we're facing potential catastrophe,
it seems, I think intuitively, we feel something's going to survive.
It may not be everything that we have in the way that it is right now,
but something's going to continue.
And that something that continues can be in a spectrum of well-being,
of catastrophe to pretty good survival.
So how can we apply taking multiple perspectives to the kind of thinking we need
to create the best possible future?
Yeah, I mean, it's both foundationally important and kind of obvious, right?
When you set it up like that.
So when we come back to saying no perspective on a thing is the thing.
Then what we get is that truth itself is trans-perspective.
And so every perspective has at least some truth in it.
But like I'm looking at, I'm looking at this side of the microphone.
The other side of the microphone might be painted different colors, right?
It might have different symbols on it.
And so we could get in an argument over what does the microphone look like?
So we could get in an argument over what the microphone looks like or anything, right?
What is the east side of the building versus the west side of the building?
And there's truth in it.
But I might have yellow glasses on so the whole thing is distorted.
I might have a fisheye lens on that distorts the whole thing.
But that distorted view still has some truth quotient.
I just have to be able to address for the distortion.
So all perspective is at minimum partial, oftentimes partial and distorted,
and yet still has some actual signal getting through.
And yet the truth of the thing, what is the building actually like,
can't be held in any of the perspectives.
So then the question is, what is the minimum set of perspectives that I need to take?
And how do I put the partial truth in those perspectives together?
And how do I correct for distortion such that I start to actually get a larger understanding,
but not picture of the whole?
The moment I try and make it a picture, if I want to make a picture of what the building looks like,
that includes the inside end, the outside and the east side and the west side,
I can't make a picture, right?
So I would have to distort it and then the whole thing would be wrong.
I can make a video tour, but now I've had to add the dimension of time to allow multiple perspectives.
And so the desire to be able to get on the outside of reality,
not be part of it and be able to see the whole thing at once is actually a bad idea.
So how does collaborative co-creation affect what you've just said?
Because actually, theoretically, one person would be limited by what you've said.
So a group of people working together would reduce that limitation.
Well, each person is going to have a perspective that might have some distortions,
some truth and some partiality.
So then the question is, is there a process of conversation that we can go through that can...
Now, if I think that my perspective has no distortions,
then I'm going to be limited in the type of conversation I can have with you.
If I think my partial perspective isn't partial and it's the truth and the whole truth,
I'm going to be very limited in the kind of conversation what we can do.
But if I know that my perspective is partial and I'm open to the idea it might have a distortion I can't see,
and I'm also open to the idea that it might have something novel to add that others aren't seeing,
now we can actually have a meaningful conversation if we're all in that place.
Then we can say, well, if some other people can see the same spots as me,
at least parts of the same spots, and multiple of them aren't seeing the red that I'm seeing,
maybe there's a distortion, how do we check it out?
And if you're seeing something else over here, maybe there's a partiality, how do we show those together?
And this should be what the art of conversation is, which should be at the foundation of civics, right?
Which is how...
But first at the individual level, how do I make sure I'm sense making well?
How do I try and correct for perceptual distortions, biases, right?
And how do I try and take as many perspectives within myself as I can?
And how do I remove my identity from my perspective so that I can be trans-perspectival
as opposed to being attached to an identity and an in-group that all shares that perspective, right?
And then can I actually listen to you and try that perspective on?
Can I actually go and be in your spot, try that perspective on, try multiple on,
and then be able to have a trans-perspectival frame?
Not frame, trans-perspectival relationship with reality that is not holdable in one frame.
As you're listening to this conversation with Arjuna Arda and his radically brilliant guest,
you might feel inspired to go deeper into your own expression of radical brilliance.
Come join us for a one-week radical brilliance laboratory held in a beautiful rural location
in the Sierra Nevada mountains of California.
During the laboratory, you'll have an opportunity to dive deeply into all four quadrants of the brilliant cycle.
This means you'll be able to explore experiences of consciousness without boundaries.
And you'll be able to start accessing original impulses of creativity from within yourself
that can become your unique contribution to the world.
You can get in touch with your own learning and integrate mistakes that will allow you to mature and grow.
You'll have the chance to deeply mine your own resources as well as connect with other brilliant people
in a small, intimate context for a week.
You can check out the Radical Brilliance Laboratories at radicalbrilliance.com under the Events tab.
So let's explore also, you've just posed questions very valuably.
Referencing, referencing, can I do that?
But by definition, when we collaborate or when a group of people collaborate,
each individual has the opportunity to do exactly what you've just said.
So it's not just one person now seeing how many perspectives they can include.
What happens when many people not only represent different perspectives,
but all have the shared intention to become multi-perspective?
So if we think about the way that our brain intakes information from our sensory organs,
if I just have one eye, I can have distortions because where the optic nerve comes into my retina,
there is actually a spot where light's not hitting.
So my eye has to move back and forth to be able to kind of fill that in, but I can have distortions.
And I don't have depth perception in a single eye.
So I've got these two eyes and they overlap what they can see, right?
So that does a couple things.
It gives me error correction because where there is a mistake in this one
or where there's a hole in the light, this one will be able to see.
And because I can now calculate the hypotenuse of the triangle between them,
I get depth perception.
And because I can see the difference in the periphery from this one and this one,
I get peripheral vision.
So I don't have the left eye and the right eye in a debate with each other, right?
Arguing over who is right.
They're completely collaborative.
They're completely collaborative in a way that gives error correction to both of them
and then what we call parallax,
which is additional information that neither had on their own.
Neither had depth perception, neither had clear periphery.
Now then, so the brain's job is not to have them debate.
And it's not just to add them together.
It's to do this almost like magical, phenomenal process
of being able to get rid of the distortions in both
and then get new synergistic information that was contained in neither,
but is contained in the contrast of them.
There's one interesting thing about that analogy,
because when you talk about two eyes, there are two eyes,
and actually biologists say that it's more accurate to put a body as a community of cells
than as, I know, it's still about the body as a thing is really inaccurate
in the same way we're talking about, you know, a crowd of football games.
It's not a thing.
It's a collection of individuals.
So, you know, we know this, that many of the cells in the body
can exist and be transplanted.
They can exist in the autonomous of the body.
So the eyes, each eye is like its own thing,
but the interesting thing about that analogy is it's been governed by a single intelligence.
You've referred to it as, they're not two brains when operating each eye.
So how could we learn from that in the same way like a beehive operates that way?
How can we posit a way of creating the future
where something similar happens in the way that you and I could collaborate,
but really with the experience of being governed by one intelligence,
that we are both instruments of?
Yeah.
So let me give another example that will be important for how we do this.
So now I've got two eyes that are doing this for vision.
I've got two ears that are doing a similar thing for hearing.
And the sound waves are going to hit this year first and then this year later
if the origin of the sound is coming from there.
And so I can get an awareness of where things are in the space
based on the difference in the ears.
It can also be louder on here, right?
Yeah.
And so now the brain has to run a parallax between the ears,
but then I've also got between the ears and the eyes,
which are totally different types of information,
not just different locations of a similar type of sensor,
because I can see where something is and hear where it is.
And if I get conflict between those, then we throw an error, right?
I can hear something and turn around to see it to try and verify
and get additional information.
And so not only is the brain working on creating a unification,
rather than say a singular, I'll say there's a unifying process
that creates continuity between the left eye and the right eye,
left in the right ear, but also between the ears and the eyes.
And also between the ears and the eyes and proprioception
and smell and the internal sensing and external sensing
and all of the stuff to create a coherent sense of self
and a coherent sense of reality so that it can navigate.
You know what I'm realizing as you speak,
is that actually there's another element that we haven't,
I don't feel we've quite labelled coherently enough
that we've got two ears, two eyes, a brain,
but we've also got an incredibly complex, high-speed communication mechanism
between all of them.
We've got neurons that are also an intrinsic part of that whole piece,
which I guess would be analogous to highly effective communication between people.
So if I look at the way the sense organs all get processed together,
to get a perspective on self and a perspective on the world,
that factors all of them, tries to factor the distortions and limits out of each,
tries to give synergistic information across them
that allows me to navigate the world well.
I can see that this happens on so many levels.
I can now, rather than look at the sense organs,
I can look at the neurons and say each neuron is doing some information processing.
But a whole neural network, or the brain as a whole,
is doing synergistically more information processing
than the sum of those neurons separately.
Some of the neurons will actually get some wrong information processing.
They'll throw some errors.
And if those errors keep cascading, then we'll get major problems.
So the brain has processes of error correction
where if one particular neuron throws some error,
there are ways of being able to detect that,
meaning I'm getting information from this neuron over time
where I can contrast its signal this second versus a second to go in a second from now.
I'm also getting information from other neurons nearby, right?
And there's a way of being able to contrast all that
so that I can get both error correction and parallax.
Again, information that exists only in the contrast of these different information
is not on any of them on their own.
If we started to think about humans as sense organs or humans as neurons
and being able to say we're all sensing something, we're all processing some information,
rather than debate with each other,
or rather than say we're processing such different types we can't interact,
we have to only interact with other specialists of our type,
like eyes and ears not wanting to work together, or are we open to the...
Or left and right.
Right.
You're a left eye.
I don't go with you liberal types.
Right.
So, is it what if we said
that we are inevitably as individuals and as small groups
and as whatever partial groups affecting the other individuals
and other groups and partial groups are affecting the whole
and we're inevitably being affected by the whole.
And so, if we could have better coordination with the whole,
that would work out better for everybody,
we can see war as a failure of coordination between the people on both sides
to come up with a solution by them killing each other.
We can see environmental collapse as a failure of coordination
between our current self and our future selves and our grandchildren
where we're getting ahead today by doing things that are actually ruinous to our own future care.
And incidentally, both war and environmental degradation both have great analogies in the body.
Yeah, they do.
I think it'd be a good idea to, if you don't mind,
we can kind of start to bring this to a good conclusion
by seeing...
We've floated a lot of very useful ways of seeing things here.
How can we wrap this up that becomes poignantly relevant
to facing predicaments as a race today?
We've got big crises to face.
We've got also incredible opportunities for evolution.
So, I'm hearing there's a lot of things fairly near the surface
in what you've said that we can apply to evolution, to conscious evolution.
Let's see if we can...
We've talked about a number of things that are not the same thing,
not the same mechanism.
So, like the first point we're talking about, uploading or downloading
and recognizing that the depth of experience we have
and the depth of work and exposure and training in a field
through whatever mechanisms increases the kind of intuitive and insightful capacities in those fields.
Then you say, well, knowing that, I'll kind of trust my intuition more
in domains where I actually have a lot more domain knowledge.
In other ones, I'll listen, but I'll check it.
And in areas where I really want to have meaningful creativity,
I'm willing to work at it, like I'm willing to actually put the work in.
And I'll recognize that if I've hit a diminishing response curve
or I'm hitting my head against this thing, I'll see if I can go access quieter states.
And then I'll see if I can get any insights and come back.
There's a whole set of insights around that process.
The most important thing from this conversation relating to the world
and it almost sounds trite and yet it's so profoundly missing
is perspective taking and perspective seeking.
Actually, there's a guy from the kind of integral philosophy world named Clint
who was sharing with me a PhD dissertation he did a little while ago
that was quite interesting.
He's an interesting thinker.
It's been kind of long held that higher stages of consciousness
are associated with the capacity for perspective taking,
the ability to have identity decoupled from perspective.
And so as he was doing some kind of deeper study and analysis,
the insight that he came from was it's actually not so much perspective taking ability
as perspective seeking orientation.
It was a more active, not just I can take someone else's perspective competently
but that I'm actively doing it.
I think this is hugely valuable.
And St. Francis has seeked more to understand than to be understood
for so many reasons because the thing I wanted to be understood about,
I find out was wrong once I understood the other side.
I don't even want to be understood about it.
Once I have understood the other side,
what I have left to say is not only more clear and meaningful
but also there's more receptivity in the other person
since I've heard them and they know that I get it and I care
and I don't want to harm the things that they care about.
Like for all those reasons, but also when you come to things,
so this is key for if you want to stop war,
you have to actually have each of the sides be able to really get the come from
of the other side to come up with a proposal that could actually work.
If you want to get over left-right kind of polarization,
you've got to say, OK, as long as we keep making proposals
that either benefit the economy and ruin the environment
or help the environment and ruin the economy,
we're screwed if we keep making dumb proposals like that
because they both matter and when we put them in this area of trade-offs,
the people who are having the hardest time paying the bills can't be environmentalists.
And the people who walk through the forest a lot and are doing all right financially
don't get to care about your kids who have a hard time getting a job
that they would like to.
So let's see if we can do a better job of rather than making the other guy an enemy
because he's trying to harm the thing you care about
because it was a dumb proposal to begin with based on the theory of trade-offs.
Can we at least get their perspective to be like, oh, shit,
that perspective also has truth that matters.
I need to come up with a proposition that factors what is meaningful from that perspective too.
Well, I'm hearing that everything we've talked about today
from the downloading all the way through to the widening of perspective,
what all of that has in common is actually unveiling to some degree
from the grip of what you thought you knew to be true
because the downloading that we talked about actually requires you to take a break
from being knowledgeable and to enter into a more kind of spacious state
which is where often this kind of downloading experience happens
but equally being open to all of the perspectives realized
it requires you to release your grip on what you thought you knew
and what you thought you had on the answers.
Completely.
It's actually really such a valuable insight that
if I'm wanting a solution that I don't currently know
it's not going to come from rerunning the set of things I already think I know.
If I'm wanting anything that is actually creative or actually innovative
what that means is that it's not just the thing that I already had, right?
So there's a place of being able to, as you said,
enter into where new solutions might exist that I don't already have.
Yeah, exactly. I was just laughing when you were speaking
because sometimes when you hear somebody speak in a generalized way
you illustrate it and I was just remembering the times when
I've lost my car keys or something and I go look in the places it might be
and when I can't find it I go look in those places again
two or three times instead of looking in new places
I go back and look in the places I've already looked.
Thanks a lot for hanging out today.
I feel like what I really love about talking with you is
I see how you have the wisdom to stay in the exploration
more than a place of arrival and I find that incredibly refreshing
and it makes these conversations really alive
and like we're really at the frontiers
instead of sitting comfortably in the living room of our already populated area.
Totally.
Thanks a lot, man.
Thank you. It was fun.
Wow, I hope you enjoyed that conversation with Daniel Schmackdenberger
as much as I always enjoy hanging out with him.
I'm going to ask you to reflect a little bit on this conversation.
It's always helpful and we can move from passivity in listening to a podcast
into co-creativity where we make it real for ourselves.
So I'm going to ask you in the light of this conversation
to reflect upon your own experience.
Think about the last time something completely original came into your mind
that you'd never thought before.
What was it preceded by?
The last time you thought a thought that had never been thought before
or said something that had never been said before,
how did that come into your awareness?
Where did it arise from and what was the fertile soil in which that took place?
Everything that Daniel shared with us today came from his exploration of his own experience.
I want to invite you to do the same
and to learn something from your own experience about original creativity.
Thanks so much for being my guest on this podcast
and I look forward to catching up with you next time.
Thank you.
