In the previous lecture, we discovered that our number sense began with the idea of a
one-to-one correspondence.
Here in this lecture, we'll examine the words and symbols that early cultures employed
to represent numbers as abstract quantities.
Early advanced societies, including the Sumerians, the Egyptians, Mayans, and Chinese, developed
sophisticated numerical systems.
The Babylonians used counting tokens that led to one of the earliest forms of writing,
cuneiform.
While each of these different systems offered a means of keeping records, very few provided
an efficient means of calculation.
The desire to calculate led to the development of arithmetic aids, such as counting boards,
the precursors to the abacus.
Here we'll consider how these important arithmetical tools may have laid the groundwork for a place-based
number system that we use today.
Now where did our Arabic numerals, the ten symbols, zero, one, two, three, all the way
out to nine, where did those numerals come from?
The surprising answer is India.
But what about cultures whose primitive number language remained primitive?
Here we'll see connections between our modern world and societies whose number language
never progressed beyond one, two, many.
But even early societies are fully employed numbers to create sophisticated calendars,
keep track of agricultural production and record commercial transactions, but they still
struggled with a complex arithmetic idea, especially calculations that involved fractions.
The age-old struggle to perform complex arithmetic ran parallel with the age-old struggle to
devise an appropriate means to represent numbers.
Well, let's begin our study of early number systems in Mesopotamia.
We recall from the previous lecture the pebble jar used by the Sumerians as a means of counting
was one where tokens were used to later stamp markings on the jar itself.
Then the tokens were replaced by the stamped images in the soft clay.
Like 3500 BCE, the round jars evolved into flat tablets and with symbols embedded in
these tablets known as pictographs.
Here might be the moment when numbers were first viewed as nouns rather than adjectives.
Even fairly recently, different words were used for the same number of different objects.
There's a wonderful quote by the 20th century British philosopher and logician Bertrand Russell.
It must have required many ages to discover that a brace of pheasants and a couple of
days were in both instances the number two, again moving from these actual counting of
things to an actual noun rather than an attribute.
These pictographs created by a reed-stem stylist in clay were developed by the Sumerians and
Babylonians collectively known as Mesopotamians and I want to show you how this actually worked.
So for example, here we'd see a clay tablet and they would use a reed stylist similar
to this and they would just make an impression in the clay.
So for example, they would just do this or this or this and these circular impressions
you could see, well these actually represented the units 10, so each of these were 10.
And then they noticed something really interesting that if they took the stylist and instead of
imprinting straight in to get a circular image, they were to put it at an angle, a little bit
of a skew, then in fact they would see an image that looked like this or this or this
and these these a skew images actually stood for the number one.
So in fact this right here would represent well 10, 20, 30, 31, 32, 33.
This would represent 33, perhaps 33 units of oil for example.
So this is how the symbols used and you can see that with one instrument they were able
to produce two different styles of writing and they each took on a value.
Well soon what they did was they actually sharpened the reed stylist and it gave way
to a pointed stylist and therefore we were able to create more delicate shapes and in
fact these number symbols evolved into what is called cuneiform and may have been the
first instance of writing in human history all coming from our desire to articulate and
express numbers.
If we journey to Babylonia then we find that the Babylonians developed a system that used
symbols for powers of 60, so one, then 60, then 3600 and so forth.
So what's so special about 60, why were they using 60?
Well it happens to be the smallest number that can be divided evenly by two, you can
cut it in half by three, by four, by five and by six.
So it's a very convenient number if you're going to chop it up into equal pieces.
But historians aren't really sure why they actually used 60 although this is a property
about the number 60.
Well in cuneiform we see two different symbols, the so-called nail which represented the number
one and the dovetail which represented the number ten.
So you can see that the circle was replaced by the more interesting and artistic looking
dovetail which stood for ten.
Well their number system was both additive like the Roman numerals, we'd add up the symbols
we see, but also positional like the decimal system that we use today and I wanted to illustrate
both of these qualities for you with a couple of just quick examples.
So in this example here we see two dovetails and three nails.
So we add like we would with Roman numerals and so we'd see two dovetails, that means
ten and ten is twenty, three nails would be another three, so we add and we get twenty-three
just as we would with Roman numerals.
In this example here it's a very large number, we see one, two, three, four, five, five dovetails
that's then fifty, we add them all up and we see nine nails, so that's nine, so that's
fifty, fifty-nine.
But also there was a positional quality in cuneiform which is very similar to the way
we write numbers now, we've got a unit spot and then a ten spot and then a hundred spot
and so forth.
So in this case we have to remember that they were units using a base of sixty which means
that when we moved over to a spot it wasn't the tens spot but it was actually the sixties
spot, a little confusing.
But let's take a look at this example.
Here I see two nails in the sixties spot, so I have two sixties which would be 120 and
then I have one nail in the unit spot and so this number represents 121.
Now with this number written in cuneiform we see that we have ten dovetail in the sixties
spot and so that would be 600 and then in the unit spot I see a ten and a one which
is an eleven, so this represents the number 611.
Now you'll notice it's really important that we have the appropriate spacing, spacing here
is crucial and in fact there's actually some ambiguity since there was no symbol for zero,
zero wasn't even a number yet.
And so we have an ambiguity here, let me show you what I mean with an example.
If we take a look at this, what do we see?
We see two nails that are spread apart.
Well are they spread apart so that in fact that first nail is in the sixties spot, in
which case the number would be 60 plus one or 61, or is that nail actually further over
and in fact in the 3600s spot in which case this number would be 3600 one.
So you could see that there is definite ambiguity here without the utility of R0.
Now while this positional system was developed and put into effect by the second millennium
BCE it wasn't until about 300 BCE that they actually had a symbol for zero but it was
just as a placeholder.
In fact it was not considered a number and we'll talk more about the positional systems
and the importance of zero in the next lecture so we'll hold that off for now.
If we now move to ancient Egypt we see that the Egyptians also employed pictographs for
numbers as early as 3500 BCE but with the invention of papyrus which is an early form
of paper made from the papyrus plant the Egyptians were able to record more complex
bookkeeping and calculations. The famous rind papyrus from around 1650 BCE contains many
calculations and includes hieroglyphics for addition and subtraction.
Now this important document is our principal source of information about Egyptians' understanding
of numbers this is really a significant document.
The author is conjectured to be Imhopetep an architect and builder of the Sakara Pyramid.
Now the scribe of the rind papyrus the person who actually put pen to papyrus and wrote
it down was named Ames. Now the work actually opens in a very dramatic style which gives
you an indication of the import and of the magnitude of such a document so in fact the
rind papyrus opens with the following. Accurate reckoning the entrance into the knowledge
of all existing things and obscure secrets it is the scribe Ames who copies this writing
so very dramatic very important and he actually includes his name in this document which just
shows you that he was really very proud of this work. Now in fact scribes of the time
were also considered teachers they were the equivalent of teachers in fact back then and
there's a wonderful ancient quote about scribes as teachers that I wanted to share with you
now.
As for the learned scribes they did not make for themselves pyramids of copper with tombstones
of iron. They were unable to leave an heir in the form of children who would pronounce
their name but they made for themselves an heir of the writing and instruction they made.
I mean the truth is writing is our true link to our past and indeed a great monument perhaps
even more significant than the pyramids. I mean really I'm an educator so I'm biased
toward this but education really endures. Now we'll actually see the impact and the
influence of the rind papyrus and its scribe Ames and what they had on the world of numbers
throughout the entire course so we will continually return to Ames and the rind papyrus. If we
now move to ancient China we discover that the Chinese appeared to have had a number
system involving powers of ten since as early as 1400 BCE. Now with symbols for one through
ten in addition to having symbols for a hundred and a thousand. Now unlike the clay or papyrus
that we've seen in the very dry Middle East much less survived the humid Chinese climate
making their historical record of number development and their use much much sketchier.
However there is one thing that we have evidence of and that is that the ancient Chinese used
the words for large numbers in a poetic manner in order to create new words they would make
compound words using the words for large numbers and I wanted to give you some examples of
these which I think are really quite beautiful. For example they would take the number one
hundred and then put it together with thing so one hundred thing meant everything. You
see how the large number was actually depicting this everything all things. One hundred times
think that meant prime minister right someone of a great wisdom. One hundred worker meant
working class. One thousand direction meant versatile which I think is maybe my favorite
thing it really captures the image you know one thousand direction really is versatile
you're all over and a hundred thousand month meant antiquity. So again a very very poetic
way of using the words of numbers to capture what we mean. Now if we move to Central America
we find that the Mayans had a numerical system by the third century CE. Now their system
involved a powers of twenty and use symbols involving dots and lines. Now dots and dashes
still remain with us today if you consider the symbol that we use for noting the division.
If you take a look at these symbols what you actually notice here is certainly this limit
of four because we get to four and then the fifth thing you see the symbol actually changes
we go from the dots and the lines begin to come together and again we see reflections
of the barred gate method of counting that we actually use today. Now their system was
certainly more compact than some of the others we've seen but it still was cumbersome for
calculation so in this direction we haven't made an awful lot of progress. Now they did
have a symbol for zero but used it solely as a place holder and did not view it as a
number. Well now in all these and the other number systems it's important to note that
the utility dictates the level of complexity and the naming conventions of numbers. Primitive
cultures may function very well with words only for one, two and many. They don't have
billion dollar gross national products to actually record. In their world they only
need to be able to count up to say two. In fact according to the 19th century anthropologist
the Boracundos from Brazil would count up to four and then express many by pointing to
their hair and the implication here what they were saying was beyond four things were as
countless as the hairs on my head. Again we see this limit of four as a recurring theme.
Moving from hairs on our body to looking at our entire bodies we consider how the body
has influenced the development of the language of number. For the lingua people of Paraguay
words for numbers reflected body counting. The word for ten literally means finished
both hands which is a great image we've counted through both hands. I love this one the word
for fifteen means finished foot so we've got the two hands and one finished foot which
gives us fifteen. In Indonesia lima means five even though it literally means hand and
so you could see the reflections of our body within the notion of number. In some languages
the word for whole person is the same thing as twenty. Now as we move toward language
the language of numbers used today we discovered that there are many echoes of early references.
The Spanish word trace for three and the French word tray for very much derived from
the Latin word tress which means among other things beyond the ideas you have one two and
then beyond that's where we see very much or three. The word three in English is derived
from the Anglo-Saxon three which is related to the word throp which means a pile or a
heaping and we'll see more about these piles in the context of numbers a little bit later.
In the days of Romulus around 750 BCE the Roman calendar had ten months starting with
March and the last five months of the year the months five through ten were named in
order to describe their distinction in the position of the year. So they were called
Quintillus five, sextillus six and then maybe some that you've heard of September for seven,
October for eight, November for the ninth and December for the tenth. It's amazing
that September, October, November, December have within them the reflections of numbers
at least as they were positioned in the calendar year back then. Now January and February were
added later and Quintillus and sextillus were renamed Julius and Augustus in honor of the
two famous or infamous Caesars. So numbers arose out of utility however once the notion
of number came alive in our imagination it took on a life of its own and this gave birth
to number theory and that birth took place in India. By the sixth century BCE members
of a religious community in India called the Jains or the Janna were exploring mathematics
with a new and sophisticated perspective. The Jains classified numbers into different
categories and including at least four different types of infinity. Well we'll delve into
infinity at the beginning of lecture 20 toward the end of the course. Now many argue that
in some sense the Jains were the first number theorists that is the first group of individuals
to study number as an independent abstract object of interest. Now the Jains were really
a religious sect and thus they viewed number and mathematics more as a means toward their
religious studies than an end which is really a shame for the math community because with
their insights their contributions could have been even more dramatic than they actually
were. Now during the same period there was an interesting character trying to find his
way in life as well as find his way in numbers. This character was the influential Pythagoras
who was born in Samos off the Turkish coast in 569 BCE and traveled extensively including
to Egypt and to Mesopotamia before finally settling in the south of what we now know
as Italy so quite beautiful part of the world. Now Pythagoras led the ancient Greek movement
in the study of the abstract notion of number. In fact some believe that Pythagoras as well
as Plato might have been inspired by the work of the Jains and so again we can see cultures
coming together within the context of number. The Pythagoreans were among the first to consider
numbers as abstract objects rather than as tools and to prove theorems involving numbers.
Now we'll study the Pythagorean Brotherhood and their seminal work in greater detail in
lectures five and eight. Now this period truly represents the birth of the life of numbers.
Up to this point number meant by the way the natural numbers that is the collection of
numbers one, two, three, four and so forth. So when did the negative numbers enter the
scene? Again the development came at different moments in history in different cultures.
In the first century BCE the Chinese solved systems of equations simultaneously using
negative numbers. There's evidence of calculation with negative numbers in India between 200
BCE and 200 CE. In the third century CE the great Greek mathematician Delfantis described
an equation equivalent to an expression and the answer turned out to be negative five
and so he called this equation absurd because the answer was a negative number which to
him made no sense. Now this equation I can actually say in modern language it would
look like 4x plus 20 equals zero. So here's the first equation we see but don't worry
about it. The point is there's an unknown value for x and we have to figure out what
value of x would make that equation be true. Well the way we could actually solve this
is to subtract 20 from both sides and so that would then give us 4x equals negative
20 and then we could simply just divide both sides by four to undo the multiplication by
four in the x and I see that x equals negative five and therefore since this wasn't a number
in the mind of Delfantis he called this absurd. In the seventh century India negative numbers
were used to represent debt so you can really see that this was a sophisticated point of
view. In fact the great astronomer Brahma Gupta was the first to offer a systematic
treatment of negative numbers during this period. Well while negative numbers have been
around for over 2,000 years as late as the 18th century some important mathematicians
discarded negative solutions to equations because they viewed them as unrealistic. Today we
define the collection of integers that's the word we're going to use to describe the
collection of all the natural numbers together with their negatives and with zero. So the
integers consist of zero, one, two, three, four and so on together with negative one,
negative two, negative three and so on. That's the collection we're going to call the integers.
It's interesting to consider that just 200 years ago or so mathematicians dismissed negative
numbers as unrealistic. Today we consider these numbers of course very real and almost take
them for granted. Here again we see the challenge of expanding humankind's notion of number,
a recurring theme throughout our course. Given that we mentioned solving equations I thought
it would be fun to take a minute to enjoy some moments in ancient arithmetic from a
variety of different cultures. So from Sumerians let's consider some early division. One of
the oldest recorded division calculations dates from 2650 BCE in Sumeria and here was
the challenge. You have a granary with a given amount of barley that is to be distributed
so that each man gets seven sila of barley which was a unit of measurement. The question
was how to determine how many men there were. And in fact it's interesting because historians
actually conjecture that this division calculation was performed using the calculate, the tokens
that we mentioned in the previous lecture. Well let's now look at the early Egyptians
and we'll consider multiplication. They had a brilliant way of multiplying numbers and
this technique was called doubling and I want to give you an example. Let's actually multiply
13 by 21 and their method was to continually double the 21. So we start with 1 times 21
which is 21. Then we double. 2 times 21 is 42. Then we double again. 4 times 21 is 84
and then we double yet again and we see 8 times 21 is 168. Now if we were to double
again we'd have 16 times 21 but remember we're trying to multiply 13 by 21 so that would
exceed the value we're looking for. So we stop right here at 8 times 21 and then we
take the number 13 which is the real thing we want to multiply by 21 and we write 13
as the sum of these doubled numbers. So in fact how could we write 13? There's only one
way of writing 13 in terms of 1, 2, 4 and 8 and it turns out it's 8 plus 4 plus 1 that
equals 13. So what's 13 times 21? It's 8 plus 4 plus 1 all times 21 which we see is 168
from our chart plus 84 plus 21 and we see that the product is 273. And their method
really foreshadows the important modern notion of binary expansions that drives our technological
age and actually runs our computers and we'll describe this idea in the next lecture. They
also perform calculations involving fractions but only those with numerators wants, only
1 in the top of the fraction. These are called unit fractions and this convention actually
limited their understanding of more complicated numbers. If we now hop to the Babylonians
we can actually see the occurrence of an early square root. So the Babylonians were computing
square roots as early as 1800 BCE and they were able to actually calculate a very good
approximation to the number, the square root of 2. And in fact if you look at this image
you see a square and notice that we see three dovetails. Those three dovetails if you remember
means we have 30 and so this actually meant the square had size 30 and they need to actually
calculate the square root of 2 and if you notice in the image here we see the numbers
1, 24, 51 and 10 which actually gives the expansion for the square root of 2 but remember
the Babylonians use this funny base 60 expansion and so this would really be read today as
1 plus 24 divided by 60 plus 51 divided by 60 squared plus 10 divided by 60 cubed. And
if you would actually add that up on a calculator you would see a number 1.414213 which notice
actually agrees to the precise value of the number square root of 2 as you can see to
six decimal places which is really an amazing approximation without a calculator. In fact
what is a calculator? The question really is who is a calculator? Because before the
onset of modern calculation devices the word calculator referred to an individual who
would perform calculations. In terms of computing devices many ancient cultures performed calculations
on sand tables and this is really the earliest form of the abacus and so pebbles were used
inside the sand in various columns to mark the ones and the tens and so forth and moved
the pebbles back and forth to depict the addition or the subtraction. Perhaps this
is the inspiration for our place based decimal system. By the way it's another possible origin
for the zero symbol because when we take out a pebble it leaves an indentation around dimple
if you will in the sand and that of course means we have nothing there and perhaps that's
where we get zero. Well the sand table led to the abacus. The classic Chinese abacus
came to use in China during the 14th century CE. However long before that time the Chinese
as well as Egyptians, Romans, Greeks and Indians used simpler calculating boards similar to
the sand tables as early as 450 BCE. Now the use of these abacus varied from culture to
culture. In fact the 5th century BCE Greek historian Herodotus is credited with the
observation that the Egyptians move their hands from right to left in calculations while
the Greeks move from left to right. Well the abacus allows a very fast way of calculating
things and we still use it today. Well I want to close this lecture with the evolution of
the symbols that we use for numbers today. Our modern 10 Hindu Arabic numerals the symbols
0 through 9 arose from a mysterious mixing of traditions from two cultures. The origins
of the numerals themselves can be traced back to India and evolved from 400 BCE to 400 CE
and they grew out of the Brahmi numerals. These symbols were introduced to European nations
through the writing of Arab and Persian mathematicians and scientists. Today we refer to these symbols
digits as the Hindu Arabic numerals. And where do these origins come from? Well one we understand
this one. Two if you look back to the Chinese for example we see those two lines. If you
connect those two lines very quickly you get a two and the three hash marks if you connect
them you actually get a three. But historians actually disagree on the origins of the remaining
numerals so those still remain in mystery those actual symbols. Now writing these numerals
actually became a form of art as we see in the work of a variety of artists. The 10 Hindu
Arabic numerals actually formed the heart of our current decimal system and that system
is one that finally allows humankind with an efficient means of performing calculations.
Now we'll describe this powerful decimal system an example of what is referred to as a place
based or positional system in our next lecture. But for now let's just enjoy the evolution
of the abstract idea of number.
