Welcome to the magical and spiritual allure of number. Numbers were not only important
tools in early civilizations, but they were also a source of mystery, entertainment and
even spirituality. Once humankind named numbers, there grew a curiosity to study them in their
own right. How did numbers capture the imagination of our ancestors? Perhaps even the most primitive
thinkers recognized that numbers hold the key to enormous power. Numbers were used to name the gods
in Mesopotamia. In ancient Greece, the Pythagoreans, perhaps inspired by the religious sect the
Jains from India, were the first to view numbers as abstract objects and elemental in all matter
and living things. They also discovered that the most fundamental harmonies in music arose from
ratios of natural numbers. Numbers that were connected with triangles and squares were thought to
have special powers. In this lecture, we'll look at some of the ideas of the Pythagoreans
and other practitioners of number mysticism. So-called perfect numbers and amicable numbers
are notions that originated in ancient Greece and continue to capture the imagination of individuals
around the world today. Games involving numbers date back as early as 2000 BCE. One of the most
popular and persistent number challenges is the so-called magic square. Over 3,000 years old,
magic squares have been used to ward off the plague, appease the gods, and entertain the curious.
Here we'll explore some of the fascinating appearances of magic squares throughout history,
including in the work of Benjamin Franklin. While entertaining and thought-provoking,
number recreation draws humanity into explore many more serious and subtle properties of number.
Well, let's begin our journey into number mysticism with a look at some rituals and beliefs
involving numbers. The Babylonians associated a sacred number to each of their gods. 60 was the
number associated with Anu, their all-important god of heaven. Now, now recall that the Babylonians
had used a base 60 number system, and so 60 was their most important number, and perhaps that's
why they associated it with their most important god. 30 was the number associated with Sin,
the lunar god, because the Babylonian month was 30 days long. Now, as we saw earlier, many modern
religions specify the number of prayers to be recited, and hence the use of the rosary beads
that we saw in a previous lecture. In Islam, the number five is a good omen. There are five
elements of the Muslim profession of faith, five daily prayers, five keys to the mystery
in the Quran, five senses, and many more, perhaps five more. The number four is avoided in Japan
because the word for four, she, sounds very similar to the Japanese word for death.
Of course, many cultures today, there's a well-known superstition about the number 13. Many people
dread Friday the 13th. Many people, in fact, don't like staying in hotels that have a 13th floor.
In fact, some hotels don't even have a 13th floor, and in fact, Scottish airports have no gate 13.
Instead, what they have are gates 12B, so there you have it. We now turn our attention
to the famous cult of Pythagoras. In the 6th century BCE, Pythagoras, perhaps as we noted in
lecture three, inspired by the religious sect known as the Jains in India, ushered in the dawn
of a new era in how people viewed and studied numbers and mathematics in general. The Pythagoreans
elevated the study of numbers to the highest intellectual level. Now, they actually had a
distinction between what they called arithmetic, which was the study of numbers, the abstract
study of numbers that we're partaking in right now. They separated that from what they called
logistic, which to them was the practice of using numbers for calculation. They really focused on
the more abstract notion of arithmetic and left the calculation issues aside.
In their studies overall, they actually focused on four disciplines, arithmetic, geometry,
astronomy, and music. Let me just say a word about geometry in this context. Here,
the ancient Greek sense of geometry also included the measurement of lines and computing the areas
of objects. Embedded within geometry, in fact, it was number theory. Number theory was part
of geometry. When we say geometry, in the Greek sense, that was also number theory. We see arithmetic
geometry, astronomy, music, two of those actually contained number theory. Those four subjects
formed what was known and continues to be known as the quadrivium. Later on, this evolved into
what we think of as the liberal arts. Here we see that, in fact, the foundation of the liberal arts,
really half of the foundation sits on number theory. We see how central it is in our understanding
of things. Now, they studied numbers as abstract objects, the Pythagoreans, exploring their intrinsic
properties. Now, why do they put so much energy in understanding the abstract notion of number?
This is an important question for us to think about. Well, one of the Pythagoreans' core beliefs
was that the divine ideas which created and maintained the universe are those of number. Thus,
the way to obtain perfection and become closer to the gods was to study arithmetic. In fact,
Pythagoras himself is said to have said, number is the first principle, a thing which is undefined,
incomprehensible, and having in itself all numbers. Here we can see really how Pythagoras viewed
number in the same incomprehensible and undefined light that he actually might have viewed the gods.
So we see this connection. Now, to place their number contemplation in context, I'd like to say
a few words about the group known as the Pythagoreans. Now, Pythagoras himself founded a community of
scholars that he called the Brotherhood. Now, in fact, the Brotherhood was not a collection of men,
but really a community of families. And in fact, some scholars conjecture it was the inspiration
for Plato's Republic. Again, we see evidence where the emphasis on number really generated
something extremely significant, such as Plato's Republic, which seems to be outside the realm
of mathematics. Again, number has influenced so much of our history and our culture. Women
were included in this Brotherhood as scholars, which was very unusual and extremely progressive
for the time. In fact, after Pythagoras' death, his wife, Theano, and his daughters,
led the Brotherhood. So we see this evidence of women being equals in this endeavor.
Now, the Brotherhood believed that the numbers, now remember from the Pythagorean point of view,
numbers were the natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so on. Well, they believed that these
numbers were basic to all qualities of matter and living things. Now, they kept their studies secret,
passing down beliefs and results in the oral tradition. Now, in fact, let me just say a word
about how the studies would take place. When a new member of the Brotherhood would enter,
they would take a vow of silence, and so they would sit quietly and listen to the more senior
scholars speak and pontificate, and then after some unit of time, the junior members would then
be allowed to speak. This might sound strange, but really, it mirrors a traditional education
as we know it, if you think about it for a moment, because traditionally, students come into a
classroom and they say nothing, they're very quiet, and the instructor pontificates on the subject,
and then once the students graduate, they're allowed to speak, I guess. But you can see a
reflection of that, I think that's what was going on during this period. Well, since they really
adopted an oral tradition, our knowledge of Pythagoras' work is based on the writings of
scholars in later generations, including Euclid and Aristotle. Now, in many ways, they were a
peculiar group. The community had many strict and unusual rules, including, for example,
a prohibition on eating beans, that was not allowed. You couldn't go hunting, and you were not
allowed to wear wool. Now, they dressed in white, and they slept on white linen bedding, and they
were vegetarians, and members who betrayed the Brotherhood's secrets were severely punished,
and we'll talk about that in a future lecture, in fact. Now, the Pythagoreans believed that
numbers were the secret principle of reality, and as such, numbers had individual traits and
characteristics, and they actually took on almost a personal human form, and I thought I would share
with you some of the numbers and the characteristics that the Pythagoreans held. Now, the most important
number to the Pythagoreans was the number one, which they call the monad, which to them meant
unity, and in fact, we still use the word unity to represent one quite often. And this was the
generator of all numbers, which makes sense, because if you take one and add it to one, you get two,
and if you add it to one again, you get three, and this was their notion of number, was the
counting numbers, and so one gave birth to all the numbers, so it was the most important, and also
was given the assignment of being the number of reason. So one was the number of reason. The
number two, they called the dyad, which represented diversity and opinion, and even the diversity
of opinion, and this was also the first female number, so this is the first number that actually
has a sex associated with it, and in fact, the idea of having the female number hooked up with
this notion of diversity of opinion might, in fact, be the inspiration of the old adage that
it's a woman's prerogative to change her mind. It really might have come out of this Pythagorean
sense of the number two. The number three was referred to as the triad, and it represented
harmony, and I really like this, because it represents harmony, because three is actually
two plus one, and two meant diversity, and one meant unity, so if you take diversity and add
unity, you do get harmony, so a really beautiful way to see the number three. Also, three was
considered the first male number, so the first male number, so this is so much for the progressive
nature of the Pythagoreans. They believed that if you took a woman, which was two, and added reason,
which was one, you got male, so now this wasn't my, this is not in my opinion, I'm just reporting
the news here, so so much for the progressive nature. The number four was associated with a
square, since you can use four dots to actually produce the corners of a square, and four also
stood for justice or retribution, so that was the quality that was assigned to four, and we actually
see reflections of this today in our expressions, the squaring of accounts, or let's get the issue
squared away. You see again, we see reflections where numbers actually ended up being the
key ingredients to even phrases that we use in our everyday lives. The number five stood for
marriage, which makes sense if you think about female being two, and male being three, and if
you take two and three and add them, you get five, so that was marriage. The number six stood for
creation, quite possibly because if you take a female and a male, that's a two and a three,
and then you add a child, an offspring, that sum would be six. Now the number ten, which they
called the tectractus, was the most important and most holy number to them. It represented
the four elements of the universe in their eyes, fire, water, earth, and air. Now geometrically,
the tectractus was represented by ten dots arranged in an equilateral triangle, we have one dot on
top, and then two, and then three, and then four. Notice that if you add up those dots, one plus two
plus three plus four, it actually yields ten. The ten lines that form this triangle, or the numbers
one plus two plus three plus four, those four numbers, are what represent the fire, water, earth,
and air. In fact, the Pythagoreans had a chant that they would actually use, a prayer, if you will,
that actually was to the number ten and to this tectractus, and I wanted to share with you a
translation of that prayer that the Pythagoreans would use. Oh holy tectractus, thou that contain
us the root and the source of the eternally flowing creation, for the divine number begins with the
profound pure unity until it comes to the whole four, then it begets the never-tiring holy ten,
the key-holder of all. So you could see that they really liked ten, ten was a biggie. Well,
moving beyond the numbers of the gods in the Pythagoreans' minds, which were the
natural numbers, one, two, three, four, and so forth, the Pythagoreans
actually admired the relations between certain ratios of natural numbers and musical harmonies
as well as aesthetic proportions. Now they didn't consider ratios, in other words fractions,
to be actual god-given numbers. Fractions had no real existence to them beyond ratios of natural
numbers, and let me just say a word about that. It's a little bit peculiar because we think of
fractions as numbers just like we think of seven as a number, but remember the Pythagoreans lived
in a tightly different world, they had a different view of the cosmos, and so while here it seems
peculiar that a number like one-half wouldn't be considered a number, we have to put ourselves back
in a time where in fact that would make sense, where in fact the numbers were clearly defined as
one, two, three, four, five, and so on, and one-half was merely a combination of one and two in an
interesting way, looking at that ratio. So they saw them as ratios and not as god-given numbers.
Now in their study of music, they observed that strings with lengths in a ratio of one to two
vibrated in octaves, and strings with lengths in a ratio of two to three vibrated in a perfect
fifth. So they discovered several such fundamental musical ratios, and you could see the mathematics
actually incorporated in the sound, in the music that they produced.
The Pythagoreans were among the first to study the golden ratio. Now two numbers are in the golden
ratio if the ratio of their sum to the largest is equal to the ratio of the larger to the smaller.
So let me say that again. So if we have two numbers, we have a large one and a small one. Now if we
take a look at the ratio of the sum of these two to the larger one, then that ratio should
be equal to the ratio of the larger one to the smaller one. When we have two numbers that actually
enjoy that equality, then we say they're in a golden ratio. Now we can actually use the quadratic
formula to actually solve for what that golden ratio is, and while we won't do it here, it's not
important. Let me just report that the golden ratio numerically works out to be one plus the square
root of five all divided by two. And if you were to work this out on a calculator and look at the
decimal expansion, you'd see 1.618033 and so on. It continues forever. Well Pythagoras' wife,
Theano, was a mathematician whose best work is said to have been in the golden ratio, although
none of her writings have been uncovered, and maybe because she didn't write since this was
more of an oral tradition. But we have no evidence of it, but this is the conjecture.
The Pythagoreans studied special numbers that had certain geometric or arithmetic aesthetic appeal.
One such collection is the figurant numbers. Now figurant numbers are those that can be
visualized in particular geometric ways, including triangles, squares, pentagons, and pyramids.
For example, triangular numbers are numbers for which if you took that many dots, you could form
perfect equilateral triangles. For example, the smallest triangular number would be three,
because three points, of course, can produce a perfect equilateral triangle. And then the next
triangular number would be six, because we take these three and then add three more numbers here
to get a larger equilateral triangle, and you can build larger and larger such numbers.
The perfect squares, the square numbers, four is the smallest one because four points will
generate a square. And then the next one would be nine, which would be one, two, three, one,
two, three, one, two, three, forming a three by three square. So the next square number is nine
and so forth. And those are the perfect squares that we actually are familiar with. And then the
pentagonal numbers would be five at first, because five points will form a perfect pentagon.
And then the next pentagonal number is 12, as you can see, because you put them together to
make a larger pentagon. Okay, well, a perfect number is a number that's actually equal to the
sum of its proper divisors. Now, remember, a proper divisor is a number that divides evenly
into a number, and proper means that it's not the number itself. So a proper divisor is a number
that's smaller than a given number that divides into it evenly. Let's take a look at an example
to really solidify this idea in our minds. Let's consider six. Well, six is actually considered
a perfect number, because let's first of all find all the divisors or all the numbers that divide
in evenly into six. Well, there's one, one divides into evenly into everything, two, because six is
even, and then three, because three divides evenly into six. So the only divisors of six are one,
two, and three. And notice something really amazing. What if you add up those numbers?
One plus two plus three equals six. And that makes it a perfect number. Let's take a look at
another example. Let's take a look at 28. I claim that 28 is another example of a perfect number.
Well, let's find all the numbers that divide evenly into 28. We always have one, then there's two,
four divides evenly into it, as does seven and 14. So we have a bunch. But what happens if we just
add those numbers? What if we add one plus two plus four plus seven plus 14? Well, we actually get
28, an amazing coincidence. 28, therefore, is a perfect number. Well, you might be saying,
gee, it sounds like perfect numbers are all over the place. Well, they're quite scarce indeed.
Let's take a look at an example that's not a perfect number. Let's consider 10 and wonder if,
in fact, this is perfect or not. Well, what are the numbers that divide in evenly into 10,
the proper divisors? Well, there's one, there's two and five. Those are the only numbers that divide
in evenly into 10. Those are the proper divisors. What happens when you add up one plus two plus five?
You get seven and you get eight. And so you actually see that you don't get 10. So not so good,
not so good. Now, perfect numbers have actually captured the imagination of individuals throughout
the history and for centuries. The fifth century church father, Saint Augustine of Hippo,
was so moved by the perfect number six that we just saw that he actually declared, and I want to
read this to you because this is an amazing quote showing how important this religious man took the
number, the perfect number six. He said, six is a perfect number in itself. And not because God
created the world in six days, rather the contrary is true. God created the world in six days because
this number is perfect. And it would remain perfect even if the work of the six days did not exist.
A really dramatic sentence for a religious individual saying that six being perfect,
it almost trumps the number of days required to create earth in this religious context.
Well, numbers that, well, in fact, there are many, let me just say that there are many open
questions about perfect numbers that are still unanswered. Are there infinitely many perfect
numbers? We only have finitely many, we only know finitely many, and we don't know if infinitely
many perfect numbers exist. And no one knows an example of an odd perfect number, which is quite
mysterious. So do they exist or not? No one knows. Well, numbers that also attracted the attention
of the Pythagoreans were what are called amicable pairs of numbers. Now a pair of numbers, so if
we take two numbers together, we call them amicable. If a very peculiar thing happens, if in some sense,
if we look at the proper divisors of one and add them up, we actually get the second number.
And conversely, if we take the second number and look at its proper divisors, when we add those
up, we get the first number. So we kind of see a little reflection of the perfect number, but
not quite. We need two numbers here. Let's look at an example. Let's consider 220 and 284. I claim
these are amicable numbers, and let's verify that. So we have to do a calculation. First, let's find
all the proper divisors of 284. It turns out those divisors are 12471 and 142, which means that each
of those numbers divides unevenly into 284. Well, what happens when you add up those numbers?
Well, when you add up those numbers, you get the first number, 220. So you can see that 220 is
sort of linked up with 284, but it has to work the other way as well. So let's consider the
proper divisors of 220. Well, they turn out to be, there's a lot of them, by the way. There's one,
there's two, there's four, five, 10, 11, 20, 22, 44, 55, and 110. All those numbers divide
unevenly into 220. What happens when you add all those up? You get the second number, 284. So you
can really see these two numbers come together, and that's why they're called amicable. They're
very friendly to each other. Now, again, there are many open questions about amicable numbers.
Are there infinitely many pairs of amicable numbers? To this day, we don't know. We only
know finitely many examples. And are there any odd, even pairs of amicable numbers? That is,
are there any pairs where one is an odd number and one's an even number, and yet they're amicable?
No one knows if that's possible or impossible, and no one has an example. Well, questions involving
perfect and amicable numbers remain some of the oldest unanswered questions in all of mathematics.
So we're really seeing things that still capture the imagination, even though they come from
antiquity. Well, let's leave these open questions of the cult of Pythagoras for the moment,
although we'll return to the Pythagoreans and their view of number in lecture eight. But now
let's enjoy some recreation with numbers and just have some fun. Now, to generate a random number
for games and things, we have been known to toss dice. In fact, this is a really ancient tradition.
Dice made of fired clay dating from 3000 BCE have actually been found in northern Iraq.
And at the time, of course, the ancient players didn't have symbols for numbers. The dice were
actually before the numbers. And this is perhaps why they marked the sides of their dice with dots
to denote the quantities. And amazingly, we use the same configuration for our modern dice today.
5,000 years later, what we see, in fact, are the same exact configurations that they used so many
millennia ago. Absolutely amazing. That's where this comes from. So the reason why we have dice,
dots on dice is because we didn't have numbers. The dice came first. Well, some number games only
require the digits on our hand. Here's an ancient one that the Egyptians played with their fingers.
It was called Mora. And it was played as early as 2000 BCE. So you have two players. I'll be both
players, but they each at the same time would extend one hand and some number of fingers.
And simultaneously, each player would yell at a number. And if that number matched with the
number of fingers that was shown when you add them up of the two players, then that person gets a
point. For example, if the person would say six, then they would lose. But if the person would have
said three, they would have gotten a point. Not a very exciting game. But remember, this was before
cable TV. So who knows? Okay, well, much more interesting are the grids of numbers known as
magic squares. Magic squares have been a source of fascination, entertainment and superstition
for over 3,000 years. A Chinese book, Lo Xu, the book of the River Lo from 10 from 1000 BCE,
tells the story of a turtle emerging from the river with a pattern of dots carved into its back.
And as the legend goes, the 21st century BCE emperor, Yu, found a divine tortoise while he was
bathing. The markings on the tortoise's shell formed a three by three grid of numbers in the form
of dots, of course, since we had no numbers at the time. And that was considered to be a message
from the heavens, instructing the emperor how to govern. So I don't think this method is used
anymore. But back then, this is how heaven would relate to the emperor. Well, if we write the grid
of numbers down from the turtle's back. Now notice, in fact, if you look at it, for example,
in the upper left corner, you see four dots in the form of square, that's number four,
right next to it, to the right of it, you see a long line of dots. If you count them, there's nine.
And next to it, you see two dots. That's two and so forth. The middle one, for example, has a little
cross type thing, which with five dots, since that's the number five. So we see the numbers four,
nine, two, three, five, seven, eight, one, six. Well, by the fifth century BCE, it was noticed
that the nine numbers in the grid exhibited some amazing arithmetic properties. First, each number,
each digit from one to nine appears in the grid and appears exactly once. Take a look and see
for yourself. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine. They're all there and they all
appear once. And secondly, and perhaps more profoundly, the sum of any row or column or
one of any of the two diagonals, if you add up those sums, it always equals the same value
15. In fact, check it out. If you look at the first column, you see four plus three plus eight,
and you see 15. And that holds for all the columns, all the rows, and the two diagonals.
Now, when they discovered this, this amazing, incredible structure, it was viewed with magical,
mathematical, and spiritual interest. And today, as a result, we call these grids magic squares.
More generally, any time we take a natural number n and consider the square, an n by n square grid,
it's called a magic square. If we can arrange the numbers from one out to n squared in such a way,
so that each column in each row contains exactly n numbers, and if you sum any row, any column,
or the two diagonals, the answer you get is always the same. You get the same sum.
In fact, the great German artist, Albrecht Dürer, included a four by four magic square in his
engraving, Melancholia. And it's what's really neat about this particular magic square is that,
first of all, the sum of each row, column, and diagonal turns out to equal 34. So that was the
sum number that they all agree upon. But the really neat thing that I like is that he put a coded
message in here, and the code was that if you look at the two numbers in the middle and the bottom row,
that indicated the year of the engraving that the engraving was made, 1514, which is really neat.
Well, magic squares were thought to protect against the plague, and even Benjamin Franklin
enjoyed the challenge of constructing magic squares while he was a clerk in the Pennsylvania
assembly. Apparently, the Pennsylvania assembly wasn't as interesting as constructing mathematical
objects such as magic squares, and he actually produced at least two eight by eight magic squares.
Now, modern mathematicians have proved many results about magic squares that we won't go into.
Existence theorems that exist of all sizes, results involving related structures such as
Latin squares or even orthogonal Latin squares, if you can imagine such things. Now, the current
hot game is the game of Sudoku, which may appear to resemble the magic squares, but there's no
sums involved in Sudoku. In Sudoku, the numbers are just placed in a particular way, and so
they're just abstract symbols, really. There's no arithmetic involved. We have to make sure
that every row and every column and every row has the numbers from one to nine embedded in it,
and every little small three by three square has all the numbers from one to nine inside of them,
too. So, really, it's a game of logic rather than a game of arithmetic, and so, in fact,
there's no reason to actually have the symbols per se, except, in fact, we can replace the
symbols of the digits by any symbol, and it would still be a fine Sudoku puzzle, but here we're
using the ordination property that we're so comfortable counting, one, two, three, four,
five, six, seven, eight, nine, that we can immediately see which digit is missing.
Hard to do if we use other symbols. So, again, we see how numbers are so innate
in everything that we do and even how we think. Anyway, the great magic and mystical allure of
numbers continues to us with us till this very day, and it has a long and interesting human tradition.
