Once our ancestors identified and named the abstract objects known as numbers, they gave
birth to ideas that immediately took on a life of their own, attracting the interest
and capturing the imagination of the curious minds throughout human history.
In this part of our course, we'll explore the early steps of that historical journey
to discover and appreciate the structure and beauty of numbers in their own right.
We'll start with the realization that numerical structure, beauty, and pattern existed long
before our ancestors named the numbers.
We'll open the life of numbers with an exploration into numbers within nature by considering the
uninviting rough facade of a pineapple and simply counting.
From there, we'll move to some beautiful flowers.
Our studies of fruit and flora will lead us to discover the famous Fibonacci numbers.
Some believe that this sequence was discovered in India over 2,000 years ago.
We'll see how Leonardo de Pisa, also known as Fibonacci, came upon this sequence of numbers
as an answer to a question he posed involving the reproductive habits of rabbits in his
influential arithmetic text published in 1202.
His seminal work actually introduced the Hindu-Arabic number system to the West.
We'll return to this beautiful pattern that both nature and Leonardo incorporated in
their works and make a striking observation first established by Edward Zekendorf in 1972.
Every natural number can be expressed as the sum of different Fibonacci numbers.
Thus we'll see that every natural number in some sense is either a Fibonacci number or
a not-so-distant cousin of several different Fibonacci numbers.
This attractive observation demonstrates that not only are the Fibonacci numbers a natural
part of nature, but also a natural part of the natural numbers.
Well, it seems fitting to open our exploration into the nature of numbers by considering
the numbers in nature.
Now, one life lesson we take away from the study of numbers is that the best way to understand
our world is to examine it closely.
In this case, we'll focus on an ordinary pineapple.
So if you happen to have a pineapple handy, this is an excellent time to grab it.
That's what I'll do.
So if I grab a pineapple right here, quite often just looking at things closely reveals
structure and in a numerical context we look and we see if we see quantities within the
side of the pineapple and we quickly actually see some.
For we see that there are spirals that are going up in this direction and then if we
look really closely, we actually see that we have spirals going up in the other direction,
namely this way.
Well, one of the most powerful ways to understand our world better through number is just to
ask how many.
How many is an excellent way to actually make progress in understanding?
So in this case, I want to ask how many spirals are there going up this way on this facade
and how many are actually going up this way on the pineapple?
Now, of course, a pineapple doesn't know right-handed spirals from left-handed spirals,
so we'd expect the same number of spirals to occur in each way.
Well, let's now verify that by just simply counting.
So let's count and see what we see.
Well, so I'll try this right now.
Now this is like one of those cooking shows where I've done this in advance because it's
pretty hard to count them, but I made it a lot easier by actually marking them with a
ribbon.
Isn't that pretty?
And if you look closely, you can see the spirals really in quite dramatic depth and you might
notice that one of the spirals actually is marked with these yellow dots.
It's there because I once tried to count the spirals without those yellow dots and I counted
for about three days.
So this allows me to know where I start and so that I will know when to stop.
So we'll start right in the yellows and we'll count together and see how many we see.
Well we see one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, and notice now we're back to
where we started.
So there's eight going in this direction.
Okay, great.
Let's now count the spirals in the other direction and see if we get eight as well.
So if we try that and voila, here we are.
Let's count the spirals in this direction and we'll start with the yellows.
So we see one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, oh, oh, more than eight, nine,
ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen.
So we're getting thirteen in this direction, which is really surprising.
Well of course, as we said at the onset of this course, a surprise is a great moment
because it's a moment where in fact our intuition runs counter to reality and it's a great moment
of learning because now in fact we can retrain our intuition and actually make new discoveries.
So this is now a great moment.
Well now before we talk more about the pineapple, let's turn our attention to the beautiful
flowers we see around us and in particular I want us to look at the daisy and the cone
flower.
Now when you look at these, we're now immediately attuned to the spirals in their center.
If we focus on the daisy for example, the yellow spirals we see there, we see two sets
of interlocking spirals.
And now of course, what must we do?
We can't curb our enthusiasm.
We have to count.
We have to count those spirals and see.
Do we think that we're going to have the same number of spirals going one way versus the
other way?
We can't count no because in our experience with the pineapple, our thinking is that in
fact the spiral counts may be different.
So already you can see by counting, we get to have a new world view and so our intuition
is no.
Well let's count.
So we'll count in one direction.
Let's see what we get.
Here we go.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty, twenty-one.
So we have twenty-one in this direction and now let's count the other direction.
See what we have.
This is pretty fast.
Let's see if you can keep up.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, fourteen,
fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, eighteen, nineteen, twenty-one, twenty-two, twenty-three, twenty-four,
twenty-five, twenty-six, twenty-seven, twenty-eight, twenty-nine, thirty, wow, thirty-one, thirty-two,
thirty-three, thirty-four.
Okay, finally.
So our modified intuition was correct.
Different number.
If we were to consider a pine cone, we could count the spirals on its side if we found
one like walking in a park.
And we'd see on a small pine cone three going up one way and five going up the other way.
Well, now, what if we now list our numbers that we just found in order of their size?
And let's now move from the numbers in nature and consider the nature of these numbers.
So let's just look at these numbers now abstractly.
What we see are three, five, eight, thirteen, twenty-one, thirty-four.
Now let's look at these numbers and see if we see any pattern here.
Well, we see an amazing coincidence.
If we add any two adjacent numbers from our list, that sum is the next number appearing
on our list.
Eight plus thirteen equals the next number, twenty-one and so forth.
Well, this amazing coincidence actually can be generalized.
What if this pattern were to continue?
Well, then we could actually extend the list indefinitely.
The next number would be fifty-five because that's twenty-one plus thirty-four.
The number after that would be eighty-nine because that would be the sum of thirty-four
plus fifty-five and so forth.
We'd see one hundred forty-four.
We then see two hundred thirty-three and so on.
You can see the numbers are getting bigger and bigger.
Even more interesting, we could also extend our pattern in the other direction and actually
figure out what comes before, right?
What would come before the three if the pattern were to continue?
Well then, it would have to be some number that when I add to three, I get five.
That would be a two.
Before the two, I'd see a one because that would be the number when I add to two generates
three.
And what would come before that one, it'd be another one because one plus one would give
me the two.
Well, this pattern of numbers can be used to better understand our physical world and
this is the power of math because what we do now is we look at the world and we see structure,
we see number.
When we abstract it and when we abstract, all of a sudden, we see structure that we
didn't see before and with that abstract structure, we look back into our everyday world and we
see that world with a greater clarity.
In this example, if we look at a giant sunflower, we could guess the spiral counts and we might
guess fifty-five and eighty-nine and for the spirals of a certain size, for the certain
sized sunflowers, we actually see fifty-five and eighty-nine.
This image that, in fact, we're seeing is actually an image that I took when I was in
Greece, a very romantic place where I was actually running a course on number theory
and the theory of numbers.
So a wonderful place, of course, as you can imagine, to talk about numbers.
Now, why do nature spirals and their counts often appear on this list of special numbers?
Well, let me give you one theory which seems to be plausible.
Now, the daisy is an example of what's called a composite flower.
That means that each little floret that we see, each one of those little yellow dots,
is in fact an individual flower and they grow from the very center of the stem and gradually
move outward.
So the image we should have is if this were, in fact, the image of the flower, that in
fact the baby florets are pumped in in some sense right in the center and then they slowly
move out.
So the florets on the very, very outer part near the yellow part, near the white flowers
out on the perimeter, in fact are the oldest and the florets right in the center are the
most recently born flowers.
Well, okay, biologists have hypothesized that these florets position themselves to have as
much room around them as possible.
So, in fact, we have this circular flower and the little florets are being pumped into
the center and then, of course, as more are being pumped in, these current flowers are
being pushed away and they migrate out to the boundary, but they migrate and position
themselves in such a way they jostle, if you will, so they have as much room around them
as possible.
And this actually makes a little bit of sense when you consider that, in fact, they might
need photosynthesis and they have the sun affecting their growth and so they might want
as much space around them as possible to get as much light around them as possible.
It's a reasonable theory.
Well, if we assume that theory, we can actually prove mathematically that if we now pack the
disc so they fill up space in this circular region in this fashion where they keep juggling
and jiggling until they totally pack space in that constrained space, that the florets
will, in fact, generate two sets of spirals and those spiral counts will be numbers on
our list.
That's a mathematical theorem.
Well, it's amazing to see that we might have a description for why the pattern in nature
actually occurs.
But let's take a moment now to consider the history of these special numbers and how they
fit into our story of number and let the actual nature of it drift into the background.
The third century BCE Indian poet, Pingala, included these numbers in his commentary on
Sanskrit grammar.
This was to help the devout understand and attain a better purity in the cadence of certain
Indian ritual chants.
Later, also in India, in the 6th century CE, mathematician Virahanka studied meter patterns
of long and short syllables and showed how some meter counts actually corresponded to
these lists of numbers.
Now today, this famous sequence of numbers is known as the Fibonacci numbers.
They're named after Leonardo de Pisa, an Italian mathematician who made many believe,
in fact, was one of the greatest European mathematicians of the Middle Ages.
Leonardo's father was named Bonacci and Fibonacci is a shortening of the Latin Phileus Bonacci,
which translates to the son of Bonacci.
In 1202, Fibonacci published an influential text entitled Libre Abakai, which means the
Book of Calculating, that actually introduced the Hindu-Arabic numerals to the West.
He also strove to popularize this system which we now use.
In fact, his book opens with a very dramatic quote.
His book opens with, the nine numerals of the Indians are 9, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1.
With these nine figures and with the sign zero, which in Arabic is called Zephiram, any desired
number can be written.
Very dramatic beginning to this.
And as an aside, it's interesting to note that Fibonacci refers to zero here as a sign
rather than a number.
You can see that even though zero is considered a number here, there is a distinction between
zero which came along so later in our understanding of number, even here in 1202.
Now his text explained how to perform arithmetic using this decimal system that we use today,
rather than the analogous calculations using the more cumbersome Roman numerals, which
were still popular in Italy at that time.
Of course, in fairness, old habits are hard to break and even Fibonacci, who championed
the cause of the base 10 system that we use today, actually returned to the more familiar
Babylonian base 60 system of the time to actually solve an equation during a mathematics competition.
So even though he was touting this great message, there were moments where he actually revert
back to the way he learned as a child, which again makes some sense, I would think.
While we're turning now to the Fibonacci numbers themselves, in chapter 12 of his book, he
posed an intriguing question involving the reproductive habits of rabbits.
Now here is the translation of his question.
It's a little bit cryptic.
It's a word problem, if you will.
A certain man had one pair of rabbits together in a certain enclosed place and wishes to
know how many are created from the pair in one year, when it is the nature of them in
a single month to bear another pair, and in the second month, those born to bear also.
Well, quite cryptic, in fact, and let me say what's going on here in our own words.
Our goal here is to count how many rabbits will be in the enclosed space at the end of
12 months.
Now the question, I hate to admit, is not particularly well posed.
So we'll make some assumptions as to as to the question.
First we'll assume that every pair of rabbits born consists of a male and female rabbit,
so therefore reproduction is possible, and no pair of rabbits will die prematurely before
the year is out.
And we'll also assume that the first pair of rabbits with which the man starts is a
pair of babies, thus at the end of the first month we would still have just one pair.
Let me try to actually enact this out, but this would be a totally wholesome reenactment.
Well, we begin with the babies.
So here we have a baby pair of rabbits, the very beginning of the first month.
Now at the end of the first month, all they do is mature because they're too young to
actually reproduce.
So I'll put them over here, but at the end of the first month we actually see that they
are all grown up.
So this is now the same pair of rabbits, but now a month later.
Well now that they're matured, they can actually produce offspring, and they decide to do so
in the next iteration.
So in the next iteration, of course, they're still around.
So here they are.
They're still around, and they're wonderful, but now they produce some offspring, and here
are the offspring.
Aren't they cute?
Little pair.
One boy, one girl.
Great.
Now what happens at the end of the following month?
Well, of course, this pair is still here.
It will never, ever go away.
That pair is always here.
Now this pair actually grows up and now is mature enough for the following month to reproduce.
But this pair reproduced as well, because every month they're going to reproduce for
now on, now that they're adults.
And so they actually reproduce themselves, not themselves, but they reproduce yet again,
and they produce another pair of babies.
Now what happens now in the next iteration?
So in the next iteration, both of these adult pairs live on and reproduce.
But also this baby pair is now a come of age, so they actually now are grown up.
But don't forget that these two pairs of adults have reproduced yet again, so now we see two
pairs of bunnies, which I'll just fit in here.
I think we can fit them in here.
As you can see, this little pen of space, this confined space, better be large enough
for all of them.
But let's see the pattern in how many rabbits we have during the months.
We start with the one, at the end of the month we still have one, then we have two, then
we have three, then we have five, and you can actually see that at the end of the next
month we're going to have eight.
Why?
Well, because all the three adults are going to reproduce three new pairs.
And all these pairs are going to live.
So we have one, two, three, four, five, and then we add three, we see eight.
Well, following the rules, we see that the number of pairs of rabbits present are always
equal to Fibonacci numbers.
Now how many do we have at the end of the year?
Well, I could leave this to you to figure out if you want, but I'll just give you a
hint.
It's 233 pairs in the man's enclosed place, so I hope the enclosed place is sufficiently
large.
Now, this solution was the first time that this list of numbers appeared in the literature
of Western mathematics, even though nature has held this list much, much earlier.
Fibonacci numbers throughout the ages have been a source of inspiration and continue
to attract the attention of mathematicians and math enthusiasts from around the world.
There are many results about the Fibonacci numbers, new theorems involving the Fibonacci
numbers continue to be discovered by mathematicians today.
This is a very, very active area.
In fact, there's a mathematics journal named the Fibonacci Quarterly, where people publish
articles on the Fibonacci numbers.
Now, the Fibonacci numbers are connected to the ancient and aesthetically appealing
golden ratio, studied by the Pythagoreans, and I want to remind you of what the golden
ratio is and then try to elucidate that connection.
Well, the golden ratio is a number that is equal to 1 plus the square root of 5 all divided
by 2.
If we were to calculate that number, we would see a decimal 1.6180339 and the number decimals
continue.
Well, what does this very cryptic, mysterious number have to do with the more natural Fibonacci
numbers, all of which are examples of natural numbers?
Well, we saw consecutive Fibonacci numbers appearing in the spirals of nature, so we
see them two next to each other, one and then the next one appearing in the spiral counts.
Well, let's figure out, in fact, how fast they're growing by taking a look at the relative
size of two consecutive spiral counts.
In other words, let's compare two of the adjacent Fibonacci numbers as we go further
and further out in our list by looking at their relative size or their ratio.
So let's divide.
We'll divide 1 divided by 1, the first two Fibonacci numbers, then 2 divided by 1, then
3 divided by 2, 5 divided by 3, 8 divided by 5, 13 divided by 8, 21 divided by 13,
to compare how these numbers are growing relative to each other.
Now, if we look at the decimal expansion for that, we see some interesting structure in
the decimal.
For example, notice that 13 over 8 is equal to 1.625, 21 over 13 has a decimal that begins
1.615, and if we go a little further out, we see 144 divided by 89 equals 1.6179 and
so forth.
And even further out, 610, a large Fibonacci number divided by 377, the Fibonacci number
right before it, equals 1.618037, which notice agrees to the golden ratio's decimal expansion.
To five places.
Well, in fact, the further out we go, and you might want to enjoy trying this as an exercise,
to see that if we take two consecutive Fibonacci numbers, the larger they are, when we look
at their ratio and divide the larger by the smaller, we get a number that's getting closer
and closer to this magical golden ratio.
Now, two comments about this observation.
Well, the golden ratio we now see, in some sense, is intrinsically involved in nature.
Many people believe that the golden ratio appears in works of art and has aesthetic value.
And this remains open, although some artists have been known to deliberately incorporate
these numbers, this number, the golden ratio in their artistic works, even in works of
music, for example.
But for our purpose here, the interesting foreshadowing is that we have a collection
of rational numbers, a collection of fractions, which are heading closer and closer and closer
to this more complicated number.
And this is an interesting point that will actually be the key to unlocking more complicated
numbers.
That when a number is exotic and complicated, what we tend to do is, in fact, try to approximate
it by simpler numbers, in this case, by fractions.
And so this theme that we can approximate a complicated number by a succession of simple
numbers is a very important one that will allow us to move the frontiers of mathematics
and number theory forward.
Well, for Fibonacci fans, it might be sad that there are natural numbers that are, alas,
not Fibonacci numbers.
The smallest example of this would be four.
Notice that four is not on our list of Fibonacci numbers, nor is six or even seven.
So this could be a source of some strife for those who are real fans of the Fibonacci numbers.
Well, happily, in 1972, Edward Zeckendorf proved a beautiful theorem, and his result
states that if a natural number is not itself a Fibonacci number, then it can be written
uniquely as a sum of non-adjacent Fibonacci numbers.
Now, this is a mouthful, but it's basically saying that you're either going to be a Fibonacci
number if you're a natural number, or I can write you as a sum of Fibonacci numbers in
a particular way.
So let's take a look at an example to have this make a little bit more sense than to
be real for all of us.
Let's pick four, which, of course, we already saw was not a Fibonacci number.
Notice very easily that there are two numbers that are Fibonacci numbers that sum to four,
in particular three and one.
Three plus one equals four, and you'll notice that three and one are the only two ways that
we can add non-adjacent, different Fibonacci numbers to produce four.
Notice that they're non-adjacent in the sense that there's a Fibonacci number sandwiched
between one and three, in particular two.
What about six?
Well now we can write six as five plus one, two Fibonacci numbers, and that's the only
way to write six as distinct Fibonacci numbers that aren't next to each other.
Seven also can easily be written as five plus two.
So we see what we mean by taking a non-Fibonacci number and expressing it as a sum of Fibonacci
numbers, and Zekendorf actually proved that, in fact, there's only one way of doing this
if you, in fact, do not allow repeats and do not allow the Fibonacci numbers to be next
to each other.
Now this expression of natural numbers into decomposing natural numbers and expressing
them into Fibonacci numbers is now known as the Zekendorf decomposition, and I want
to explain to you why this is true and how you can actually express any natural number
you wish as the sum of Fibonacci numbers in this way.
It's actually a neat process that illustrates an interesting idea.
So to express a natural number in this manner, we apply a divide and conquer strategy, which
will be very important in our next lecture.
So the rule is we first find the largest Fibonacci number that's less than the natural number
we wish to express.
So think of it this way.
We have this number that we wish to write as the sum of Fibonacci numbers.
We start going backwards in our list of natural numbers until we hit the very first Fibonacci
number.
So that's the largest Fibonacci number smaller than our number.
And we take our number and write it as this Fibonacci number plus whatever we need to,
so add a remainder if you will, to make it equal to the original number.
Now we've actually made progress, and this is the divide and conquer idea.
For example, let's take a look at 30, which is a fairly large integer, a natural number.
The first thing I do is I go backwards from 30 until I hit my very first Fibonacci number,
and we'd see 21.
Then I ask, okay, that's a Fibonacci number.
What do I have to add to 21 to make it equal 30?
Well the answer is 9.
So I've made some progress.
I wrote 30 as 21 plus 9.
Now alas, 9 is not a Fibonacci number.
But notice two things.
First of all, I have a Fibonacci number 21 in the picture, and 9 is a number smaller
than my original 30.
This is why I divided and conquered.
All of a sudden I've reduced the complexity of my question to an easier one.
Now what do I do?
What I do is I look at 9 and I say, how can I express 9 as the sum of Fibonacci numbers?
I use the same process, so I divide and conquer again.
I start at 9 and I go backwards in my list of natural numbers until I hit my very first
or the largest Fibonacci number, that's less than 9.
In this case, it's easy to see that number is 5.
What do I have to add to 5 to make it equal to 9?
Well the answer is 4.
So now I see that 30 equals 21 plus 5 plus 4.
Now I have 21 and 5, which are both Fibonacci numbers, but 4 unfortunately is not.
But we see what to do.
We divide and conquer again.
And we see, as we saw before, that the number 4 is equal to 3 plus 1.
So I see that 30 can be expressed as 21 plus 5 plus 3 plus 1.
And there I've written 30 as the sum of Fibonacci numbers using this method of finding the biggest
Fibonacci number that's smaller than my number and continually dividing and conquering.
And Zekendorf proved, it's a theorem, that in fact this method always works.
There's only one way to represent numbers in this fashion.
And in fact, if you force that the numbers are never, that are always different from
each other, and in fact never next to each other, the Fibonacci numbers that we use are
never next to each other, this way of writing the numbers is in fact unique.
And this result can be proved in general, and that's what Zekendorf did, although you
can see how the method can be used to work in any way.
Well this notion of expressing natural numbers in terms of smaller, special natural numbers
really foreshadows one of the most important ideas from number theory.
An idea whose genesis can be found in the ancient work of Euclid.
And Euclid's historic observations are really at the heart of the next lecture.
For now, we should appreciate that all around us there's not only beautiful nature, but
within that nature there are beautiful patterns and those patterns involve number.
