In this lecture we'll introduce the concept of prime numbers, those natural numbers greater
than one that cannot be written as a product of two smaller natural numbers.
The formal study of prime numbers dates back to the ancient Greeks when Euclid first established
the fact that there are infinitely many primes.
In fact, Euclid's proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers is considered by many to
be one of the most elegant arguments in all of mathematics.
Here we'll also discover that the prime numbers are the fundamental multiplicative building blocks
for all natural numbers that exceed one.
In other words, every natural number larger than one is either a prime number or can be expressed
uniquely as a product of prime numbers.
Well, there appears no particular pattern to the prime numbers.
Great mathematical minds including Carl Friedrich Gauss wondered how many primes there were
between one and any given number.
The answer, now known as the prime number theorem, was given independently in 1896
by Jacques Hadamard and Charles de la Valier-Poussée.
The study of primes remains a very active area of research today,
and this area is known as analytic number theory.
We'll close this lecture by describing several questions involving the prime numbers that remain unanswered to this day.
Well, let's begin by carefully describing these special numbers.
In the last lecture, we saw how we could divide and conquer the natural numbers
using the Fibonacci numbers and addition.
Here we'll continue this divide and conquer theme, but leave the Fibonacci numbers behind
and now focus on multiplication rather than addition.
We define a prime number as any natural number larger than one
that cannot be written as the product of two smaller natural numbers.
So, for example, five is a prime number because we can't express it as the product of two smaller natural numbers.
Six, on the other hand, is in fact not a prime number because six can be expressed as two times three.
Two natural numbers each smaller than six whose product yields six.
Five is prime, six is not.
The first few prime numbers are two, three, five, seven.
Now nine is not a prime because nine is three times three, two smaller natural numbers that give nine,
so we don't include nine, but 11 and 13, 17, 19, 23.
These numbers cannot be divided and conquered and in some sense they're the atoms of the natural number.
They're the atoms of the natural numbers. They're the smallest, smallest pieces.
Now, why isn't one a prime?
How can we always talk about these numbers that are greater than one?
Well, the primes that evenly divide a number reveal intrinsic features of that number.
For example, if the prime two evenly divides a particular number, that tells us that the number must be even.
Thus, the primes will allow us to discover in some sense the personality of natural numbers
or the makeup of the numbers, an arithmetic personality, if you will,
rather than the more human personalities that the Pythagoreans associated with numbers.
The trivial fact that any number can be viewed as itself multiplied by one,
for example, six equals one times six, leads to no new insights into that number.
Therefore, one shouldn't be viewed as a prime number.
The more theoretical explanation, which isn't so important for us here,
is that one is the only natural number whose reciprocal, whose inverse, namely one over one, which is one,
is also a natural number.
Because of the special property, today we refer to one as a unit, which comes from unity from the Pythagoreans.
And in advanced mathematics, units are never considered as prime numbers.
Well, we now celebrate the work of the great Greek mathematician Euclid.
Euclid, around 300 BCE, was the first to prove theorems involving the prime numbers.
Now, he was the author of 13 books known as the Elements of Geometry.
And many believe these to be some of the most important treatises ever written.
Euclid pulled many ideas together for the first time into a unified hold
and established the notion of rigorous proof that actually remains with mathematics to this very day.
Euclid's books, seven, eight, and nine of the Elements, contained over 100 theorems from number theory.
Again, remember that the Greek sense of geometry included number theory
because they were concerned with measuring lengths.
That's how they viewed number as lengths of things.
Now, his proposition 14 stated that every natural number greater than one
can be expressed uniquely as a product of prime numbers, except for possibly rearrangement of the factors.
Let's look at an example. Take 12.
Well, we could write 12 as 2 times 2 times 3.
Those are all prime numbers.
Now, we could also write it as 2 times 3 times 2, or even 3 times 2 times 2.
But notice that in all those cases, all we did was rearrange those factors.
We always had two copies of the prime 2 and one copy of the prime 3.
There's only one way to write 12 as a product of primes if we ignore the order that we write the factors in.
Well, this important result is now known as the fundamental theorem of arithmetic.
And in mathematics, fundamental doesn't mean easy or basic, it means important.
So this is in some sense one of the most important theorems from arithmetic.
By the way, we note that the uniqueness aspect of this result would no longer hold
if we considered 1 as a prime number, because then we could write 6 on the one hand as 2 times 3
and on the other hand as 1 times 2 times 3.
So if 1 were a prime, we'd no longer have unique factorization.
Well, we now arrive at the age-old question, how many primes are there?
Well, Proposition 20 of Book 9 states the following.
Prime numbers are more than any assigned magnitude of prime numbers.
Well, I want to pause here to see exactly what this means.
Prime numbers are more than any assigned magnitude of prime numbers.
That means any assigned magnitude.
Suppose we think of a collection of prime numbers, let's say 100.
So we look at 100 prime numbers.
Euclid's theorem states that the prime numbers are more than that, which means there are more than 100 primes.
Okay, let's consider a different number, maybe a million.
Okay, so the assigned magnitude will now be a million.
Well, Euclid's theorem says that the prime numbers are more than a million prime numbers.
So what he's saying here in today's language is that there are infinitely many prime numbers.
Now Euclid wasn't thinking in the language of infinitely many,
because infinity really was not a notion that was being considered at the time,
but this is how he phrased it.
Any magnitude you think of, the primes will be even greater than that.
Today we'd say there are infinitely many prime numbers.
Euclid's proof, which we'll see for ourselves in just a moment,
is considered by most mathematicians today to be one of the most elegant proofs in all of mathematics.
Perhaps it's a little surprising upon first blush that there should be a notion of aesthetics
or beauty in mathematics and in mathematical proof, but indeed there is.
And we'll see for ourselves several theorems and their proofs that are considered aesthetically appealing to mathematicians.
Now I'll try to articulate what the aesthetic appeal is so we can hone our own sense of aesthetics
within a mathematical and a numerical realm.
Well, let's now consider the beautiful idea of Euclid that allowed him to rigorously prove
that there are in fact infinitely many prime numbers.
Now one strategy would be to say, well let's just list them all.
Well of course that's not a good argument because if there really were infinitely many, as we'll show,
then that list would take us forever to write.
And a mathematical argument in fact has to be a finite number of steps of logic, reasoning, and previous theorems.
The proof has to end.
So we're up against an interesting challenge.
We have to prove infinitely many things exist in only finitely many steps.
So we have to be really clever.
Happily Euclid was very clever for us.
So instead of actually tackling this harder question,
let's warm up to it to build some intuition into Euclid's wonderful idea by trying to do something very, very simple.
Remember when we're faced with a hard challenge, let's not do it.
Instead let's retreat, do something easy.
So we'll attempt to simply find a prime number larger than 3, which seems a little frivolous
because you could immediately say, well how about 5?
Well yes, but by that method you're using the fact that 3 is a small prime and we know facts about small primes.
Well, what I'd like to do is just use the primes 2 and 3 and try to find another prime,
but never using the fact that 2 and 3 are small and familiar to us.
For if we could craft an idea that never used the fact that 2 and 3 were small and we could build another prime,
then we could maybe extend the idea to prove this for any number of primes.
Well, Euclid's idea was to create a number that is not a multiple of 2 or 3.
Now let's think about that for a second.
Suppose that Euclid could build a number that is neither a multiple of 2 nor 3.
Well, that natural number by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic has to be able to be written as a product of prime numbers.
But if 2 and 3 are not factors in this number, then 2 will not appear in this list of primes,
3 will not appear in the list of primes, and yet we know that there is this list of primes.
So that list of primes must be primes that are not 2 or 3.
We've just found a prime that's not 2 or 3.
That's his idea, to build a number that definitely will avoid 2 and 3 as factors.
Well, here's what he did.
He first multiplied the 2 primes 2 and 3 together.
Well, 2 and 3, if you take that product, of course, that is a multiple of both 2 and 3,
so it seems like this is not a good choice, but then he does something truly ingenious.
He adds 1.
So he looks at 2 multiplied by 3 and then adds 1.
Now, let's just first note that that number is 7, and notice that 7 is indeed a prime number that's neither 2 nor 3.
So that's exactly what we're trying to do.
But I want us to think about this abstractly and not actually compute the fact that these numbers are so small we can see 7.
Let's look at the representation of 7 as 2 times 3 plus 1.
How can I look at just that number and see that 2 is not a factor of it?
Well, because we could see that the plus 1 means that 2 won't divide in evenly into 2 times 3 plus 1,
because I have a remainder of 1.
Similarly, because that 3 is being multiplied by the 2 in front there,
I see that 3 can't be a factor of this number because there's a remainder of 1 again when I divide by 3.
So therefore, without even computing the number 7,
I see that neither 2 nor 3 can be a factor of 2 times 3 plus 1, because the plus 1 messes up the works.
Therefore, there must exist a third prime.
Now in this case, the number 7 happens to be prime itself,
but that just happens to be a happenstance of the small number.
Now using this idea, we can now prove Euclid's theorem in general.
So let's consider this.
We're going to take the exact same idea.
This is now the complete proof that Euclid came up with.
Suppose we have a finite list of prime numbers.
For example, 2, 3, 5, 7, and all the way out to a last prime number.
I don't know what that last prime number will be called.
I'll call it P.
So I'll use the letter P just to distinguish the last prime number on this finite list.
Maybe there's 20 of them, maybe there's a million of them,
but it's a finite list of prime numbers and P will denote the last one.
Well, we now wish to show that there exists a prime number that's not on this list.
What do we do?
Well, we apply Euclid's idea.
We consider the number that we get by taking 2 and multiply it by 3
and multiply it by 5, by 7, all these primes up to P.
We look at that product and then what do we do?
We add 1.
So we add 1 to this number.
And we notice that none of the primes on our original list can divide evenly into this number
because there's always this remainder of plus 1 at the end.
So if we divide this big number by 5, because 5 occurs in this product,
that plus 1 is going to be the remainder.
So it doesn't go in evenly, 5 doesn't go in evenly into this number,
nor does the last prime P that we have.
Because again, we see a remainder of 1 when we divide this product plus 1 by P.
Now, by the fundamental theorem of arithmetic,
we conclude that there has to be a prime dividing this number
because every natural number can be expressed as a product of primes.
So there's a prime that's a factor of this number and divides in evenly into this number,
and yet it can't be any of the primes from our original list from 1 to P.
This implies that there must exist at least one other prime that's not on our list.
And because this argument can be applied to any finite list of primes,
not just up to P, but any number you want,
we conclude that, in fact, the number of primes can't be bounded by any number.
Therefore, they're infinitely many.
If we think they're only finally many, we take their product and add 1,
and there must be a prime dividing that enormous number,
and that prime is not on our list, so we miss that.
And we can do this for any finite collection.
Therefore, they're infinitely many primes.
Now, this theorem is truly beautiful and elegant, and why?
Well, because we're proving a dramatically profound mathematical result,
a result that really allows us to understand numbers in a richer way.
And yet the argument itself, while complicated and requires some serious contemplation to take it all in,
the idea is very beautiful in that it's so basic.
We just take a product of numbers and add 1.
Now, you might look at this later and say,
gee, that seems straightforward, I guess,
but the genius was to come up with the idea of multiplying all those numbers together and adding 1.
That's by no means obvious.
Once a mathematician sees that idea,
she can certainly go through and complete the proof,
but finding that idea really requires some genius.
So this is considered one of the most beautiful arguments,
theorems in all of mathematics.
Now, I want to offer a few words about some modern advances in our understanding of the prime numbers.
Well, how many primes are there up to a certain point?
We know by Euclid's theorem that we just talked about that there are infinitely many primes.
But is there a way to know how many primes there are up to any particular number?
For example, how many primes are there up to five?
Let's call that number of primes p5 or p of five.
We read that as saying p of five.
How many primes are there up to 20?
Let's call that number of primes up to 20 p20 or p of 20.
How many primes are there up to a thousand from one to a thousand?
How many primes are in that list of natural numbers?
Let's call that p of a thousand.
So whatever that number is, we'll denote it as p of a thousand.
Similarly, if I'm given any natural number n, let me call p of n the representation of the number of primes that are less than or equal to n.
So, for example, p of five would equal three because there are three primes that are less than or equal to five, namely two, three, and five.
There are three primes, therefore, p of five, the number of primes that are less than or equal to five, would equal three.
Similarly, we have that p of 20, which represents the number of primes less than or equal to 20, would actually equal eight because there are eight primes that are less than or equal to 20,
and they are two, three, five, seven, eleven, thirteen, seventeen, nineteen.
So we see, in fact, that many.
P of a thousand, which I'm not going to recite for you, is equal to 168.
That means that there are 168 prime numbers between one and a thousand.
So that's what this function means.
Now, the question is, is there a formula for p of n in general?
That is, is there a formula that tells us how many primes there are up to any given point?
Well, this question remains unanswered to this very day.
Many mathematicians throughout the ages contemplated this question, including the great 19th century mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss.
Gauss is considered by most mathematicians today to be one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.
And really, the father of modern number theory, as we know it.
Gauss once wrote that number theory is the queen of all mathematics.
And given this royal theme, along with the stature and respect that the mathematics community has for him,
Gauss is often referred to as the prince of mathematics.
So you get a sense of the royalty that the math community has bestowed upon this great mind.
Well, let's now return back to this p of n, the number of primes there are up to a number n.
Many individuals, including Gauss himself, notice that the number p of n was closely approximated by something very interesting.
And the number is n divided by the natural logarithm of n.
Now, what is the natural logarithm of n?
For our purpose, it's not that important, but let me just say a word about it.
First of all, if you want to compute the natural logarithm, you can just do it on a calculator so you can get the value fairly easily on any scientific calculator.
But if you want to think about what it means, basically what the natural log of a number is is roughly how many digits that number has.
More precisely, it's approximately 2 times the number of digits.
In fact, even more precise, the natural log of n is equal to around 2.3 something times the number of digits of n.
For our purpose here, let's just think of the natural log of n as roughly speaking the number of digits that's required to write the number n out.
So, for example, the number 362 would have a value around 3 because there are 3 digits.
For our purpose, that's fine.
Well, the conjecture, the observations that people made was that the number of primes up to the point n, p of n, is approximately equal to n divided by the natural log of n, or roughly the number of digits that n has.
Now, this statement was finally declared to be a theorem in 1896 when two mathematicians working independently offered a proof of the result.
Now, today, this important result is known as the prime number theorem, and it was proved by Jacques Hadamard and Charles de la Valier-Poussin.
Now, the interesting thing here is that they prove this totally independently in the same year. Amazing, right?
Well, remember my copper orb.
When our understanding of mathematics grows to a certain point, then these big questions naturally are ready to fall.
And before that point, we need a dramatic big new idea before we can make progress.
So, here, mathematics and our mathematical understanding, humankind's understanding of math, got to a point where this prime number theorem was ready to fall to be proven.
And it turned out that two individuals, two different places at the same time, saw that insight and proved the theorem.
This happens quite a bit in mathematics when the orb goes out.
Well, the prime number theorem gives us that n, as n gets larger and larger, as the number gets larger and larger,
the number of primes between 1 and n gets closer and closer to this funny number, n over the natural log of n.
Now, how can we make that more precise? Let me try to actually state the theorem in some precision.
How would we know if two numbers are the same?
We know that two numbers are the same, one way, is if we divide one into the other and we get the answer of one.
For example, one way, a silly way, to see that seven is the same as seven, is to divide seven by seven and we get one.
If two numbers are identical, their quotient will yield one.
Well, in our context, the theorem actually says that if we look at the ratio of the number of primes up through a certain point,
and look at the ratio between that and this other thing, n over the natural log of n,
that ratio will get closer and closer to one, will be coming closer and closer together, as n gets larger and larger.
In fact, the prime number theorem actually can be stated as that this function p of n, the number of primes up to n,
divided by n over the natural log of n, if we take those two quantities and compare it, as n gets larger and larger,
this ratio approaches one, so these two values are getting closer and closer to each other.
That's the actual statement of the theorem, in fact.
Well, because this ratio only approaches one, for any particular fixed value of n that you think of,
there's always going to be a little gap between the actual value of primes up to that point and this peculiar number n over the natural log of n.
And this gap is often viewed as the error or an error term.
And exploring how the error in this result is shrinking, as the n gets bigger, is a very active field of study.
In fact, an important part of analytic number theory.
And it's in fact connected to one of the most famous and important open questions in all of mathematics today,
known as the Riemann hypothesis, named after Bernhardt Riemann, the great 19th century mathematician who first conjectured an answer.
Well, it's interesting that even after thousands of years of serious study, many questions remain unanswered about the prime numbers.
Even though there are infinitely many prime numbers, you might wonder what is the largest prime number that we know is prime today?
Now, finding the largest prime number known to date is an ongoing quest that has captured the imagination of thousands of people and computers.
And because the methods used to establish these numbers are indeed prime, the numbers typically have a very special form.
So these large numbers that are established to be prime look the same way.
Now, the largest prime known today was found in September 2006, using a number of supercomputers all collaborating and working together.
Now, I'll tell you what the number is. Let me just describe the form first.
It's going to be 2 raised to a really big exponent, and then I'm going to subtract 1.
And so the number is 2 raised to the power 32,582,657.
So take 2 to that really big power, take your answer, and subtract 1.
That number has over 9,800,000 digits.
If you decide to print out that number in a 12-point font, it would require over 2,500 pages to have that printed out.
That number is prime, and that's the largest prime that we know of today.
But of course, we also know that there are infinitely many primes, so there are many more out there.
In fact, most of them are still out there waiting for us to find them.
Well, this large prime is an example of what's called a Mersenne prime.
That's a prime that's of the form 2 to a power minus 1.
Any prime of that form is called a Mersenne prime, named after the 17th century French monk, Marin Mersenne, who studied primes of this form.
Again, this is a typical form of the large primes that we tend to generate in today's age.
Well, in fact, after the 23rd Mersenne prime was found in the late 1960s,
the members of the Department of Mathematics at the University of Illinois at Urbana were so excited that they actually put that number on their postage stamp.
That number, by the way, was 2 raised to the power 11,213, and again, minus 1.
By the way, the largest prime known today, that prime that has over 9,800,000 digits, is only the 44th Mersenne prime known.
So this large one that we just found was the 44th Mersenne prime.
Now, while we know that there are infinitely many primes, no one knows if there are infinitely many Mersenne primes.
That is, no one knows if there are infinitely many primes of the form 2 to a power minus 1.
Again, we see this as a refined question because we know that there are infinitely many prime numbers,
but the question is, are there infinitely many prime numbers that have a certain look?
Well, another refinement comes from considering pairs of prime numbers.
Now, notice that beyond the prime number 2, the closest 2 adjacent or 2 consecutive primes can be from each other is 2,
because between every prime number, we have to have at least one even number.
After 2, all the primes are odd numbers.
We couldn't have a big even prime number because then 2 would divide into it evenly and we could break it apart into smaller pieces.
So all the primes are odd after 2, and therefore the closest they could be apart would be 2 apart
if there's one number in between them.
Well, 2 primes whose difference is 2 are called twin primes.
So for example, 3 and 5 are twin primes because they're both primes and they're 2 apart from each other.
5 and 7 are also an example of twin primes as are 11 and 13 because they differ by 2.
These are all twin primes, but 7 and 11, even though they're consecutive primes,
they're not twin primes because their distance from each other is not 2.
Well, one question that is still open to this day is, are there infinitely many twin primes?
Well, the twin prime conjecture states that in fact indeed there are infinitely many twin primes.
And while many mathematicians believe this statement to be true, no one has yet to produce a complete proof.
And remember in mathematics, just because we think something is true is not enough, we have to prove it for certain.
Another famous unsolved question is known as the Golbach conjecture.
This question asks, can every natural number greater than 4 be expressed as the sum of 2 odd prime numbers?
Notice for example that 6 equals 3 plus 3, 2 odd primes.
8 equals 3 plus 5, again, 2 odd primes.
24 equals 5 plus 19, again, 2 odd primes.
Even 1,000 can be written as 3 plus 997, and 997 is the prime as is 3.
So the question is, can every even number bigger than 4 be expressed as the sum of 2 odd primes?
A tricky question because usually prime numbers are multiplied together as in the fundamental theorem,
and here we're doing something peculiar, we're trying to add them.
Well this question first stated in a letter by Prussian mathematician Christian Golbach
to the great Swiss mathematician Lienhard Euler on June 7th, 1742,
remains one of the oldest unanswered questions in mathematics today.
And it's known, this conjecture which is known as the Golbach conjecture,
it's known to actually hold for every single even number up to 3 times 10 to the 17th.
That means that if you imagine the number 3 and put 17 zeros after it,
all the even numbers before that number can be expressed as the sum of 2 odd primes.
But even this enormous number doesn't prove that it's true always.
Maybe out there in the stratosphere of natural numbers there's a counter example
an even number that can't be expressed in this manner.
There's actually a bounty on this question.
There's a million dollar prize to the first correct and complete proof of the conjecture.
But I urge you to consider other investment opportunities
before investing your time in working on this notoriously hard question,
unless you enjoy the quest of thinking about prime numbers,
which then a totally worthy endeavor.
But don't do it for the money.
The prime numbers are a wonderful collection of numbers that form the atoms of our natural numbers.
They've been studied since Euclid and remain a fascination to all that think about them.
