Welcome to the World of Arithmetic. In this lecture, we'll open with a brief historical
overview of the familiar arithmetical functions of addition, subtraction, multiplication,
division, and exponentiation, and the axioms that accompany them.
Many of the basic rules of arithmetic are so obvious and sensible that we accept them
without even a second thought. One such rule that we learned in our youth actually does
not fit this particular mold, and that's the declaration that a negative number multiplied
by another negative number produces a positive number. Here we'll discover that this rule
is, in fact, a theorem that can be deduced in an elegant manner from the basic axioms
arithmetic. Thus, we'll finally resolve a conundrum that has mystified many individuals
since their early childhood. Before moving on, we'll also take a momentary detour to
explore the origins and evolutions of the symbols of arithmetic that have become the
mathematical icons of our early school days. Combining numbers using the basic operations
of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division quickly leads us to some interesting
and important numerical questions. For example, what does 2 raised to the power square root
of 2 mean, and is that a number? Here we'll take and pull ideas of Nicholas Ormsme, the
great 14th century mathematician and philosopher and others, to make sense of 2 raised to the
power square root of 2, and moreover to realize that such a thing is indeed a number. Well,
up to this point in our course, for the most part, we've been focusing on numbers themselves
and discovering how a more sophisticated understanding of nature and of our world leads to a more
sophisticated understanding of number. Here we'll consider various ways of combining numbers
in order to widen our view of number further still. So let's begin with some basic arithmetical
rules of the road that we've all seen in grade school and now discover their origin. In fact,
a good bit of our basic intuition about arithmetic was foreshadowed by Euclid himself. Euclid,
in the third century BCE, offered five what we call today common notions, basic self-evident
truths that did not require proof. Now, in modern mathematics, we call such statements
axioms. The axioms are the statements we just state without proof and upon which we
build the edifice of mathematics through theorems and proofs. So what were his common notions?
The first one was things that are equal to the same thing are also equal to one another.
So for example, suppose that Deb has the same amount of money as I do and Mike has the same
amount of money as I do, well then Deb and Mike must have the same amount of money and
we call this transitivity today. His second notion was, if equals be added to equals,
the holes are equal. So in this context, suppose now that I give both Deb and Mike ten dollars
each, well then they still have the same amount of money even though they each have ten more
dollars than they had before. Number three is, if equals be subtracted from equals, the
remainders are equal. Well, if I now take back ten dollars from Deb and Mike, then they
still have the same amount of money but might not be too happy with me. Anyway, number four
is things that coincide with one another are equal to one another. Now today in geometry,
we call this notion congruent and it basically means that two geometric objects are congruent
if I could take one and physically slide it on top of the other and they match up perfectly.
This would be the notion of congruent. And finally, his last common notion was that the
hole is greater than the part. So for example, a whole chocolate cake is greater than any
piece of it. And of course, chocolate cake is greater than anything whatsoever. Now by
the way, we notice that in the previous lecture, Cantor showed us that this notion is not always
true with infinite collections. For he found a collection and a part where they actually
had the same number of elements. They were equally numerous because we had a one to one
correspondence. Well, in the eyes of arithmetic, there are two special numbers, each of which
we've already celebrated and that have certainly earned a rightful place of honor in the pantheon
of numbers. The first number is zero known in this kind of mathematical context as the
additive identity. Because if zero is added to any number, the sum of the given number
and zero is in fact the given number. For example, zero plus five equals five. So when
we add zero to five, we preserve the identity of five. That's why it's called the additive
identity. The second number is the Pythagorean number of reason, unity, the number one. Here
in this context, we refer to the number one as the multiplicative identity. Because if
one is multiplied by any given number, the product of that given, the product of those
two numbers is the given number. For example, one times five equals five. So again, we preserve
the identity of five. Well, since we're here with zero and one, I wanted to briefly mention
inverse numbers. These are very valuable when we're solving equations. Given any number,
say five, there exists another number, in this case we call it negative five, such that
the sum with five equals zero. More generally, given a number n, the number negative n is
called the additive inverse of n. In an informal sense, the additive inverse undoes the addition
of a number. In terms of undoing multiplication, given any non-zero number, say two, for example,
there exists a number whose product with two equals one, in this case, namely half. More
generally, every non-zero number n has a reciprocal, one over n, so that their product equals one.
The number one over n is called the multiplicative inverse of n. Arithmeticly speaking, addition
and subtraction are opposite operations, just as multiplication and division are. This observation
was first made by ancient Egyptians, who viewed each pair of operations as mirror images of one
another. Today we say they're inverse operations, less romantic phraseology, but just as descriptive.
Zero is the only number that does not have a multiplicative inverse. And why is that? Well,
because any number n, when multiplied by zero, yields zero. Now, this statement is not an axiom.
It's a provable theorem, and as we'll see in a moment, in fact, the proof only requires one thing.
We need to recall that numbers also satisfy what's called the distributive property. If I add or
subtract two numbers, so take b and add it or subtract it from c, so b plus or minus c. And I
multiply that entire quantity by a, that's the same exact number as distributing the a to first the
b and then to the c and look at bc plus or minus ab plus or minus ac. So that's the distributive
property. So for any number, let's take a look at seven and consider seven times zero. Well, I can
write zero as one minus one. So I see seven times one minus one. If I now use the distributive
property, we just said, I could see that we have seven times one minus seven times one. But one is
the the multiplicative identity. So seven times one is just seven. So we see seven minus seven,
which equals zero. So I just proved that seven times zero equals zero because of the distributive
property. Of course, we can apply this idea with any number, not just seven. And thus we've just
proven that any number multiplied by zero equals zero. Which is really quite wonderful, really. We
actually give a proof of that. Well, now that we're in the mood, let's have a little bit more fun with
multiplication and finally figure out why a negative times a negative always equals a positive. Now, of
course, we know that a positive number multiplied by a positive number is positive. Because, for
example, two times three means that I have three copies of two. So two plus two plus two and it's
six. Similarly, it makes sense that a negative number multiplied by a positive number is going to
equal a negative number. For example, negative five times two means I have two copies of five of
negative five. That is negative five plus negative five, which equals negative 10. However, the famous
rule that a negative number multiplied by a negative number is a positive number is by no means
obvious or even clear. So let's now see why this rule actually holds. Now, we'll just consider a
specific number to illustrate the idea of the argument. But the argument actually works for all
negative numbers. So now let's prove that negative one multiplied by negative one equals one. And this
is going to be a real mathematical proof. So stay with me, but we need to see this finally
resolved. Let's first remember what negative one means. That's the first thing we have to do. Well,
negative one is the additive inverse of one. In other words, one plus negative one equals zero. That's
where we'll start. Now, if we multiply each side of this equation by negative one, then we see negative
one times the quantity one plus negative one equals negative one times zero. We now use the
distributive property and write this as negative one times one plus negative one times negative one
equals negative one times zero. Well, we just proved that any number multiplied by zero is zero. So
the right hand side is zero. And remember that one is the multiplicative identity. So negative one
times one is just negative one. And so we see our equation becomes negative one plus negative one
times negative one equals zero. And we're there. All we have to do is add one to both sides. And that
first negative one becomes a zero. And we see negative one times negative one equals one. Amazing. By
the way, it was Brahma Gupta, the seventh century astronomer who we mentioned back in lecture three,
who was the first to offer a systematic treatment of negative numbers and zero, including the
multiplication of sign numbers. So a negative times a negative equaling a positive is by no means a new
idea, but certainly a wonderful one. Well, now, have you ever wondered where all those cryptic
symbols of arithmetic that we know and love come from? Well, if so, this is your lucky day because
I want to share with you some of the interesting history and evolution of our arithmetical notation.
Well, let's begin with addition and our plus sign. In ancient Latin manuscripts, the word et et, which
is Latin for and, was used to indicate addition, which makes sense, right? Two and three equals five. So
they'd use e and then a t and they'd be writing this cursively. And then after a while, they would
just write the t. And then that t, as you could see, slowly evolved into the plus sign that we use,
are used to. So the plus sign that we use actually came from the t in et Latin for and. Really neat,
I think. In a manuscript from 1489, we find the Greek cross used for addition, which is what we
use today. The Latin cross was also used, but it was printed horizontally. Sometimes the Maltese
cross, the very ornate cross, was used for very formal writings. By the way, the minus sign that we
use today, a dash, makes its first appearance in the literature in 1481. Well, using the x-like symbol
as we do today for multiplication, came about in an interesting way. Our multiplication sign first
appears in Leonardo de Pisa, also known as Fibonacci's, important book, Lieberabekai, from 1202. And we
mentioned the book earlier. He employed the notation to indicate what we might consider today as cross
products of pairs of numbers. So for example, he'd make a two by two grid of numbers. For example, here
you see two, three, four, six. And then he'd use the cross to indicate which two opposite numbers to
multiply. So he would take the two times six and get 12, and then the three times four and get 12. He
recorded them both, 12 equals 12, and then he'd move on with his calculation. So this cross that you see
to indicate which two were to be multiplied slowly evolved into the product of just two numbers as we use
them today. What about our division sign? Well, in 1751, we see an inverted D, so a D written backwards, used
for division. In other words, we'd write 15 and then that inverted D five would equal three, because 15 divided
by five would be three. Just two years later, in 1753, we find the symbol that we use today with the horizontal
bar and the two dots. Although originally, there were actually two dots on the top and two dots on the bottom,
interestingly enough, and somewhere along the line, we canceled one of those dots away. In terms of writing
fractions, as we noted in lecture eight, Ames in the Rhine papyrus used a dot over a number to indicate a unit
fraction. So although he didn't have our symbol five, a dot over a five in his notation would mean one over five
or one fifth. Now the dot actually derived from the hieroglyph for an open mouth, indicating how fractions were used
to divide up rations of food and drink. And as we noted before, many of the questions from the Rhine papyrus
concerned dividing up red and ale. So it was quite a lively bunch of people, at least in the stories of the Rhine
papyrus. Writing fractions stacked using three terraces of type with a horizontal line between the numbers goes back to Arabic
writings. And even Fibonacci and Libre Abacay used stacked fractions. The writing of a slash for a fraction all in one line,
such as two thirds, first appears in a text published in Mexico in 1784. You could see it's a multicultural
contribution from all walks of the world, all points of the globe. In fact, we first see that this is actually almost like a tilted
flourish. So it's very elegant, and then slowly it evolved, or should I say devolved, into the less ornate slash that we use today.
Well, let's now turn to the important arithmetical objects known as powers and exponents and leave the notation behind. And to start
with, let's just consider powers that are natural numbers. They're the easiest ones. The great 17th century mathematician and philosopher
Renee Descartes developed a shorthand way of writing powers. He'd write five squared to mean five times five, and five cubed, which would
mean five times five times five. Now this notation allows us to write very large values in a very compact fashion. For example, instead
of writing one billion as one followed by nine zeros, we could just write 10 to the ninth power and be done with it. So it's a very
powerful way of notitating numbers. In view of Descartes notation, let's see that n cubed times n squared equals something that just in terms
of n. And what would it be? Well, I would take n cubed and write out n times n times n, and then I'd multiply that by n times n. So how
many n's am I multiplying? Five. And so I see n to the fifth. And so the rule here is that if we have the same base and different
exponents, we just add the exponents together. And this is always a tricky rule. And in fact, when I teach my college students this, I actually sing
for them a little jingle that I wrote to remind them of the method to do this. And it goes like this, and I'm tone death. But it goes, when in doubt,
write it out. Because just by writing out what n cubed mean, n times n times n, and n squared, n times n, we see n to the fifth, we add the
exponents. Now, this song is really an example of a much more general principle known as the law of exponents, which says that if I take n to the
power a and multiply it by n raised to the power b, then in fact we have n raised to the power a plus b. Now, in algebra, we often combine products,
sums, differences, and natural powers to create what are called polynomials. And we'll see this throughout our course. This is our first introduction to this idea.
Now, that is expressions such as 3n squared minus 2n plus 10. We're just adding multiplying numbers, and we're raising, in this case, n to natural number
powers. Or even more elaborate, 120n to the 95th power plus 12.3 times n to the 35th power minus 11n to the seventh power minus 5n plus 27.
Anything like that are known as polynomials. And as we'll see in lecture 15, polynomials can be used to refine our understanding of numbers and thus plays a significant role in the evolution of
numbers. Well, now it's time to move beyond natural number powers and consider fractions in the exponent. That is, what does it mean to raise a number to a fractional
power? Let's answer this riddle by using what we already know and considering a specific example. What power of 9 equals the square root of 9?
Now, recall that the square root of 9 is 3 because 3 squared, 3 times 3 equals 9, and the square root undoes the square. So the square root of 9 equals 3. So we know that.
But the question is, what power of 9 will equal the square root of 9? Well, I don't know what that power is, so let's give it a name. It's an unknown. Let's call it p for power.
So suppose that 9 to the p equals the square root of 9. Well, then if we just squared both sides or multiplied the left hand side by 9 to the p and the right hand side by
square root of 9, then we see 9 to the p times 9 to the p equals the square root of 9 times the square root of 9. Well, the square root of 9 times the square root of 9 is just 9.
And by the law of exponents, we know that 9 to the p times 9 to the p is 9 to the p plus p or 9 to the 2 times p. So we see that 9 to the 2p equals 9.
9 to the 2p power equals 9. So on the right hand side, we see 1, 9, and on the left hand side, we see 2p multiples of 9. Well, there has to be the same number of 9s on both sides, so 2p has to equal 1.
We have 1, 9 on one side, we have to have 1, 9 on the other, and so 2p equals 1, and so we see, if we divide both sides by 2, that p equals a half.
Therefore, we just discovered an amazing fact that 9 to the 1 half power means square root of 9. That is, 9 to the 1 half power equals the number 3. Similarly, 2 to the 1 half power means the square root of 2.
These examples, in fact, can be generalized. If we have a fractional number as an exponent, a fraction exponent, then its denominator, the number below, signifies a root.
So for example, 8 to the 1 third power equals the cube root of 8, which is in turn equal to 2, since 2 cubed 2 times 2 times 2 equals 8.
In general, we can say that a raised to the 1 over b power is the b th root of a.
Well, what if our fraction in the exponent has a numerator other than just 1? Well, no problem at all. For example, let's consider 8 raised to the 2 thirds power.
Well, in that case, I first take the cube root of 8, and then I square the quantity, which in this case, the cube root of 8 is 2, so I see 2 squared, which equals 2 times 2 or 4. So 8 to the 2 thirds power is equal to 4.
And more generally, we say that a raised to the c over b power is equal to the b th root of a all raised to the c power.
Well, Nicholas Orzmi, one of the most influential philosophers and mathematicians of the 14th century, was the first to write and make sense of fractional exponents.
And this really was an individual who was a great thinker. In fact, he once noted, and I love this little quote,
Therefore, I indeed know nothing except that I know that I know nothing. I think a very brilliant quote, because it really identifies the fact that every time we think we understand something, so much more is left to be understood.
As an aside, sometime later, the notion of fractional exponents was rediscovered by our friend, Simone Stevin.
While the symbols for fractional and other exponents were suggested by Orzmi and Stevin, the convention is really due to John Wallace, a 17th century English mathematician, and also to Sir Isaac Newton.
And the notation of putting a fraction in the exponent became popular around 1676.
Now, all notation aside, the important fact is that we can now make sense of taking a number like 2 and raising it to a fractional power like 7 fifths.
It means that we must first take the fifth root of 2, which we can do on a calculator, and then multiply that number by itself seven times.
By the way, in case you're wondering, that works out to be 2.63915 and so forth.
The point is, it's a real number.
Natural numbers raised to fractional powers are numbers.
Well, all was well with number until Orzmi declared and dared to wonder something totally bizarre.
What does it mean to raise a number to an irrational exponent?
For example, what does 2 raised to the square root of 2 mean? And is that thing a number?
The answer is, as we're about to see, yes, that thing does have meaning and it is a number.
But how can we see what it means?
Since it's way too complicated of an object, we immediately retreat and we try to inch up to it by constructing objects that we already understand.
So, this is an exciting moment since we're about to discover a new type of number.
Now, how can we inch up to 2 raised to the power square root of 2 power?
Well, in lecture 10 we showed that rational numbers, the fractions, are dense in the number line.
In other words, we can find fractions as close as we wish to any real number at all.
For example, we can approach the square root of 2, who has a decimal expansion of 1.414213 and so forth, using fractions.
1.4, which is 14 over 10, or 1.41, which is 141 over 100, or 1.414, which is 1,414 over 1,000, and so forth.
In fact, we foreshadowed this idea in lecture 6 when we saw that the ratios of Fibonacci numbers approach the golden ratio.
Well, we'll now use these fractions that approach the square root of 2 to approach the value 2 raised to the square root of 2 power
by computing 2 to the a over b, in which a over b is a fraction near the square root of 2.
In this case, we first consider 2 raised to the power 1.4, that equals 2 raised to the 14 over 10, which equals 2 raised to the power 7 fifths,
which we just found to be 2.63901 and so forth.
If we were to calculate 2 to the power a over b for each a over b approximating the square root of 2,
then we could produce a list of numbers by just taking the bth root of 2 and then multiplying and then raising it to the eighth power.
So for example, we'd see 2 raised to the 1.4 power is 2.639 and so forth.
If we look at 2 raised to the 1.41 power, we'd see 2.6573 and so forth.
And then we can go down the list and go 2 to the 1.41421356, which turns out to be 2.6651441, and look what's happening.
We see that these values are converging upon a particular decimal number.
The values are looking more and more the same.
Thus, we now define what we mean by 2 raised to the square root of 2 power.
We declare it to be the number we're approaching in this manner.
Specifically, 2 to the square root of 2 power is the real number whose decimal expansion begins 2.66514414 and so forth.
So in this lecture, we not only saw the origins of arithmetic and those cryptic symbols that we've been taught to use,
but we've developed a deeper understanding of what that arithmetic represents and what it actually means.
And we've actually proved some theorems involving the arithmetic.
For example, a negative times a negative being a positive or any number times 0 equals 0.
We see that not only can we make sense of fractions as powers in exponents,
but that by inching up to them, we can actually make sense of irrational powers.
And those strange new objects are indeed themselves numbers in the truest sense.
Thus, we see that arithmetic can be used to enhance our understanding of number
and help us widen our ever-growing notion of what number means.
