In this lecture, using pi and e as two famous exemplars, we'll introduce the mysterious
world of transcendental numbers.
We'll see how numbers fall into one of two different classes.
Whether they are a solution to some special type of equation or they're not the solution
to any such equation.
If a number is a solution, we call it an algebraic number and otherwise we call it transcendental
or a transcendental number.
The existence of algebraic numbers goes back to at least as far as the Babylonians who
were solving quadratic equations as early as 2000 BCE.
However, humankind had awaited several millennia before we were able to demonstrate the existence
of even one transcendental number.
Joseph Leaville in 1844 made this wonderful discovery about nature and number by actually
constructing one.
As we've seen throughout these lectures, what at first appears exotic and rare are
in fact commonplace and ordinary.
While it took thousands of years to show that transcendental numbers even existed, it took
Georg Cantor only 50 years after Leaville's seminal work to prove that almost all numbers
are transcendental.
Even though we know that real numbers are teeming with transcendentals, it remains a
very difficult task to produce specific ones even today.
In fact, David Hilbert in his famous address at the 1900 Congress of Mathematics in which
he listed 10 fundamental open questions of mathematics challenged the mathematical community
to prove the transcendence of two raised to the square root of two power.
While many mathematicians including Hilbert himself considered this question out of reach,
Alexander Gelfand and Theodore Schneider independently gave an affirmative answer to this question
in the mid 1930s.
We'll close our discussion of transcendental numbers by describing some questions that
remain unanswered to this very day.
Well, the main object of interest in this lecture is the notion of a transcendental number.
Unfortunately, transcendental numbers are defined indirectly.
They're defined by what we say they're not.
They're not the solutions to certain equations.
And so I want to open this lecture here with a few minutes about those equations themselves.
Now, because these ideas are challenging for all who encountered them for the first
time, including the mathematicians themselves, here we have an opportunity to celebrate one
of my favorite lessons for understanding difficult notions.
First try to understand simple things deeply.
So let's start at the beginning and see our story slowly unfold.
Well, one of the most common practices in mathematics is the solving of equations.
The simplest equations in my mind are the equations that look like, for example, x minus
two equals zero, for which I can see that the solution would be x equals two.
What does it mean to find a solution?
It means we have to find a value for x so that when we plug that value in for x in the
equation, the equation is valid.
Another example would be two x minus ten equals zero.
Again, fairly simple.
And if we work through and solve that, we'd see the solution is x equals five, because
if I replace the x by five, I would see two times five minus ten.
By the way, when we write two x, that always means that we're multiplying.
So if there's no symbol in between two and an x like that, that means two times x.
So we see two times five minus ten, which does indeed equal zero.
That's a solution.
Well, in fact, these are two examples of what are called linear equations of the general
form something times x minus something equals zero.
Now if m and n are integers in the expression nx minus m equals zero, then the solution
to that, which is x equals m divided by n, is a rational number.
In other words, it's a fraction.
We have a ratio of two integers.
So for example, three x minus two, if we were to find the solution of that, we'd see the
answer is that x equals two thirds.
And notice two thirds is indeed a ratio of integers.
It's a rational number.
So these three equations are in fact a special case of the simplest class of equations that
we have known as polynomial equations.
These are sums and differences of numbers multiplied by x's that are being raised to
various natural number powers and then all set equal to zero.
So let's now see some examples of polynomial equations that are not linear just to get
into the groove.
Now these are going to make some up and these are going to be just random and ugly looking
things but I assure you that we're not going to solve them but I want you to get a sense
of what they look like, their general form.
For example, x squared minus two equals zero.
That's an example of a polynomial equation.
Five x cubed plus nine x squared minus thirty five x minus seven equals zero is even a more
elaborate one and you can make even really complicated looking ones.
For example, negative x to the twenty-fifth power plus forty nine x to the seventeenth
power plus x to the ten minus twelve x equals zero.
Wow, that looks really impressive.
But they all have the same form and that's what I just want us to see here now.
They all have this similar look.
Now even with these more intimidating polynomial equations, a value of x that makes the equation
valid is called a solution to that equation.
That is, if we plug in that value that for the unknown x, we see that the equality holds.
Even though it looks complicated and so forth, if we had a value we could plug in and see
if it satisfies the equation or not.
So for example, let's see that x equals three is in fact a solution to the polynomial equation
x squared minus nine equals zero.
Well, let's check and see.
If we replace the x, the unknown x by a three, what we see here is three squared minus nine.
Well, three squared is three times three, which is nine.
So we see nine minus nine, which indeed equals zero.
So yes, it's a solution.
Let's check to see another example that the square root of two is a solution to x squared
minus two equals zero.
So if we look at the polynomial x squared minus two equals zero and now we substitute
for the unknown x, the square root of two, then what do we see?
Well, we see the square root of two squared.
Well, remember that when we square a square root, those two functions counteract each other
and we're just left with in this case just the two.
Square root of two squared equals two.
But then we subtract two, which means we yield zero.
So in fact, we see that the square root of two is a solution to that polynomial.
So we see solutions.
Now, for this lecture, we'll only consider polynomials having integer coefficients.
In other words, the only numbers we'll see multiplying all those x's are going to be
natural numbers or their negatives, which has been the case in all the examples that
we've seen so far.
Solving polynomial equations is very, very difficult in general.
For quadratic polynomial equations, and by the way, an equation, a polynomial equation
is a quadratic equation if the highest power of x is a two.
So we see x squared and no x cubes are higher.
Well, for quadratic polynomial equations, we can actually employ the so-called quadratic
formula to solve them and we actually studied the quadratic formula long ago in our math
classes in school.
However, in general, it's been proven that it's impossible to have a formula that can
find the solutions to an arbitrary polynomial equation.
That is, we know for certain that no such big formula exists.
This important discovery was made by Everest Gawa, a brilliant young 19th century French
mathematician who tragically, at the age of 20, was killed in a duel on May 30th, 1832.
Really a sad story.
Now, we're not exactly sure today why this duel took place.
One romantic theory is that Gawa was defending the honor of a young lady.
A less romantic but more likely explanation is that he was defending his radical political
beliefs.
What we do know for sure is that the evening before this fateful duel, Gawa stayed up all
night writing down his mathematical ideas.
He was 20 years old and he was writing and writing because he realized things might not
go so well the next day.
And in fact, the ideas that he wrote were the ideas that resolved this question showing
that there is no big solution to all polynomial equations.
There's no formula that will work.
He proved that that night.
In fact, in his last letter to his brother Alfred, he actually wrote, Don't cry, Alfred.
I need all my courage to die at 20.
A very tragic story and an untimely death of an incredible mind.
Well, the desire to solve these polynomial equations goes back at least to the Babylonians
in 2000 BCE.
For example, they studied the solutions to x squared minus 2 equals 0.
One solution to this equation, as we just saw, is x equals the square root of 2.
And as we've noted several times in the course, the Babylonians approximated this value in
base 60.
The numbers that are solutions to such polynomial equations with integers are known as algebraic
numbers because they're numbers that arise from using algebra to solve the equations.
The integers, of course, are all algebraic numbers because if you think about it for
a moment, take, for example, the integer 7.
If we consider the polynomial x minus 7 equals 0, 7's a solution.
Well, if you're a solution to such an equation, then we see that you're an algebraic number.
So all the integers are algebraic numbers.
Similarly, all the rational numbers, all the fractions are algebraic numbers, as we saw
with the examples we looked at at the opening of this course.
So those are two collections of well-known algebraic numbers in our minds, the integers,
the counting numbers, the rational numbers.
But of course, we've also seen some irrational numbers that are algebraic.
The square root of 2 is the most famous that we actually proved following the ancient Greeks'
proof.
For example, the cube root of 5 is an algebraic number because it's actually a solution to
the polynomial equation x cubed minus 5 equals 0.
Now to see that, let's actually substitute the cube root of 5 in for the unknown x and
see that indeed it's a solution.
If we take the cube root of 5 and cube it, well, just like with the square root being
squared, a cube root being cubed, those two operations cancel out so we just see 5.
5 minus 5 is 0.
So indeed it's a solution to that and therefore the cube root of 5 is awarded, the title,
an algebraic number.
Well, while algebraic numbers have no specific look to them, they often involve roots.
For example, the square root of 2 is an algebraic number.
The cube root of 2 is an algebraic number.
The square root of 5 minus 7, and you can even make more elaborate ones.
For example, the square root of 6 plus the fourth root of 22 all over 9.
Well, these are all examples of algebraic numbers and you can see that these can get
a very complicated looking very quickly.
In fact, this reminds me that Sir Winston Churchill carried the memory of these square
roots and cube roots throughout his life.
In his autobiography entitled My Early Life, A Roving Commission, he reflects on his bout
with mathematics as part of his entrance exam to be admitted into the military academy and
I thought I would read a little excerpt from his book in his own words.
All my life from time to time I have had to get up disagreeable subjects at short notice.
What I consider my triumph moral and technical was in learning mathematics in six months.
Of course, what I call mathematics is only what the civil service commissioners expected
you to know to pass a very rudimentary exam.
I suppose that to those who enjoy this peculiar gift, senior wranglers and the like, the waters
in which I swam must seem only a duck puddle compared to the Atlantic Ocean.
Nevertheless, when I plunged in, I was soon out of my depth.
He goes on to say, When I look back upon those care-laden months,
their prominent features rise from the abyss of memory.
Of course, I had progressed far beyond vulgar fractions and the decimal system.
We were arrived in an Alice in Wonderland world at the portals of which stood a quadratic equation.
We turned aside not indeed to the uplands of the delectable mountains, but into a strange
corridor of things like anagrams and acrostics called signs, cosines and tangents.
Apparently, they were very important, especially when multiplied by each other or by themselves.
There was a question on my third and last examination about these cosines and tangents
in a highly square-rooted condition, which must have been decisive upon the whole of
my afterlife.
It was a problem.
Luckily, I had seen its ugly face only a few days before, and I recognized it at first
sight.
Well, there you see this vision of mathematics and how these numbers with the roots can be
extremely intimidating.
In fact, he reflects on mathematics just a page or so later, and I wanted to share with
you his reflections on his own discovery of mathematics.
He writes, I had a feeling once about mathematics, that I saw it all, depth beyond depth was
revealed to me, the bis and the abyss.
I saw, as one might see, the transit of Venus, a quantity passing through infinity and changing
its sign from plus to minus.
I saw exactly how it happened and why the trigiversation was inevitable, and how the
one step involved all the others.
It was like politics, but it was after dinner, and I let it go.
So there you have a great, great memory from Churchill.
Well, getting back to our transcendental numbers, once mathematicians found these algebraic
numbers, it actually led to a very natural question.
In fact, it led to one of the most important questions in mathematics that remained unanswered
all the way through to the 19th century.
Are there any real numbers that are not algebraic?
In other words, are all real numbers these algebraic numbers?
So is every real number a solution to some polynomial equation having integer coefficients?
Well, a number that is not algebraic is called a transcendental number.
So the big question was, do transcendental numbers exist?
Well, Gottfried Leibniz in 1682 was probably the first to use the term transcendental,
but the modern definition of a transcendental number probably didn't arise until the next
century in the work of Euler.
The question of the existence of transcendental numbers remained unanswered until 1844, when
Joseph Leeville actually produced a particular real number and proved that it could not be
an algebraic number.
In other words, it could not be the solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
His number, known as Leeville's number, is the first number actually to be known to be
transcendental.
And its decimal value is 1.110001, and then a run of 17 zeros, then a 1, then an even
longer run of zeros, then a 1, and then an even longer run of zeros followed by 1, and
so forth.
That is, his number has a decimal expansion just consisting of zeros and ones, and with
the number of zeros between the ones growing at a very dramatic rate, almost at a rate
of n factorial, if you remember the factorial from the previous lecture, which is the product
of all the natural numbers up to a certain point.
By the way, we can see for ourselves that this number is irrational, namely it's not
a fraction, since its decimal expansion does not eventually become periodic because the
runs of zeros are ever increasing, so we can't have a repeating piece.
So we know it's irrational, but he proved much more.
He proved that it's transcendental.
It's not the solution to any polynomial equation with integer coefficients.
Well, this result was one of the greatest triumphs in our understanding of number and
continues to inspire beautiful, important mathematical research.
This area is known as transcendence, or transcendental number theory, and I must confess that Leeuvel's
result is my personal favorite result in all of mathematics, so this is a wonderful theorem
and certainly means a lot to me.
As we've already noted in 1873, Charles Irmeet proved that E is a transcendental number.
I'm just using that language, and nine years later, Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that
pi is a transcendental number, just converting what we said before about not being a solution
to polynomial equations with integer coefficients using the phrase transcendental number, which
means the same.
Now, the transcendentals form a vast world of mysterious numbers, and our understanding
of them is relatively limited even today.
It remains a great challenge and an amazing undertaking to establish the transcendence
of a particular number.
And why?
Well, because in theory, if you want to show that a particular number is transcendental,
in some sense, you'd have to go through all the infinitely many different polynomial equations
with integer coefficients and check each one and make sure that this number is not a solution
to any of them.
Well, that, of course, is impossible in finitely many steps, and so people have to use ingenious
ideas in order to get around that and prove transcendence indirectly, indirectly.
Well, given this reality, Georg Cantor in the late 1880s surprised the mathematics community
when he showed that almost all numbers are in fact transcendental.
In other words, the percentage of algebraic numbers is so small that it's effectively
zero, and in fact, mathematically, it is zero.
So the probability of picking one is, in fact, zero.
And this extends our previous observation that almost all numbers are irrational.
Remember, if you pick a number, a real number, out at random, it's with certainty that that
number will be irrational.
In fact, the famous mathematical historian, E.T. Bell, in 1937, described this vision in
a very romantic manner.
He wrote, the algebraic numbers are spotted over the plane like stars against a black
sky, the dense blackness in the firmament of the transcendentals.
A wonderful image.
If you look up into the dark sky, you see stars.
Of course, we see them because they're the exception.
But if you were to just somehow pick one point out in space, the likelihood of selecting
one of those stars would be zero.
More likely you would hit the black background, and that dense black background is the firmament
where the transcendentals live.
Once again, we see in our course this wonderful theme that the familiar numbers, in this case
the algebraic numbers, like square root of two, are, in fact, the rare numbers, while
the more mysterious transcendental numbers are more the commonplace and more the ordinary.
Again, we see this wonderful dichotomy between our understanding and intuition versus reality.
Thus, we're presented with another opportunity to retrain our thinking and intuition, although
this is by no means easy to do.
It's difficult to even grasp the idea of a transcendental number, let alone imagine
that, in fact, the real line is teeming with them, and the square roots of two and cube
roots of five that we're familiar with are the exception.
Well, I now want to share the story of a very famous question about transcendental numbers
that was posed by the early 20th century German mathematician David Hilbert.
One of the most famous international mathematics conferences is the Congress of Mathematics
held every four years.
In 1900, at the dawn of the 20th century, the Congress of Mathematics held in Paris
invited David Hilbert, one of the greatest mathematicians of the modern age, to deliver
an address on August 8.
Hilbert took this opportunity to reflect on the then current state of mathematics and
consider where it has been and the next direction in which it should move.
So, in his address, he posed open questions that he believed would shape the future of
mathematics.
He actually posed 23 questions, although only 10 were presented in the conference, but in
the conference proceedings, which he contributed, he listed all 23.
Of the 23 offered in 1900, 10 of those questions have been solved completely today, and the
rest still remain open.
In this famous list of questions, I want us to focus on his seventh question that he
describes.
The question actually involves a number that we ourselves studied earlier, the number two
raised to the square root of two power.
We figured out what that meant in a previous lecture, but he asks here if that number was
in fact transcendental.
Now, more generally, Hilbert asked the following question, so I'm going to state this question
in mathematical language, but we'll see that it's similar in structure to two raised to
the square root of two power.
He asked the following, he said, let's let A be an algebraic number that's not equal
to zero or one.
So, throw away zero or one, but take any other algebraic number you can think of, and let's
let B be an irrational algebraic number, like, for example, square root of two or the cube
root of five.
Then, the question is, if I take A and raise it to the B power, is that number a transcendental
number?
That was his seventh question.
Now, most mathematicians believe that this question would remain unanswered for a long,
long time, because it appeared totally out of reach using the current techniques and
theorems from number theory of the day.
However, in a surprisingly fast turn of events, an answer was provided by Alexander Gelfand
in 1934, and then again by Theodore Schneider in 1935.
And amazingly, Schneider wasn't even aware of Gelfand's work.
Once again, we see where our knowledge of mathematics is at a point where a question
was about to fall, and two great minds independently on their own, but simultaneously, saw that
avenue and cracked the question open, provided the answer.
They proved that the answer is yes.
All those numbers that Hilbert described are indeed transcendental numbers.
The result today is now known as the Gelfand-Schneider theorem to celebrate and honor both men who
created the proof.
Now, we can actually apply their theorem, and this powerful result, to establish that
two raised to the square root of two power is indeed transcendental.
Let's just do it really quickly to see that the number is transcendental.
So first of all, the number two is neither zero nor one, which is one of the stipulations,
and notice that it is algebraic because it's the solution to x minus two equals zero.
So therefore, it is an algebraic number that's neither zero or one, and so it's a allowable
candidate for the base.
And what about the exponent squared of two?
Well, it's an algebraic number because it's a solution, as we've seen earlier, to x squared
minus two equals zero, that's a polynomial.
And the Pythagoreans and we ourselves proved that that number is irrational, so we have
an irrational algebraic number.
We can use that in the theorem as the exponent.
So the hypotheses are fulfilled, we've satisfied the conditions required in order for us to
conclude through the Gelfand-Schneider theorem that two raised to the square root of two
power is indeed a transcendental number.
Well, many open questions remain, and I want to share some of them with you.
In fact, our understanding of transcendental numbers is very, very narrow, very, very limited.
So for example, pi plus e, we don't know if that number is transcendental, as far as
you might remember we discussed earlier that we don't even know if that number is even
irrational.
So we certainly don't know if it's transcendental.
Pi times e, nobody knows.
Pi to the e power, nobody knows.
Pi raised to the square root of two power, no one knows.
Notice we can't use the Gelfand-Schneider with pi raised to the square root of two power,
even though the square root of two is indeed an irrational algebraic number.
Pi is not an algebraic number, because we've already discussed that pi is an example of
a transcendental number, and the Gelfand-Schneider theorem says nothing about a transcendental
raised to an algebraic power, only algebraic to an algebraic power.
E to the e is another example where we know nothing about pi to the pi, two to the pi,
and two to the e.
You can make up lots of numbers of this sort, and we really don't know anything about them.
It's amazing how limited our understanding of numbers genuinely is at the forefronts.
Now we conjecture that all of these numbers are transcendental, because they look so complicated
and so forth, but that says nothing, that proves nothing.
We have to be able to prove it, and in fact we don't even know if any of those numbers
are in fact even irrational.
So there's much work to be done if we really want to understand the transcendental numbers
in greater depth.
Well, the point in this lecture is to discover that there's different ways of actually approaching
and viewing number, and we can classify numbers depending upon whether they're sympathetic
to algebraic expressions or not.
If they are, then we call them algebraic numbers, and if they're not, we call them transcendentals.
We've seen lots and lots of examples of algebraic numbers in our own mathematical histories,
and certainly in our course, for example the square root of two, and the natural numbers,
and the ratios of natural numbers, the fractions, but the transcendental numbers remain enigmatic
in our minds.
However, in reality what we're seeing is that the number line is teeming with these transcendental
numbers, and they are more the norm than the exception.
And quite often we see this again and again in our course where that which is the most
familiar turns out to be the most exotic.
So I hope you will consider thinking about transcendental numbers, an extremely deep
idea that continues to intrigue the world of mathematicians and mathematics to this day.
