We'll open this lecture with a historical look back at algebra.
What it means, its symbols, and how it can even distract from star-crossed lovers.
Inspired by the study of algebra, in particular solving polynomial equations, we'll then
offer a mathematical story that opens with the natural numbers and naturally leads to
the discovery of the integers, the rational numbers, and then the algebraic irrational
numbers such as the square root of 2.
This story brings us to a seemingly innocuous or perhaps even ridiculous question.
Are all algebraic numbers, in fact, numbers as we know them to this point?
In other words, is every algebraic number a real number on the number line?
Well, this will bring us to Gialamo Cardano, a 16th century Italian mathematician with
an interesting story.
We'll soon discover that the answer is no.
There are equations that have no solutions among the real numbers.
Cardano was the first to consider square roots of negative numbers.
He called them fictitious and meaningless numbers.
This discovery led to the need to expand our notion of number yet again and thus in turn
to develop the so-called complex numbers or imaginary numbers.
However, in view of our story, these new numbers will not appear to be that imaginary.
Given this new expanded view of number, that is the collection of all complex numbers,
no wonder if we've captured every algebraic number in this expanded net of numbers.
Carl Friedrich Gauss in his PhD thesis of 1799 showed that the answer is yes, and surprisingly
much, much more is true.
In fact, we'll see that in the eyes of this algebraic approach to numbers, when we ascend
to the complex numbers, we have arrived at the end of the number line, the ultimate notion
of number.
While this observation is true using this algebraic lens, we'll soon discover that there
are other mathematical lenses through which we can gaze into the world of number, and
through those visions, we actually see and discover different conclusions.
Well, to get started, I want us to return to our heady days of algebra.
In fact, what exactly is algebra?
Well, at the heart of algebra, we find two numerical expressions that are equal to one
another.
However, algebra holds a mystery.
Some number or numbers in one of the expressions are unknown.
Thus, the main mission in algebra is to figure out the number that represents that unknown
quantity.
For example, if we consider 2 times 5 equals 10, well, this is a true equation, but nothing
is hidden from sight.
However, the equation 2x equals 10, well remember 2x means 2 times x, 2x equals 10 has a mysterious
quantity, namely that x.
Our mission now is to find the number x that makes that equation true.
In other words, we must find a number with the property that when it's multiplied by
2, the product equals 10.
Of course, we see that in this case, our mysterious number is simply x equals 5.
Now, when we think of algebra, we might think of those dreaded word problems or story problems.
These have challenged some and tortured others for thousands of years.
The book entitled Greek Anthology from the 4th century BCE contained many algebraic riddles.
In fact, here's one from that ancient book.
Six people are to divide a heap of apples.
The first person receives one third of the apples, the second person receives one eighth
of the apples, the third person receives one fourth of the apples, and the fourth person
receives one fifth.
The fifth person receives 10 apples, and the last person is given only one.
How many apples were there in the original heap?
Well, that's the kind of question that we've all faced from time to time.
Maybe I shouldn't tell you the answer, but just in case you're wondering, the answer
is 120, and you can go back and check that 120 satisfies all those conditions every person
gets the appropriate number of apples that they're allotted.
Today, we often refer to an unknown as X, but Ames in the Rhine Papyrus represented
unknown quantities with a symbol for heaps.
And if you remember, back in this period, numbers were defined by heaps or piles of things.
So using a symbol that means heaps seems very natural and consistent with that point of view.
The ancient Chinese indicated unknowns by their physical position in the equation, how
they were placed, while in the Hindu works, we actually see the unknown represented as
a dot.
Brahmagupta and later Bhaskara used names of colors to designate different unknown quantities,
while in Arabic works from 900 CE, different coins were used to represent unknowns and
refer to one unknown as thing, which is interesting that there was an unknown object, and so we
called it thing, even though it represented some number, we just didn't know what that
number was at this point.
It was Rene Descartes in 1637 who adopted the italic letters X, Y, Z, all lower case,
for unknowns.
And this is the notion and notation that is used today.
Now why the popularity of X?
Descartes favored X since it was the least most common letter in the French language,
and so it would be the least confusing.
It was the least used letter to start French words.
Beyond the unknown, the always present object in equations, of course, is the equal sign,
which we denote as two short little parallel horizontal lines.
Ames, in the Rhine Papyrus, used a symbol that meant it gives for the equation sign,
which again is wonderful because certainly 1 plus 2, well, it gives 3, and so that makes
sense.
In texts before 1557, Latin words such as equales, abbreviated as A, E, Q, were actually
used, the letters were actually used to denote the equals.
Some actually used a long hyphen for an equal sign.
But it was Robert Record who published an algebra text in 1557, which he introduced
the symbol to horizontal parallel lines, although his were actually very, very long
at first.
And this symbol was later shrunken down to the more modest equal sign that is familiar.
Record's book was also the first English text to introduce our current symbols for addition
and subtraction.
Well, algebra remains an important tool to help answer important questions.
However, believe it or not, it can also be viewed as a past time.
The great 12th century mathematician Bascara authored a text entitled The Gem of Mathematics.
It contains entertaining challenges to keep the interest of the reader, and he wrote these
puzzles in verse, and I wanted to offer you an example of one.
Oh, tender girl, out of the swans in a certain lake, ten times the square root of their number
flew away to Manessa, Saorvar, when the rains came at the monsoon.
One eighth went away to the forest called Sala Padmini.
Three swans remained in the lake engaged in amorous play.
How many swans were there in all?
The kind of question that we saw when we were kids and we dreaded, you know, square root
of the number of swans, it's very silly in a way, and the legend has it that Bascara
wrote this book, in fact, for his daughter.
And if you notice, it opens with oh, tender girl, perhaps referring to his daughter.
And the story goes that he actually wrote this book to try to distract his daughter from
seeing a certain suitor which Bascara didn't particularly like and was trying to, although
having a question that involves swans engaged in amorous play, I don't know how successful
this distraction really was.
Well, let's now witness the growth of numbers within an algebraic garden.
In other words, let's exploit our desire to find solutions to simple equations and see
how the notion of number evolves and where it takes us.
We begin with the numbers that we can really count on, namely the natural numbers.
That is, we'll now momentarily pretend that our entire world of number consists solely
of the collection of natural numbers.
If we consider simple linear equations such as x plus 2 equals 5, we see that these equations
do have solutions.
In this case, x would be 3, which is a counting number.
It's a natural number.
However, we run into trouble if we consider the equation x plus 7 equals 5.
For there's no number in our pretend universe that actually satisfies this equation because
we have no number negative 2, only the natural numbers.
Well, as we saw in an earlier lecture, the father of algebra himself, the Greek mathematician
Delfantis, around the year 250, wrote about such nonsensical equations.
If an equation had a negative number solution, he called the entire equation absurd.
Again, note the bias and the prejudice.
It's hard for minds, even great minds, to become open to notions and ideas that seem
so unnatural and counterintuitive at first, but still we try to overcome it.
Well, returning back to algebra in our evolving number sense, it seems sensible that simple
equations such as x plus 7 equals 5 should have solutions.
Thus, the algebra now forces us to expand our notion of numbers so that these equations
have solutions.
Therefore, we now allow negative natural numbers to be viewed as numbers.
We recall from lecture 3 that the great 7th century Indian astronomer Brahma Gupta was
the first to offer a systematic treatment of negative numbers.
This expanded view leads us to the integers.
That is, let's now build the world of the rational numbers.
We have the integers, which are the numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, and so on, with 0 and with negative
1, negative 2, negative 3, but let's see how algebra demands more from us.
If we consider the entire world of numbers to be comprised solely of this collection
of integers, then we face further trouble when we consider simple equations such as
3x equals 5, so 3 times x equals 5.
The solution there would be 5 thirds, x equals 5 thirds, and there's no integer that satisfies
this equation because 5 thirds is in fact not an integer, it's a ratio of 2 integers
with a denominator of 3.
And yet, it seems sensible that simple equations such as 3x equals 5 should have solutions.
Thus, we now expand our notion of number so that these equations do have solutions.
In other words, we now introduce fractional numbers into our ever-evolving world of number.
This expanded view leads us to rational numbers.
Now, as we've seen in previous lectures, fractions go back to the Egyptians and the
Greeks, but did the Greeks view rational numbers as numbers or as merely ratios of numbers?
Again, this remains open.
In our minds now, algebra dictates that in fact we view these rational numbers or ratios
as numbers.
Notice how algebra is beautifully growing our number sense for us, just by our desire
to find solutions to equations that seem simple and should have solutions within mathematics.
Well, let's now journey into the universe of algebraic numbers.
If we consider the entire world of number to be comprised solely of the rational numbers,
in other words, the fractions, then we face further headaches when we consider simple
equations like x squared equals 2.
Well, because we know that the solution, one solution to this, is in fact x equals the
square root of 2 because the square root of 2 squared equals 2.
And we've proven that the square root of 2 is in fact an irrational number.
That's not a ratio.
And so therefore as the ancient Greeks discovered thousands of years ago, and we discovered
in lecture 8, there's no solution to this because there's no rational number that will
satisfy this in our current number state.
And yet it seems sensible that simple equations such as x squared equals 2 should have solutions.
What are we forced to do?
Well, thus we expand our notion of numbers so that these equations do have solutions.
In this case, we have the new number square root of 2 and also negative square root of
2, which is the other solution.
Therefore we now allow these irrational numbers to be considered as numbers.
Now we call the collection consisting of all of these numbers, the irrational and the one
we saw earlier, we call that collection the algebraic numbers.
And so now we've arrived at the algebraic numbers.
Well, up to this point in our algebraic evolution of number, all the numbers that we've seen
are numbers that we've already discovered in previous lectures, even including these
algebraic numbers, which we saw in the previous lecture.
Well, that's about to change, and it's going to change with a character named Cardano.
Girolamo Cardano was a colorful 16th century Italian physician and mathematician.
He was the first to describe typhoid fever.
He invented the combination lock, but was always short of cash, and thus was also an
accomplished gambler and chess player, so quite a character.
One of his greatest works was a text he wrote in 1545 entitled The Great Art.
And it was an algebra text, and in it he included a systematic method for solving certain cubic
equations.
So these are equations which have an x cubed in it, but no x to the force or higher powers,
just x cubes.
But even his solution was not without controversy.
Niccolò Tartaglia derived this particular solution and shared it with Cardano.
Tartaglia claimed later that Cardano promised not to publish it, and thus this led to a
very long and bitter plagiarism battle between these two men.
Well, in a different direction, but perhaps even more controversial, Cardano posed the
following question in his book The Great Art, and the question read, divide ten into two
parts whose product is forty.
In other words, we're asked to find two numbers that sum to equal ten, and whose product
equals forty.
Sounds like a harmless question.
Well if one were to work it out, the answers turn out to be five plus the square root
of negative fifteen, and five minus the square root of negative fifteen.
Now, it's easy to see that if we take those two numbers and just add them together, that
the square root of negative fifteen minus the square root of negative fifteen, they
cancel out, and five plus five is ten.
So the sum being ten is easy to see.
And if one were to very carefully multiply those two numbers together correctly, we'd
actually see that the product is forty, as it was supposed to be.
But the question really is, what does the square root of negative fifteen mean?
To face this challenging question, we need to consider a simpler question.
The question that I want us to think about is, does x squared plus one equals zero have
a solution?
Well, let's think about x squared plus one equals zero.
Well, if there is a number x that is a solution to x squared plus one equals zero, then if
I were to subtract one from both sides, I would see that x squared equals negative
one.
Okay.
Well, we notice that in this case, x can't be zero, since zero squared is zero, and it's
not equal to negative one.
So x equals zero is out, it's not a solution.
Therefore, the number x must be a non-zero number.
However, let me remind you that in lecture twelve, we proved that the square of any non-zero
real number equals a positive number, because a number multiplied by itself is either positive
times positive, or negative times negative, and we saw that in both cases, the answer
is positive.
And thus, since we have a square equaling negative one, we see there is no real solution
that's going to actually satisfy that.
No real number will satisfy this equation.
And yet, it seems sensible that such a simple equation as x squared equals negative one
should have solutions.
Okay, now this is an interesting moment, because we find a need to expand our notion of numbers
yet again.
So let's do just that.
Let's now widen our notion of numbers, so that these equations do have solutions.
Therefore, for the first time in this course, we find the need to expand our notion of number
beyond the real numbers of our number line.
And we're finally going to take off from the line.
We call these new numbers complex numbers, and we denote the special number square root
of negative one as the lower case italics i.
This special number i is our first number that is not real.
It does not correspond to any point on the number line.
And as we noted, Cardano was the first to consider square roots of negative numbers.
Now he called these numbers fictitious and meaningless numbers, which is a wonderful way
of describing numbers that don't have any sort of physical measurement associated with
it or a negative.
Today we call the number i an imaginary number.
In fact, Cardano himself wrote about this and said, put aside the mental tortures involved,
no progresses arithmetic subtlety, the end of which, as is said, is as refined as it
is useless, implying that, well, the math is correct, we derive it this answer, but
in fact these numbers mean nothing and they're useless.
Well, it turns out that Cardano was in fact wrong about the utility of these numbers.
These imaginary numbers are used in physics to help us understand and model flows and
the dynamics of currents and fluid.
So in fact, even things that, again, first appear to be totally abstract and devoid of
application utility turn out to be descriptors of our everyday world.
The name i was given by Leonardo Euler two centuries after Cardano's original work.
We note that because i is not real, then it cannot be a fractional number because of course
all fractions live on the real line, hence i is another example of an irrational number
by it not, in fact, living on the line.
However, the number i is an algebraic number because it is the solution to the polynomial
equation x squared plus 1 equals 0, let's check that.
If we let x equal i, remember i is the square root of negative 1, if I take the square root
of negative 1 and square it, remember that the square root and square counteract each
other and so what we see here is just negative 1, negative 1 plus 1, indeed equals 0.
So it is a solution, therefore i is an algebraic number.
Well, now armed with the special number i, which is the square root of negative 1, we
can now define all the complex numbers so we can extend this notion yet further.
So the complex numbers are numbers that we can write as a real number plus a real number
times i, or put more mathematically, x plus yi, where x and y are real numbers from the
number line.
So for example, 2 plus 3i is an example of a complex number, as is negative 3i.
These are just two examples, there are of course many, many examples of complex numbers,
but this is the general form that they take.
Now just as with real numbers, we can add, subtract, multiply and divide complex numbers
so we can perform arithmetic with this new collection of numbers.
For example, let's compute i squared.
Well we know by its definition that i squared actually equals negative 1.
But what about higher powers of i?
What about i cubed?
Well i cubed would just be i times i times i.
So i times i is negative 1, and negative 1 times i is negative i.
So i cubed is negative i.
What is i to the fourth power?
Well i squared is negative 1, and if we square again to get the fourth power, we see 1.
Or in other words, i times i is negative 1, i times i is negative 1, and negative 1 times
negative 1, we actually proved ourselves, is 1.
What about i to the fifth?
Well that would be 1 times i, which is i.
i to the sixth would be i times i yet again, which would be negative 1.
And in other words, what we're seeing here is that we return to the number i, and then
we start to repeat.
So it's a repeating pattern when we take higher and higher powers of i.
We see i, and then when we square it, we see negative 1, then negative i, then 1, then i,
then negative 1, then negative i, then 1, then i, then negative 1, and so forth.
And this keeps repeating as we take higher and higher powers of i.
We cycle through these four numbers.
Well this repeating pattern actually continues, and it will actually apply this really neat
fact in the next lecture to discover something truly amazing.
Well, how can we visualize these complex numbers?
We recall that the real numbers can be viewed as the points on the number line.
Well, it turns out that we can generalize this idea and visualize complex numbers by
replacing the number line by a flat plane of numbers.
So here we actually see two number lines that meet up at right angles.
The horizontal number line is referred to as the real number line, the one that we're
used to, and this new vertical number line is referred to as the imaginary axis.
And this figure is called the complex plane, and we can actually visualize complex numbers
by plotting their location in the plane.
For example, let's consider the complex number 3 plus 2i.
How do I find out where that point is in this plane?
Well the 3, the first number, tells me how far to go over in the horizontal direction
on the real axis.
So I move three units to the right, and then the 2i tells me how far up or down I should
go.
In this case I go up two units, and that point that we see represents the number 3 plus 2i.
So there's that point represented in the plane.
More generally, we can plot the complex number x plus iy by moving to the real axis, the
number x, that's the horizontal, go over to the value x, and then go vertically up or
down the y, and then that dot we see is x plus iy.
Well, the complex plane really is a generalization of the number line, but we notice that we
need to include that extra direction, that up-down direction, for the new number i that
we introduced.
In fact, this vertical axis, as I said before, is sometimes referred to as the imaginary
axis.
Bringing these ideas back full circle to the beginning of this lecture, we recall that our
algebraic development of number evolved through our desire to find solutions to polynomial
equations with integers.
It was the 11th century Persian mathematician Omar Kayam who first formalized the notion
of algebra by explicitly considering solutions to polynomial equations.
He, unlike the ancient Greeks, viewed the irrational numbers as numbers themselves.
Well, we've seen that we can even solve equations such as x squared plus 1 equals 0, even though
our solutions are no longer real numbers and no longer reside on the number line, and these
new imaginary numbers are certainly no more imaginary than the square root of 2.
Remember, that was a number that was imaginary to the Pythagorean.
So the phrase imaginary really is just one within our minds, but these numbers are just
as abstract and just as real as the other numbers, although they're not real numbers
as we define them in a mathematical sense.
Incredibly, with just the inclusion of this one new number, the imaginary number i, we
were able to build all the complex numbers just using the real numbers.
And as we've seen, we need these complex numbers because they are the solutions to certain
equations.
However, do we need more numbers?
Do we need to expand even more?
In other words, do we need to expand our notion of number further to ensure that all polynomial
equations of this form have solutions?
In a surprising turn of events, it can be proven that just by including i and all the
complex numbers x plus yi, we've captured all the algebraic numbers.
In fact, every polynomial equation has solutions of the form x plus yi in which x and y are
real numbers.
That's it, we have all the algebraics.
This incredible result was established in 1799 by the great child mathematics prodigy,
Carl Friedrich Gauss, in his PhD thesis.
Gauss today is known as the prince of mathematics because he's so great and made so many important
contributions.
Gauss's amazing and surprising insight shows us that there's no need to create any additional
numbers after we include the imaginary number i to ensure that all polynomials have solutions.
We might note, however, that Gauss still found the number i to be very mysterious.
In fact, in 1825, he wrote, the true metaphysics of the square root of negative one remains
elusive.
So, even though he was performing work using these numbers, it still wasn't exactly clear
what these numbers represented.
The incredible fact that once we include i, we need nothing more in order to describe
solutions to polynomial equations can be expressed mathematically by saying that the complex
numbers are algebraically closed, meaning that all algebra questions that we could think
of with polynomials can be solved in the world of the complex numbers.
There's no further expansion, so with i in hand, we've come to the end of the number
line, or maybe I should say the number plane.
When we view the world of numbers with this algebraic lens, of course, the reality is,
as we'll soon see, there are other lenses with which we can look at the world of number,
and within those lenses, our view and vision of number can grow further still.
Enjoy i.
