Here in this lecture, we'll visit the frontiers of our understanding and discover what humankind
knows and doesn't know about infinity.
After an overview of what we've seen thus far in our travels through infinity, we'll
turn to several important questions that we've yet to consider.
Are there infinitely many different sizes of infinity?
Is there a largest infinity, a mother of all infinities, if you will?
Is there a cardinality of numbers that actually is between the cardinality of the real numbers
and the natural numbers, or is the cardinality of the real numbers the next infinity after
the infinity of natural numbers?
In view of our previous discoveries, we'll be able to answer two of these questions.
However, the remaining question has a shocking answer.
This question, which preoccupied Cantor at the end of his life, remained unsolved for
decades.
Here we'll delve into the fascinating 20th century story of that question known as the
Continuum Hypothesis.
As we'll see, this question leads us to one of the highest cliffs of mathematics.
Its unusual answer, found by Kurt Gertl and Paul Kohn in the mid-1900s, literally brings
us to the very edge of that cliff.
We'll take a moment to enjoy the incredible sight and then carefully take one step back
to avoid falling off into the abyss.
Well, before we travel further into the endless wonder of infinity, I wanted us to reflect
on where we've been and what we've seen.
As demonstrated by the events of history, we've seen that it's a long and challenging
undertaking to transform the counter-intuitive theorems of infinity into reasonable, sounding,
believable, and dare I say, intuitive notions.
I know how difficult it is to wrap one's mind around these incredibly foreign ideas.
Thus, before we move forward, I want us to take a momentary pause and take in the panoramic
view of the mathematics of the infinite.
The first step in infinity is to admit that it's beyond all real numbers, and thus we
must immediately forego any desire to enumerate a collection containing infinitely many objects,
but instead compare these collections with other such collections.
If two collections are equally numerous, we say they have the same cardinality.
In this case, this implies that even if the collections are infinite in size, there's
a way of pairing up the elements from one collection with the elements in another collection
so that no element is without a partner and no element is partnered up with more than one
other element.
This idea is called a one-to-one correspondence and allows us to determine if one collection
is larger, smaller, or equal in size to another.
Any infinite collection whose elements can be listed so that there's a first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, and so on without any element left unaccounted for is said to be
countable, or countably, or countably infinite set.
In other words, it has the same cardinality as the set of natural numbers, since we have
an immediate one-to-one correspondence.
We pair the natural number up with the first element, the natural number two up with the
second element, the natural number three up with the third element, and so forth.
We've shown that the even natural numbers are countable since we can list them and pair
them with each natural number which is equal to the double of the number.
So for example, one gets paired with two times one or two, two gets paired with the even
number four, three gets paired with six, four gets paired with eight, and so forth.
Even the integers, that is the collection of natural numbers, their negatives, and zero
are countable since we can shuffle together the negative and positive numbers and then
pair them with the natural numbers in this alternating fashion where we have the one-to-one
correspondence between the integers and the natural numbers.
The rational numbers, that is the collection of all ratios or fractions, first appears
to be much larger than the collection of natural numbers, but again, a systematic means of
expressing those ratios, in this case in an endless array of numbers, leads to a means
of snaking a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers.
Even the rational numbers are countable.
The situation changes dramatically when we turn to the collection of all real numbers,
that is, all the points on the number line, or equivalently, all endless decimal expansions.
For it is provably impossible to create a one-to-one correspondence between the real
numbers and the natural numbers.
There are just too many real numbers.
Cantor demonstrated this impossibility by assuming that there was such a one-to-one
pairing between the natural numbers and the endless decimal numbers, and then using his
idea of diagonalization, he successively switched digits along a diagonal of digits to construct
a real number in decimal form, that is, by its very construction, definitely not on the
list.
Hence, Cantor arrived at a contradiction, a logical impossibility, if you will, and thus
his assumption was wrong.
Therefore, we see that the real numbers form a larger infinite collection than the natural
numbers.
The real numbers aren't countable.
We call collections that are not countable uncountable, and so the real numbers are,
in fact, uncountable.
Holding two different sizes of infinity, we wonder if there is a third.
Extending his original idea, Cantor was able to generalize his result and produce what
is now known as Cantor's theorem.
If we have any set, any collection, then the set of all its subsets is a larger infinity
than the original given set.
This remarkable theorem followed from a modification of Cantor's diagonalization argument, and
we illustrated this generalized technique with an example involving the set of three
Marx Brothers.
If we now consider the collection of all subsets of real numbers, then by Cantor's theorem,
this vast collection must be larger than the collection of real numbers.
Hence we uncovered a third size of infinity, one even larger than the uncountable collection
of all real numbers.
Well, with time, these ideas can be made our own, but it does take time.
Well, once our narrow view of reality, which stated that there's just one infinity, collapses
under the weight of Cantor's mathematical arguments, other previously unimaginable questions
soon arise.
For the remainder of this lecture, I want us to explore some of these interesting new
conundrums and their solutions.
Let's face our first question right off the bat.
Are there infinitely many infinities?
Great question.
In the previous lecture, we considered Cantor's argument that showed that the power set of
any set has a larger cardinality than the original set.
We used this result to find a third size of infinity.
Well, so are there infinitely many different sizes of infinity?
By applying Cantor's theorem again, we see the answer is yes.
Let's consider the power set of the power set of the set of reals.
Now this collection is the set of all subsets of the power set of the real numbers.
In other words, but this is not going to be clear.
In other words, this collection is the set of all subsets of the set of all subsets of
the real numbers.
It's really a set theoretic tongue twister, if you will.
It's a collection whose elements are sets of sets.
Well, by Cantor's theorem, this new collection has a greater cardinality than the cardinality
of the power set of the real numbers.
Remember, Cantor proved that whenever you have a set, no matter how convoluted it may
be, if you take the power set, it's bigger.
So if we take the power set of the power set of the reals, that's going to be larger still.
Thus, we just produce a fourth size of infinity.
So the smallest infinity we considered was the set of natural numbers.
Then the next largest infinity we found was the infinity of the real numbers.
Even larger still was the infinity of the power set of the reals.
And now we're seeing an even larger infinity, the power set of the power set of the real
numbers.
Well, if we just repeat this process, we discovered that there are infinitely many different sizes
of infinity.
We could just take the power set of the power set of the reals and take its power set and
build from there.
This insight leads us to our second question.
Is there a largest infinity?
In other words, is there one all-encompassing mother of all infinities in which all other
infinities reside?
Well, given our previous observation, we see that the answer is no.
For if we had such an infinite collection, then we'd need only consider its power set
to produce a collection that, by another application of Cantor's theorem, must be larger still.
Thus, just like the natural numbers themselves, there's no largest or last infinity.
They keep growing and growing without bound, just like the natural numbers.
Amazing, amazing fact, which takes a while to become intuitive.
So we got from one infinity to infinitely many infinities.
Well, we now come to the final question in our quest toward infinity.
Is there an infinity between the sizes of the natural numbers and the real numbers?
Now, let's remember that the cardinality of the natural numbers is smaller than the cardinality
of the real numbers.
So we now wonder, is the cardinality of the real numbers the next infinity after the cardinality
of the natural numbers, or is there a collection whose cardinality is strictly between those
two infinities?
Well, this question leads to what is known as the continuum hypothesis.
The continuum hypothesis asserts an answer to this question.
Specifically, it states that the cardinality of the collection of real numbers is the next
largest infinity after the countable collection of natural numbers.
And remember, Cantor sometimes used the word continuum to mean the real numbers, and that's
why this is called the continuum hypothesis, hypothesizing that the continuum is the next
infinity.
Well, Cantor himself was the first to pose the continuum hypothesis and worked very
hard to prove it, but was unable to resolve the issue.
David Hilbert listed the continuum hypothesis as the very first challenge in his list of
23 that he posed in his keynote address at the International Mathematics Congress at the
turn of the 20th century, which we mentioned earlier.
For Cantor himself, the continuum hypothesis was almost an obsession.
This obsession, along with his combative relationships with Kroniker and others, had
serious and negative impacts on his life.
Now, to place these issues in historical context and expand our understanding of Cantor's struggle,
let's take a moment to consider some revealing moments from his personal life.
In 1874 and 1884, Cantor published his seminal papers on infinity, including six papers that
formed the foundation of modern set theory.
But in 1884, he suffered his first major bout with depression and was plagued by mental
health problems for the remainder of his life.
During the last 30 years of his life, Cantor was in and out of mental clinics.
While his professional struggles contributed to his difficulties, today he might have been
diagnosed as bipolar, manic depressive, and his problems only intensified with the loss
of his mother in 1896 and his youngest son in 1899.
Though he continued to do valuable research, his focus on mathematics did decline.
In fact, for a brief period, Cantor turned his energy to proving that Francis Bacon was
the author of Shakespeare's plays.
Some have argued that exposing Bacon to the world corresponded to Cantor's desire to
expose the ugly sides of Kroniker to the world.
As it turned out later in his life, it appears as though Kroniker and Cantor had some type
of reconciliation.
After finally living to see the mathematics community acknowledge and celebrate his incredible
contributions to mathematics, Cantor died of a heart attack in a sanitarium in 1918.
He was 73.
Today, in the center of the University of Hall, there's a plaque that shows his face
and an image suggesting his diagonalization method.
Engraved, we find the words of Cantor himself.
The essence of mathematics lies precisely in its freedom.
It's difficult to know if Cantor was thinking about mathematics being the freedom to get
away from his personal problems and personal demons, or in a different context because
Cantor himself preferred the term free mathematics to mean the more traditional term, which we
call today pure mathematics, the mathematics that are not modeling the world, but instead
are understanding mathematics for mathematics' sake.
In either case, the statement and the quote seems very fitting for such a great man who
dealt with so many demons.
Well, let's now return to the story of the continuum hypothesis.
The continuum hypothesis proposes that the cardinality of the continuum, in other words,
the cardinality of the real numbers, is the next largest infinity after the countable collection
of natural numbers.
Well, this seemingly straightforward assertion has a very strange resolution.
The statement, in fact, resides outside of the domain of mathematics.
In other words, it can be shown to be neither true nor false within the narrow confines
of mathematics and its standard axioms.
The issue is extremely deep and involves advanced work in logic and set theory.
In 1940, the great Austrian logician Kurt Gertl showed that the continuum hypothesis cannot
be disproved using the tools and theorems from mathematics.
In 1963, Paul Kohn, who passed away in 2007, showed that it cannot be proved using mathematical
machinery.
So the continuum hypothesis is provably not provable and not disprovable, and we can prove
that.
Thus we say that the statement itself is independent.
It actually resides outside of the world of mathematics and her axioms.
This is very difficult to appreciate and even to wrap your mind around, but an analogy can
help make this idea a little bit more intuitive.
Let me offer you my intuitive sense of what this means to have a statement that's outside
of mathematics.
Let's visualize this.
Imagine that we have two spacecrafts, two spaceships that are going to be independently
launched out into the galaxy of mathematics and that will reveal the world of mathematics
and how it looks.
Let's think about how this will go.
We have two spaceships and we're going to have two mathematicians that are actually
going to enter into these spaceships.
In these spaceships we will give them every single axiom of mathematics.
Those are the self-evident truths upon which we start all of mathematics.
Those are the foundations.
We give them all of them these facts.
They're going to go out into outer space and they're going to now spend years and years
and years and years, thousands of years, producing all the theorems of mathematics up to this
point.
Okay.
Now what does that mean?
Let's back up here and think about what that means.
What it means is that they're going to go off and generate mathematics.
However, before the first spaceship goes off, I approach the capsule and go in and say to
the mathematician, okay, you've got all your axioms here, but I'm going to give you one
extra axiom, one extra fact that the other spaceship doesn't have which you can use.
That fact is that the continuum hypothesis is true.
There is no infinity between the natural numbers and the reals.
You can use that.
And so the mathematician astronaut is like, oh, great, I've got an extra one.
That's fantastic.
And so she takes off, goes out into the outer reaches of mathematics and starts to prove
all the theorems that are possible using the axioms and this one extra axiom.
Then I walk over to the other spacecraft and I walk in and I walk into the capsule and say,
okay, you've got all the axioms, the same as the other person, you're ready to go, but
I'm going to give you one more axiom.
One more axiom that you can use.
And that axiom is that the continuum hypothesis is false.
There does exist an infinity in between the natural numbers and the reals.
You can use that fact.
And so this astronaut mathematician is like, yes, one more, that's great.
Takes off into the outer reaches of mathematics to describe all of mathematics that's possible.
Well, so a few thousand years later, these two mathematicians return from their voyage
through the galaxy of mathematics and they have these large tomes, these big books of
all the theorems of mathematics, one than the other.
And what do we see?
We see that when we look down their list of theorems, they are identical.
They agree exactly.
All the theorems up to the point of the continuum hypothesis match up perfectly.
Mathematics was unaffected by the truth or the falsehood of the continuum hypothesis.
And so when they go off into space, each having an opposite point of view, it doesn't change
anything at all.
That's a visual way that helps me think about what it means to be independent.
It means, in fact, that it doesn't change mathematics at all, whether we assume it's
true or not.
All the mathematics up to that point would be proven correct whether we assume its truth
or assume it's falsehood.
The continuum hypothesis can be either true or false.
Now, Gertl actually believed that the continuum hypothesis was false.
And Cohn also leaned to rejecting the continuum hypothesis, but we know it's independent of
mathematics.
She wanted to take a moment just to share with you the story of Paul Cohn, or at least
the story as I heard it when I was growing up in the math community as a graduate student,
because it's a great story, and probably it's probably true.
But as the story goes, Paul Cohn was a young mathematician.
He just earned his PhD, and he was attending a seminar in set theory and logic, which is
the area in which the continuum hypothesis resides.
Now, he wasn't an expert in this area.
His area was analysis, but he wanted to attend this seminar just for fun, if you could imagine
such a thing.
And so he was this young PhD sitting there in the audience, and apparently as the story
goes, he wasn't particularly impressed with what he heard.
The theorems that were presented and the mathematics didn't sound particularly profound.
Remember that Cohn wasn't expert in this area, so in fact, he just didn't seem to appreciate
this.
So after the seminar, as the story goes, he approached some people in the audience and
said, well, this didn't seem all that dramatic.
What's the big question in set theory these days?
And so this person, who was a little taken back by the mazzi of this young, brand-new,
newly minted PhD, said, well, the biggest question, of course, is the independence of the continuum
hypothesis.
You see, because in 1940, Gertl proved one direction.
He showed that you can't disprove it, but still it remained an open question whether
you can prove that you can't prove it.
And Paul Cohn had the audacity to say, you know what?
I'm going to go out and try this problem and work on it.
And he did.
And in fact, he solved it, which just goes to show you that sometimes it takes a lot
of guts and maybe almost arrogance, although I'm not implying that Paul Cohn was arrogant,
but it takes a lot of guts to face these big challenging questions.
But if we don't face those challenging questions, they'll never get resolved.
We'll never answer difficult issues if we don't have the guts to go and face them.
Anyway, this young, brand-new PhD produced a solution.
It was extremely complicated, took up pages and pages and pages of complicated advanced
mathematics, logic, and set theory.
And of course, it was so complicated that people didn't want to read it, right?
Who wanted to go through and read this beginner's solution to a very well-known, difficult problem
that great minds haven't been able to solve, only to go through, page after page, to inevitably
find the mistake that we're sure is there.
So people really did not want to read it, and they wouldn't look at it.
But Kurt Gerl himself got a copy of this manuscript.
Now, Kurt Gerl was at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton, right next to Princeton
University.
And Paul Cohn was a visitor there as well at the same time.
And one afternoon, during tea in mathematics, the community gets together usually in the
afternoon and has an F's T. It's very civilized.
They get together to have tea.
There's also blackboards there, so you can do math, too, but you drink tea.
Well, this man, Kurt Gerl, walked up to this very young PhD and quietly said to him over
tea, congratulations, you've solved this problem.
And that was the first time that the math community acknowledged that, in fact, he had
produced a complete and correct solution.
So it took Gerl himself to read through the work, to actually be able to articulate and
say, yes, this is right.
This young guy got it.
Well, of course, once he got Gerl's seal of approval, then everything fell into place,
and people then read it and studied it and did agree that it was indeed correct.
And just a little time later, Paul Cohn was awarded the Fields Medal, which is the equivalent,
the math equivalent of the Nobel Prize in mathematics, and he won this very, very, the
highest honor in mathematics given to a young mathematician, and he won it for his work
on that.
And so then he actually then went and spent a good portion of his remaining years thinking
about trying to conquer the Riemann hypothesis, which we mentioned about primes in a previous
lecture, and that wasn't nearly as successful.
Now I don't know how much of the story is true, but it's a wonderful story, and it does
show us that, in fact, it's important to tackle hard questions and be brave enough to take
things on that seem like greater minds weren't able to solve.
Well, the study of number and the notion of comparing sizes of collection has brought
us to one of the cliffs of mathematics itself.
This is one of the edges of math, for we see a statement that is neither provable or disprovable
within the realm of mathematics.
Now I can't resist closing this chapter on infinity with the very moving words of the
great 18th century English poet, William Blake.
And I wanted to share with you one of his poems that I believe captures the image of
grasping at the incredible ideas that surround the study of the infinite.
And so while we sit back and try to make sense of all this totally counterintuitive ideas
and try to make it intuitively reasonable, while we struggle with that, I want us to
think about the words of William Blake.
To see a world in a grain of sand and a heaven in a wildflower, hold infinity in the palm
of your hand and eternity in an hour.
