Saving the Appearances, A Study in Idolatry by Owen Barfield, 2nd Edition
We have seen that in the older doctrine of invented and applied roots of speech, as pointing to the origin of language,
and in the more recent one of metaphor as the principal instrument of the growth of meaning,
we are saddled with two notions, which are both of them inconsistent with the testimony of language itself.
If, on the other hand, we approach the history of meaning free from all assumptions based on biological theories of evolution,
if we take our stand simply on a faithful study of the nature of language, then we shall not be seduced into any such arbitrary surmises.
Instead, we shall be obliged to admit that metaphor is a misleading concept to apply to any but the later and more sophisticated stages of language.
For all the evidence points rather to that sort of polarization of an ancient unity into an outer and inner meaning, which was traced in Chapter 12.
In other words, it points to the source of language in original participation and, in doing so, indicates the direction in which we must look for a true understanding of those mysterious roots.
It is there too that we may hope in the end to aspire the historical function of the word in determining the relation between thought and things.
We have seen that the difference between what I have called original participation and the participation which can be grasped today in beta thinking is, above all, a difference of direction.
In the former, the represented is felt to be on the other side of the phenomena from the perceiving self.
At the same time, it is felt to be linked with or related to that self otherwise than through the senses.
The self, so far as there yet is one, is still aware that it and the phenomena derive from the same super-sensible source.
This kind of consciousness, then, is the subjective aspect of that coming into being Paripassu of man and of his phenomena, which was referred to in Chapter 10.
Objectively, we can only describe the earlier stages of this process as a time when man, not only as a body, but also as a soul, was a part of nature in a way which we today, of course, find it difficult to conceive.
Subjectively, he could not yet call his soul his own.
The farther back we penetrate, the more indistinguishable would his acts and utterances become from processes taking place in what has since become outer nature.
It is conditions such as these which we must strive to realize in imagination if we would hope to understand the root element of language.
Speech did not arise as the attempt of man to imitate, to master, or to explain nature, for speech and nature came into being along with one another.
Strictly speaking, only idolaters can raise the question of the origin of language.
For anyone else to do so is like asking for the origin of origin.
Roots are the echo of nature herself sounding in man.
Or rather, they are the echo of what once sounded and fashioned in both of them at the same time.
And therefore it is that they have always fascinated those adventurous souls, such as Fabre de Olivier, Kurt de Gébelin, or, in our own time, Hermann Beck, A. D. Wadler, and others,
who have sought to explore that difficult and perplexing territory, devastated as it has been by ensuing millennia of cultural divergence and etymological accidents, the relation between the sounds of language and its meanings.
The split between sound and meaning, for their relation in any modern language is no more than vestigial, is one aspect of the ever-widening gulf between outer and inner, phenomenon and name, thing and thought, with which this book is concerned.
We have seen how that polarization into man nature, which was the means to man's self-consciousness, was exaggerated by the scientific revolution into an exclusive disjunction.
It was still a polarity, so long as some image-conscious, some participation survived.
We have seen also in the preceding chapter how the disjunction was deliberately purposed by the Jewish nation. I believe it will someday be realized that their mission was at the same time to prepare humanity against the day when it should be complete, that is, our own time.
The Hebrew language through which, as we have seen, the inwardness of the divine name was later revealed, is at the same time, according to some opinions, that one among the ancient languages in which the roots preserve most clearly, though still dimly enough, the old unity of sound and meaning.
If we try to think of these roots as words, then we must think of words with a potential rather than an actual meaning.
Certainly those who have any feeling for sound symbolism and who wish to develop it will be well advised to ponder them.
They may find, in the consonantal element in language, vestiges of those forces which brought into being the external structure of nature, including the body of man, and, in the original vowel sounds, the expression of that inner life of feeling and memory which constitutes his soul.
It is the two together which have made it possible by first physically and then verbally embodying it, his personal intelligence.
The objective of this book is, however, a limited one, namely, to demonstrate on general grounds the necessity of smashing the idols.
It cannot therefore attempt to investigate in detail what sort of knowledge may result from doing so, and it would be quite beyond its scope to carry this difficult subject any further.
Suffice it to say that the Semitic languages seem to point us back to the old unity of man and nature through the shapes of their sounds.
We feel those shapes not only as sounds, but also, in a manner, as gestures of the speech organs.
And it is not so difficult to realize that these gestures were once gestures made with the whole body, once, when the body itself was not detached from the rest of nature after the solid manner of today, when the body itself was spoken even while it was speaking.
In an Aryan language, such as Greek, on the other hand, where natural and mythological significances so easily meet and mingle, we can feel more easily the nature of phenomenal, that is, imaginal, participation.
The Aryan tongues point to the same ancient unity as the Semitic, but they do so through the quality of their meaning.
Among the speakers of both types of language, a few centuries before the Christian era, a last faint echo of that unity appeared in the form of tradition and doctrine.
In the Sefer Yisra, for instance, whose authorship was traditionally assigned to Abraham, and which was perhaps committed to writing about BC 600, the account of creation given in the Book of Genesis is expanded and related in considerable detail to the sounds and signs of a language at once divine and human.
And the influence of the Jewish doctrine of the Word of God, which was at the same time the source of the phenomenal world and the incarnation of wisdom in man, is still clearly apparent in the Book of Proverbs and in the apocryphal Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom of Solomon.
In the world of Greek thought, the development in a similar direction, and particularly by the Stoic sect of the logos of the Greek philosophers, is better known, and it is an old story how the two streams met in Alexandria and united in a form which is probably best exemplified in the writings of Philo Judeus.
All things came into being through the Word. This teaching of the creative Word, this last testimony to a creation which was not a mere creation of idols, and to an evolution which was not a mere evolution of idols, is one which Christian thought, thanks to the opening verses of St. John's Gospel, has never been able to entirely ignore, though it has by now come near to doing so.
But the significance of this must be deferred to a later chapter.
19. Symptoms of Iconoclasm
We have seen that the theory of metaphor, as the means by which language originally acquired its inner meanings, is incorrect. But it is important to remember how it arose.
It arose because there is a close relation between language as it is used by participating consciousness and language as it is used at a later stage, metaphorically or symbolically.
When we use language metaphorically, we bring it about of our own free will, that an appearance means something other than itself, and, usually, that a manifest means an unmanifest.
We start with an idol, and we ourselves turn the idol into a representation.
We use the phenomenon as a name for what is not phenomenal, and this, it will be remembered, is just what is characteristic of participation.
Symbolism, as we saw in Chapter 11, is made possible by the elimination of participation.
But at the end of Chapter 16, it was observed that in certain circumstances this may give rise to a new kind of participation, one which could no longer be described as original.
What then has occurred?
If we rapidly review the whole historical development of the word, we must say that, as soon as unconscious or subconscious organic processes have been sufficiently polarized to give rise to phenomena on the one side and consciousness on the other, memory is made possible.
As consciousness develops into self-consciousness, the remembered phenomena become detached or liberated from their originals, and so, as images, are in some measure at man's disposal.
The more thoroughly participation has been eliminated, the more they are at the disposal of his imagination to employ as it chooses.
If it chooses to imprint its own meaning, it is doing protanto with the remembered phenomena what their creator once did with the phenomena themselves.
Thus, there is a real analogy between metaphorical usage and original participation, but it is one which can only be acknowledged at this high or even prophetic level.
It can only be acknowledged if the crude conception of an evolution of idols, which has dominated the last two centuries, is finally abandoned, or at all events is enlightened by one more in line with the old teaching of the logos.
There is a valid analogy if, but only if, we admit that, in the course of the earth's history, something like a divine word has been gradually clothing itself with the humanity it first gradually created, so that what was spoken by God may eventually be re-spoken by man.
This granted, we can see how language, in the course of its history, has indeed mediated the transformation of phenomena into idols.
But we can also see how, by reason of this very fact within man, the phenomena have gradually ceased to operate as compulsive natural processes,
and have become, instead, mere memory images available for his own creative speech, using speech now in the wide sense of Aquinas' word.
We should expect accordingly that, with the progressive decrease of participation throughout the Greco-Roman or Aristotelian age, we should find a growing awareness, however faint, of this capacity of man for creative speech.
And we should expect to find a marked increase in that awareness after the scientific revolution.
It is what we do find.
Let us take, for example, the romantic theory of the creative imagination, and glance briefly at its previous history.
Permanentary hints of an attribution of creative power to man, as artist or poet, appear as early as the first Christian century, with Dio Chrysostom.
A century later, Philostratus maintained of the works of Theides and Praxiteles that,
imagination made them, and she is a better artist than imitation, for where the one carves only what she has seen, the other carves what she has not seen.
By the third century, Platinus is maintaining that, if anyone disparages the arts on the ground that they imitate nature, we must remind him that natural objects are themselves only imitations,
and that the arts do not simply imitate what they see, but re-ascend to those principles from which nature herself is derived.
For Scaliger in the 16th century, who was closely followed by Sidney and his Apology for Posey, the poet is one who maketh a new nature, and so maketh himself as it were a new God.
Coleridge's doctrine of the primary and secondary imagination, when it came, and the whole romantic stress in England and Germany on the creative function of art and poetry, was then, by no means a wholly new adventure in thought.
It was rather that the whole attitude to nature which it implied had been rendered acceptable to a much wider circle by the rapidly increasing idolatry of the 17th and 18th centuries.
Something very much like it had already been thought by a few.
It became almost a popular movement in the world, beginning at last to hunger for iconoclasm.
We have already had occasion to note the close relation between the apprehension of images and the making of them.
As long as nature herself continued to be apprehended as image, it sufficed for the artist to imitate nature.
Inevitably, the life or spirit in the object lived on in his imagination, if it was a faithful one.
For at the same time, it could not help being more than an imitation, and as much as the artist himself participated the being of the object.
But the imitation of an idol is a purely technical process, which, as was quickly discovered, is better done by photography.
Today, an artist cannot rely on the life inherent in the object he imitates any more than a poet can rely on the life inherent in the words he uses.
He has to draw the life forth from within himself.
It is for the same reason that an ever-increasing importance came to be attached to the invented image,
and men become more and more dissatisfied with imitations of nature both in the practice and in the theory of art.
It is easy to see how it came to be held that the truest poetry is the most feigning.
For there is no doubt about where the life in an invented or fictitious image comes from.
There can be no pathetic fallacy there.
What is peculiar to the Romantic movement, as indeed its very name recalls,
is the further reaction of this enthusiasm for fictitious and fabulous representations on the phenomena, on nature herself.
This is also what took the Romantic conception of art properly understood a step beyond the Neoplatonic theory referred to above.
The Neoplatonic theory holds that man, the artist, is, in some measure, a creator.
The Romantic conception agrees, but goes further and returns him, in this capacity, to nature herself.
With what result? It is no longer simply that the arts re-ascend to those principles from which nature herself is derived.
The principles themselves have changed their venue,
for we are told by the Romantic theory that we must no longer look for the nature spirits,
for the goddess Natura, on the farther side of the appearances, we must look for them within ourselves.
Unconscious of the joy that she gives, never a trace of her beauty,
never was the spirit that she leads, never alone through my soul.
Feelless, even for her artistic age, the fatal blow of the pendulum is the same.
It is the pendulum.
It serves as the force of the force that the goddess Natura.
Pan has shut up shop, but he has not retired from business.
He has merely gone indoors, or in the well-known words of Coleridge,
we receive but what we give, and in our life alone does nature live.
It is again beyond the scope of this book to trace in detail the way in which the origin of the Romantic response to nature
is exemplified in that association between Coleridge and Wordsworth, which gave rise to the lyrical ballads.
It was the dejected author of The Ancient Mariner who grasped the theory,
but it was Wordsworth who actually wrote the nature poetry.
If nature is indeed dis-godded, and yet we again begin to experience her, as Wordsworth did,
and as millions have done since his time, no longer as dead but as alive,
if there is no represented on the far side of the appearances,
and yet we begin to experience them once more as appearances, as representations,
the question arises, of what are they representations?
It was no doubt the difficulty of answering this question which led Wordsworth to relapse occasionally into that nostalgic hankering after original participation,
which is called Pantheism, and from which Coleridge was rendered immune by his acquaintance with Kantian philosophy.
We shall find somewhat the same contrast in this respect between Goethe and Schiele.
It is because of its failure to answer this question that the true, one might say the tremendous impulse underlying the Romantic movement,
has never grown to maturity, and after adolescence the alternative to maturity is Purity.
There is only one answer to the question. Henceforth, if nature is to be experienced as representation,
she will be experienced as representation of man.
But what is man?
Herein lies the direst possibility inherent in idolatry.
It can empty of spirit. It has very nearly succeeded in doing so, not only nature, but also man himself,
for among all other idols is his own body.
And it is part of the creed of idolatry that when we speak of man, we mean only the body of this or that man,
or at most his finite personality, which we are driven more and more to think an attribute of his body.
Thus it is that the great change which the evolution of consciousness has brought about
and the great lessons which men had begun to learn have all been wrenched awry.
We had come at last to the point of realizing that art can no longer be content with imitating the collective representations,
now that these are themselves turning into idols.
But instead of setting out to smash the idols, we have tamely concluded that nothing can now be art which in any way reminds us of nature,
and even that practically anything may be art which does not.
We have learned that art can represent nothing but man himself,
and we have interpreted that as meaning that art exists for the purpose of enabling Mr. Smith to express his personality,
and all because we have not learned, though our very physics shouts it at us,
that nature herself is the representation of man.
Hence the riot of private and personal symbolisms into which both art and poetry have degenerated.
If I know that nature herself is the symptom of my representations,
I cannot do otherwise than adopt a humbler and more responsible attitude to the representations of art and the metaphors of poetry.
For in the case of nature there is no danger of my fancying that she exists to express my personality.
I know in that case that what is meant when I say she is my representation is that I stand,
whether I like it or not, in, I do not love the expression but I can find no defter one in English,
a directionally creator relation to her.
But I know also that what so stands is not my poor temporal personality,
but the divine name in the unfathomable depths behind it.
If I strive to produce a work of art, I cannot then do otherwise than strive humbly to create more nearly as that creates,
and not as my idiosyncrasy wills.
After all, there is warrant for it.
At the beginning of the first chapter I pointed to the phenomenon of the rainbow
because it is especially easy there to realize the extent to which it is our creation.
But we know equally well that it is not only the colors and curve of the rainbow which proceed from the eye,
it is not only Iris who has gone indoors.
We know that light itself, as light, whatever we may think about the particles, proceeds from the same source.
Now for the impressionist painters, this became a real experience.
They really painted nature in the light of the eye as no other painters had done before them.
They were striving to realize in consciousness the normally unconscious activity of figuration itself.
They did not imitate, they expressed themselves in as much as they painted nature as the representation of man.
They will serve as a reminder, though they are not the only one,
that the rejection of original participation may mean not the destruction, but the liberation of images.
The narrator wishes to thank his wife for reading the German passage in the middle of this chapter,
as my own German is insufficient to the task.
