When we are born, we already know one thing, we have too little time, much too little time.
In the blink of an eye, the shedding of a tear, we become old.
Yes, viewer, you are old.
Your grave has been dug and the music for your funeral service selected.
But there is hope, because isn't aging merely an illness,
one that will sooner or later catch up with each and every one of us?
What if there were a pill that could cure our mortality?
Stop believing your life is defined by death and know this.
Heaven is waiting for you.
Silicon Valley is obsessed with eternal life.
Billions are being invested in the hacking of our biology.
And Google has even created a special department whose sole purpose is researching the biology
of our mortality.
The techies are convinced that the human code can be cracked.
If not during their own lifetime, then shortly thereafter.
Am I afraid of death?
You bet I am.
Death sounds boring.
I mean, it's just like it's the end of everything.
Death there's no way back from.
If you don't look young, you're not young, and therefore you are more likely to die.
The biggest risk factor for mortality is your age.
We are already somewhat at that point where we can choose at any point to stop our lives.
But people who want to live, who enjoy life, wouldn't it be nice to have the option to
extend our lives as long as we wish?
This is Backlight in search of eternal life.
Thank you for calling the Alcor Life Extension Foundation.
This call may be recorded if you're reporting the death or near death of an Alcor member.
You only live twice or so it seems.
Deep in the desert of Arizona, far away from the dangers of the earthquakes and strict regulations
of Silicon Valley and the state of California, we find Alcor, a center where, after your
legal death, you can have yourself frozen while awaiting the technology that will be
able to bring you back to life.
Freezing your body costs $200,000, freezing your head costs $80,000, and family members
get a discount.
Well my husband and I were the founders of Alcor.
We incorporated it in 1972.
This is a picture of my husband.
When I first met and fell in love with him, quite a young man, and I chose that picture
because it helps me to remind people that a part of what we are interested in is not
just coming back as old people with feeble hearts or something, but when the technologies
are available to revive us, they will be robust enough.
They will also be able to rejuvenate us.
So next time I see him, he'll probably look pretty much like this.
And I might point out, in addition to our people, patients, we have a lot of pets here
too.
These two pets belong to our vice president of finance, Bonnie McGee, and maybe Bonnie
can come out and tell us a little bit about these special pets.
Yeah, so this is my cat, Leica, and my dog, Nutmeg, and they're crowd-preserved here.
They're my family.
They're kind of like my children.
So I just want to be reunited with them in the future.
How much does it cost to have your cat preserved at Alcor?
It's about 5,000 for just the head, yeah.
And for dogs, it can vary dramatically because they're small dogs, they're big dogs, and
so every one of them, we have to kind of price individually, depending on their size.
This is the patient care bay, currently three of my family members are here.
This is the capsule where my husband is.
My husband was cryopreserved in 2012.
This is the capsule where my mother and my father-in-law are, and I'll probably be in
a capsule like this one behind you.
Directly after passing away, patients, or just their heads, are lowered into their ice-cold,
temporary resting places.
According to the people at Alcor, they are then located in a realm somewhere between life
and death.
What is it like for you because they're neither dead nor alive?
Well, it's kind of like if you were in a hospital and a person was in a coma.
You know that their body is still alive and that there's hope that medical technology
will be able to fix what they died of and bring them back to a healthy state of functioning.
And so for me, it's very much like that.
I feel very joyful and happy when I'm back here.
In addition to my family members, I have dozens of good friends that I've known over the years.
This is just a very inviting place for me, I like being here.
Am I afraid of death?
You bet I am.
Death sounds boring.
I mean, it's just like it's the end of everything.
Death, there's no way back from.
With cryonics, we're talking about stopping death so that we have a chance of living vastly
extended lifespans.
But death, real death, means all the information that was once in your body.
All that information is gone irretrievably.
Maybe fear isn't the right word because obviously you're not experiencing anything when that
happens, you're not feeling anything.
Maybe a better word to say is a protest or detesting the idea of just going out of existence.
Finnish physicist and successful science fiction author Hano Rianimi went to Silicon
Valley to establish his own biotech company, Helix Nanotechnologies, and to write about
the fate of humanity in a distant future.
Science fiction is a very important tool for trying to grapple with the consequences of
new technologies like life extension.
We naturally process the world through stories.
So science fiction is a genre that not coincidentally came about after the Enlightenment and sort
of during the Industrial Revolution, when the world was changing very rapidly.
And a lot of mainstream fiction doesn't really deal with rapid change in the world and how
we respond to that.
And yet that's now exactly what we're going through within our lifetimes and within
a matter of years.
So having sort of the mental toolkit to deal with that, having sort of fictional scenarios
that can sort of help you comprehend what happens when a radical technology appears
and changes what it means to be human, changes how we interact with each other.
Certainly it's sort of frustrating to imagine that there is this ticking clock that we have
in ourselves shortening the telomeres with every cell division and some ultimate limit
that we're approaching.
But I don't actually believe it's the ultimate limit.
I think 80 years or 100 years or 120 years is far too short in a universe with so many
things to learn and to do.
And our brains don't lose their ability to learn even late in life.
So if we could just take care of the rest of the body and also prevent neurodegeneration,
I think there are many other lifetimes that we could happily fill with activity and fun
and excitement.
The headquarters of the Leading Sense Foundation are also located in Silicon Valley.
Sense is a non-profit organisation which aims to stimulate research for the rejuvenation
industry on a global scale.
All of these pictures on the walls are kind of depictions of the kind of biology we do.
And we have a bunch of posters up here that are brief reports on the work done by the
summer interns that we have.
We only have a few thousand square feet of lab space, probably about one-third of our
research is done here, the rest is done in universities and institutes around the country.
All that looks the same really, you know.
Eccentric Aubrey de Grey is the authority in the field of life extension and has received
millions from venture capitalists, including PayPal founder and Facebook investor Peter
Thiel.
De Grey has also invested the majority of his own 16 billion pound inheritance from his
mother.
So all of these little canisters, you can see those little drawers, all of these can
contain anything you like, but many things we need to store, if we create a particular,
for example, a mutant collection of cells that have a particular property that is useful
for an experiment, we may want to use them immediately, but we may also want to use them
a year from now.
And we don't want to have to recreate them then, so we can put them in here.
Sometimes it's not actually cells, it's just DNA, for example.
We'll just have a sample that will be suspended in some kind of suitable preservation material,
but it will still decay unless it's very cold.
Even if it's as cold as, for example, minus 20 degrees centigrade, that will still decay
slowly.
That's why we have to take it down to this kind of temperature, minus 18.
I grew up in the UK, and I spent most of my life there, and I moved here kind of gradually,
you know, step by step.
But I feel that, you know, spiritually I am very at home here, I feel very at home
here, simply because there are so many people who think like me, who find it natural to
aim high and to make a difference to the world and, you know, are smart and committed and
hard-working, and have the same kind of drivers that I have.
Yeah, but are you also here because of the funding, because of the money?
Well, certainly the actual nuts and bolts of how we ended up here, how I ended up here,
have a lot to do with the people who are here being the right people, and that of course
includes very much the people who were willing to financially support this pioneering work
when it was even more pioneering and even more controversial than it is now.
You know, that kind of attitude of funding really high-risk, high-reward work is what
made Silicon Valley what it is, both in terms of information technology and in terms of
biotech, and it kind of was inevitable that we would end up here.
Our approach to addressing the medical problems of aging is a damage repair approach.
We are interested in restoring the body of an older individual in terms of its structure
and its composition to something like how it was in early adulthood, and we recognise
that if we can do that reasonably well, then we will by definition restore their function,
both mental and physical, of the body.
But that's very different from the way that people have historically thought about how
to address aging, either by directly attacking the symptoms of old age as if they were normal
diseases like infections, or alternatively by trying to clean up the way the body works
so that it just ages more slowly in the first place.
So I think that a good chance, maybe a 50-50 chance that people in their 30s or 40s will
be able to avoid the ill health of old age however long they live, and that of course
there are correspondingly better chance that people are, let's say, kids today.
Now, if you're actually more than 40 now, if you're 60 or 70, then of course you've
got less chance.
But again, it depends who you are as well.
Not every one of the same chronological age has the same biological age.
I'm 54, but I still think I've got a pretty good chance of benefiting from all of this
because I'm biologically about 40.
Why are you controversial in your field?
And at the same time, you're the front-runner of this movement.
There are two ways in which I'm controversial.
One is that there is a great controversy about whether we should defeat ageing.
And that arises from people's fear of getting their hopes up, people's fear of the unknown.
I've also been more controversial in the scientific community because the ideas that
I put forward were very radical, very different from the approaches that people thought were
realistic before I came along.
And you know, that's perfectly normal.
If you're pioneering, you know, by definition that means you've got new ideas and those
new ideas are not going to be obviously right to everybody who immediately hears them.
So you know, I feel that if you're not pissing anybody off in this life, then you're probably
not making much of a difference.
Silicon Valley is the Olympus of our times where the gods and demigods of tech have gathered
and now make decisions that affect the entire world.
So maybe it's not surprising that they are also thinking about life extension and immortality.
You can see this kind of hubris as a consequence of the way Silicon Valley has evolved because
you have had sort of these enormous successes created by people who started almost from
nothing, who sort of built incredibly successful companies around technological innovations
that are now worth hundreds of billions of dollars and sort of effective lives of literally
billions of people.
So if you see that happening in a very short span of time, it's quite natural to say, well,
I'm not going to be constrained by the limits of biology, just like we disrupted taxis or
disrupted search or social networks, we can do the same for biology.
But I think there are also examples that kind of show that perhaps people who come from
a tech background are not always good at judging the risks and the difficulties associated
with biology.
There are people who simply accept the risks and use themselves as living laboratories
of life extension and experiment with their own cells and genes.
Liz Parrish is the founder and CEO of BioViva, a biotech company offering anti-aging therapies.
She herself was the first patient and underwent a gene therapy which involved having her telomeres,
the edges of her chromosomes, lengthened.
According to BioViva's own researchers, her biological age dropped considerably from
her 47 years.
So it's not entirely true that I'm the first genetically modified woman on earth.
From the beginning of history, humans have been genetically modified by viruses.
So when you get sick, you often get a viral integration.
And then there's lots of people who are going through genetic therapies right now for monogenic
disease.
So that means if they have a single gene that has a problem, we can replace that and actually
cure the disease, which is fantastic.
But I am the first person to be genetically modified to actually treat biological aging
and doing that on purpose.
So that's where I'm number one.
We know that looking younger is more attractive because it's actually in less of a disease
state.
If you don't look young, you're not young and therefore you are more likely to die.
The biggest risk factor for mortality is your age.
Wasn't it also a bit scary to do these therapies?
Well, my son has a chronic disease and so it's actually really hard for me to watch
him suffer with that every day.
It was hard for me to watch my grandmother's die.
We can't continue to live in the delusion that we're going to live forever just because
we're not dead today.
Okay, so we have to pioneer new technology and to me, it's more scary not taking a risk
on new therapies and knowing the way I'm going to die.
So I'm not interested in dying the way that people did in the past.
And are you afraid of dying?
Are you?
No, I'm not afraid of dying.
So that's probably one of the reasons I make a good pioneer.
So for me, it's kind of all or nothing.
Either we start solving the problems of the future and the now, or we are not participating
in making a better world.
So I would rather be dead than die of the diseases of aging.
In most Western countries, these controversial therapies, often tested only on animals, are
illegal.
So Liz Parrish travelled to Colombia to undergo her gene therapy.
The idea of me being the first patient wasn't somebody else's.
That was my idea that we couldn't use the therapies in other people if we didn't really
know what would happen.
And since it was my company, I would take the risk and I really want to stick by that
I wouldn't put any drug into another body that I wouldn't take myself.
So it was an exciting time and it was very contemplative.
I ensured that everything in my life was in order so that in the worst case scenario,
nobody was left with any messes.
And we really, as a group, a very small group, felt like we were pioneering the future for
humanity.
And that felt the best.
Right now death is inevitable and disease is inevitable and we're trying to change that
and so being part of that felt really important.
It really did.
What would be an ideal age for you?
If you could choose when you were going to die.
I don't think anyone could really do that because if you said a thousand on your thousands
birthday, I think you would say a thousand and one, right?
So we enjoy living.
We don't know what comes after living.
So what is there?
Do we really want to gamble on that or would we prefer to go on living?
And we see by how people behave and how much money they spend on healthcare trying to stay
alive after they've been diagnosed that people prefer to live.
And so when we think about big ideas about how long we can live, it becomes really quite
overwhelming.
It's like, what would I do with all that time?
But again, humans fall into time really easily.
We know what to do with time when we have it.
We always say we don't have enough and I foresee that we will continue to say that even if
we extended lifespan by three times again.
In a gated community built around a golf course in Phoenix, Arizona, there lives another do-it-yourself
life extender.
This real estate millionaire and early retiree uses, amongst other things, the experimental
Fox 04 Dry, a substance that until now has only been tested on mice.
It has spectacularly turned back the biological clocks of the mice.
Okay, so here's where I keep some of my supplements and experimental longevity drugs.
This is olive leaf, biotin, testosterone, natto kinese, glucosamine, arnie goatweed.
Not sure what that's supposed to do for me, but it sounds good.
There's also rapamycin, which is a very interesting longevity drug.
So this is an exciting time for longevity enthusiasts.
Whatever I take, there's a kind of a risk analysis that I do.
Some things, there's a very low risk, I take it.
The question is, how likely is it to help?
Well, that's weighed into it as well.
Now, for example, Fox 04 Dry, from the studies that we've seen so far, the risk seems low
with the mice that were tested.
That's why the big reason why I'm taking it.
It's not manufactured in large quantities now.
You have to get a lab to synthesize it for you, custom made.
So this is extremely expensive.
How expensive is it?
I think that it's about, normally you buy low quantities, but like $500 for a milligram.
So that would make this $5,000.
That of course you get quantity discounts.
All done.
Why are you so interested in extending your lifespan and using yourself as a patient
zero in this field?
So I think that maybe the political answer would be that I'm doing it to save the world
and there is a small piece with me that is interested in saving the world and helping
science and whatever my results are, and I've published a little bit of it, positive
or negative, they will help other people that come after me.
On the other hand, I guess I'm inherently selfish in that I would like to find something
where I can extend my lifespan and extend my health span more importantly and perhaps
be around for a long time.
I'm worried about him because we had some previous situations.
The decininib.
That's when you lay down and was scratching and your heart was beating and you look like
all puff up, right, Darren?
And I was worried, so we checked the blood pressure was very high.
What was it, Darren?
Yeah, he got better, but I'm worried when he takes a lot of pills or new stuff.
I want him around and obviously he's looking good.
Can you show me what you mean?
Yeah, like before when I put the hand, it was like nothing.
There was the scalp, you know, like you could see skin right now.
There is like hair, you can't see anything there.
My nails seem to grow well.
Yeah, I mean aches and pains, I don't really have those.
I'm fairly fit.
Just a standard, I guess, problem.
So I think for my age, I'm probably fairly normal.
I'm 52 next month.
53.
52.
Doesn't this thought that you might outlive the woman you love because you used to stay
there and she doesn't scare you?
It's not that I believe this is such a radical formula that I will take one shot and then
suddenly I'm, you know, Benjamin Button.
And this is maybe step one and then other technologies, who knows, stem cells or whatever
happens to be the best thing available.
And my wife will take also if I can convince her.
In the Great Smoky Mountains in Tennessee lives Kathleen Ann Goonan, science fiction
author and until recently professor at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
Immortality is a dominant theme in her work.
I would like to live longer than expected.
I don't know that anybody would not want that.
And I've used that idea in a lot of science fiction and short stories.
And it's, it's a part of the landscape in science fiction, really.
Am I a techno optimist?
Yeah, absolutely, absolutely.
You know, some of the biggest and most humanity changing things are happening
right now and I, I do remain an optimist.
I'm excited.
But don't you think that interfering with our own biology is crossing your line?
We've always messed with our biology.
Always.
We mess with everybody's biology.
Everything's biology.
We breed animals.
We, you know, we kill germs.
My life has been saved several times by those who knew how to mess with my
biology in the right way.
And I'm thankful for that.
And so, no, I don't, I really don't think there's any line there.
So we can already rejuvenate, improve and optimize ourselves and DNA or replace
entire body parts that no longer function properly.
But if our bodies are already simply do it yourself, kids, and you can just
rebuild yourself in any way you want, what will the people of the future look like?
Especially if, for example, you have only had your head frozen at Alcor.
Many of our members want to come back in a physical human body that looks pretty
much like maybe they named the age 25.
That seems to be a very popular age for people to aspire to.
But many, like me, also would really rather come back in something more
glamorous than the biological body.
For me personally, I don't really want to come back as a biological entity.
It's nice, but it's very limited.
It's very fragile.
And so my preference is to bring me back, give me a body that's made up
of nanobots, sometimes called a nanobot swarm.
Just as the human body is made up of trillions of biological cells that work
together, the swarm can work together to create the body that you want.
And it can be changed anytime you want, unlike a biological body.
So if I want to go skiing on Mars on Olympus Mons, I don't have to worry
about the fact that there's no oxygen there.
I can have a body that can function without oxygen.
That kind of thing is what I'm more interested in personally.
If you take it as a given, that Silicon Valley point of view is that we are all
data information and that all we have to do is to, in the most, putting it
the most optimistic way, is to find a way to replicate that data, to replicate
that data in a way that you could save it somewhere, you could upload it.
Different forms become available.
You can go into cyberspace.
You can have a different body.
You could be endless adventure.
If you're data, that is a lot of data.
Where are you going to store the data?
How will you reassemble the data?
How do you make that data so that it's alive and conscious the way you and I are?
Is that us or is it someone else?
Maybe.
I think that living longer will change everything about what makes us human.
And what does make us human?
A lot of people would say our memories make us human.
So your identity is your memories.
And in a long, long, long life, say, hundreds of years or thousands of years,
it seems odd to think that you would still be the same person that you thought you were.
And sweet tea, the sweet mouse right there, and what's the documentary today, or is it a documentary?
It is.
And what's it about?
It's about science fiction, it's about life extension, possibility of life extension and what people think about it.
Would you like to extend your life longer than expected?
Yeah, Jesus will do that for you.
When you're time to go, you're going to go.
Well, I will add that God does give scientists and doctors knowledge.
All knowledge comes from him.
So if he gives them knowledge to develop a cure, then that's good.
That comes from him.
That's part of your life cycle.
You're going to live till he says, come on home.
Eat clean, live healthy, you'll live long as you're supposed to live.
Because God tells the time that you're going to die.
Nobody but him.
That's what I believe.
Some people experience a greater sense of powerlessness in the face of their own mortality than others.
But for the time being, death will come to each and every one of us, rich or poor.
Some say the future will be a new dawn full of promise,
while others are left wondering where this road is leading us
and prefer to leave these things for God or nature to decide.
Immortality will in any case result in some new problems.
But does this mean that the human quest for a longer life will end in just a stay of execution?
If your sort of ethical starting point is to reduce suffering,
then longer life spans will just give people more opportunity to suffer.
So maybe from that point of view, it would be a bad thing.
But from my personal perspective, I don't see the downside.
I think the downside is really the societal disruption it'll cause
and sort of the kind of moral responsibility
than to make it available to as many people as possible.
The question for me is how many other people will this benefit?
We have access more or less to therapies and modifications
that can help us live longer and help our organs and hearts and everything
and other parts of the world they don't.
And it will be the same thing with life extension.
And of course everybody would want it.
And so whatever method you're going to use to extend life,
there comes the idea of who's going to get longer life,
who's qualified, who's not.
Is it equally distributed?
Well, probably not.
Probably not.
And who decides who's going to be living longer?
With what point of view?
With what moral compass?
With what goals?
So there's a dilemma right there too.
I suddenly look to the future and ask myself what's it going to be like?
But when I do so, I'm a lot more careful than most people
to take into account the uncertainties that are involved.
What people go wrong is they'll say,
well, OK, so supposing we fix aging, there might be this problem.
In particular, they'll often make a completely crazy assumption,
which is that everything else is just not going to have happened by then,
that the rest of the world or other technologies are going to be more or less what we have today.
You know, people will just forget that we've got all this automation coming
and they'll say, oh dear, we'd not do this.
We'll never be able to pay the pensions.
I mean, that's just so brain dead when you think, you know,
the idea, the whole idea of pensions is just going to have to go away completely
when hardly anyone even needs to have a job at all.
And, you know, where are we going to put all the people?
You know, people will say that.
But hello, you know, overpopulation.
We have it today. It's bad today.
We've got climate change and everything.
But we're already fixing that problem by developing ways to make people pollute less,
especially, of course, renewable energy to minimize use of fossil fuels,
but also, you know, desalination, artificial meat, all those things.
So the carrying capacity of the planet is absolutely certain to rise
far faster than the population of the planet rises.
And people will completely forget that.
I mean, what's going on?
Currently in Silicon Valley, there are lots of people who are more like me,
more, I would say, rational about this kind of thing.
You know, they understand that their own efforts may help,
may make a difference to their own chances or other people's chances
of actually making the cut.
It's very important for people to understand that this really is
humanity's biggest problem.
And furthermore, that it's a problem that we are in striking distance to solving.
What we see is a better world coming, and we have to be very careful
that we don't get stuck in the myths of what is ethical.
So when we talk about biological aging and should we solve it,
you know, you have to remember as a society, we've already decided.
We've mandated to cure cancer, to cure Alzheimer's.
So treating it biological aging, we have to be very careful
that biological aging is essentially just curing those diseases.
So when we look at the U.S., we look at a country that has the longest lifespans
and the shortest lifespans in the same country due to the lack of access of health,
due to insurance companies and their really criminal policies.
And so, you know, this is something that gene therapy will give us the opportunity
to do is equalize health across everyone.
The gene therapies can be given like immunizations are given today at a very low cost,
but they have very high value of keeping people healthier longer.
The great thing about gene modulation in the future is not just to eradicate the diseases of aging,
but to actually allow humans to work together, to modulate the hormones that drive us to war
and disaster and terrorism, to take those type of things and actually create genetic profiles
that will create people who just work towards a bigger goal and can work together in happiness and harmony.
Hey Darren, good morning.
Nice to meet you.
Manjolo, nice to meet you.
Right this way.
Is this your first time here?
No.
Good.
That's just energy running through.
It's going to start waking up the central nervous system.
As with so many earthly matters, it seems to be only a question of time and money
before our lives can be lengthened considerably.
But how the immortality industry will change the future of humanity is in part reliant on the good intentions of
and financial injections by the demigods of Silicon Valley.
Face that way.
And if you're wealthy enough, you can choose to spend your money on expensive
electro massages and freeze and oxygen therapies for a reviving boost.
So if you're lucky, you might just hang on long enough.
I've sent off my DNA sample for analysis and I got the results back, about to open them.
But before I do, I just want to kind of remember what my other results were.
The first time, it showed that I was 47.4 years old.
Oh, here we are.
Results.
Oh my God.
Guys, this is good.
It's not 47.7, which would be what it's still good.
It's 46.8.
You're getting younger.
That is cool.
I'm very, very happy.
Plus or minus?
There's plus or minus 5.8 years.
But don't be in diapers, okay?
No, as I said before, it's a subtle therapy.
But it does look positive.
Look at this one.
That's gorgeous.
I take personally, like, natural way of life.
Then one person is dying and the next one, it's been born.
That's natural cycle of their life.
And for me, it's more important in the old age to die with dignity, not to be left alone,
not to be without support, either family or medical support.
For me, it's how you live and how you die.
My wife and I have different opinions on the Almighty, let's say.
I don't believe that there's a bearded fellow watching over us and controlling us
and that there's going to be anything after we die.
We are already somewhat at that point where we can choose at any point to stop our lives, right?
But people who want to live, who enjoy life, wouldn't it be nice to have the option
provided the technology is available to extend our lives as long as we wish?
I think in the far distant future, depending on the speed of technology,
the speed of developing nanotechnologies that are much more radical
and not as contained as they are now,
that, you know, humanity could move off in many different directions, not just one.
And so, so much so that just like distant, distant, distant cousins
might not see themselves as part of the same family.
Humans could evolve with different abilities, different specializations,
different types of bodies that they would seem just alien to us.
I think in almost any scenario where we can imagine, there will be some kind of death.
I mean, we live in a universe where entropy will ultimately win.
And so I think even if we go to extreme technological possibilities
of transforming ourselves into completely digital form
or otherwise sort of getting to the point where even the biological medium is no longer a limitation,
even then there will, I believe there will be some form of death
where some form of information loss over time, no matter how long,
that will result in some kind of end.
Thank you for watching.
For more on this subject, take a look at the playlist.
You can also watch this recommended video.
Don't forget to subscribe to our channel
and we'll keep you updated on our documentaries.
