If somebody wakes me up in the middle of the night
and asks me to summarize in one sentence
what happened in discussions of foundations
of quantum mechanics over the past 30 years or so,
the sentence would be, look, the possibility
of a realistic understanding of quantum mechanics
has now been decisively put back on the table.
The arguments that had carried so much weight
for a whole century to the effect
that such a naive, realistic understanding was impossible
have been decisively, clearly, concisely refuted
to everybody's satisfaction.
And now the project of trying to use our best physics
as a guide to our metaphysics
is at least back on the table.
Hello, this is Robinson Earhart here with Pins the Podcat,
a new Pins the Podcat-based t-shirt
that Pins is currently shielding with her body.
And then the introduction to an absolute,
total banger of an episode,
Robinson's podcast number 157,
with, coincidentally, one of my absolute favorite people
in the Robinson's podcast universe
and the philosophy universe and the physics universe.
And that is David Albert,
who is the Frederick E. Woodbridge Professor of Philosophy
at Columbia University and goes without saying
for a long time listeners of the show,
one of the world's most respected philosophers of physics.
And he's also the director
of the Philosophical Foundations of Physics program
at Columbia University and a faculty member
of the John Bell Institute for the Foundations of Physics.
And while this is Pins is probably somewhere in the hundreds,
maybe 157th episode,
maybe she's made an appearance on every episode,
I'm not sure, while it's her 157th episode on the show,
possibly it's certainly my 157th appearance.
This is David's fifth appearance on the show,
which is a record.
And that's how you know that I love him.
And then he appeared on episode 23 with Justin Clark Done
on metaethics and absolute space,
on episode 30 on the philosophy of time,
episode 67 with Tim Modlin,
the founder of the John Bell Institute
for the Foundations of Physics
on the Foundations of Quantum Theory.
And then episode 106 with Sean Carroll
on many world's Boltzmann brains and fine tuning.
But in this episode, we talk about David's new book,
which I just read and highly recommend,
and I'll get more to that in a moment,
a guess at the riddle,
essays on the physical underpinnings of quantum mechanics.
And as we talk about that,
we also talk about the metaphysics of quantum mechanics.
And the book is great.
It consists of three essays about quantum mechanics,
though even the introduction is worth
the price of the book in its own right,
so I highly recommend it.
But if you're interested in the philosophy of physics,
though I will make the caveat
that it requires some background knowledge,
but you can pick that up from David's other book,
Quantum Mechanics and Experience,
you should definitely be reading this book.
So that's what we talk about.
Finally, check out the John Bell Institute.
My last guest, Fay Dauker is a faculty member there as well.
And Tim Modlin, who I just mentioned,
and there are so many others that I've interviewed,
but the JBI is devoted to providing a home
currently situated in Hvar, Croatia,
but tentatively, tenuously, tentatively,
on the foundations of quantum mechanics.
And they need donations, so please help.
I've donated, please help then.
I mentioned that shirt, I think, that Pins was blocking.
And it says Robinson's podcast with Pins the Podcat.
And there I am, riding her with my glorious mustache,
like she's a horse.
And that's available at robinsonsfashionempire.com
along with a couple of other shirts.
And I don't have a Patreon or anything,
so if you feel like wearing a shirt like this,
you can get it there.
And you could also try the robinsonairheart.com URL.
But now, without any further ado,
I will hand it off to me a little bit and largely David.
So I hope that you enjoy this conversation
as much as I enjoyed having it with the aforementioned David.
All right.
You and I have spoken before with Tim Monlin
and then Sean Carroll about quantum mechanics
and its theories or interpretations.
But I don't think we've ever talked explicitly
about the metaphysics of quantum mechanics.
And I think a good place to start
before we get into maybe the meat of a guess at the riddle
is what some of the core metaphysical questions
are about quantum mechanics
and why it is that only more recently
these questions are being asked again.
Right.
I'm not sure there's a very sharp distinction
between what you were calling interpretations
of quantum mechanics
and what you're calling the metaphysics of quantum mechanics.
But the idea is roughly this.
In the beginning of the 20th century,
when quantum mechanics was first being formulated,
when these very, very strange behaviors
of subatomic particles were being experimentally discovered
and when people were struggling
to make sense of these behaviors
and of issues like the stability of atomic matter
and so on and so forth,
quantum mechanics was developed
by a circle of people who were in many ways
intellectually centered on Niels Bohr in Copenhagen.
A theory was developed that these people
claimed very influential.
I mean, and convinced everyone.
Was not amenable to any realistic understanding, okay?
That the only coherent way to approach this theory
was in a radically instrumentalist way.
That the theory was a mechanism,
that the theory was a recipe or an algorithm
for making predictions about the results of experiments.
And any attempt to correlate the symbols in the theory
with things that were going on under the table,
things that were really going on in the world
in between these experiments
that could give us an account of why the experiments
were coming out the way they did,
any such realistic aspirations were declared by Bohr
and the circle of people around him to be,
any such aspirations were declared to be hopeless.
Any attempt to pursue these aspirations
were gonna collapse into paradox and contradiction
and so on and so forth.
I mean, it is thinking back on it now,
pulling back on it by a hundred years.
The idea that people somehow convinced themselves
that the outcomes of certain experiments,
you know, the positions on pointers
of various measuring devices,
somehow entailed that there wasn't a world out there
that could be captured in realistic language or,
I mean, it's astounding to think nowadays
that people talk themselves into a position like that,
but they did indeed.
And the person at the center of these developments, Bohr,
was apparently a sort of breathtakingly charismatic figure.
You know, if you read Bohr,
if you read the kinds of arguments for this position
that Bohr attempts to write down on paper,
it's impossible to make sense of them.
It's really impossible to make sense of them.
But his effect on people that he spoke to in person,
his effect on smart people that he spoke to in person
was astounding.
People would take a walk in the woods with him
for a half an hour and their lives would be changed.
And he was, he inspired enormous intelligence
and intellectual loyalty and intellectual reverence
among some of the smartest people in the 20th century.
Anyway, for all these reasons,
there was a very strong prejudice in physics
about quantum mechanics,
that quantum mechanics in some very decisive way
represented the end of the scientific project
as it had previously been construed, okay?
Where it was a project that was aimed at providing us
with a more or less literal,
more or less naively realistic picture
of how the world worked.
And a picture that was gonna be fit then
to be a guide to doing metaphysics, okay?
A picture that was fit
to at least be a starting point
to read our metaphysics off Trump.
And the effect of Bohr and his circle,
and like I say, this was a circle of people
who quickly convinced the entire community
of theoretical physics.
The effect of this was to declare that on the contrary,
if there was a project of metaphysics at all,
physics wasn't gonna have anything to contribute to it
because physics was just not in the business
and could not be in the business
of providing, of offering anything
like a literal flat-footed traditionally realistic
sort of picture of what was going on in the world.
Good.
This general mood in theoretical physics persists
for more or less a century.
There's a lot of stories to tell
about how it was maintained for that long.
It involved a lot of real sort of
on a professional and intellectual level, brutality.
People who were interested in these questions
didn't get jobs, were dismissed as nuts,
even figures like Schrodinger and David Bohm,
and especially and particularly Einstein,
who raised objections to this,
who said that they didn't see
how these anti-realist arguments worked,
who were interested in developing
a realistic understanding.
These people were responded to with dismissal,
with gibberish, with purported answers to them
that weren't really answers to their questions at all.
This prohibition on thinking along these lines
was enforced with a very, very heavy hand
throughout much of the 20th century.
You know, a lot of your viewers
probably recently saw Oppenheimer over the summer.
One of the things that's going on off-screen
in Oppenheimer that never really gets explained
but has a few consequences on-screen
is the position of Einstein in physics
at the time of the Manhattan Project.
There's a scene, I think, early in the movie
when Oppenheimer is being shown around his,
the office he's being offered
at the Institute for Advanced Study,
and they see Einstein out the window,
and the guy who's showing him around says,
you know, I never understood why you didn't involve
the Einstein Moore in the Los Alamos Project.
After all, Einstein is the foremost,
you know, the foremost thinker about physics alive.
And Oppenheimer responds kind of mysteriously in the movie.
Well, he was the foremost figure.
It's been, you know, it's been 40 years or so
since the guy really did anything.
That's not true.
What the guy had been doing during those 40 years
was raising objections to the attitude of Voronni's circle
about quantum mechanics.
And even such a sort of towering figure as Einstein
could be ostracized, could be turned into
what Einstein used to refer to as a museum piece.
Because of the sort of brutality of the insistence
that nobody challenged this dogma of Bors,
that the realistic, you know,
that physics needed to accept
the end of its realistic aspirations.
Okay, good.
Like I say, there's a long interesting story
about how this was enforced.
It involves, you know, one could write a sort of
underground intellectual history of the 20th century
just by following this debate out.
I mean, it involves the rise of modernism.
It involves the McCarthy period in the United States.
It involves all kinds of interesting stuff.
There's a nice book about it
that I recommend to your viewers
if they're interested in this history
that came out a couple of years ago
by a guy named Adam Becker.
It's called What is Real.
I think the title is kind of goofy,
but I think the book is quite good.
Anyway, to get around after a lot of certain locations
to your question,
I would say in the last 30 years or so,
a number of philosophers of physics and physicists
have finally very powerfully,
very clearly made the case
that Boren and his circle were completely wrong about this.
That there are arguments that any attempt
to produce a realistic interpretation
of quantum mechanics was bound to collapse
into paradox and self-contradiction
and so on was shown by means of producing
a number of explicit constructive counter examples
to be false.
So,
what, you know, if somebody wakes me up
in the middle of the night and asks me
to summarize in one sentence
what happened in discussions of foundations
of quantum mechanics over the past 30 years or so,
the sentence would be,
look, the possibility of a realistic understanding
of quantum mechanics has now been
decisively put back on the table.
The arguments that had carried so much weight
for a whole century to the effect
that such a naive, realistic understanding was impossible
have been decisively, clearly, concisely refuted
to everybody's satisfaction.
And now the project of trying to use our best physics
as a guide to our metaphysics
is at least back on the table.
One may have had doubts from the beginning
whether physics should be a good guide to metaphysics
or not, but if you were inclined to think
that a good metaphysics ought at the very least
to be very deeply informed by our best available physics,
that was now back on the table as a coherent possibility.
Let me say in a little more detail what went on.
The thing that the Bohr's arguments
that there couldn't be any such thing
as a naive, mechanical, realistic understanding
of the experiments that quantum mechanics described
centered on a particular problem,
centered on a particular paradox,
which came to be called the measurement problem, okay?
That it was, but you know,
that there was some very important idea
that quantum mechanics and quantum mechanics
being the most fundamental contemporary approach to physics.
Physics itself required before you got started
cutting the world up into a part that is observed
and a part that observes, okay?
And if you tried to give a complete description
of the world within your physics,
that is if you tried to push everything
to the side of the observed, okay,
to the, into the collection of things
that the physical theory is supposed to describe,
the theory would implode, the theory would collapse,
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
So there was supposed to be this obstacle
to a traditionally realistic, comprehensive description
of the world that had to do with the act of measurement
and that came to be called the measurement problem.
What happened over the past 30 years
is that arguments were made that,
so this problem, let me just back up a little bit,
this so-called measurement problem
was absolutely not thought of by Bohr and his circle
as something in the nature of a scientific problem, okay?
As something that it was gonna be the task of physics
to solve, okay?
It was something quite different of a quite different kind.
This is where physics came up against the limits
of the scientific comprehensibility of the world, okay?
This is where physics came up against the limits
of the kind of project that it had always been engaged in.
This was the direct encounter with the ineffable
or something like that, okay?
So the measurement problem didn't represent something
that anybody should work on or anything like that.
And it was considered a sign of naivete,
of intellectual immaturity on the part of people
as Auguste, as Einstein, and so on,
that they thought that what you should do with this
is try to solve it, okay?
Good.
A number of people working mostly,
whose work was mostly ignored
did in fact present solutions to the measurement problem.
People like David Bohm in the 1950s,
people like the Italian physicist Gerardi,
Romini, and Weber in the early 1980s.
What happened in people may be like Everett,
also like you Everett in the 1950s.
Whether Everett really achieved the solution
to the measurement problem or not is a debate,
a debate that I've had on your show with Sean Carroll
and so on and so forth.
But anyway, there were a number of people
whose work wasn't paid very much attention,
who did explicitly, by counter-example,
show that Bohr was wrong.
They wrote down coherent solutions to this problem,
coherent ways of allowing oneself
to think that quantum mechanics amounted
to a complete description of the physical world,
including the process of measurement,
including the measure treated as an ordinary physical object
and so on.
Good.
These things happened.
Nobody paid much attention to them.
Bell, I think, inspired a generation of people
closer to my age to look at these proposals.
Seriously, to see that they really did provide
decisive, constructive counter-examples
to the doctrine of Bohr and his circle,
and that they refuted what was announced
as this huge discovery in the beginning of the 20th century,
that the days of naive realism
about what science could do were over, okay?
Good.
So a number of people wrote down constructive,
you know, explicit solutions to the measurement problem,
at least insofar as the simple versions
of quantum mechanics, non-relativistic,
so-called first quantized versions of quantum mechanics go.
And this, and I think what happened
over the past 30 years or so
is that a bunch of people thinking
about the foundations of physics
took these counter-examples,
investigated with them, worked with them,
were able to present a very, very decisive case
that this problem, which was supposed to be
the great obstacle to a realistic version
of quantum mechanics, could be solved, okay?
That in fact, it was an ordinary scientific problem,
like other scientific problems.
And what you needed to do in order to solve it
is make certain explicit physical mathematical changes
in the quantum mechanical formalism
so that it wasn't burdened with this problem anymore.
So ironically, the contribution of philosophers here
was to insist that a certain problem
which Bohr had wanted to insist
was a gigantic philosophical problem
about the fundamental ineffability of the world
was in fact an ordinary scientific problem, okay?
Which is exactly what Bohr had been denying it was.
Once you've got this,
once you've got several proposals on the table
for actually solving this problem,
once you have several proposals on the table
for an actual internally consistent mathematical framework
of a theory which was clearly susceptible
of a realistic interpretation,
then the question can again arise and finally did arise,
I would say about 25 or 30 years ago in a serious way
in discussions of the foundations of physics,
a question can then arise about
what the appropriate realistic interpretation
of this theory is,
what this theory is in fact telling us
about the structure of the world,
about the natures of these subatomic particles
whose behaviors are so strange
about how it is that matter manages to stay stable
even though classical physics would have predicted
it's almost immediate collapse,
someone and so forth.
So you've got a chance to treat this theory again
as lots of people were treating physics
toward the end of the 19th century, okay?
As the sort of royal guide to metaphysics, okay?
Maybe it wasn't all there was to metaphysics,
but it was something that was going to be
a great aid to metaphysics.
It's one of the places where metaphysical speculation
about the structure of the world
ought properly to start, okay?
And this business got up and running again.
I would say about 20, 25 years ago.
Ironically, there were a whole bunch of people,
like I say, people of around my age,
people like Tim Moglin,
people who you've had on your show a lot,
people like Barry Lower,
lots of people who were interested
in the foundations of physics.
There were a bunch of people who had,
who were absolutely in lockstep with one another,
who were finishing one another's sentences.
When it came to giving these arguments
that Bohr's position was wrong, okay?
And as soon as it felt like
that job had been adequately done,
we found that we had very different intuitions.
Now that the possibility of entertaining
a realistic interpretation of quantum mechanics
was back on the table,
now that this measurement problem,
which was supposed to be the great impediment
to such an interpretation had been taken out of the way,
now that we were free to say to ourselves,
good, what does this theory seem to be telling us
in a sort of naive realistic way
about the structure of the world?
It turns out that people who had been involved
in arguing that the measurement problem
was a scientific problem
and had a scientific solution
ended up with very different intuitions
about what the theories we were left with
suggested about the basic metaphysical structure of the world.
And what I mean by the basic metaphysical structure
of the world, and this is finally at very long last,
getting back to your original question,
what we mean is questions like
what the fundamental physical systems are, okay?
What the fundamental physical ontology of the world is.
That's the question that a lot of these debates
have been around, and also associated questions
about what we should think about phenomena like,
what we should think about principles of the locality
and phenomena of non-locality,
which I'm happy to go into later on if you'd like.
But the basic metaphysical question is the standard one.
What's the fundamental ontology of the world?
What's the stage, which we used to think was
three dimensional space and time
on which that ontology parades around?
What's the stage on which the fundamental history
of the world unfolds?
Those are the sorts of basic metaphysical questions
that people are thinking about.
There's a lot there, and it was all great.
I have a few comments.
So your discussion of Bohr's character very much,
I mean, it brings me back to at least Molen,
who I've talked to a couple of times recently,
and I just read his book,
Einstein's Unfinished Revolution,
which I think came out three or four years ago.
But he also talks a lot about Bohr.
It's much more of an invective about the anti-realists,
but it's an amazing how an endeavor that should be,
I mean, mathematics aside,
the paragon of objective and personal investigation
can in fact be dictated and steered by a person
with such strong anti-realist philosophical prejudices.
And it's quite amazing.
I mean, like I say, I think there are a lot of stories
you can tell about this,
about what was going on in people's heads.
I don't think, for example,
this was completely independent of things like, say,
you know, what kinds of phenomena,
the rise of literary modernism
in the beginning of the 20th century,
the influence especially on people like Bohr,
of philosophical figures like Hegel,
and Kirk, you know, and his countrymen, Kirk,
you know, there seemed to be enormous intellectual revolutions
going on all over the place.
That was kind of the thing to do, okay?
In literature, there was supposed to be
a crisis of representation, okay?
Which had to do with the origins of literary modernism.
I don't have any historical evidence at all for this,
but it makes so much sense to me
to imagine Bohr saying to himself,
you think you've got a crisis of representation, okay?
You got a crisis of representation
about human motivations, about history,
about I got a crisis of representation about rocks, okay?
This is infinitely more radical
than your crisis of representation.
So I think there was a spirit of, you know,
that had to do with Hegel, that had to do with Kierkegaard,
that had to do with the rise of literary modernism
in the beginning of the 20th century
and so-called crisis of representation.
There is no doubt that the development of quantum mechanics
was an influence on lots of people in, you know,
who were importantly involved
with the rise of literary modernism.
I think you can tell a lot of stories
about Virginia Woolf, for example.
I think you can tell a lot of stories about Joyce.
I think you can tell, you know, there's a beautiful,
there's a,
Walter Benjamin has two essays that I know of about Kafka.
One of them, there's an earlier, longer one
which never moved me that much.
There's a shorter, later essay about Kafka,
which I find extraordinarily moving.
And one of the ways he reads copy starts out by saying,
I know there are all kinds of standard readings of Kafka
about the bureaucratic structure of modern life,
about this, that, so on and so forth.
I wanna read Kafka as a reaction
to the discoveries of modern physics, okay?
Or at least that's one of the ways he wants to read them.
And he starts out with this long quote,
this famous quote from Eddington's wonderful book
called The Nature of the Physical World.
This book was apparently an enormous influence
on Walter Benjamin.
And he starts out with this famous quote
from Eddington's book about how complicated it is,
given the picture of the world
that we have from modern physics
to walk across a room, okay?
That the electrons in the floor
are smacking into the electrons in your feet
and you're trying to keep your balance.
And how does, it's a very, very beautiful passage.
Benjamin quotes this passage at length
and says, I can't think of any passage anywhere
in all of literature that's more like Kafka
than exactly this passage from Arthur Eddington.
Good.
So anyway, I think there was a zeitgeist
that boars attitude, you know,
and that boars sort of undermining
of the realistic objective aspirations,
traditional aspirations of physics
that he thought it fit in with, okay?
They saw themselves,
these people saw themselves as at the vanguard
of a tremendous intellectual upheaval
that was much bigger than just physics, okay?
That was gonna expand to lots of things.
He had these, all of these gurgi-flake slogans,
you know, a trivial truth is a truth
whose negation is false.
A profound truth is a truth
whose negation is also true, okay?
Of course, you can smell Hegel in this a mile away.
So, yeah, it is funny that that was the case.
It is funny that that would succeed in physics.
I mean, there was this funny combination of things.
They, on the one hand,
they had this absolutely useless and, you know,
mind-numbing dogma about anti-realism
about what he called complementarity,
which is this doctrine,
this sort of Hegelian dialectical sort of doctrine
that I've just been talking about.
So there was all this fluff around the mathematics
that they had.
Then they had this mathematics.
They had this recipe for predicting the outcomes
of experiments, which was unrealistic.
Unbelievably breathtakingly powerful and accurate, okay?
So they had this sort of glamorous talk.
They had this insane predictive power.
This is a compelling combination, okay?
And was a compelling combination to lots of people.
One other comment before we move on is that you,
I think your words were for bore and all quantum mechanics
should just be thought of as an algorithm
for making predictions or explanations.
And then my words or in Bell's words,
we shouldn't be, there are no variables really to get at.
We're just concerned with observables.
But this is quite interesting to me
just because of some conversations I've had
on the show with some eminent string theorists
where I think there's an illustrative distinction
to be found.
And the string theorist I have in mind
in particular is Andy Strominger.
So he, of course, is well-known with Kumrun Vafa
using string theory to account for this major problem
with black holes.
But as I was talking to him-
You mean the information loss problem?
Yeah, yeah, Beckenstein Hawking radiation, yeah.
And as I was talking to him,
it became quite clear that he's using,
in the same way maybe as bore or similar way,
he's using the apparatus of string theory
to solve this important problem and make some predictions.
But at the same time, he said that he has
essentially zero credence that we will ever observe strings
that will ever confirm their existence in any way.
And the illustrative distinction that I think is here
is he still thinks that there's a fact of the matter
about whether they're there or not.
Whereas for bore, my understanding is
we don't even ask that question.
It's outside the purve of science.
But I understand this is the case with all string theorists.
I think your friend, Brian Green, for instance,
he quotes a couple of times this prediction of Ed Whitton
that maybe you'll look up in the sky
and see a cosmic string.
And that would be a funny way to confirm string theory.
But before we move on,
let me just try to summarize really quickly
what we've covered so far.
So the-
Can I say a word about this?
I think string theory gets kind of a bad rap
about the observability.
And from what you're describing
of what Strominger said to you,
I think he conceded more than he needed to, okay?
It's one thing to, you know,
we are used to for a long time in science,
getting what I might,
what I guess you might call indirect,
but nonetheless very compelling
and determinately empirical
confirmations of some of our theories, okay?
It's not the case that the only way
to reasonably raise our credence
in the existence of strings is to see a string, okay?
We could show that certain other,
you know, other claims about the world
follow from, can be deduced from
the hypothesis that strings exist.
And if we notice those features in the world,
that has every right in the world to be called
a piece of empirical data,
which is confirmatory,
confirmatory in the philosophy of science sense.
Doesn't mean it proves anything,
things don't get proven in the natural sciences.
But what to reasonably raise our confidence
in the existence of strings.
People often say stuff like this
about multiverse theories as well,
which are closely connected with string theories.
People say multiverse theories are not scientific theories
because by stipulation,
we can't observe these other universes.
That doesn't seem right to me.
If we have strong reason to believe,
strong empirical reason to believe,
that certain claims about the fundamental structure
of the world are true in the sense
that they provide the best and most compelling
and most reasonable explanations
of phenomena that we do observe, okay?
And we also find out that those principles
which we take to be well confirmed
entail that other universes must exist, okay?
That's good empirical evidence,
albeit indirect, for the existence of other universes.
So I think some of the string people
would be absolutely right to defend themselves
on empirical grounds more vigorously than they often do, okay?
It's not the case that the only empirical confirmation
we can imagine in string theories
that we look up in the sky
and we see a big cosmic string.
There are all sorts of ways
which although there may be more indirect,
are perfectly reasonable, perfectly compelling,
perfectly continuous with the scientific tradition
in which we might be able to put ourselves
in a position to say the hypothesis that strings exist
are well confirmed by our experience
of the, by our empirical experience of the world.
Well, maybe we'll have a chance
to get back to string theory
because it comes up in one of your essays.
And I guess at the riddle though,
you don't actually refer to it as string theory.
You just mentioned these, I think seven compact
or six compact dimensions.
But anyway, let me, let me again,
try to just summarize this before we move on.
So the upshot is that the,
well, the upshot for the, for Boers,
that the denial of the Bibles by the Copenhagen School,
it precluded any connection of physics going forward
with metaphysics.
And there was a lot of hostility
to people like Boem or Einstein who saw
some sort of something deeper.
But as you summarize, I mean,
due to the concerted effort of a few philosophers
that I've gotten to talk to and physicists lately,
realism is back on the table now
and metaphysics should be informed by physics,
which is a point that Tim often makes.
But now within realism,
there are many different competing views.
Okay, great.
This is, I guess, maybe a sidetracking us for a moment,
but I recently spoke for a second time
to another ex-Columbia and ex-Heim Gaifman student,
Anubhav Vasudevan, who's now a professor at Chicago.
And we talked for, I think, close to two hours
all about Charles Saunders Pierce's Bizarre Metaphysics.
And as I prepared for that conversation with Anubhav,
I realized that the title of your new book
comes from one of Pierce's, I guess at the riddle.
It's just, I can't claim any,
what very little reading I've done of Pierce
is stuff that I admire.
And I'm very much aware of his role
in the development of American pragmatism and so on.
But I've got nothing interesting to say about Pierce,
except that his title was good enough to steal.
Yeah, no, it was a good title.
But okay, so then moving on.
Another thing I should ask you about,
I've asked you about, not only since you've already
brought it up and given me permission to do so,
but because it's of enduring general interest
and also metaphysical interest,
is about the history of locality as a phenomenon in physics.
So, this is something else I may ramble for a while.
I really love the rambling, that's great.
Cut me off when you need to.
So look, there's a really interesting story here.
There's a very basic expectation.
There's a very basic intuition
with which we approach the world, okay?
This intuition is much, much older than
modern physics or modern science.
By modern, I mean, since the 17th century,
it's much older than that.
It's much older than scientific speculation.
It's probably much older than human beings, okay?
It seems to me that fish have this intuition
or octopi have this intuition or something like that.
Well, you never know about octopi.
Yeah, here's the intuition,
which is called nowadays locality in physics.
The intuition is that things that happen here, okay?
Are only, or let me put it this way.
Things that happen here only directly
and unmediatedly influence other things
that happen immediately contiguous to here,
both spatially and temporal, okay?
Stuff that, the effects of stuff that go on here
don't jump discontinuously across space and time
and affect something else, okay?
Things that happen here only directly affect
other things that happen immediately contiguous to them.
Of course, by doing something here,
I can make it the case that eventually dramatic things
happen far away.
I give someone an order to travel to Chicago
and punch somebody in the face or something like that
or I flip a light switch over here
and on the other side of the room, a light goes on.
But in all of those cases, we are convinced
that if you scrutinize the process carefully enough,
if you rip up the wall where the light switches,
you'll find a wire running continuously
and without a break all the way from the light switch
to the light that went on.
If I analyze the process by which the guy in Chicago
got punched in the nose,
well, I affected this guy while he was standing
right next to me by giving him this order.
I can even break that down.
I influence the air right at my lips by moving my lips.
That moving air caused air next to it to move.
That moving air caused the air next to it to move,
dot, dot, dot, dot, until it got to his ears.
Then he goes and gets on a plane,
keeping my orders in mind all the time, travels to Chicago.
The guy ends up getting punched in the nose.
The claim is that under any circumstances
where something that happens over here
affects something that happens over here,
it will always be possible to find
by sufficiently rigorous examination,
an unbroken chain of mediating causes
and effects that stretches without a break
all the way across the spatial and temporal influence
from the first cause to the ultimate effect.
From my flipping the light switch to the light going on,
from my moving my lips in a certain way
to a guy getting punched in the nose in Chicago,
blah, blah, blah.
Good.
As I say, this is a very, very deep intuition
that with which we come to the world.
It seems to me it's an intuition
which in some crude form is hardwired into us
by natural selection.
It's not a joke that it predates human beings.
It's not a joke to say that fish and lions and so on
believe in locality.
If the predator is far away,
he can't hurt you until he's near you, okay?
And indeed violations of locality, okay,
are very much of the essence of what we have in mind
when we use words like magic, okay?
Voodoo is supposed to be,
it's part of the essence of Voodoo,
that it's supposed to be a genuine violation of locality.
I never made that connection.
Interesting.
It's a sense in a dull stomach over here
and it's not thought that that gives the guy a stomach ache
on the other side of town
because it generates waves,
physical waves of anything going out.
It's magic, okay?
And it's magic, it's part of the essence
of what you have in mind by calling it magic
that it violates locality, okay?
So locality is a word that's sometimes associated
with special relativity,
with the constraints of special relativity
that no influences can move faster than light,
then altogether misses the depths of what's going on here.
This is a very deep primordial,
pre-scientific, pre-human,
hardwired by natural selection intuition we have
about how the world works
and about what can be expected from the world
and its reactions to what I do.
Good, or to what any agent does.
Good.
This principle has a really interesting history
in modern physics,
where once again what I mean by modern
is the developments starting with figures
like Galileo and Newton and so on in 17th century.
Specifically, when Newton first wrote down
his theory of gravitation,
it explicitly violates this principle of locality, okay?
It says that two material bodies
at a certain distance from one another
will exert a certain gravitational force on one another, okay?
And moreover, if you move one of them,
the gravitational force that the other will experience
will change instantaneously
and it'll change without any physical process
that you might refer to as propagation of that influence
changing in the space between them, okay?
If the sun vanishes, we fly away immediately.
If the sun vanishes, we immediately fly away, okay?
Good.
It was widely noticed
as soon as it was written down
that Newton's universal law of gravitation
was a violation of the principle of locality.
And lots of people,
this kind of violation was referred to
in the nomenclature of that time as action at a distance, okay?
Newton's universal law of gravitation
was said to stipulate that there was an action at a distance
from one mass to another.
And lots of Newton's contemporaries,
not least Newton himself,
considered it for that reason, preposterous, okay?
And Newton was the first to say,
and he shows this by standing on his head
and working very hard during his career
to try to imagine a local account of gravitation,
which he was never able to do.
But everybody, including Newton,
reacted to this by saying,
look, this is great.
This is providing a wonderful account
of the motions of the planets and so on and so forth.
But it couldn't be the final account of gravitation.
And the reason that it couldn't be
the final account of gravitation
was precisely its violation of this very deep principle,
this very deep primordial expectation we have
of the world that it's gonna be local.
Good, so that's where things stood
for a couple of hundred years, okay?
There was this Newtonian law of gravitation.
Everybody knew it was non-local.
Everybody knew it was of fantastic predictive
and explanatory utility, okay?
But I don't know if everybody,
I don't know the history well enough,
certainly lots of people were very vocally skeptical
that it could possibly be the most fundamental account
of gravitational phenomena,
precisely because it was non-local.
Good, nothing happens about this for 200 years.
Then in the 19th century,
people started making systematic scientific investigations
of electrical and magnetic phenomena.
And the laws that were written down
particularly for electrostatic attraction and repulsion
between like electrical charges
or different electrical charges
had exactly the same mathematical form
and exactly the same predictive and explanatory utility
as Newton's law of gravitation, okay?
The force that electric charges exerted on one another
according to 19th century mathematical theories
of electrostatic force were non-local
in exactly the way Newton's gravitational force was non-local.
But the interesting thing about electricity
was it was a more complicated case than gravitation
because early experiments by people like Faraday
showed that there was some intimate connection
between the electrical force and the magnetic force.
People started trying to develop a unified theory
of the two of them.
And these developments went on at a frenzied pace.
There were lots of brilliant people working on this,
especially some names that are especially important
are Faraday and Maxwell.
And this development culminates
toward the end of the 19th century in Maxwell's equations.
The first thing to say about these equations
is early in the 19th century
when people were studying forces
between electrically charged particles,
people started to get into the habit
initially as a purely notational device
to talk about things that they called electric fields, okay?
So they would speak, but this was just a notational matter.
They would speak not as if this charged particle
exerted a force on this charged particle,
but rather this charged particle created around it
an electric field that extended throughout all space.
And that field was what was directly felt
by the other charged particle.
Adopting this notation makes the phenomenon look more local,
on a sort of formal level, on a sort of mathematical level.
Nobody at the time took that seriously.
Nobody at the time was taken in by that, okay?
Everyone was convinced that there was still
a very deep metaphysical puzzle here
about an apparent violation of locality.
But this field language, this field notation
began to insinuate itself into the way people talked
about electric and magnetic phenomena.
And by the time you get to Maxwell,
a big transformation has taken place.
Maxwell is trying to put together all that's been learned
over the previous century about electrical phenomena
and magnetic phenomena,
and their empirically discovered relationship
to one another.
And the equations, the four simple equations
that Maxwell is forced to write down
in order to bring all these phenomena together
ends up treating fields
as basic ontological constituents of the world
on a metaphysical par with material particles, okay?
Fields turn out to be the kind of thing
that can push one another around.
They have their own rich internal dynamics.
It turns out that, for example,
if you just look at the energies of particles
interacting with one another electrically
and they're flying around
and having all kinds of effects on one another,
if you just keep track of the energies of the particles,
the total energy of the system you're looking at
won't be conserved.
It won't be the same at different times.
The same is true of momentum,
but it was discovered by various investigators
that if you attributed certain amounts of energy
and momentum to the electric and magnetic fields
by means of a very simple formula,
then you could prove that the total energy
of the system consisting of the particles
and the fields was conserved.
So there was reason to believe
that electric and magnetic fields,
these things that had just been taken
as notational devices 50 years earlier on,
were now things that there were strong reasons to imagine
could have energy, could have momentum.
Once again, they contained a rich internal dynamics.
They were pushing and pulling on one another,
so on and so forth.
They were acting more and more and more
as if they were genuine fundamental physical stuff as well.
And one of the great revolutions
in our picture of the world that we get to
by the end of the 19th century
with Maxwell having written down his equations
is that the fundamental ontology,
physical ontology of the world has suddenly doubled.
It once consisted just of material particles.
By the end of the 19th century,
almost everybody is convinced
that it consists of two kinds of things,
material particles and electromagnetic fields, okay?
And that the fields are completely
on a metaphysical and ontological par with the particles.
Okay.
Another thing that happened,
a beautiful byproduct of this, okay,
was that it was noticed
that if you actually solve Maxwell's equations carefully,
if you have say two repelling positive charges
here and here and you ask what happens
to the force on this charge if I suddenly move this one,
it is not the case that the force on this charge
instantaneously changes.
It's the case that moving this one
changes the electric field in its immediate vicinity.
That change in the electric field
in its immediate vicinity
changes the electric field slightly farther away.
That change in turn changes the electric field
slightly farther away than that, dot, dot, dot, dot.
This change ripples across space
at what turns out to be the speed of light, okay?
And after a finite time results in a change
in the force experience by this other particle,
moreover, the process of propagation of this change
throughout the spatial interval, okay,
is something which has measurable physical manifestations.
It's indeed electromagnetic radiation.
It's light, okay?
There's a sort of little light flash
propagated from one to another.
You can see if you put the appropriate instruments in there,
the change in the force propagating
at a definite finite speed, the speed of light
from the particle that's generating the field
to the particle that's feeling the field, okay?
So at least in so far as electromagnetic radiate,
as electromagnetic phenomena is concerned,
this threat of violations of locality has collapsed, okay?
Good.
People like Einstein were enormously inspired
by this Maxwellian account of electromagnetic behavior
and engaged for a whole bunch of reasons,
but one of them were these concerns about locality
in trying to understand the phenomenon of gravitation,
more after the model of Maxwell's treatment
of electromagnetic phenomenon.
And the result of this is what's universally regarded
as one of the greatest achievements
of the human imagination.
In 1915, when Einstein first publishes
his so-called General Theory of Relativity,
which is a theory of gravitation,
and lo and behold, one of the many astonishing
accomplishments of this theory
is that Newtonian mechanics is rendered local, okay?
That is Newtonian, gravitation is rendered local.
That is, it turns out in Einstein's General Theory
of Relativity, just as in the Maxwellian case,
that if I move one of these masses,
it changes the gravitational field
or what is now the geometry of spacetime in general relativity,
only in the region immediately next to it,
those changes cause changes further out,
those changes cause changes further out, dot, dot, dot.
And once again, this propagates through space
at the speed of light, okay?
And it's only after a finite time
that the other mass feels the change.
This phenomenon of propagation,
which you should also in principle be able to measure, okay,
is called the gravitational wave, okay?
And lo and behold, just a couple of years ago,
people won a Nobel Prize for finally directly observing
these gravitational waves that Einstein's theory had predicted.
So this is a sort of beautiful, immensely satisfying story, okay?
Everybody had to hold their breath for 300 years, okay?
But they held their breath for 300 years
and they were rewarded, okay?
The initial crisis caused by Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation
gets beautifully, satisfyingly, breathtakingly,
resolved in Einstein's general theory of relativity.
And lo and behold, in the 2020s,
people actually for the first time
are able to observe these gravitational waves
that propagate the changes in these forces through space time.
So this is a beautiful story.
Unfortunately, a few years after general relativity,
with the advent of quantum mechanics,
this blows up in everybody's face, okay?
Quantum mechanics, and this is what makes the story so poignant
and so dramatic and so shocking.
It turns out that the quantum mechanical recipe
for making predictions about the outcomes of experiments
includes instructions, which at least on the formal level,
you'd be tempted to call non-local, okay?
That is the recipe that you're supposed to follow.
Instructs you in certain circumstances
that when you measure some feature of a particle over here,
depending on how that measurement comes out,
you want to instantaneously change
the way you describe in your formalism
the state of some particle over here,
which may be arbitrarily distant,
which may be on the other side of the universe, okay?
Good.
Nobody in the early days of quantum mechanics,
I mean, it was Einstein who first noticed
that quantum mechanics contains these instructions,
which are non-local, okay?
The way the algorithm was initially written down,
you have to do some digging in the algorithm
to really expose the fact
that it's giving you non-local instructions
about how you want to proceed.
It was Einstein in his famous paper with Podolski and Rosen,
the so-called EPR paper in 1935, I think,
who first very clearly points out
that the formalism is non-local and this way.
And this is a particularly emotional matter for Einstein
because he just got finished saving the world
after 300 years from Newtonian non-locality, okay?
So Einstein and his colleagues notice
that there's this non-local feature of quantum mechanics.
Of course, Bohr, and Bohr's,
if you want to read Bohr's most sustained written account
of his philosophical attitude towards quantum mechanics,
you can find it in his famous response to this EPR paper, okay?
The EPR paper is,
can the quantum mechanical description of the world
be considered complete?
And Bohr several months later,
publishes a paper with the same title
that's intended to dismiss Einstein's concerns.
So Einstein notes that the algorithm
contains this non-local feature, okay?
And he considers that weird and alarming
and an indication that's something we don't understand
that this couldn't be the end of the story,
just as Newton's non-locals theory
couldn't have been the end of the story, okay?
And Bohr essentially writes a paper,
I mean, it's a paper that's very, very hard to understand.
I've heard a story from friends of mine
just as a little sidelight,
but it gives you an indication
of how difficult Bohr's response was to understand.
I've heard recently that almost all of the reprintings
of Bohr's paper that have been published
over the past 60 years had two of the pages reversed, okay?
And nobody seems to have noticed, okay?
This is how impenetrable this paper is, okay?
You look at it, it's really hard to understand,
but if somebody holds a gun to my head
and says, tell me in one sentence what this paper is saying,
I take it the thing that Bohr is saying is,
who gives a shit about this non-locality?
That we make no pretense to describing the world here, okay?
This is not, the fact that the algorithm
for making predictions contains this non-local instruction
shouldn't be construed as our saying the world is non-local.
We are not saying the world is non-local,
we're not saying the world is local,
we're not saying the world is anything.
We are not in the business of saying how the world is.
We're in the business of telling you
how to predict the outcomes of experiments.
Who cares about this?
Why is Einstein all worked up
and mired in these old fashioned questions
about what's really going on in the world?
We've outgrown questions about what's really going on
in the world, we're so over questions
about what's really going on in the world, so on and so forth.
Bohr has a lot to say in this paper,
a lot of it is very hard to understand,
but like I say, if you hold a gun to my head
and ask me for the one sentence summary
of what Bohr is saying, that's what Bohr is saying.
Good.
The issue lies there.
I mean, astonishingly, you know,
when Einstein published his paper,
everybody in physics got very worried.
Oh my God, Einstein has an objection to crowning mechanics.
What are we gonna do?
Bohr publishes this pile of gibberish a couple of months later
which is in no way a response to anything, okay?
And everybody says, thank God, Bohr solved the problem.
And I can testify to you that generations later,
if you go to your physics professor as an undergraduate, okay,
and say, what about these Einstein objections
to quantum mechanics, your physics professor,
at least when I was an undergraduate,
and it certainly continued for at least a generation or so
after I was an undergraduate,
your physics professor would tell you what's wrong with you,
what are you in junior high school?
Bohr cleared that up a long time ago.
Go read Bohr's paper.
And if you say to your physics professor,
can you just tell me what Bohr said to clear it up?
The guy says, yeah, I can't remember, I don't know,
but I know that Bohr cleared it up.
Go read Bohr's paper, it's all over, okay?
Can you go read Bohr's paper?
And it is literally like listening to the Oracle at Delphi,
okay?
It's like listening to somebody hanging upside down
by their ankles, screaming hysterically,
and you're supposed to understand deep wisdom in this.
Okay, good.
So Einstein said, something's wrong here, this is non-local,
okay?
Then another 30 years goes by,
where nobody says anything.
Nobody says anything because everybody has been told
that Bohr settled this problem, okay?
Even though on being asked,
everybody found that they weren't able to say how Bohr,
you know, it's like what Augustine famously says
about time, that you know exactly what it is
until somebody asks you, okay?
So this is true of Bohr's response to EPR.
You know exactly what it is until somebody asks you,
then you get all confused,
and you tell the student to go read Bohr's paper,
and it turns out that that doesn't help.
Good.
Finally, Bell comes along in the mid-60s,
in the mid-1960s,
sees that the EPR argument is correct, okay?
Wonders is also aware,
as very few people were aware at the time,
of this attempt by David Bohm
to solve the measurement problem, okay?
To write down an explicit version of quantum mechanics,
which was capable of being treated as a universal theory,
something that also solves the measurement problem,
treats the observer like an ordinary physical object,
blah, blah, blah.
He was aware of Bohm's theory,
he was aware that Bohm's theory was non-local,
in just the way that Einstein observed
that the standard quantum mechanical recipe was non-local.
And Bell wondered
whether you could improve on Bohm's theory,
by writing down another theory,
which was as successful as Bohm's theory,
and as quantum mechanics,
in making correct empirical predictions.
But was rid of this disease of non-locality,
just as Maxwell had done for electromagnetism,
just as Einstein had done for gravitation.
And there was a tremendous temptation to say,
when confronted with an apparent non-locality in the world,
don't worry, don't get hysterical,
we've been through this before, twice, okay?
We've been through this with Newton,
we've been through this with electricity,
they all look non-local at first,
it turns out you think harder,
you hold your breath for 300 years,
everything gets cleared up, okay?
Good.
Bell fiddled around with Bohm's theory for a while,
trying to come up with a local version of it,
that was as successful at making correct
experimental predictions,
found he couldn't do it, okay?
And then realized that there was a simple argument,
an astonishingly simple argument,
that takes 15 minutes to present,
and we now have even cleaner versions of it,
that take five minutes to present.
Found he could construct a proof,
that there could be,
that any theory that made the same predictions
about these pairs of particles as quantum mechanics did,
like Bohm's theory or anything else,
must include at some point or another,
one of these non-local instructions, okay?
The non-locality was inescapable, okay?
So we now had a simple proof,
that the way we had been saved in the case of gravitation,
that the way we had been saved in the case of electricity
was not gonna happen in this quantum mechanical phase, okay?
That this non-locality was not a sort of disposable artifact
of the mathematical formalism,
or part of an approximate description
of what was going on,
it was absolutely as a matter of mathematical certainty,
as a matter of mathematical proof inescapable, okay?
And this is one of the great metaphysical challenges
of quantum mechanics, okay?
In let, once again,
you have a, you have a, a boring kind of approach,
you have a radically instrumentalist kind of approach,
you couldn't care less about non-locality.
The recipe for making predictions
contains non-local instructions, who cares?
And if you say, well, I don't understand,
isn't that asserting that the world is non-local?
Answer, from Bohr's perspective, not at all,
not in the slightest.
You seem to think that science is in the business
of telling us how the world is.
It's not, get over it, get that out of your head, okay?
That's not what's going on.
But the minute you try to entertain
what we're being told as claims about the way the world is,
we have a proof from Bell that we're gonna be,
that this non-locality is gonna become a genuine claim
about the world out there behaving non-local, okay?
And this, I mean, I think in one of Brian Green's books,
and I wouldn't dispute this, Brian Green refers
to this particular discovery as the most startling,
single discovery in the history of natural science, okay?
And it really does.
And this discovery was famously referred to
by Abner Shimonie, a great philosopher of physics
of a previous generation,
as what he called experimental metaphysics, okay?
This seems to be bearing on really deep claims
about the structure of the world.
Claims, which I've just explained
in my ridiculously long story,
claims that are deeper than almost any other commitments
of modern science,
claims that are older than modern science,
claims that surely cavemen believe,
claims that it seems reasonable to me to say fish believe
and octopuses believe and so on and so forth.
So that's the real, and that's why this issue of Bell's theorem,
this issue of non-locality is a huge,
is an enormous example of how if we're licensed again
to begin to take physics realistically,
how modern physics might have very, very profound
and surprising implications about our ideas
of the basic metaphysical structure of the world
and of our ideas about time and space and so on and so forth.
Well, again, I have a number of things to say.
One, I'm just, I'm extraordinarily fortunate
and by extension, so our listeners to get a front row seat
to these impromptu mini lecture long spills,
but they're terrific.
Just as a historical comment,
so general relativity renders gravitation local,
the end of a very long saga.
I hadn't realized this connection to Einstein's contribution
to EPR and why the issue of locality, non-locality,
would be so important to him and his legacy.
That's very neat.
I also, experimental metaphysics is a great way
of describing it, this is very deep.
Yeah, this is Abner Shimoni's very nice phrase, right?
It's not, it doesn't convey the importance
of these experiments.
You know, we'll just tell you a little bit more about that.
Bell says, Bell has a proof that a very specific,
very small subset of the empirical predictions
of quantum mechanics are incompatible with locality,
are logically incompatible with locality.
The nice thing about this is this set of predictions,
as I said, this is not all the predictions
of quantum mechanics by any means.
He shows that if merely some very specific
and quite small subset of those predictions are true,
then locality is ruled out, okay?
So he said, if these particular experiments come out
in this particular way, I can give you a proof
that locality is ruled out.
It turned out that the experiments he was talking about
were easy to do with technologies
that were available at the time.
People ran out and did them, okay?
You can then refine these experiments,
make them, you know, eliminate possible loopholes,
possible errors in your detection devices,
so on and so forth, which people then did.
There was a big industry of improving these experiments
because experimentalists have to make a living too.
But people ran out and did these experiments
in much more detail, but from the very beginning,
the experiments came out exactly
as quantum mechanics predicts.
And it was this small subset of experiments,
those are all you needed to do.
And the fact that those experiments came out
the way they did, Bell showed was incompatible
with the possibility of there being
any comprehensive local description of the world, okay?
And Abner Shimonie meant to convey by this title, wow.
We did these, we had to just do a couple of measurements
and we found out, so we found out not only
that quantum mechanics, the quantum mechanical predictions
about these things are right,
it now no longer matters to this conclusion,
whether at some point in the future,
we're gonna cease to believe in quantum mechanics.
That's not gonna make any difference.
What we know is incompatible with relativity,
excuse me, with locality, is the quantum mechanical
predictions about this very small set of experiments, okay?
Those predictions have already been measured
to be correct, okay?
It doesn't matter if for other reasons later on
we abandon quantum mechanics, okay?
These particular predictions of quantum mechanics,
we already experimentally know to be true,
and that's enough to know that no matter
what the right theory of the world turns out to be,
locality is false, okay?
So, Abner Shimonie reacted to this, I think,
very appropriately by saying,
to call this experimental physics is not conveying,
is not conveying the enormity of what's just happened.
This is experimental metaphysics.
Well, I think that there are a few different directions
in which we could go at this point,
and maybe I'll try enumerating them
and you can see what makes sense.
They all have to do with a guess of the riddle,
but one way is to stick with some high-level issues
because you describe two ways of using quantum mechanics
to get a better understanding of the metaphysics
of our world to approaches top-down and bottom-up
that might be interesting to get into.
Another one is in the course of this story,
Maxwell brought fields into the ontology of the world
with his equations, and this, of course, has a parallel
with the introduction of the wave function
to the ontology of the world.
And we might talk about wave function realism
and its nomic alternatives propounded
by the primitive ontologists.
And then the third possibility is ways of dealing
with locality, non-locality, perhaps,
by rethinking or talking about our notion of space.
But whatever you wanna do.
So those three questions are, in fact,
intimately related to one another.
So yeah, so maybe I'll, so it's nice of you
to ask me to be a guest on your show
in conjunction with the very recent publication
of this book of mine called, A Guest of the Riddle.
And so I can say a bit, so I can touch on all three
of the questions you raised by talking a little bit
about what's going on there.
So look, as I said, what happened, I would say,
about 20 years ago or 25 years ago,
is that people like Tim Maudlin and Shelly Goldstein
and Barry Lauer and Nino Zange and a bunch of other people.
And me, thought we were done making the case
that Bohr and his circle were wrong, okay?
That the measurement problem was a scientific problem,
that we already had several proposals
for solving it on the table.
We don't know yet which of those proposals
is gonna turn out to be the right one.
The different proposals, in many cases,
differ in empirically discoverable ways,
although the experiments we would need to do
in order to distinguish them from one another
are beyond our current technological capabilities.
But we thought we had finished making the case
that this was a scientific problem,
not the occasion of the scientific confrontation
with the eternal, ineffable mystery of being
or something like that, okay?
We thought we had finished making that case.
We thought we had, as it were,
cleared, established a clearing
in which the project of learning about our metaphysics
from our physics could get up and running again.
And questions about what the basic ontology
of the world is and so on,
questions about what the basic structure
of space and time are,
which were the traditional concerns of metaphysics,
but as very much informed by physics,
that conversation between physics and metaphysics
could get up and running again.
And as I mentioned an hour and a half or so ago,
something interesting that happened
is that this collection of people,
people like me, Barry Lowery, Tim Moedlen,
Shelley Goldstein, Nino Zange, lots of other people
found that although we were finishing each other's sentences
in insisting that the measurement problem
was a scientific problem,
in resisting the view of Bohr and his circle,
the minute we felt like that job was done,
not that everybody was convinced,
but that anybody who was willing to read the stuff
and think about it would be convinced
that we had said all we could say.
The minute we figured that job was done
and we moved on to the obvious next job,
okay, what is the ontology
that this theory is depicting for us?
How do we read the metaphysics of the world
off of this theory?
The minute we turned to this other problem,
we found that we weren't in lockstep at all anymore,
that we all had very different intuitions
about what looked like the obvious ontology
to read off of these theories.
And I think there was a bunch of looking around at each other
and saying, my God, I thought I knew you.
I mean, how could your,
I thought we were all thinking about the same thing.
How could your intuitions about this
have turned out to be so different from mine?
But we did find that we were left
with very different intuitions
about what the obvious way to read off ontology
and metaphysical structure
from these solutions to the measurement problem that we had,
what the right way to do that would be.
It always seemed just very natural
without even thinking about it much.
That the question you wanted to ask yourself
in order to read off ontology
from these new versions of quantum mechanics we had,
is to ask yourself a question like,
what is to this quantum mechanical theory
as particles are to Newtonian mechanics?
Particles, everybody agrees,
are the fundamental ontology of the world
that Newtonian mechanics is telling us about, okay?
So the question you wanna ask yourself
is you look at the logical structure of the theory,
you look at the mathematical structure of the theory,
and you ask yourself,
what stands to this theory as particles
stand to Newtonian mechanics?
Or equivalently, what is it that the equations of motion
in this theory are the equations of the motion of, okay?
Just as the equations of motion in Newtonian mechanics,
like F equals MA,
are the equations of the motion of material particles.
If you ask yourself the question that way,
the answer is perfectly straightforward and trivial.
The equations of motion of quantum mechanics,
the equations of motion associated with quantum mechanics,
are the equations of the motion
of the quantum mechanical wave function, okay?
On, you know,
boring and anti-realist pictures of the world,
the wave function like everything else in the theory
was not to be interpreted as a physical object, okay?
It was some kind of mathematical device
which helped you make predictions
about the probabilities of the outcomes of experiments.
But the minute you've solved the measurement problem,
you've eliminated the obstacles
to taking this theory realistically,
and you try to take it realistically,
and you approach the question of what the theory is about,
okay, in the way that I just described,
the answer is just immediate.
The theory is about the wave function
in exactly the sense that Newtonian mechanics
is about the motions of material particles,
and in exactly the same sense,
and this is a closer analogy,
as Maxwell's equations are about the evolutions
of electric and magnetic fields, okay?
Good.
This is what I'm referring to as the top-down approach.
You start with the mathematical formulation of the theory,
and you ask yourself, what is to this theory
as particles are to Newtonian mechanics?
Good.
You're immediately trivially led to the answer,
oh, it's about the wave function.
It seems like, if I follow this analogy
with Newtonian mechanics and with Maxwellian electrodynamics,
the concrete physical object here,
whose evolution is being described by this theory,
is the wave function, okay?
Now, the minute you say that,
you have questions to answer that you don't have
in the Newtonian case,
and you don't have in the Maxwellian case,
and that's because unlike Newtonian particles,
and unlike Maxwellian electromagnetic fields,
these wave functions, which you're now declaring
are the fundamental concrete objects of your ontology,
are things that undulate around,
not in the familiar three-dimensional space
of our everyday experience of the world,
but in this very, very high-dimensional space.
And so the minute you say,
gee, I guess what I'm getting from this theory
is that the concrete fundamental physical objects
are these wave functions themselves,
then it seems like what you're committing yourself to
is a claim of the form that the stage
on which the real precise microscopic history
of the world plays itself out
is this very high-dimensional space,
not the three-dimensional space we're used to.
And the first question that you're gonna wanna answer,
or one of the first questions you're gonna wanna answer
is, okay, then you're gonna need to tell me a story
about why it is that
our everyday macroscopic empirical experience
of the world is as of a three-dimensional world, okay?
Our experience of the world as three-dimensional must,
if this is true, be in some way misleading,
or not the whole story or something like that.
And you're gonna want a story
about how these three-dimensional appearances
get produced, okay, by these undulations
of this concrete wave function object
in this very high-dimension space.
And one of the first stories that you wanna tell
if you're reading the theory this way
is how the mechanics of the production
of these three-dimensional appearances works.
And one of the burdens on anyone
who's trying to defend this kind of wave function realist view
is gonna be to tell a story like that.
And a lot of papers I wrote since the first time
I know of that this wave function realist view
was put in print anywhere, was in a paper that I wrote,
I think sometime in the late 1990s.
And obviously the questions that arise
the most immediately are these questions about,
well, where do these three-dimensional appearances come from?
Tell me the story of those.
And I've spent a good deal of time in the years since then
trying to make it clear how that story goes.
I think the story is in fact surprisingly simple
and straightforward and has to do with the structure
of the dynamical laws
and the way the structure of the dynamical laws.
It has to do with taking seriously on board the notion
that the way things appear to us
is more a matter of dynamics
than basic ontological structure.
That's a bit of a long story.
But anyway, I've spent some time trying to tell that story.
There are other people, people like Shelley,
people like Tim, people like Nino.
I've got a very different reaction from the word go, okay?
They said, look, the minute you realized
that just doing this little game that I just described,
okay, you asked what is to quantum mechanics
as particles are to Newtonian mechanics,
whether the quantum mechanical equations of motion,
the equations of motion of,
the minute you notice that this way
of trying to answer the ontological question
is gonna commit you to this very high dimensional,
fundamental space, you ought to come to your senses
very quickly and see that this shows
that this approach you were taking is just a non-starter,
okay?
The approach is very intuitive.
I see the appeal of it, but for God's sake, grow up, okay?
Two or three steps into it,
you're supposed to see that this commits you
to preposterous claims about what the fundamental space
of the world is.
Indeed, lots of these people seem to be convinced.
I don't wanna misrepresent them.
They seem to be convinced that any claim to the effect
that the sort of three dimensional objects
of our everyday experience of the world,
tables and chairs and haircuts and universities
and stuff like that are really the undulations
of something in a very high dimensional space.
It feels to them just like a complete non-sequitur,
like apples and oranges.
That is, you say, how would things have to be
undulating around in this high dimensional space
in order for there to be tables and chairs here?
It seems to them like asking,
how would oranges need to be moving around
in order for there to be an apple, okay?
And you say, look, there's no way for oranges
to move around such that there would be an apple, okay?
They just have nothing to do with one another, okay?
And this is a complete non-starter
and it stands for them as a very fundamental feature
of our empirical experience of the world
that there must be in the fundamental
metaphysical structure of the world,
a fundamental three dimensional space.
Otherwise, the business of making connections
with our empirical experience of the world
just never gets off the ground, okay?
So this was a very basic difference in our intuitions, okay?
And this led them to develop
these primitive ontology views,
these gnomic attitudes toward the wave function.
You say to them, wow, taking the wave function to be a law,
it's so awkward, it feels so goofy.
So the wave function is a gnomic entity,
but then there are laws of the evolution of the wave function.
So there are various levels of laws, stuff like that.
They perfectly well understand all this, okay?
They just think that the other approach,
the minute you start identifying
the fundamental structure of the world
with this higher dimensional space,
it's just a non-starter, it's just a non-sequitur.
There's gonna be no way to make a sort of,
you know, intuitive, explanatorily useful connection
with our everyday three dimensional experience of the world.
I don't think that's true.
Indeed, I think there's a nice way to make this connection.
And one of the things that's happening in this book
is that I thought recently
that I found a much more compelling way
to sort of lead a reader or a listener
to this high dimensional wave function, realistic picture,
what I call a bottom up approach
rather than a top down approach.
Where, as I was just describing,
in the top down approach,
which is what we've just been talking about,
you start with the finished mathematical formalism
of some physical theory, Bohm's theory,
or some other way of solving the measurement problem,
some other version of quantum mechanics
that incorporates a solution to the measurement problem
so that you can begin to talk realistically about it at all.
You start with this finished mathematical architecture
and you begin to ask what kinds of metaphysical pictures
of the world could be sort of draped around
this architecture of a mathematical theory
in such a way as to fit with it well, okay?
So you ask yourselves these questions
that I just described asking.
What is to the quantum mechanical mathematical structure
as particles are to the Newtonian mathematical structure
or something like that?
That's what I'm calling a top down approach.
The reason I was inspired to write this book
is that it occurred to me
that there was a very different approach,
approach that's supposed to lead to the same place
which is the reasonableness
of this high dimensional wave function realist picture,
but leads to it by quite a different route.
You ask yourself the kinds of questions
that people should have been asking themselves
in the very beginnings of quantum mechanics 100 years ago.
Wow, these subatomic particles
are behaving really strangely, okay?
These experiments are coming out in ways
that are really weird.
What kind of a thing would a particle have to be
in order to behave this way, okay?
So you ask yourself the sort of nuts and bolts
in the weeds, scientific kinds of questions,
which if Bohr and his circle had been honest, reasonable,
scientific workers,
they would have been asking themselves in the first place.
Instead of creating this whole Mishigas
with Hegelianism and I don't know what, good.
And I found that if you allow yourself
to play very, very simple games,
cooking up toy theories, very simple versions of theories,
incorporating a higher dimensional space,
but just slightly higher, not much higher
like in quantum mechanics,
but you go from a one dimensional space
to a two dimensional space or something like that
and imagining things knocking around
in this higher dimensional space and asking yourself
how those things would look if you look at them
from the perspective of a lower dimensional space
of our experience.
And the striking thing was the minute you start to play
very simple games like this,
behaviors that are sort of distinctively quantum mechanical,
behaviors that are sort of the signature behaviors
of quantum mechanics, just fall right out.
Okay, the minute you start playing these kinds of games.
So that was very striking to me.
It was very encouraging.
It looked like a much better
and more compelling explanation
of the quantum mechanical behaviors
than the top down kind of explanation.
So that's what suggested to me to write a short book.
Even though I had been talking people's ears off
about this wave function realism for 20 years,
this seemed to me a completely different
and much more compelling way to approach it.
Mind you, a big part of the reason I stole this title
from Pierce, okay.
A big part of the reason the title appealed to me
is that the title, and I hope you'll agree
if you've seen the book, the book,
I hope has a kind of modesty about it at the end of the day.
Okay, I don't think I wrote the first book I ever wrote,
which was like 40 years ago,
a book called Quantum Mechanics and Experience, okay,
was a book that was very much involved
with this first project of resisting
and refuting the anti-realism of Bohr and his circle.
And that book was very much the book
of a angry, very confident young man, okay.
And it was what Sidney Morgan Besser used to call
the Edward G. Robinson approach to philosophy,
which is that you just suddenly bust through the door
with guns blazing in both hands.
You kill everybody in sight, okay.
And you tell people what the truth is, okay.
Here, I take myself to be in a different position, okay.
Here, I'm not sure I see a knockdown argument
that the primitive ontologists are wrong.
I'm not sure I can see
because we're getting into metaphysics after all,
you know, how there are ever gonna be
fully decisive arguments about this.
I think that to the extent that I can get somebody
to see how this new version
of a wave function realist picture works,
you have this feeling that if you can just yell at them
for long enough about it,
they're gonna see how much more explanatory it is.
You know, it's this feeling of like,
you're looking at one of these optical illusions
of a vase and two faces looking at each other.
And you show it to your friend and your friend says,
I can't see the faces.
And you say, come on, don't you see?
Here's the nose, here's the mouth, so on and so forth.
And you say that to them for a little while.
And they say, yes, of course, now I see the faces.
I'm hoping it's like that.
But when I wrote my first book,
I was in a way in a much more fortunate position.
I was in the happy position of just pitting myself
against people whose views were riddled
with trivial outright stupid logical contradictions.
So it was just easy to come in and shoot the room up
and kill everybody in sight.
And say, we got a bunch of new rules here.
This is a different exercise.
This is an exercise in arguing
that if you really think about it,
I can't imagine that you're not gonna find this
the most compelling explanation of these phenomena.
And as I say, what suggested that after all this time
of bending people's ears
with this wave function realist view since the 1990s,
what suggested I write a new book about it
is I found it completely different
in what seems to me a much more compelling way
to claw your way towards it.
From the bottom, starting with the weirdness
of the behavior of these subatomic particles
and asking yourself what the hell kinds
of things could behave that way, okay?
Rather than starting with the full mathematical formalism
of the theory of their behaviors
and asking yourself what kind of metaphysical picture
the world went along with.
Well, I think this modesty is certainly conveyed
by the title.
It's not the answer to the riddle.
It's a guess at the riddle,
but then the third essay in the book
also begins with this claimer that-
Please, please for help, right?
Yes, it's rather than shooting up the room,
it's a useful contribution to clarifying the question.
That's good.
I have a quick question.
You used a word that I don't think I've ever heard before
and that's, you said this whole mishegas.
Is that Yiddish?
Oh, it's Yiddish.
If you're in philosophy,
you have no excuse for not knowing Yiddish.
Mishegas is craziness.
Okay, that's a good one too.
Craziness, it's a little less,
it's a less aggressive word than the English craziness.
It's more sympathetic and forgiving
of the crazy people than the English word crazinesses.
But it essentially means craziness, all this mishegas.
We were talking about Brian Keating's cause,
well, observer, I'll call him an observer
and astronomer before we started.
And he's also Jewish.
And from him, I learned the Yiddish word shlamazel,
which I think is also a terrific one.
But I mean, I have way more questions.
There's so much more to talk about.
Your book goes into a lot of depth,
but I feel like this is probably a great place
to stop.
So, dude, thank you again so much.
This was terrific.
I really enjoyed reading, I guess, at The Riddle.
Thank you, and I had a great time talking your eros.
Thank you for the invitation
and thank you for the questions.
It was a lot of fun.
Hold on.
If you haven't subscribed, liked, commented, or reviewed,
that would be so helpful.
And if you haven't yet,
you could also follow me on Twitter and Instagram
at Robinson Erhan.
