And with that, I can say that it's my great pleasure to introduce today's speaker, Ina
Sipulito, here in our CCNB seminar series at the Free University in Berlin, where we
have in this semester, as a topic of the seminar series, like tutorials on the free energy
principle and predictive coding. And what was it half a year ago? Ines Sipulito was also
organizing here big workshops that probably many people have attended on the free energy
principle here in Berlin over the Berlin School of Mind and Brain. So Ines is affiliated to the
UCL in London. She is also a fellow at the Developmental Psychology at the Faculty of
Behavioral Science Faculty at the University of Amsterdam and is here in Berlin as lecturer
at the Mind and Brain School, which belongs to Humboldt University and is dealing in her work,
as I understand it, mostly with free energy principle in the context of interpreting the
mind's function. We had multiple talks here in this series before, which were introducing mostly
technical aspects of free energy principle and computations within that. We are very much looking
forward to your talk today. And with this, I think I directly hand over. Nice to have you.
Thank you so much, Timohander. Thank you so much for inviting me, joining these wonderful
speakers that you've been having in this really great initiative group on the free energy principle
in Berlin. Thanks so much for the very kind introduction. I am going to now try to share
my slides. Hopefully, there won't be anything rent access in systems preferences. Yes, I think
that's fine. Yeah. So the title of my talk is the free energy principle on the edge of chaos.
I would like to just preface it by saying that it is a little bit of a talk on the
philosophy of science of the free energy principle. And that's sort of like speaking
to and relating to the most recent events that have been happening on the last year.
So if you could just give me the next slide. Perfect. So yeah, here we go. There's been a
little bit of discussion going on on the literature on the philosophy side. People are
talking to each other about this realism, non realism kind of approach to the free energy
principle. Of course, in philosophy, this is not news. It is a very live discussion in philosophy
of science in general about theories, models, etc., in science, in scientific practice.
And more recently, this debate has been revived in the light of the free energy principle. And
that's what I wanted to talk about today. So if you go to the next slide. Yeah. So the line up
for today is just these three main points. I will go very quickly over the realism debate.
And then I will introduce just the essentials of the free energy principle, which of course,
people that are usually coming to these seminars, of course, they're very, very much
acquainted. But I'm going to highlight the points that we need to highlight in order to then come
back and think about the free energy principle in the light of the realism debate. Okay, so next
slide. Yes. So we go now to the realism debate. And nobody would be happy with this definition
that I have here, because the realism debate is so nuanced, philosophically speaking, that it
will be, it is very difficult to come up with a definition that will make everybody happy. But
let's try. So we can say about realism or try to define the properties of a model are expected as
somewhat an ontological property of the phenomenon of scientific interest. So you should find some
kind of isomorphism, some kind of match between the properties of the model and the properties
of the phenomenon under study. Next slide. So for example, the property of study is as we are here
precisely to study all of that things that we love the brain cognition or even cell activity.
Next slide. Yes. So basically now there are three or I was thinking about how can we
put this together, the literature is so vast. And so integrated, I was thinking, okay, let's try to
put together at least three main groups, or three main ways that we can think of realism. So the
first one is the sort of like the more traditional one, which is thinking about under realism,
thinking about models as accurate representations, right. And this comes, for example, from Godlob
Frege in sense and reference. Next slide. Yeah. So the second one is a little bit more complex,
but it's sort of like what we have, we find a lot in cognitive science or cognitive neuroscience,
which is the idea that if models are obstructions, and if they succeed to predict,
then the properties of the model should be literally present in the system being modeled.
It was, was there a question?
Oh, I thought I had a microphone. Okay. So you find, for example, that in particularly very
explicitly in this paper by Michael Rescora, defending a realist perspective on Bayesian
cognitive science. Next slide. The third way of being realist in scientific practice is to claim
that claims made about the system of interest of scientific interest by truth preservation can
also apply to the system itself, in which case a target system is held to the properties of
the model. So this is found, for example, in these two papers that I have here, which are
very recent in the literature on the free energy principle and active inference. So that would
be one way to connect or think about models made under active inference or free energy principle
that also hold a realist perspective on the target system explained under the free energy
or active inference. Next slide. Oh yeah. So then what happens is to put it a little bit more of a
simpler way is that the mappings between the model and the target, so the mappings between the model
and the target, allow to convert truths found in the model into claims about the target system.
So that's the very, very basic idea that is being held in this third realist assumption.
And then we have the converse or the counterpart, anti-realism, and roughly the definition goes
something like this. The model is simply an instrumental tool that once applied to some
activity of scientific interest, then the model allows to learn about and draw predictions about
a system of scientific interest. So the main gist is that as opposed to having an accurate
match or isomorphism by virtue of these or that way of thinking or arguing for it,
the model is simply an instrumental tool that is an opportunity for learning.
Next slide, I think. Oh yeah. However, the system under study does not need to have the properties
of the model, as of course it is argued for in the realist take on it. So that's why
life debate going on. Next slide. Okay. So now also a couple of ways of being anti-realist.
Right? So the first one is the meaningless way of thinking about models. Models are in themselves
meaningless. They do not hold semantic value other than that that is constructed under or by
using them to understand or predict behavior. And this was, for example, held by David Hilbert
or Bas van Vressen. Next slide. Oh yeah. In their view, models need not to be more than
empirically adequate because they are mathematics. Because mathematics is arithmetic and algebraic
qualifier free identities. So in this sense, models themselves are semantic. They do not
hold any semantic value and they are qualifier free. Next slide. Okay. Then very much in agreement
with David Hilbert and Bas van Vressen is Albert Einstein in this amazing lecture that he gave
in Berlin in 1921. If you haven't had the opportunity to read it, please do so. And it tells us this
was in Berlin and it tells us, as far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not
certain. And as far as they are certain, they do not refer to the reality. It is certain that
mathematics generally and particularly geometry owes its existence to the need which was felt
of learning something about relations of real things to one another. So of course, this is very
much in line with the anti-realism held by David Hilbert and van Vressen. Next, and I think I have
something. Yeah. And this is actually something that if you are interested on, I've just alluded to
and the paper is just out. It's a commentary on Michael Miguel Aguilera's paper in Physics of Life
Reviews. And we do go on and a little bit on that, Kasper Hesp and I. Okay. Next slide.
Then anti-realism take two is that there is found as models thought of as idealizations or fictions
in science. And the idea is that models are, allow us to abstract certain features of a phenomenon
and they are for that reason, by virtue of abstraction, an opportunity for learning. Next slide.
Then take three on anti-realism is the view that the success of a model justifies
the acceptance of the epistemic value of the model without necessarily making ontological claims.
So basically what we are saying is that the virtue of the model resides in its epistemic
value and not in its ontological commitments or ontological commitments that one would make
by virtue of using a model. I think there's more on that slide. The success of our best scientific
models, informed models, even if our model is extremely successful, which of course we never
know because nobody would ever claim that they have a model that is true. In the best case scenario
we would claim that we have a model that is viable. So even if we have a very viable model that does
not, according to this view and anti-realist view, that does not allow us to hold a belief that
everything in the model is true. So not even that, the model is viable. Okay, next slide.
Oh yeah, so then we find these ideas, for example, as far back as Oziander in his introduction to
Copernico's Magnus Oppos, and it's just something like this. The astronomer will take
as their first choice that hypothesis, which is the easiest to grasp. The philosopher will perhaps
rather seek the resemblance of the truth, but neither of them will understand or state anything
certain unless it has been divinely revealed to them. Now, since one cannot in any way attain the
true causes, one will adopt whatever suppositions enable the motions to be computed correctly.
Okay, so this is take three. The models are, it's about the viability of the models rather than
the truthiness of the models. Okay, so next slide. Oh yeah, so then when last thought on
anti-realism take three is that then the hypothesis and assumptions that may or may not be encoded in
a computational model are not intended to describe the way the object being modeled is actually structured.
But next, simply serve to represent the observed data in an economical fashion. And this is quite
interesting because these are thoughts that were present quite a while back in time. Okay, next slide.
So this was the setup. Of course, it did not do any justice to the realism debate, which is
absolutely rich, super nuanced, but at least you got an idea of like three takes of how to be
realist about models, or three ways of being non-realist or instrumentalist, if you will,
about models. So now I want to say something about the FEP just highlighting points that I find
interesting in order to then come back to the realism debate and think about the FEP under
that realism debate and see what we make of it. Okay, so then next slide. All right, so I want to
say here that typically my take on the FEP is, so there are these two ways that you can get to the
FEP. One is through the low road, which you start with Helmholtz unconscious machine and then you
work your way through Bayesian inference until it gets to active inference until it gets to FEP.
My take or my preferable take is the high road or what Carl is called the high road,
which is where you start with biology and with certain observations that you make
in the behavior of the world and then you put forward sort of like a first premise
about as an attempt to start explaining how systems, living systems, adaptive systems behave in the
world in a way that that first premise explains throughout across the board adaptive behavior.
So this is my preferred way I think is the one that is most plausible and most interesting to me
and it starts off with the question of how is it that living organisms persist while engaging in
adaptive exchanges with the environment and this is an extraordinary thing because that's what I'm
really obsessed about and I really like is that it's so extraordinary that you have an environment
that is constantly changing so the only rule is that things change and yet living systems do not
succumb to those changes they actually persist in this changing continuously changing environment
and this is the thought that I find extremely important because we should not lose sight of
that thought because once we do that we'll get us into other paths that I find at least I find
less interesting such as minds as computers. Okay having said that next slide so this is living
systems maintain themselves by and then we continue maybe you can just open it yes by remaining in
non-equilibrium steady states right they are open systems which is why as we all know the
non-equilibrium steady states in a nest next one and they do that by restricting themselves to a
limited number of states and why is that well because there is only a very a finite number of
states they will keep them alive and they will not attain a certain phase boundary that would
kill them or something like that okay next one yeah okay so then the FEP coming from this high
road or described or explained from this high road then the first thing to bear in mind is that it
is a first principles in statistical physics understanding where organisms must maintain
their existence and this is what I was referring to earlier on as that first premise so we look at
the world we look at how living beings and adaptive systems behave in the environment right and there's
one thing that is common to these systems is that they maintain their existence right and this is
nice to have as a first premise because it's not controversial at all I don't think that anybody
would good dispute this now the second step of the FEP is that how do they maintain their existence
how do they maintain this imperative well by minimizing free energy which can be seen or put
forward or cast as computational solution to the problem of explaining how the systems
maintain their existence okay next slide so then active inference becomes super relevant here as
we know because it is a theory of how living organisms maintain their existence so how they
comply with that imperative of remaining alive maintaining their existence they minimize surprise
how via perception and action yeah next slide so then the very first premise that we have when
we start off our understanding from the FEP is that to survive any living organism has to maintain
itself in a suitable set of preferred post or preferred states while avoiding other
these preferred states of the environment but then here another very philosophical question
comes up for the philosophers in the room which is okay but what are preferable states or prefer
states for a certain system how do we define them how do they know right so a bunch of
epistemological questions could come up right and the FEP does reply to that next slide
okay so what are these preferred states right okay so preferred states are composed of two
important aspects so one is those that are defined by niche specific evolutionary adaptations
which for example it would be very unlikely to find as we are doing our research for example
to find a butterfly in in a river right because that would not be good for the butterfly so those
are niche specific evolutionary adaptations even though there was once was a student of mine
who told me that some butterflies like to go in the water so maybe this is not a good example I
should change this example okay then the second way of defining preferred states is a very important
one which is the learned cognitive goals so as systems interact with the environment of course
they learn much more about the environment and themselves and that would be the second
way of setting or determining what would be a preferred state in order to maintain existence
for an adaptive system okay next one so in order to survive a fish for example has to stay in a
comfort zone that corresponds to a small subset of all the possible states in the universe it has
to stay in water for example yeah next similarly a human has to ensure that the internal states so
for example the physiological variables like body temperature and heart rate remain within
acceptable ranges otherwise they will die so or they will become a corpse next one
so then here I found this extremely interesting for for our perspective as human beings because
if we do start with thinking okay human beings need to maintain their body temperature so they need
to do that by exerting active control but then there are different ways that we can do that as
opposed to non-human animals right so on the one hand we can do and use all the physiology such as
sweating but we can also use some cognitive mechanisms to buy a drink for example non-human
animals could for example look for water or we can also have some cultural practices like for
example turning on the air conditioning just some examples okay so then the FEP or energy
principle can be thought of as these sort of like steps where we can think about active inference as
the biological problem of survival as surprise minimization where these surprising states are
those that are outside the comfort zone of living organisms so for example surprising state for the
petafile would be water and the surprising state for the fish would be being outside of what then
the free energy principle sorry then the free energy minimization comes very handy because it is a
practical and biologically grounded way to explain how adaptive systems minimize surprise of these
sensory encounters with the world okay next slide then we can of course as we all know use active
inference precisely to explain this coupling between a system that is adapting to a continuously
changing environment where we can have the system of interest as internal states and the system with
which the and the surrounding environment of the system as external states where as we all know
internal and external states do not directly influence one another but they are indirectly
influenced by blanket states such as sensory and active states and the nice thing about it is that
we can use the mark of blanket formalism that is scale-free which interestingly allows us to
set up the internal states of scientific interest for us okay next slide yeah so then
this allows us if we want and to note that I am doing literally the higher road to the FEP
this allows us to now think about or bring into the conversation if we want the mechanistic
predictive processing explanation which is derived from the FEP describing cognition as
inference that aims to diminish free energy so then what we have is we have this mechanistic
explanation of a process theory that allows us to explain the activity in the brain in terms of
this coupling between internal and external states being mediated by by blankets and sorry by blanket
states meaning activity being explained by active inference which then it can be very much translated
to the language of the vision brain hypothesis okay next slide yeah which is very of course known
for us as top-down processes that encode predictions from priors and bottom of processes that encode
sensory observations such as prediction errors so there's like two way trafficking
occurring in brain activity and explaining how brain activity works okay next one
now this was the sort of like the high road to the FEP and now I want to make like some or
highlight some points that I find quite relevant and interesting in thinking about things or behavior
within the FEP framework or by putting in the FEP classes so one even in one way we do the whole
top-down approach or the high road approach to FEP where we start with that very very simple
observation that living beings adaptive systems they want to maintain their existence right even
when we start with that and then we find the FEP and active inference as a way of explaining how
they do that and then we arrive at active inference and can translate all the active
inference formalism through a two predictive coding and explain how things work in the brain for
example it is important to note that even when we do all of that trajectory inference is not
necessarily accurate so the optimality of all these mathematics and formalisms is subjective in
the sense that organisms operate on the basis of a subject or a subjective generative model
of how the observer observations are generated okay next one so I find this picture in the
active inference book by Pizzullo and Thomas Carr and Carl very very interesting and useful to
precisely convey the point I want to make about the generative model that I feel that sometimes
we just don't don't see exactly how it really work or his role is so the generative model
may be optimized as a new experience is acquired so think about that slide that I heard of how
there's a system how how would we determine what would be the preference states to a system right
so it's precisely through a generative model that allows us to optimize
model as new experience or new knowledge is acquired right so then we have for example this
picture here where you see the difference between generative model and a generative process I think
I have more things in this slide could you just yeah okay so then we have this distinction that
should be made between a generative model and the generative process and why so well because
the generative model may or may not converge with the generative process and that's sort
of what I wanted to highlight now um next slide yeah so the organism the organism's model includes
a range of hypotheses about a hidden state which does not necessarily include the true value of
the hidden state of the generative process the generative process is as you will see here in
the picture the generative process is the world right is how things are in the world right and
the generative model is how I think that things are right so um it includes the way that I think
that things are in the world includes a range of hypotheses about the world but those hypotheses
do not necessarily include the true value of the world of the generative process right um
there's so many much other. So the models we use to explain our sensorium may include hidden
states that do not exist in the outside world and vice versa. So in short what these means is that
there does not necessarily need to be an isomorphic match between the generative process and the
generative model. So that's the gist here. Next slide. So this is where action becomes extremely
interesting and extremely relevant because action is what is in the middle between generative model
and generative process. So that's where we get active inference and at least I think it's the
most interesting thing in active inference framework as opposed to other competing explanations
or frameworks. So because action is generated on the basis of the inferences made under a
generative model right but we just said that the generative model does not necessarily include the
true states of affairs of the generative process but notably action is generated on the basis of
the inferences made under a generative model. Next slide. So action is part of the generative
process in the sense of it is true action that we make changes in the world. So action is really
that interesting thing that is between the generative model and the generative process.
Action is generated under the generative model which does not necessarily match isomorphically
with the generative process and yet action is what is influencing the generative process.
Action is what is influencing the world. Okay so the interesting point here is that despite
action being selected from the inferences drawn under a model that is not necessarily accurate
as we said it is this action that is going to affect the generative process. Okay next one.
So action can be formulated as the minimization of the discrepancy between the
generative model and the generative process. So it is not only that thing that is sitting
in the middle between generative model and generative process but it is actually what
can be used and is used to minimize the discrepancy between generative model and
generative process. Next one. So this is the point that I wanted to make on the FEP
and now I want to get us back to think about the FEP and the realism debate and see whether there
are some interesting points or things to consider and think about. Next slide. Okay so let's think
about the free energy principle under the realism debate and let's think about the free energy
principle under the option one of realism where the idea was so to say in the definition was that
models are accurate representations. Okay so if we think about the FEP and the realism debate
of the first option then we would have to say that generative models are inaccurate representations
because they do not necessarily hold accuracy about the generative process. So we could say that
okay so then the generative models constructed under the FEP they are realistic representations
with some kind of form of minimal form of realism some minimal form of structuralism and similarity
because well they are generative models are representations of generative processes they're
just not accurate they're inaccurate representations and they work so that could be one way to do that
and this is sort of what I think that Kirschhoff, Kivostain and Robertson
think in their paper but I would be also keen to hear their thoughts about that. Next.
Yeah so the reason that I say that is because once we look at their paper in the literalist
fallacy and FEP model building scientific realism and instrumentalism so we saw before
in one of the slides when I was presenting a realism debate that one way of defining realism
is that the mappings between the model and the target allow to convert
truths found in the model into claims about the target system so in this case would be the mappings
between the FEP model allow to convert truths found in the FEP model into claims about the target
system which be an adaptive system and then we find this for example no sorry let me just yeah
thank you and then we find for example this passage in the paper similarity we have argued for
above between the properties of the generative model and adaptive behavior such that one can
capture real statistical relations in the world which is the generative process as we just said
by means of generative modeling so it seems that in their paper that's precisely where they're
situated in the literature which is precisely on the first claim by realism where there is a similarity
between the generative model and the generative process but as we saw just now the generative
model does not necessarily need to be accurate about the generative process next one
yeah which is precisely what I was saying an organisms model includes a range of hypotheses
about the hidden state which do not necessarily include the truth value or the true value of the
hidden state of the generative process there is not necessarily an isomorphic match of the model
of the generative model and the generative process or of the organisms and the world right okay next
so then the second option would be the anti-realist option so what we said about
generally speaking we looked at three different ways but what we said was that
generative models are empirically adequate so we talked about oh they're viable models
and not really true models about scientific phenomenon of interest they are empirically
adequate to the extent and if they allow us to learn more about the target system and if they
allow us to make predictions about the target system then they are quite viable they're quite okay
so that's the anti-realist view and in the case of this anti-realist view
then representation or matching accuracy is not an issue because models represent in the way that
they are used or we use them to form or generate understanding about a target system
next yeah okay yeah okay so this anti-realism would be this anti-realism about FEP would be
very much in line with for example this brilliant work by Albert Einstein on mathematics and geometry
geometry and experience that will be perfectly aligned because what what he says there is that
well models are empirically adequate and this is more or less and models will be more or less
adequate and this is important to define what we mean by adequacy right that's the next question
then we more and more or less adequate depending not on accuracy so not on how much the generative
model matches the generative process so not on accuracy but on whether or not it minimizes
free energy so it is in the sense of whether or not the model is being used allows the minimization
of free energy and much less on whether the model being used matches the reality
so that's a little bit of a twist there next slide
so then then this non-realist FEP would also be very much in line with for example
complex and dynamical systems theory because as we know it is organisms as complex systems that
persist by seemingly to defy the second laws of course they don't really literally defy the second
law of thermodynamics but they seem to defy that law of thermodynamics that dictates or prescribes
that they should tend to dissipation on chaos but as we observe behavior in the wild and in the world
we see that living organisms adaptive systems they don't do that they don't persist to or they
don't succumb to the second law right so they are extremely complex and dynamic in the sense that
their behavior is quite adaptive and that's what makes them so interesting so in this sense if our
FEP models are virtues not by virtue of them being accurate in the sense that they literally match
isomorphically with generative process but by virtue of whether or not the model allows the
system to minimize free energy then they'll be very much in line with the complex systems theory
it would also be I believe in line with an activism theory which I'm not sure if everyone
in the room is acquainted with but it's without there's been some some attempts to make these
links between the FEP and inactivism and I think that given other work that I've done in the past
I think that the only viable way of really making this bridge logically sound is through a non-realist
FEP a realist FEP is much more harder to argue for in their bridge or connection with inactivism
so by the I'm sure that more most of us are acquainted with it inactivism states that
living beings enact a world to adjust and adapt biologically cognitively and culturally
to the world okay next slide yeah so then this is very much it we've we've covered now the three
points I wanted to talk about next slide and I just want to conclude by by sort of like laying
out what the options are for us in this particular debate that has become very lively debate in the
last one year or so so when we start from the high road and this is important to convey it's not
starting from the low road it's starting from the high road so when we start from the high road to
the FEP so when we start from the observation of how biological systems adaptive systems behave
and then we have two flows we have science options which is how do we model these systems
and how to think the models by which we explain living adaptive behavior okay so we can take
the realist take on it on our models and say well there is realistic representations our models
literally match isomorphically by different philosophical strategies or arguments they
literally match the behavior that we observe and by the same reasoning we can also say that the
organisms behaving in the wild they also behave and adapt by virtue of possessing models that
literally match the world around them so that's one option the other option is the anti-realist
option which is to say that the models that we as scientists have the FEP models as well as the
models that we as living beings have they allow us to interact with the environment understand
the environment because they are empirically adequate not because they accurately represent
the generative process so these are the two options that I just wanted to highlight today
I think this is my last slide yeah okay thank you so much for your time and of course I'm very
much keen to hear your all your thoughts and questions
