During the COVID lockdown, this headline went viral.
Nearly half of men say they do most of the homeschooling.
3% of women agree. I bring this up not to debate who's right, but because it's a
great example of something called egocentric bias.
Most people think they do most of the work. For example,
researchers have asked authors of multi-author papers
what percentage of the work they personally did. And when they add up
those percentages, the sum is on average 140%.
When couples are asked to estimate how much of the housework they do,
the combined total is almost always over 100%.
Now you might think this is because people want to appear more helpful than
they actually are. But that's not it. When couples are asked
what fraction of the fights they start or how much of the mess is theirs,
the total is again over 100. People think they do more of the work,
but they also think they cause more of the problems. So why is this?
I think it's simply because you experience and remember vividly all of
what you do, but not all of what everyone else does.
So naturally you overestimate your own contributions and underestimate others.
And I think this bias leads us to underestimate the influence of
other things on our lives, like the role luck plays in our success.
Take hockey players for example. If you ask a professional hockey player how they
managed to reach the NHL, they might mention their hard
work, determination, great coaches, their parents'
willingness to get up at 5am and so on, but they probably won't
acknowledge how lucky they were to be born in January.
And yet in many years 40% of hockey players selected into top tier leagues
are born in the first quarter of the year, compared to just 10%
in the fourth quarter. An early birthday can make you up to four
times as likely to be a pro hockey player. And the reason for this
disparity is presumably because the cutoff date for kids hockey leagues is
January 1st. Those born in the first part of the year
are a little older and so on average bigger and faster than kids in their
league born late in the year. Now as they grow up this difference should
eventually shrink to nothing, but it doesn't.
Because the young kids who share the most promise are given more time on the ice
and enter more tournaments where they receive better coaching and improve
their skills. And these advantages compound year after
year, so by the time you get to the pros, birthdays are heavily skewed towards
the start of the year. But does any professional hockey player
feel thankful for their birthday? Probably not.
And we are all like that, largely oblivious to the fortunate events that
support our success. Probably the most significant bit of luck
many of us enjoy is being born into a prosperous country.
Around half the variance in income received by people around the world is
explained by their country of residence and that country's income distribution.
If you were born in Burundi, for example, which has the world's lowest gross
national income per capita of just $730 a year, it doesn't
matter how smart or hardworking you are, you're unlikely to earn much as an
adult. Now many people get offended if you
point out how big a role chance plays in their success.
And I get it, if we are just a product of our circumstances
then our hard work and our talent seem to count for nothing.
People think it has to be either skill or luck that explains success.
But the truth is you need both. Take these eight track and field world records.
All the athletes who achieved these records are obviously world class,
extremely dedicated and talented, and yet when they achieved their world records
seven out of eight had a tailwind. Now these athletes all had the ability to
win a gold medal, but to set the world record required a bit of luck as well.
The importance of luck increases the greater the number of applicants
applying for just a few spaces. Consider the most recent class of NASA
astronauts. From over 18,300 applicants in 2017
only 11 were selected and went on to graduate from the astronaut training
program. And we can make a toy model of the selection
process. Let's assume that astronauts are selected
mostly based on skill, experience and hard work,
but also say 5% as a result of luck, fortunate circumstances.
For each applicant I randomly generated a skill score out of 100
and I also randomly generated a luck score out of 100.
Then I added those numbers together weighted in the 95 to 5 ratio to get
an overall score. This score represents the
selector's judgments meaning the top 11 by this metric
would become astronauts. And I repeated this simulation
a thousand times representing a thousand different astronaut selections
and what I found was the astronauts who were picked
very lucky. They had an average luck score of 94.7.
So how many of the selected astronauts would have been in the top 11
based on skill alone? The answer was on average only 1.6.
That means even with luck accounting for just 5% of the outcome
9 or maybe 10 of the 11 applicants selected
would have been different if luck played no role at all.
When competition is fierce being talented and hardworking is important
but it's not enough to guarantee success you also need to catch a break.
Largely I think we're unaware of our good luck because by definition
it's not something we did like the housework done by your significant other
it goes unappreciated. And here's the crazy thing
downplaying the importance of chance events may actually improve your
probability of success because if you perceive an outcome to be
uncertain you're less likely to invest effort in it which further
decreases your chances of success. So it's a useful delusion to believe
you are in full control of your destiny. I mean if I had known how bad I was when
I started YouTube or how much work it would take
I might have given up right then. Welcome to Veritasium, an online science
video blog. Now there may be another benefit to
overlooking your lucky breaks which is it makes it easier to justify your
place in society. If you have a lot of wealth or power
you can just chalk it up to your own intelligence effort and perseverance
it makes it easier to accept inequality. In one experiment participants were
put in groups of three in small rooms to discuss a complex moral problem
and one person in each group was randomly designated the team leader.
Half an hour later the experimenter came by with four cookies for each team
so who got the extra cookie? In each case it went to the team leader
even though they had no special aptitude they didn't have extra
responsibilities and they'd gotten their position through chance alone.
Once you have achieved a certain status it seems natural to feel like you
deserve it and all the other good things that come your way.
Now this is just an anecdote but whenever I've been upgraded to fly a
business class I've always observed the worst behavior in my fellow
privileged passengers they just act so entitled and uncourteous
and research has found evidence for this as well.
In another experiment participants were asked to think of a good thing that
happened to them recently and then one group was asked to list their own
personal qualities or actions that made that good thing happen.
Another group was asked to list external factors beyond their control
that led to the event and a control group was simply asked to list reasons why
the good thing happened. Now for completing this task participants
were told they would be paid a dollar but at the end they were offered the
option to donate some or all of the money to a charity.
Results showed those who listed their own personal attributes contributed
25% less than those who listed external factors beyond their control.
Now think of what all this means for people in our society specifically for
people in positions of power like business leaders and politicians.
Now undoubtedly most of them are talented and hard-working
but they have also been luckier than most and like most of us
they don't realize just how lucky they are and this gives them a distorted view
of reality. They're kind of living in a form of
survivor bias. All these leaders have worked hard and
ultimately succeeded so to them the world appears fair.
In their experience it rewards hard work but what they don't have
is the experience of all the people who have worked hard and failed.
So what are they to make of people less successful than themselves?
Well the natural conclusion is that they must just be less talented or less
hard-working and this perspective makes them less
inclined to be generous to give back and they are the ones who set the rules for
how society operates and this is particularly unfortunate
since one of the main ways many of us are lucky is in our country of
residence but what is a country except for the things
put there by people who came before the roads and the schools public transport
emergency services clean air and water everything like that.
It seems a cruel trick of our psychology that successful people without any
malice will credit their success largely to their own hard work and
ingenuity and therefore contribute less to maintaining the very
circumstances that made that success possible in the first place.
The good news is that acknowledging our fortunate circumstances
not only brings us more in line with reality it also makes us more likeable.
In a study where people had to read the transcript of a fictional 60 minutes
interview with a biotech entrepreneur, experimenters tried changing just the
last paragraph where the interviewee is talking about the reasons for their
company's success. In one version the entrepreneur personally
takes credit for the success they've had but in the other he says luck
played a significant role. Now people who read the luck version of the
transcript judged the entrepreneur as kinder and thought they'd be more
likely to be close friends with him than those who read the other version of
the transcript and raising our awareness of
fortunate events can also make us happier because it allows us to feel
gratitude. Personally I am grateful to Michael
Stevens of Vsauce who on October 7th 2012 posted the video
How Much Does a Shatter Way which shouts out my slow-motion slinky drop video
and within three days my subscribers had increased by a third and within a
month they had doubled leading me to quit my part-time job and work
exclusively on youtube videos. And I'm grateful to the writer of the
free newspaper they give out on the trains in Sydney who didn't quite
understand electricity leading me to post this picture of their
article to my instagram with a caption what's wrong with this picture
and I'm lucky that the first person to answer correctly was a beautiful woman
who became my future wife. Yep that is how I met your mother.
Now initially I wanted to make this video just to say
our circumstances and psychology conspire to make us oblivious to our own
luck and this leads successful people to view the world as fair
and those less successful than them as less talented or less hardworking
and this is before you factor in any discrimination or prejudice
but it also became apparent to me that I should talk about what to do if you
want to be successful in such a world and I think the best advice
is paradoxical. First you must believe that you are in
complete control of your destiny and that your success comes down only to your
own talent and hard work but second you've got to know
that's not true for you or anyone else so you have to remember if you do
achieve success that luck played a significant role
and given your good fortune you should do what you can to increase the luck
of others.
Hey so I had an idea for what I could do to increase the luck of others and that
is to give away a hundred Snatems kits to people who couldn't otherwise afford
them. So if you didn't know Snatems is a product
that I invented and kick-started five years ago.
It's a molecular modeling kit where all the atoms snap together magnetically.
Now I made it because I really wanted to tackle the misconception that bonds
store energy. They don't it takes energy to break them
and you can feel that with Snatems. Recently I completely retooled Snatems
so there are small holes where the magnets are. This allows them to touch
directly increasing the bonding strength so you can form bigger
more stable molecules. I call these Snatems X
and yes they are backwards compatible with original Snatems
so here's my idea for the next month you can buy Snatems for 10% off using the
code give luck and for each one sold I will give a
kit to someone who can't afford one up to a limit of a hundred so I'll put links
and more details in the description and I really want to thank you for
watching and thank you for all my good luck.
