This is the most dangerous problem in mathematics, one that young mathematicians are warned
not to waste their time on.
It's a simple conjecture that not even the world's best mathematicians have been able
to solve.
Paul Erdisch, a famous mathematician, said,
Mathematics is not yet ripe enough for such questions.
Here's how it works.
Pick a number, any number.
Seven?
Good choice.
Okay, we're going to apply two rules.
If the number is odd, we multiply by three and add one.
So three times seven is twenty-one plus one is twenty-two.
If the number is even, we divide by two.
So twenty-two divided by two is eleven.
Now we keep applying these two rules.
Eleven is odd, so we multiply by three, thirty-three and add one, thirty-four.
Even divide by two, seventeen, odd.
Multiply by three, fifty-one, add one, fifty-two, even.
Divide by two, twenty-six, still even.
Divide by two, thirteen, odd.
So we multiply by three, thirty-nine, add one, and that's forty, which is even.
So we divide by two, twenty, divide by two, ten, divide by two, five, odd.
Multiply by three, fifteen, add one, sixteen, divide by two, that's eight, and then four,
two, and one.
Now one is odd, so we multiply by three and add one, which equals four, but four goes
to two, goes to one, so we're in a loop, and the lowest number is one.
Now the conjecture is this.
Every positive integer, if you apply these rules, will eventually end up in the four-two-one
loop.
This is commonly called the Collatz conjecture after German mathematician Lothar Collatz,
who may have come up with it in the 1930s, but the problem has many origin stories and
many names.
It's also known as the Ulam conjecture, Kakutani's problem, Thwait's conjecture, Hass's algorithm,
the Syracuse problem, and simply 3n plus one.
Why is 3x plus one so famous?
Among professional mathematicians, maybe it's not famous but infamous, in the sense that
if someone actually admits in public that they're working on it, then there's something
wrong with them.
The numbers you get by applying 3x plus one are called hailstone numbers, because they
go up and down like hailstones in a thunder cloud, but eventually they all fall down to
one, or at least we think they do.
You can think of the numbers as representing the height above the ground in meters, so
a number like 26 would start 26 meters above the ground, and if you apply 3x plus one,
it rises up as high as 40 meters, and in total it takes 10 steps to get to one.
So 10 is called its total stopping time.
But take the very next number, 27, and it bounces around all over the place.
In fact, it climbs all the way up to 9232.
As an altitude, that is higher than Mount Everest, before it too falls back to the ground.
In total, it takes 111 steps for 27 to get down to one, and end up in the 421 loop.
The paths that different numbers take vary so widely, even numbers right next to each
other.
So how do you even start to make progress on this problem?
Well, honestly, mathematicians struggled.
People just decided that this was something invented by the Soviets to slow down US science,
and it was doing a good job at it, because everybody's sitting there twiddling their
thumbs and making no progress on this trivial thing that you can tell school children.
Jeffrey Legarius is the world authority on 3x plus one.
The first time I met him, I was a senior in college, and he pulled me aside and he said,
don't do this.
Don't work on this problem.
If you want to have a career, do not start spending time writing about this, or publishing
any papers about this.
Do real math for a while to establish yourself.
Alex Conturovich didn't listen.
He and Yakov Sinai looked at the paths of the hailstone numbers.
Were there any patterns?
Well, obviously, all of them end up at one, but what about the paths they take to get
there?
The pattern is randomness.
Here is the sequence of a large number chosen at random.
The graph peaks, and then drops so low that you can't really see what's happening at
this scale.
But if you take the logarithm, you find this wiggly graph with a downward trend.
It looks kind of like the stock market on a bad day.
And this is no coincidence.
Both are examples of geometric Brownian motion.
That means if you take the log and remove the linear trend, the fluctuations are random.
It's like flipping a coin each step.
If the coin is heads, the line goes up, tails, it goes down.
3x plus one is just like the random wiggles of the stock market.
Over long enough periods, the stock market tends to trend upwards, while 3x plus one
trends down.
Another way to analyze 3x plus one is by looking at the leading digit of each number in a sequence.
Here are the hailstone numbers starting with three as the seed.
And we can count up how many numbers start with a one, how many start with a two, how
many start with a three, and so on to make a histogram.
We can do the same thing for the sequence that starts with four.
That's a short one.
And for the sequences that start with five, six, and seven.
Again, for each sequence, we're just counting up how many numbers start with each digit,
one through nine, and adding that to our histogram.
If you keep doing this for more and more numbers, eventually the histogram settles into a stable
pattern.
For the first billion sequences, you'll find one is by far the most common leading digit.
30% of all numbers start with one.
And 17.5% start with two, 12% start with three.
And the frequency decreases for higher digits.
Fewer than 5% of all the numbers start with nine.
Now this pattern is not unique to 3x plus one.
It actually comes up everywhere, from the populations of countries to the value of companies,
all the physical constants and the Fibonacci numbers just to name a few.
The distribution is known as Benford's Law.
It is even used to detect fraud.
If all the numbers on your income tax forms obey Benford's Law, then you're probably
being honest.
If not, you may be hiding something.
In elections, Benford's Law can be used to spot irregularities, though you have to apply
it correctly.
Benford's Law works best when the numbers involved span several orders of magnitude,
as they do for 3x plus one.
But Benford's Law can't tell us whether all numbers will end up in the four to one
loop or not.
For that, we need a different sort of analysis.
At first glance, it seems strange that when you apply 3x plus one, all numbers should
end up at one.
I mean, consider that there are the same number of odd and even numbers, but odd numbers are
more than tripled, while even numbers are only cut in half.
Therefore, it seems like every sequence on average should grow, not shrink.
But here's the catch.
Every time you multiply an odd number by three and then add one, it will always become an
even number.
And that means the next step is to divide by two.
So odd numbers are not actually tripled by 3x plus one, they're increased by a factor
of about three over two.
I'm neglecting the plus one because it's insignificant for large numbers.
And three halves is actually the most an odd number can grow in one step.
Think of the path from one odd number in a sequence to the next odd number.
After multiplying by three and adding one, you have an even number.
And 50% of the time dividing by two brings you back to an odd number.
But a quarter of the time you can divide by four before you get to the next odd number.
So for a quarter of numbers, the next one in the sequence will be three fourths of its
initial value.
And eighth of the time you can divide by eight before getting to the next odd number.
And a sixteenth of the time you can divide by sixteen and so on.
If you take the geometric mean, you find on average to get from one odd number to the
next one, you multiply by three over four, which is less than one.
So statistically speaking, three x plus one sequences are more likely to shrink than grow.
Take 341 for example, multiply by three and add one, you get 1024, which you can divide
by two, and then divide by two again, and again, and again, and again, ten times in
total until you're down to one.
One way to visualize these paths of numbers in three x plus one is simply to show how
each number connects to the next one in its sequence.
This is called a directed graph.
It looks like a tree or a series of little streams that flow into each other.
If the conjecture is true, it means that every single number is connected to this graph.
Every tiny stream all the way out to infinity eventually flows into the massive river of
four to one.
Some mathematicians have modified this visualization by rotating the graph at each number, anticlockwise
if it's an odd number, and clockwise if it's even.
And then you end up with a structure that looks like a coral or seaweed.
And by adjusting the degree of rotation for odd and even numbers, you can create these
beautiful organic looking shapes.
Now there are two ways the conjecture could be false.
There could be a number somewhere, some seed, that starts a sequence of numbers that grows
to infinity.
Or whatever reason, it doesn't obey the same numerical gravity as all of the other numbers.
Another possibility is there exists a sequence of numbers that forms a closed loop.
All the numbers in this loop would be unconnected to the main graph.
But thus far, no loop or sequence that shoots off to infinity has been found.
And not for lack of trying.
Mathematicians have tested by brute force every single number up to two to the sixty
eight.
That's 295 quintillion 147 quadrillion 905 trillion 179 billion 352 million 825 thousand
856 numbers.
We know for certain that every single one of those numbers eventually comes back down
to one.
We have tested nearly 300 quintillion numbers, and none of them disproves the conjecture.
In fact, given this information, mathematicians calculate that any loop other than 421 must
be at least 186 billion numbers long.
So it seems pretty likely that the conjecture is true, but this doesn't prove it.
One way mathematicians have attempted to prove it is by making a scatter plot with all the
seed numbers on the x-axis and a number from each seed's sequence on the y-axis.
Now if you can show that in every 3x plus one sequence, there is a number that is smaller
than the original seed, well then you have proven the collat's conjecture.
Because whatever number you pick, you know it will at some point get smaller, and that
smaller number as a seed also gets smaller, and so on down to one.
Meaning the only way any sequence can end is in the 421 loop.
This has not yet been shown.
In 1976, Rihoteras was able to show that almost all collat sequences reach a point below their
initial value.
In 1979, this limit was reduced with almost all numbers going to less than x to the power
of 0.869, and then in 1994 it was further lowered to less than x to the power of 0.7925.
In this case, the term almost all numbers has a technical mathematical definition.
It means that as the numbers you're looking at go to infinity, the fraction that end up
under the curve goes to 1.
Then in 2019, one of the world's greatest living mathematicians, Terry Tao, was able
to show 3x plus one obeys even stricter criteria.
He showed almost all numbers will end up smaller than any arbitrary function f of x, so long
as that function goes to infinity as x goes to infinity.
The function can rise as slowly as you like, so log x is an example, or log log x works
too, or log log log log log x.
What this means is for almost all numbers, you can guarantee that there is an arbitrarily
small number somewhere in its sequence.
In a public talk he gave in 2020, Terry Tao said, this is about as close as one can get
to the collat's conjecture without actually solving it.
This is an impressive result, but it's still not a proof.
So why can't we prove the conjecture true?
Could it be because it's not true?
I mean, everyone is trying to prove it true, which means almost no one is looking for counter
examples.
It happened to me just two years ago, where there was something I was trying to prove
that I was trying for three years to prove, and I couldn't get it to work.
And then I found a counter example, and then I realized what the correct statement should
have been, and then a month later I proved the correct statement.
Maybe we should be spending more energy looking for counter examples than we're currently
spending.
I mean, remember how the number 27 grows all the way to 9232?
Here is a plot of seed numbers up to 10,000, with the largest number reached for each seed
plotted on the y-axis.
The y-axis stops at 100,000, but not all numbers can be shown at this scale.
The seed 9,663, for example, climbs as high as 27 million.
And as yet, no one has proven why a number couldn't just shoot off to infinity.
And it would take only one to disprove the conjecture.
Or some set of numbers could be part of a loop, not connected to the main graph.
As far as we know, there is only one loop, 421.
But something strange happens if you include negative numbers.
Using the same 3x plus 1 rules as before, there is not one loop.
Not two loops, but three independent loops of numbers.
And they start at low values, like minus 17 and minus 5.
Why should there be disconnected loops on the negative side of the number line, but
not on the positive side?
Now one of the most convincing pieces of evidence supporting the conjecture is Terry
Tows proved that almost all numbers have a number in their sequence that is arbitrarily
small.
But proving that almost all numbers obey this criteria isn't the same thing as proving
that all numbers do.
How many numbers between 1 and 100 are perfect squares?
The answer is 10.
So 10% of numbers up to 100 are perfect squares.
How many numbers between 1 and 1,000 are perfect squares?
The answer is 31.
So only 3.1% of the numbers up to 1,000 are perfect squares.
And the higher you go, the smaller this percentage becomes.
Such that in the limit, you could say almost all numbers are not perfect squares.
The fraction of numbers that are not perfect squares goes to 1 as x goes to infinity.
And yet we know there are an infinite number of perfect squares and we know exactly where
they are.
Now we've tested by brute force all numbers up to 2 to the 68 and they all obey the call
out's conjecture.
And you might be thinking that well we should have found a counter example by this point.
But on the scale of all numbers, 2 to the 68 is nothing.
I mean the Paulia conjecture proposed in 1919 by George Paulia asserted that the majority
of natural numbers up to any given number have an odd number of prime factors.
The conjecture was eventually proven false by C. Brian Hasselgrove in 1958 when he identified
a counter example.
What's remarkable is the value of this counter example was 1.845 times 10 to the 361.
That's some 10 to the 340 times bigger than all the numbers checked for 3x plus 1.
One way to think about 3x plus 1 is as though it's a simple program run on a Turing machine.
The seed number is the input to the machine.
So in this picture, 2 to the 68 is simply an input tape 68 squares long.
You can think of them as a string of 1's and 0's or black and white squares.
Saying that the machine has transformed every input up to this 68 square tape down to 1
should not give you a lot of confidence that it will do so for all inputs.
In fact, it's fairly simple to calculate a number that shows any arbitrary behavior
you like, so long as it is finite.
If you want a number that increases by 3 over 2 five consecutive times, you can calculate
that number.
If you want a number that climbs by 3 over 2 ten times in a row, or a hundred times or
a thousand times, you can easily calculate those numbers.
But after the finite section you specify, you have no more control, and every number
that has ever been tested always falls to 1.
If there is a counter example, it's virtually impossible that someone's going to guess it.
And the space of all possibilities is too big to search exhaustively by brute force.
2 to the thousand is not a searchable space.
So if we're going to find it, we have to find it by some intelligent process and not by
guess and check.
I had been on team 3x plus 1 for 20 years, and then at this point of view, I realized
that like, what do we really know?
It's very hard to prove a theorem that's false.
And so could it be that everyone's struggling to prove this thing because it's not actually
true?
And 2 to the 60 is not a lot of evidence.
And even the statistical version is maybe true and not evidence for the non-existence
of a divergent trajectory somewhere in the 3x plus 1 sequence.
Of course, there is another option, and that is that we'll never know, that the problem
is undecidable.
In 1987, John Conway created a generalization of 3x plus 1.
It was a mathematical machine that he called Fractran, and he was able to show this machine
is Turing complete, which means it can do anything a modern computer can do.
But it also means that it's subject to the halting problem, a chance that the machine
never stops running and so doesn't give you an output.
And this does not prove that 3x plus 1 is also subject to the halting problem, but it
is possible that given what we know, we may never prove the call-outs conjecture true
or false.
You're going to be taught in school that we know a bunch of stuff, and it's a lie.
They're all lies.
Here's this stupid little problem, come on, really we can't solve this, really?
You know, it just shows that math is hard.
If anything, it shows that all of the things that we can solve are miracles.
We have no right to have solutions to all these other problems.
For my whole life, I've thought of numbers as these incredibly regular things, full of
patterns, symmetry, and repetition.
But what I'm realizing only now is just how peculiar numbers really are.
You can see this most clearly in the choral representation.
From a simple mathematical operation comes something intricate, organic looking, and
thus far intractable to us.
Do all numbers connect to this structure?
Or is there some unique filament, a spindly little thread that doesn't connect to any
of this, that runs off to infinity?
And why is it so hard to tell?
I think that's why Paul Erdorff said, mathematics is not yet ripe enough for such questions.
What I love about 3x plus 1 is it's a problem almost anyone can understand and play around
And actually trying to figure things out for yourself is the best way to learn.
Which is why I subscribe to Brilliant, the sponsor of this video.
Now recently, Brilliant have upped their interactivity.
For example, here is a great lesson on the Pythagorean theorem.
So you don't just remember the formula, but you really understand what it means.
Now Brilliant is a website and an app designed to get you thinking deeply by engaging you
in problem solving.
It's one thing to read through a textbook and think that you get it, but it's quite
another to play with interactives and actually test yourself as you go.
And Brilliant curates the experiences so they get more and more challenging over time.
There's always a helpful tip or explanation that takes your understanding to the next
level.
I'd highly recommend their course on mathematical fundamentals, which now has even more interactivity
and it has topics that are relevant to all areas of STEM.
And algorithm fundamentals for anyone interested in coding.
It's great to have a resource like this to inspire you to learn something new every single
day.
I try to start off my day by challenging myself with Brilliant.
And so if you'd like to join me and a community of 8 million other learners, go to brilliant.org
slash veritasium.
I will put that link down in the description.
So I want to thank Brilliant for sponsoring this video and I want to thank you for watching.
