So, where are we now? We have an understanding of earth systems. We know how earth systems
evolve through time, through deep geological time. But what we now need in order to adequately
read earth's story is a tool that's going to ensure that when we're talking about geological
time, wherever we are in the world, we're on the same geological page in time.
For example, consider the stories of the dinosaurs, which existed in a period called the Mesozoic
and died around 65 million years ago. If I'm going to try and tell that story, I'm going
to have to make sure that I'm at that particular period of the story here in Montana, but also
we're over here in Mongolia. Because unless I'm doing that, I'm not going to be able to
tell an adequate global story. The problem is a problem of correlation.
So in this lecture, I'd like to ask, what are the problems with correlation? Also, how can
fossils act as timepieces and perhaps help us over this problem? And what is biostratigraphy
and how is time today managed scientifically? So, to the first of those, what are the problems
with correlation? Surely, there is no problem with correlation. We know how old rocks are.
I talked about it in the last lecture. We have absolute radiometric dating. All we need
to do is find a mass spectrometer, one of these wonderful scientific machines, put our
rock sample in, push a button and read off the date. No problem. I can tell how old the
rocks are in Montana or Mongolia or anywhere else in the world because I can come up with
a radiometric date. So, no problem of correlation. Oh, if only it were that simple.
You see, the problem is with what we actually date. Remember, we're measuring a ratio between
the unstable parent and stable daughter material. And that's critical if we're going to understand
why absolute dating isn't always available. It's because we can only really measure a
ratio of these substances in another class of system. Remember, we talked about open
and closed systems. We now need something that is more akin to what you could call an isolated
system. And as an example here, we can see a picture of the International Space Station.
Now, the International Space Station obviously cannot allow matter in or out of it, apart
from when the astronauts want to get in. But when those doors are sealed, it has to be
hermetically sealed. Also, it really can't afford to allow much change in heat, either
losing too much heat or gaining too much heat. It has to be an isolated and closed system.
In reality, finding a true isolated system is very, very difficult. But we need to get
close to that point if we're going to get no contamination. And contamination is potentially
the problem if you're dealing with radiometric dating. Fortunately, we have things akin to
isolated systems naturally in rocks. This is a thin section of an igneous rock. Now,
an igneous rock is a rock that is crystallized from a cooling magma. And you can see in this
image that looks like a stained glass window, the way the crystals are growing together.
Basically, this thin section has been created by taking a rock and grinding it so thin that
you could actually see light passing through it. And you can see the beautiful structure
of the crystals in there. As those crystals grew when the magma was cooling, though, the
crystals trapped small amounts of radioactive parent material within their crystal structure,
effectively isolating them from the rest of the igneous rock. And within then that isolated
crystal system, that radioactive parent material could then decay into the daughter material.
We have our isolated system within which our clock is ticking. So, again, what's the problem?
The problem is this. Over 75% of rocks on the surface of our planet aren't igneous rocks.
They're sedimentary rocks. The sedimentary rocks contain the majority of the environmental
evidence and the fossil evidence that we're trying to peel apart to tell Earth's history.
So we really need to be able to date sedimentary rocks. You can see here a thin section of a
sandstone. You can see that it looks very different to that thin section that I showed
you of an igneous rock. The sandstone here is composed of fragments. That's because a
sedimentary sandstone is a composed of a rock that has been eroded from a pre-existing rock,
transported, and then deposited elsewhere. So we don't see fine crystals. We see fragmented
crystals or fragmented parts of other rocks. Even if we were to find a complete crystal that
hadn't been cracked open and therefore contaminated, it really wouldn't do us any good. Because if
we were to date that crystal accurately, all it would date for us was the time of formation of
the rock from which this sediment was derived. It wouldn't time the deposition of this sediment.
So we have a problem. We have lots of sedimentary rocks and it would appear no way to date them.
So how can we correlate between areas? How can we correlate between areas where we have just
sediments and really no igneous rocks at all? Well, in an area like this, it's not that difficult.
Again, this is the wonderful Grand Canyon and you can basically take your finger and you can
trace a sedimentary horizon along for many, many miles, maybe tens of miles at times. But
this is going to become a problem when you want to move out of the area that the Grand Canyon
occupies. So you want to correlate a particular sandstone rock between the Grand Canyon and say
Bryce Canyon. Sure, you might find a rock in Bryce Canyon that looks very similar to a rock that
you saw in the Grand Canyon. It might be the same grain size. It might be the same color. It might
be the same thickness of sedimentary horizon. But could you with your hand on your heart say that
it was exactly the same rock? Obviously, you can't. There's a lot of distance between Bryce Canyon
and the Grand Canyon where there's no rock exposure at all. So there's no way you could be sure that
you're looking at the same geological horizon. So how do we get over this problem of correlation?
Because if we have no correlation, we have no global earth story. The solution back in the
history of science would have to wait until people came to a better understanding of exactly what
these are. I don't mean an ammonite. I mean the fossil in general. So how can fossils act as
timepieces then? How can they help us with correlation? Well, let's consider what a fossil
actually is. Herodotus, a Greek philosopher, had a fairly good idea what a fossil was. Fossils were
representations of former living organisms. It's our modern view. But as we move out of the classical
area and into the Middle Ages, things started to get a little bit messy. In the Middle Ages, people
had some very odd ideas as to what fossils actually were. They thought they were produced by something
that they called plastic forces. These were undefined forces within the earth that were
continually trying to form life. Fossils represented the failed remains of the spontaneous generation
of new life forms. Or in some other cases, they thought of them as the vital essence of living
things that has somehow imprinted themselves on the rock. Father, fanciful and interesting for a
fairy story, but very, very far from the truth, obviously. Various people would modernize this
view, of course. And perhaps one of the most famous was another one of my heroes. This is
Leonardo da Vinci. Leonardo da Vinci commonly found himself walking through hillsides and
mountain sides and would commonly find fossils in rocks on the top of these mountains. Fossil
clams in particular draw his attention. He made two conclusions about this. He said,
in agreement with Herodotus, these fossil clams are evidence of former life, which are now preserved
in stone through some sort of process. He also concluded that the reason you are finding fossil
seashells on the top of mountains is because those sea beds had been raised to the levels of the
mountains. That was a fairly profound thought for some money in Leonardo da Vinci's day.
People criticized da Vinci. He said, well, what you're just looking at here is evidence of the
flood. The flood came along and it washed these seashells onto the top of the mountains.
Leonardo's retort was basic logic. He said, if you had a flood occurring and rain falling down on
the mountain tops, surely all the material would be washed away from the mountains and down into
the ocean basins, not up onto them. With regard to ideas such as plastic forces, Leonardo concluded
that such an opinion, he said, could not exist in a brain of much reason, sounding not unlike one
of my former paleontology professors. Steno, someone that we met in a previous lecture, would also
contribute to our understanding of fossil by interpreting certain structures. And these are
the structures he was interpreting. These are fairly small, but they can be found as really
large structures indeed. What are they? Well, plenty of the elder thought that they were
structures that fell from the sky during lunar eclipses. I have no idea why. In the Middle Ages,
they were regarded as the tongs of snakes that St. Paul had turned to stone while he was visiting
Malta, hence their common name of glacipturi or tongstones. It was thought that in order to
counter snake bites or poisoning, all you needed to do was take one of these tongstones, hold them
to your body, or dunk them in the suspect wine that you thought had been poisoned, and the poison
would be magically detoxified. I have no idea who finally did the experiment to find that this
didn't work, but they must have been fairly crossed by the end of it. In 1666, a shark was caught near
Leverno in Tuscany, and the head of that shark was sent to Steno by the Grand Duke of Tuscany,
who probably realized that Steno kind of liked delving around in fairly yucky things. Steno
dissected it with gusto and realized that the tongstones were in fact fossil shark teeth.
In fact, the relationship was already known by quite a number of people that
sharks and tongstones were the same thing, but what Steno managed to realize was that the tongstones,
the shark's teeth which were now stone, had changed from former organic living things
into non-living things by a process, a process that we now know as fossilization,
and we'll deal with that in the next lecture. So now we have some of the basic components in place
for correlation using fossils. We have Steno's principles of stratigraphy, whereby we can
understand the relative ordering of strata. We have the concept of the earth as a really
ancient place, and we have the idea that fossils were once living organisms. The next step would
come from this man. This is William Smith, son of a blacksmith who was born in 1796 in Oxfordshire,
in England. Smith grew up surrounded by fossils. They were everywhere. For example,
this here, this is a fossil sea urchin, commonly used in Oxfordshire at the time,
as weights on scales. In addition, consider these. These are creatures called brachyopods.
They look a bit like clams, but they're actually not. They're actually very different group of
creatures indeed. But you can see how these particular ones are fairly round, and Smith and
children like Smith commonly use these as marbles. So fossils were very much in Smith's mind a lot
of the time. It was an important time as well that Smith was growing up in. It was an important time
for Britain and the Western world. We're looking at the Industrial Revolution, an industrial revolution
that was going to be powered by coal. That coal needed to be moved, though. It needed to be moved
from the coal mines to the areas of industrialisation, and the way that that coal was going to be moved
was by canals. Smith got a job as a canal and mine engineer, and he was working on the Somerset
Coal Field, looking at the mine workings, but also cutting large swathes across the country and
developing these canals, which are going to transport the coal from the Somerset Coal Field.
And that was vital for him, because what he got to see was the geology below the surface,
not just in isolated pits, but in large swathes across the English landscape.
Smith fairly quickly realised that certain strata seemed to be characterised by certain groups of
fossils, and he realised that there was a kind of a regular order in the succession of these
fossils. Certain fossils always occurred stratigraphically above other fossils. This is the basis
of what we call the principle of faunal succession. Basically, it's useful because if we find fossils
in different rocks and we know that certain groups of fossils characterise certain areas
stratigraphically, we can match those groups of fossils, even if we can't trace a stratigraphical
horizon. And if we find the same groups of fossils, and even if they're separated by great
distances, we can assume that they're of the same relative age. We have correlation.
Smith, using this and these other geological insights, would complete the first geological map
of the United Kingdom. In fact, it's one of the first geological maps of anywhere in the world.
He would also produce cross-sections of the country. Basically, a cross-section is imagining
what the rocks are doing in the subsurface, looking at the dip of the rocks and predicting
where they pass into the subsurface. Extremely useful if you want to chase
coal seams or limestone or iron-bearing rocks, all of which were important in the industrial
revolution. The map that Smith would produce is remarkable in another way as well, because if
you take Smith's map and put it next to a modern geological map produced by the British
Geological Survey, they look very, very similar indeed. Now, producing a geological map like
that was not an easy thing to do. Transport infrastructure in Britain at that time was
extremely primitive. Now, I know a lot of my friends and colleagues in North America think of
Britain as being a very small place, but you try walking about it, and that's all really Smith had.
A donkey, a horse, and a whole bunch of countryside with really no major highways at all. So the fact
that he produced such a remarkable and accurate map, it's just really astounding. Smith had other
problems as well. A bit like me, he wasn't very good at balancing his checkbook. He had lots of
problems with his finances. He was a lot more interested in fossil hunting than seeing what
his bank balance was doing. Also, some of the property, which were some of his main financial
resource, burned to the ground. And in addition to that, his wife suffered from various mental
illnesses. Smith wasn't a very lucky man. He had another problem too. It's a problem which
he'll address in other lectures. The fact that in the early days of the development of geology
and science in general, there was a definite social class system in operation. The Geological
Society of London was one of the first geological societies to come into existence in the world.
And it was definitely membership by invitation only. Definitely a gentleman scientist club only
please. Smith, as I pointed out, as a son of a blacksmith, wasn't really talking with the right
accent. To add insult to injury, after Smith tried to woo the Geological Society to accept
him by showing him the wonderful map that they produced, they dutifully came along,
looked at it hummed and hard, and then went back to the Geological Society and made their own map
plagiarise largely from Smith's map and produced it at a much lower cost than Smith was able to.
That much lower price ensured Smith's financial ruin. He couldn't compete. He'd put all his
resources into producing this map. Now, today, if you go into debt, there are various systems
that come into play. You can talk to the bank. There are various government institutions that
will help you. But back then in the 1700s in Britain, there was another way that you dealt
with debt. They threw you in prison. And that's where Smith ended up, in debt as prison.
Ultimately, though, Smith was vindicated and recognised. Later generations of the Geological
Society of London recognised that Smith was a fantastic contributor to the science of geology,
and it is now, I'm happy to say, a very equality based organisation and top notch. They awarded
Smith with the Wooliston Medal, their top award. But what is biostratigraphy now? And how is time
managed scientifically? This is the next question that we have to address if we're going to talk
about a really accurate correlation between areas. We have a fossil based benchmark, thanks to Smith,
using these groups and associations of fossils. But I really want to bring you up to date on the
type of techniques that we use today. And rather than using these groups and associations of fossil
that Smith used for correlation, we tend to use what we call is a fossil range. And I'd like to
show you one in this diagram here. This is a very diagrammatic representation of a fossil range
diagram. On one side of the diagram, you can see there's a cartoon of stratigraphy. Given Steno's
principle, the layers at the bottom are going to be the oldest and the layers at the top are going
to be the youngest. And effectively, what I've done here is record where we find fossils and those
bars represent the range over which stratigraphically those fossils have been discovered. In general,
when you see this type of chart in a scientific publication or in the literature, it looks like
this. They don't usually put the fossils there. You just get these bars with the fossils represented
below them in terms of their name. These ranges are at the core of how we now correlate using
fossils. And this is the science of biostratigraphy, basically using the range of life that has
existed over geological time to help us correlate between vastly separated areas potentially on
the surface of the planet. But just what is a good fossil for correlation purposes? Well,
really, if you're going to correlate using a fossil, it would help if that fossil had a very
short range. In other words, it didn't exist for very long. It came into existence, existed for a
short period, and then went into extinction. That might sound kind of counterintuitive. But
think about what the situation would be, for example, for a fossil brachypod, for example,
one that we call lingular, that came around in about the Cambrian period about 540 million years
ago. And you can still find representations of the species living today. It has a vast geological
range. So if you find a fossil of lingular, all it can tell you is that the rock that you're looking
at is somewhere between that vast range of geological time. Whereas you find a fossil that
has a very restricted range, the resolution is fine. It also helps if that fossil occurs in
more than one environment. So you just don't want it restricted to one particular area or one
particular environmental niche. You want it to be widespread if at all possible. For example,
planktonic creatures would be great for this or creatures that swim in the surface of the ocean.
They become widely distributed and then when they die will fall into many different types of
sedimentary rock where potentially we can find them and use them for correlation. It would help
if the fossils as well that we're looking for are relatively common. It would also help for the ideal
correlation fossil if they are easy to identify as well. As you can see from that long list,
the ideal fossil isn't very easy to come by and sometimes we have to make kind of compromises and
just want to show you how sometimes we have to compromise when we're trying to correlate between
areas. Consider these fossils over here. I have here a graptolite and our old friend the trilobite
that we've met a number of times before. Now we have a problem with these two fossils. Both can
be used for correlation purposes but we have a problem with the graptolites here. I'm going to
tell you about that. Basically graptolites were planktonic creatures but were very delicate.
They floated around out in the ocean and existed in vast numbers. They evolved very rapidly producing
many short-ranging forms and died and fell to the ocean floor preserving lots and lots of fossils
which we can use for global correlation purposes. The problem is is when you get to sediments that
represent shallower water you don't find that many graptolites. They're kind of delicate. They tended
to be smashed up. So how do you correlate from sediments that represent deep water environments
to shallow water environments? The answer is you use the trilobites. You find an area where the
trilobites range geographically and the graptolites range geographically overlapped and then you can
progress from one biostratigraphic scheme of the graptolites into the biostratigraphic scheme
of the trilobites and in that way we can kind of hop our way around the globe correlating potentially
from one group of creatures into the other. Other great fossils for correlation are these ones,
ones that we've met quite a few times already. These are of course the ammonites. They swam in the
ocean and as a result they swam in very many different or above many different environments
and when they die sank to the bottom of the ocean and we find them distributed in many sediments.
They're great for global correlation and they're particularly used to subdivide
the Mesozoic period, the time when dinosaurs are very common.
So less useful are these things. These are bivalves or clams and also these ones over here.
These are the gastropods. These are snails. Now these are fascinating fossils but they tend to
be tied to the substrate that they live in. They tend to live on the ocean floor so that means
they're not going to be as widely distributed so they're not quite as useful for correlation.
They are though very good for identifying specific environmental conditions so a particular gastropod
will have a particular affinity with a particular environment and a particular sediment and
gastropods or clams or other creatures that are dependent on a particular sediment are really
good in helping us build up a picture of those environments. So as you can see the type of
fossils you want to use depends on the kind of job that you're going to use them for but things like
ammonites and graptolites are particularly king when you're talking about correlation.
Why does biostratigraphy work? Well an understanding of why biostratigraphy would work would have to
wait for this man here. This is Charles Darwin who obviously proposed the theory of evolution
through natural selection and it's this that biostratigraphy relies upon. It's the fact that
creatures have come into existence via evolution, have existed for a certain time and then gone
into extinction producing these fossil ranges that is at the heart of global correlation.
This only occurs as I said because this process has been ongoing over time and it's allowed us to
time earth events. Now for many years geologists when they got this idea into their head really
started to set out across the world and start to correlate between regional areas and even
international areas as well. It allowed for a revolution in geology and the development of this
the geological time scale. Scientists like Lyle who we've already mentioned and other
scientists like Murchison and Sedgwick became scientific superstars. It's very difficult to
appreciate how popular and well known they were but they were definitely the hockey or football
stars of their time. Geological time today is policed if you will by the International Union
of Geological Sciences the IUGS. It's this body that determines how that geological time zone
time scale is split up and when a time division actually will be defined. Time boundaries are
also defined in space though at type sections. These are international reference sections
where scientists can compare their particular rocks and fossils to a section that has been set
up as an international section for correlation purposes and here's an example of one. This is
the international reference section for the base of the geological period that we call the Cylurian.
This base of the Cylurian occurs at 443.7 million years ago and the international reference section
is at a place called Dobbs Lynn in Scotland. This is one of those places where the rain
comes at you like this. The base of that period the Cylurian period as is the case with many
geological periods is defined by the first occurrence of a very distinctive fossil and in
this case it's at the distinctive occurrence of a particular graftalite species a species that we
call parachidograptus accuminatus. So as soon as you find parachidograptus accuminatus as indicated
by the red line on this diagram you have left the previous geological period the Ordovician
and you're now an entirely different geological period the Cylurian period. So now with this with
biostratigraphy we have a benchmark using fossils for correlation how about adding some dates to
some of those sediments. Radiometric dating can help us for example in this image that we've already
seen where we see this igneous dike cross-cutting the sediments in the Grand Canyon. We do know by
dating that igneous dike because remember it's an igneous rock it'll contain crystals that we can
date that all the sediments that the dike is cross-cutting must be older than the date that we get
from the igneous dike but there are other things we can do as well. It's a spectacular event this
is the eruption of Mount St Helens I still remember this being talked about on the news
that ash plume that you can see there is basically the fragmented regiments of a magma chamber that
had been ejected up into the atmosphere. Now ash can travel for many hundreds of kilometers in fact
ash can get right up into the atmosphere and travel all around the world so ash layers from
volcanoes can be found many hundreds and hundreds of miles from where they were originally produced.
What's also important to consider about ash is that ash also contains some of those important
little igneous crystals ejected with the ash at the same time so what we can find is when
we're looking at a whole pile of a sedimentary sequence are these ash layers we call them
bentonites they're a kind of a creamy colour and by dating those ash layers we can get a date
within that sedimentary pile and when we find successive volcanic eruptions we can bracket
sediments between them and because geologically speaking volcanoes have been erupting very very
regularly we can produce lots of dates in these sedimentary sequences that we couldn't necessarily
produce a radiometric date for. In our next lecture I'd like to continue to expand our
understanding of fossils. I want to look at how a paleontologist has to be careful in how we're
interpreting fossils because if we're not careful and we go gung-ho at interpreting fossils without
any care to potential biases we could make some rather critical mistakes in our understanding
of past worlds and when we want to reconstruct past worlds we really have to listen to what
the fossils are speaking to us. In our next lecture I want to see how the paleontologist
really has to act as a modern-day detective.
