Hi again. I hope that the lectures that we've done so far have provided you with some of
the tools of the trade, if you want to think about it in that way, that allow us to interpret
the deep geological past. And with that in mind, let's go back to some of the earliest
origins of our planet. I'd like to ask these questions. How did the solar system form and
how can we account for the way it looks today? Also, how did the earth form and how do we
account for the fact that we now live on what is a layered differentiated planet? And how
can these remote events and the formation of the moon have any bearing on the evolution
and development of life on earth? So to the first of those, how did the solar system form
and how can we account for its structure today? Why though, in a course like this, are we
considering a time when the earth was abiotic, lifeless? It's a question I often ask my
students because I do deal with this in a lot of my courses, even courses on paleontology.
Can I very often get the correct answer? The answer is context. Remember, we want to
consider the earth as a system. So if we're going to consider the earth as a system, we
have to consider the earth as a part of a larger system, a wider system, and that is
of course the solar system. So if we're going to understand the earth as the cradle of the
biosphere of life, we need to know how the earth formed in the context of the solar system.
So any hypothesis that we come up with to account for the solar system's formation
has to account for the general characteristics that we see in the solar system today. So
let's deal with some of those characteristics. First of all, we've got eight major planets.
Eight, yes, I know. It used to be nine. When I was a kid it was nine, but poor old Pluto
got booted out to touch. I'm afraid Pluto was regarded as being far too puny to be regarded
as a planet. But the planets that we do have are divided into two groups. We have the terrestrial
planets, of which of course the earth is one. They tend to be small and dense planets, rocky
in nature, existing close to the sun. And then in the outer suburbs of the solar system,
you have the Jovian planets. They're much larger than the terrestrial planets, but very
much less dense as well. Another characteristic of the solar system is that the planets all
orbit in the same direction. But they also orbit in something that we call the plane
of the ecliptic. That's an imaginary line that you can draw around the equator of the
sun in which all the planets orbit. Think of a LP record, a long playing record with
moats of dust moving around it. And I've probably just gone and dated myself by 30 years. Anyway.
Any hypotheses that we come up with to explain the formation of the solar system has to account
for these observations. And we have had a hypothesis that fairly adequately describes
that. And it's called the solar nebula disk model. It works a bit like this. It says the
solar system started originally as a massive cloud of interstellar hydrogen and dust. The
hydrogen was probably left over from when the universe was initially called into being
during the Big Bang. That's a little too early for us to go into any detail in this course.
The heavier elements that we found in that cloud probably came from the death of stars,
some supernovas, because it's in the hearts of stars that heavier elements are constructed.
So we have a cloud of hydrogen and dusty material. It's suggested that cloud then started to
collapse in on itself, probably under its own gravity. But it's also been suggested that it
might have had a bit of a hand. It's possible that a death of a star, a supernova, might have
actually helped cause that initial collapse. But once that collapse was on the way, the collapse
would really start to contract in upon itself. As it contracted, it would start to spiral down
into a central mass. We think that about 90% of the mass of that cloud would have been fairly
much in the center. After about 100,000 years after that initial collapse, we'd see that a
flattened rotating disk would have formed around it. We call that the accretion disk. It would be
about 200 astronomical units across. There'd be grains of dust in that accretion disk. And as
they were moving around that accretion disk, they would start to knock into each other. They
would start to clump together. And their gravity then would start to attract other lumps of material,
drawing larger all the time. Incidentally, an astronomical unit? Well, one astronomical unit
is a measurement that astronomers use. And it's the distance from the Earth to the Sun. That's
about 93 million miles. And to give you a little bit of perspective on the distances we're talking
here, the closest star to us, if we ever wanted to visit our closest star, is Proxima Centauri.
That's 271,000 astronomical units away.
But let's continue with our story. If you had a spacecraft which you could travel back in time
with and look at what was happening to our solar system, you'd probably see as time progressed,
a slight glow starting to occur in the center of the cloud. Temperatures and pressures are starting
to increase as more material is being added to the center. This is the embryonic period of the Sun.
It isn't a proper Sun yet. It's getting there. You could call it a proto-Sun. In fact,
the astronomers call this the T-Tauri proto-Sun phase of the solar system formation.
Dust grains will continue to clump together in this accretion disk that is surrounding
this proto-Sun, eventually forming proto-planets or planetismals. Not quite large enough to be
called planets there, but certainly on their way eventually to becoming planets. They would
continue to collide and coagulate over millions of years. And after about 50 million years,
after the initial collapse of the nebula, so there's going to form our solar system,
we get a remarkable event occurring. One of, in fact, the holy grails of physics would occur.
You would find that positively charged hydrogen nuclei would start to fuse together.
Now, hydrogen nuclei have light charges, positive charges, so they really want to repel.
They don't want to join. One scientist says, imagine trying to take a ping-pong and throwing
it into a fan that's set it high. But the pressures and temperatures were so high in the central
mass of that cloud that the repulsion was overcome and those hydrogen atoms were fused together,
falling helium and an awful lot of energy. The Sun switched on. When that occurred,
there would have been a large burst of energy. There would have been solar winds generated,
but we still have solar winds today. The solar system is an active place. But any material
close to the early Sun that hadn't accreted into a larger body would have been blown away once that
Sun had ignited. It would have cleared the house of that early solar system. So this,
neatly accounts for this hypothesis, a couple of our observations, the fact that the planets all
rotate in the same direction. They're following the rotation that is mirrored in that accretion
disk and also the fact that they're rotating in that plane of the ecliptic. Again, it's mirroring
that accretion disk. Close to the Sun, the inner planets would continue to go through massive
collisions. This is called the merger phase. After about a billion years or so potentially,
the planets would have reached their current size. In fact, it's thought that Earth and Venus
probably formed by the collision up about 10 to 20 moon to Mars size embryo planets.
It would have been a very violent and busy time in the early solar system. In that early solar
system as well, there was probably an awful lot more small terrestrial planets than the
terrestrial planets that we witness in today's solar system. But how do we account for that
division between terrestrial and Jovian planets? Well, remember we're looking at a Sun that has
switched on. So there's going to be a temperature gradient in that solar disk. We're going to
have high temperatures close to the Sun and it's going to get progressively cooler as we move away
into the suburbs of the solar system as we move further away. Volatiles probably just couldn't
exist in the central portions of the disk. It was just too warm. The less volatile material,
denser material, heavier material could condense out though in those areas around that energetic
Sun and that's why in these areas we get the dense rocky terrestrial planets. After nuclear
fusion, as we've noted, any remaining lighter material would have been blown away. In fact,
it's only beyond something that we call the snow line that the Jovian planets could start to form.
It's here that it's cool enough for hydrogen compounds like water, ammonia and methane can
condense out to form solid ice grains. In fact, it's probably these solid ice grains that forms
the cause of a lot of these Jovian planets and it also accounts for the fact that these planets
are very low in density. They would continue to gather the gases in those outer reaches of the
solar system growing to massive sizes. The low density of these planets is quite amazing. In
fact, if you were to be able to take Saturn and place it in a large enough bath, Saturn would float in water.
The nebula hypothesis really isn't anything new. It's been talked about and discussed in various
forms for a long time. For example, Emmanuel Kant in the 18th century had a form of the
solar nebula hypothesis but it's only been relatively, I guess, recently that the nebula
hypothesis has moved beyond the hypothesis and it's all to do with a time machine, this time
machine. You might say that's not a time machine, that's the Hubble telescope. Well, let me get there.
The Hubble telescope is a fantastic mission. I think one of my favorites from NASA but I do
have a lot of favorite missions from NASA. The Hubble telescope overcomes a problem. The problem
is this. If you go out with your partner one night for a romantic evening and you want to look at the
stars, they're there, they're beautiful and they're twinkling and that twinkling is the problem.
You see they're twinkling because of our thick atmosphere. It causes distortional effects.
So if you're on a ground-based telescope looking at the stars, you're going to see a fuzzy image.
Hubble gets over that problem. It exists above the Earth's atmosphere so it has a clear line of
sight without any distortional problems from the atmosphere. Well, it does as soon as you've applied
a pair of very expensive correctional lenses. This fuzzy patch, as it would appear to us on
the ground but revealed spectacularly by Hubble, is M16. It's the Eagle Nebula. It's about 6,500
light years away. A light year is the distance it takes for light to travel in one year. That's
six trillion miles, as I said. Space is space. It's big. The Eagle Nebula is like what we imagine
the original Nebula formed, our solar system, composed mostly of hydrogen gas and dust. And it
contains these. Probably the most spectacular scientific images to come out of the scientific
community in maybe a hundred years. These are the pillars of creation. Concentrations within
that Nebula of dust and gas. These pillars are trillions of miles long, just vast. It staggers
the mind, the scale of these things. There are young stars probably forming in these areas.
Can you see those finger-light predictions with little knobs on the end? We think those are where
actual protostars are busily forming. So the process of solar system formation is going on
elsewhere in our galaxy. Actually, these pillars could be gone now. It takes a long time for light
to travel to us. It's possible that a process of star death, those supernovas that occurred about
1,000 to 2,000 years ago, might have blown away all this debris and gas, and there's nothing there
anymore. Unfortunately, because of the time it takes for light to travel, it's going to be until
about the next thousand years or so that we're going to actually make this determination. You see,
I told you Hubble was a time machine. Because of the time it takes light to travel, Hubble is always
staring into the distant past. Here's some other images. This is the constellation of Orion. This
is one of the first constellations that my dad pointed out to me in the night sky. He was a
pilot in the Second World War, so he was very keen on teaching me the constellations in case,
I guess, my instruments went down by flying across the Pacific. But anyway, we can see Orion here.
You can see his two shoulders. We can see the other two stars at the bottom there represent the legs
of Orion, and that diagonal line of stars, which is Orion's belt. And just below Orion's belt,
there's a fuzzy patch. That's called the sword in Orion's belt. It's about 1,500 light years away,
but now let's look at it with Hubble. Again, we can see a glorious cloud of interstellar hydrogen
and dust, but there are other structures within this. And if we get closer, we can see them.
What we can see here really is spectacular. We can see a young protostar and surrounding it
a protoplanetary disk. The nebula model has effectively, as far as I'm concerned,
been confirmed. We can see the process of solar system formation going on right here.
It's probably a very common method by which solar systems form in the galaxy.
But how did the Earth form? And how do we account for the fact that we live on a layered planet?
So we need to bring our focus down now from the solar system back to our own home. And again,
if we're going to understand how our Earth formed, just like in our understanding of the
formation of the solar system, we have to account for the way that the Earth looks today
and build a hypothesis around that. And at a basic level, you can consider the Earth to be
a layered or differentiated planet. There are differing layers with differing densities as you
go into the planet. At a basic level, we have a light crust surrounding increasingly denser
material, with the densest material being right in the center. A hypothesis that attempts to
account for this is called the cool accretion hypothesis, which sounds a bit like something
a surfer might say in California. Anyway, it suggests that the Earth originally accreted
cold. Remember, we said that in that accretion disk, we had lumps of dust and rock clumping
together. And that's probably how the Earth formed, too. We had clumps of rock clumping
together, and then clumps of clumps clumping together, eventually forming what can be described
as a large rock pile in space. We have some remnants of those still floating around. If you
go to the asteroid belt, we have lots of these loose associations of rock loosely held together
by gravity that NASA is exploring right now. But in order to differentiate our planet,
we've got to do something to it. We've got to heat it up. And we can heat it up by
two processors. First of all, as the planet gets larger, when we have collisions between
these rocks, they're going to get more catastrophic and release more energy. So the energy of impact
would help to start heat this planet up, start to melt the planet. In addition, though, remember,
we are concentrating a lot of material. And some of that material would be radioactive material.
And when radioactive material decays, it gives off energy. That would also help this rock pile
to melt. If any of you have been to an iron foundry and seen how we take iron ore to extract
the iron from it, you put in a large container, you heat it up, and the lighter material, what we
call the slag, it's mostly silicates, floats to the surface of the container. The iron is hot,
so it sinks down to the bottom, and it can be tapped off and then used. A similar thing happened
we think in the formation of the earth. As that rock pile heated up, the heavy material under
gravity, mostly iron and nickel, sank to the center of the earth, forming the core. The much
lighter materials, such as carbon, silicon, and aluminum, or aluminum, if you're from my part
of the world, was remaining concentrated on the surface. So our planet structure, the planet we
live on, is effectively controlled by its position in the developing solar nebula. That controls
its composition, the materials that it had to work with. And it is also a product of differentiation
under gravity, giving us our onion skin layered planet. The result, abundant carbon based materials
on the surface, a metallic core, and also a planet that possibly due to the varying densities as we
go down into the planet, might initiate plate tectonic processes. Each of these processes,
each of these factors, is going to be vital in our understanding of the evolution of our planet,
and especially of its biosphere. These early times are called the Hadian period, between about 4.54
billion and 3.8 billion years ago. And to be honest with you, we have very little record of it.
As I've mentioned before, our planet is an actively eroding place. It has a highly oxidizing
atmosphere today, but also in the past, even without atmospheric oxygen. It would have been a very
erodable surface. Plate tectonics has also recycled parts of the crust, and impacts have probably
also caused problems with the record of that very early part of Earth's history.
But we do have remnants of the Hadian of that early period. The oldest rock, and it is somewhat
debated, has been found, and it's in Canada, and I've got a piece of it here. This is potentially
the oldest thing generated on our planet that you can actually touch, drop, or throw at someone,
if you're of that frame of mind. It comes from the Canadian Shield of the Northwest Territories.
It's not an easy rock to get to. It's found around about 220 miles north of the city of
Yellowknife, which is not that easy to get to in the first place. It's called a nice, which means
it's a fairly high-grade metamorphic rock. Metamorphic rocks are rocks that have been cooked,
they've been heated, and squeezed. We can see that this rock exhibits bands of different minerals.
We think that originally, before it was metamorphosed, before it was heated in this way,
it was probably some sort of granite, and analysis of it suggests that this was originally a granite
maybe about four billion years ago, so from that Hadian period.
We do have older material, though, and that material comes from Australia, but it's not actually a rock.
It's isolated crystals from an even older rock that have been incorporated into a younger rock,
so you can imagine an old rock existing, being eroded away in the ancient earth,
and then those crystals being incorporated in a younger sediment. And when we've measured the age
of those crystals, we come up with an age of 4.4 billion years old. That's incredible news,
because that means we must have had at least some sort of a solid surface of our planet,
even way back then, at 4.4 billion years ago, not long after the formation of our solar system.
And if we have a solid surface, there's a possibility that on that solid surface,
there might have been pools of water, and if there were pools of water, it's a possibility
that life might have formed perhaps soon afterwards. But how can these remote events
and the formation of our moon have any bearing on the evolution and development of life on earth?
Well, I guess I've kind of covered why some of those earlier events could have
be important in our understanding of the development of the biosphere.
It helps speak to our structured planet, the structure of our planet, which is going to have
so many implications for the evolution of life. But what about the moon? Why should this course
look at the formation of that satellite? Well, I hope to convince you that the moon has in fact
been potentially vital in the development of our biosphere. The moon has probably had
a much more profound effect than the tides that it produces in the current day, although those are
significant and certainly more significant than any sloppy romantic poetry or love songs you might
hear on the radio. So let's think about three important features of the moon which might be vital
for the formation of the biosphere on our planet. First of all, have a look at the earth. The earth's
axis isn't vertical. It's tilted to the plane of the ecliptic at about 23.5 degrees. This tilt
or obliquity changes slowly over about 41,000 years. It changes from about 21,
22.1 degrees to about 24.5 degrees over time. And it seems that the variation
in this degree of tilt is possibly linked to climatological cycles. It might have explained
in some way the periodicity and frequency of recent glacial episodes, for example.
The moon, it is thought, has had a stabilizing effect on that wobble, though. It's thought that
if it wasn't for the moon's gravity holding the earth in place, that wobble would have been more
severe, in which case the earth would have experienced a lot more severe and dramatic
climatic shifts. Because of the moon, we may have a more stable climatological planet,
and if we have a more stable condition on our planet, that means we have the potential for a
more stable biosphere, a more complex biosphere to develop. So thanks to the moon number one.
Also, the moon is bizarrely large compared to the planet it orbits. It's really big. That has
consequences for impacts from outer space on the surface of earth. You can think of the moon as
being a bit like a large catcher's mitt. Effectively, although the earth has received lots of impact,
the moon has probably taken some of the hits, and if the earth is getting hit less frequently,
that might have allowed, again, for the development of a more complex biosphere
and more complex life forms. We do know, though, that things get through. Just you wait till we
talk about the dinosaurs. The third important feature, well, in order to investigate that,
we need to look at the possibility of various hypotheses regarding the moon's formation.
Here's some old ideas. Could the moon potentially be a captured asteroid? You can imagine it.
There's an old rock in space somewhere in another part of the solar system,
and it's moving through the solar system and gets captured in the earth's gravity. And lo and
behold, we have a moon. Sounds kind of reasonable, doesn't it? But it doesn't explain certain features.
One of the features is that it doesn't explain certain isotopic data. There's various isotopic
data which can fingerprint you to where you are in the solar system, and the isotopic data that
we have from the moon and the earth suggests that they formed in the same region of space.
So the moon really can't be a captured asteroid. How about the nebula hypothesis? Well, if the moon
formed via the nebula hypothesis, if it just developed by the side of the earth out of the
same cloud of interstellar gas and dust, then there's one feature that the moon should have.
The moon should be the same age as the earth. It isn't. It's younger than the earth.
So what is the current idea? Well, the current idea maybe sounds the most fanciful,
but it is supported by the most evidence. It's thought now that the moon was formed
by the impact of a Mars-sized planet around about 30 to 50 million years after the origin of the
solar system. The material from that impact, so parts of the earth itself and the impactor,
were ejected into Earth orbit. They would orbit the planet, our planet earth, and eventually
coalesce over time to form the moon that we can see today. It also explains why our planet has
quite a tilt. It's been knocked by a large collision, and possibly also explains why the
earth has a relatively fast spin. Now, this fast spin has been confirmed by something that might
think is rather unusual, and I've got it right here. This is a fossil coral. Corals are creatures
that secrete a calcium carbonate, an endless calcite skeleton. They lay down a layer of calcite
every day. You can see there are ribs along this specimen here, representing the deposition of
that calcite. The coral itself lived in this structure at the top. These rings tend to be
grouped into months, and through analysis of these rings, you can get an idea of the length of a year.
From certain late Devonian corals, around about 360 million years ago, people have done analysis
and come to the conclusion that back then the Devonian, a year had 400 days. It would appear
that the earth has been slowing down around about two seconds every 100,000 years.
When we go to the early Precambrian then, that's the early part of Earth's history.
When we were to, if we were to stand on that early earth and look out into the sky, maybe not too
long after the moon had formed, we'd find that that moon absolutely dominated the sky. It was
around about 200,000 miles closer than the moon is today. It would have been an absolutely spectacular
feature in the night sky. But it wouldn't have just been a wonderful thing to look at. In fact,
it probably wouldn't have been a fairly precarious thing to look at. Because one of the features
that we understand from the moon today is that the moon is responsible for the earth's tides.
But in those times, we had a moon that was an awful lot closer. Therefore, the gravitational
forces would be that much more severe. In fact, the tides, it's been estimated, were not really
very much like tides. They were more like mega tsunami. Imagine the terrible and tragic tsunami
that we saw in Japan not long ago and factored up many times. Those tsunamis would have scored the
early continents, washing minerals and nutrients into the oceans and thoroughly mixing the oceans up.
In this way, it's thought, the moon was possibly the spoon, the spoon that mixed the brew of life,
from which the biosphere would develop. But perhaps we've got a little ahead of ourselves.
Before we move on to describe the formation of the biosphere, I think we really have to
account for where the other major systems come from. We are dealing with a system science here
after all. How did they form? So in the next lecture, let's consider the origin of the lithosphere,
all the rock, the atmosphere, the gaseous envelope that surrounds our planet, the hydrosphere,
all the water. Because it's in these spheres of the Earth's system that the biosphere would evolve.
We'll explore that next.
