Yn y last lechu, we dealt with a big topic. The formation of the solar system, and also the initial formation of the Earth-Moon system within that solar system.
Dysun o'u'r leiswch yn ni wedi'i ddanith i ddechrau'n ysglweud gwahanol.
Mae'n ddim yn ffordd o ddim yn y cyd яwn sicr fferwyr'n gweithwyr amre firstlym.
Felly, dwi'n meddwl ein strann, a'r gwends bridge overheidder.
Felly y pedw� yr ysgrifenni yn ynmaua melyst i التorn blaen?
Pan va 탐og eich da confusing ni'r ddweud?
Felly dw i'n meddwl ys체적 eto yr holl bwrthol ac allan yw'r bobl gweithwyr hy manneial?
Fel anest rydym ei gwirioneddarr arno i ad Berthys,
I have, where did all this water come from!
These are important questions to ask,
because it is into this earliest iteration of the early earth systems
that life would evolve...
so we really should come to some sort of understanding of where they came from.
So first of all what about all that land?
Well initially, the earth would have been a huge magma ocean
hanging in space as we described in the previous lecture
ac is also, if you remember, bouffon hypothesized about.
Eventually, though, due to the fact that that magma ocean is going to lose heat to space,
a skin would form on the surface of it, unlike the way a skin forms on the surface of your cocoa.
Today, that skin, or the crust, represents less than 1% of the Earth's total volume.
ei bod i 10 Aberisiad C altro.
Yn un fieniw, nifer bywch yn dewnfun i'r fullwch a hynny'n hynny'n ddisgwympio paifhaf
出u â geometry, yn rhoi o ddull uddurdid yr ysby๊eth fel rhan cyrraelleid.
Gyda haylfer eich dd persiwau ddysgu, wedi nosglict nag aeth셔서f yn faghchu o'n cynnwys,
ond yn mas am rhan ei quffவரu i gefnogi a phaliantoli sidau
i'r llwyddaeth?
fellan рыd gyfo ildwad o'ch fy tlifון a First We'll start with what the crust looks like today.
Tid wych yn Dál Day anrhy Plato yngber o urwedd o'i llreddau o'ch fy tlifון.
On yn prylog cyfruls amser y cael un arryd y CS.
Y c Sayan Crust, ac fel y byddw'n llawer iTrans Cowret Y tro 你nd am fyrwyr yn yr on group Malthgor yllwyth R cautious
wedi gwneud hi i'r cymerion Clas Fel Serion.
ddfod ma sy'n megwydd ym ni landfod, nibapewy i ol depoisu rose ف Jianic,
ddi tud yn bydd eisteddf i ddoedd ac sydd d lyw yn amlوج i drifiad.
Fy gynullio'n meddutaeth wedi gwneudoo'n meddwl ar y rrolaf views.
Mae Lai Llerwyr Mae i ddyddiaeth yn cenderin i跟你a,
addyn nhw ar 4,3 o classified ar uncau mewn 6,2 mil o ailau.
wi o if无 llwys.
Gowd yn cyflowion ystrych fod yn ei pryd sy'n cael bod y gweithlo'i
perty scraping?
Ren i, yn ôl rhoi ei gойn mewn.
Fydd ymy Bai Black
Llywodraeth Oceania Yma.
Aig yw wir i'n dweud yr oes priseidion o échod,
mae komb legn Overclock yn gweithio yha
of that, hot things aren't very dense, they tend to float. If you have that oceanic crust being
formed very close to a continental margin, and it interacts with it, if it's still warm,
because it is so warm and not so dense, is a possibility that it might get a little bit
ramped up onto the continent, lit of a piece of it, lipping onto the continent before the
rest of the plate then starts to subduct. We have a little fragment of oceanic crust
Mae derbyn wedi'u monüri.
Gwy anakai'r llun,
kîrer arlasik,
cymrydio'r gorburen
yn dodol COVID-19
yn dweud nodi i hydettle'r orwas
ac y bikesie',
gw directionsentio'r orwas
yn sutio'r cyflwy attitudes
ac yn gweithio
gynnig o hyffordd a'r orw bachelor.
Mae'r masgrifiadhop refwyr
On e'r hynny yn y troodos ofiolwyd yn cypros.
Efallai mae'r diagram yw y tîm pwyllwyd ofiolwyd.
Yn ychydig i fwy o'r ofiolwyd, yw'r bod ymlaen o'r fwylo fydd yn ddweud ymddangos.
Mae'r dyn nhw'n ddweud ymlaen.
Mae'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw.
Mae'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw.
Mae'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n ddyn nhw'n gawr.
Mae'n
ar creu'r geisio i'w f tears, a chesbwyd yr hollów yma i siw hisr Gru Ann meringue.
Felly mae'n rhoi ond gan chefs.
I hynny, mae'n clyw elan.
E représent你可以 hops y Maen nhw yw'r sefyll yma.
Yn credu all yr hollwyd.
Wel, ydych yn oedd ddweud cyfyddoch!
Efo'r ma motherwch, ti'r bau parity yur Ly mistakeen,
ignment yma,
vasolwch and dans subjectiveiroch.
Efallai'n hwn yn bân o'r holl hwn,
clwn i gabrio,
ond yn dro i'n eu bobl camoublodd
mae'r cyst surprising o hyfforddiad.
Mae wasbyn efo...
.. beefiga arcaf heddiw yn gynn plea o arwAlright.
Mae Mae yn gystaf яr gwmal established fel brakewmu faddwydhaethau yn gwaith ac yn 잘 enghyd.
Mae'r ddech Jobsh sociology yn my Mae yn eu cas Mistress of the Iron Serve,
bowd hefyd.
Mae flirtant Pru allan behave here,
a gallai inhabitul camperwrs sy'n hyfforddiad.
De York Notes y fen車 News,
fyddognewch gyda Cymru,
tanwch yn gwirionedd crve
i yw'r rhakaion am hefyd.
Tuw meddwl yn gwirionedd hyn ac yn gwirionedd pwe figur.
Da eraill p50.5 yn new travelli blwys mwneud yn mwynau pryd offen..
..laethon Nas Ar leveling eisiau awyr espero ei stAm Volume 3.
Fydedol bo'r cychwyn yn y model sy'n bros nos o lyst..
..mherwl, iddyn ni'i gyda'r Cwetchynau chi wedi'i bwysschawad..!
..yng Ng positionINAUDIBLE.
Dwi'n dech reliant welgyntl mail, rywbeth clrydebys am ran...
..og yn dda ni gyntaf cwmpol hefyd yn llunegau wych yn gallu..
..nikl pan'i ceau c적 o'i spirion mynd i'r petite.
yn siaraden beth o gyfarcedon ar y gaberau.
Rwy'r dyfodwch wefyd negas hyn mae'n r shade gwain fy'r r infants.
Rwy'r hyffordd yn modod dweud iawn i้ng ar offerum panchii lieff stretched a cimдуờ.
Metwan ganllewch Snow blwcigenod.
Erlig iawn majl.
...'iliadau bydal加dd.
Pwyllti wedi gweld gwahanol gwahanol gwahanol gwahanol...
...
Y yrhaethadhass rhain y maedwedd?
Well, to grade, today's crust in general, we have a thin oceanic crust and a thick, lighter continental crust riding above it.
Due to the recycling of that ocean crust, of course, no ocean crust is older than 180 million years old.
Because continental crust is lighter, it's less dense, it very, very rarely gets subducted into the denser mantle below the crust.
As a result, the continental material just tends to sit around over many, many, many millennia.
The result of that is, the oldest rocks are going to be found on the continents.
Now, the first skin that the planet had, though, would probably be all basaltic. It would be like oceanic crust.
But today, we have an awful lot of this. We have an awful lot of continental material.
So, where on earth does all that come from?
We can perhaps take a clue from this image here.
This is a lava lake at a volcano, and we can see that when you have a lava lake like that,
just like I described for the early formation of the Earth's crust, a thin skin forms on the top of the lava pool.
Below that thin skin, there'll be a lot of molten material churning away,
and as it churns away, it cracks that skin up into various pieces.
Perhaps an analogy for the formation of the first primitive plates in the early Earth.
That material still churning below it, though, is going to move those plates around,
and some of those plates will be driven below other plates due to that motion.
Again, perhaps an analogy for the earliest type of subduction that we would have witnessed on the surface of planet Earth.
But again, what about those continental land masses? All I've described there is the formation of oceanic crust.
How do we produce continental crust from a thin skin of basalt?
And the solution is just recycle that skin that subduction zones.
So, what happens when oceanic crust is subducted?
Well, first of all, if you have two oceanic plates coming together, a question to ask is which one is going to subduct?
Well, in general, what you're going to find is it is going to be the older plate that subducts.
That is because the older plate will be colder, and therefore denser.
So, when it meets in a head-on collision with a younger, warmer, less dense plate, it will be subducted.
As a subducting plate descends, it will really start to heat up. It won't immediately melt,
and when that process is ongoing, something interesting happens.
Water gets driven off the plate.
There is water contained within some of the crystal structures of the minerals in the plate,
but there will also be sediments taken down off the ocean floor into this subduction zone.
And in a kind of a counter-intuitive manner, the release of that water into the mantle above that descending slab causes melting in the mantle.
It's important to note here that the mantle isn't a large lake of magma existing underneath the Earth's lithosphere.
It's more like a plastic rock. Think of taffy.
So, we're having water released into these mantle rocks, and it's causing melting of those mantle rocks.
But what melts?
Well, this is a mantle rock. It's a rock called a peridotite.
In fact, I've got a little bit of a sample of it over here.
You can see it's a greenish-coloured rock. It's got a kind of a sugary texture to it,
and a lot of these greenish minerals are minerals that we call olivines.
There's a thin section of an ultramafic mantle rock here as well.
You can see it looks like many other thin sections. It looks a bit like a stained glass window.
Each of those colours in that stained glass window, though, represents a different type of mineral,
and each mineral has different properties, including different colours.
One of those different properties will also be differing melting points.
So, when you cause melting in those mantle rocks, only some of those minerals will melt.
The result is what we call a partial melt, and magma will be generated with a different composition
to the mantle rocks that are being partially melted.
The magma that is produced is not going to be like the peridotite, the mantle rocks.
The mantle rocks are what we call ultramafic rocks.
They're very high in iron minerals, very dense.
The magma produced by partially melting an ultramafic rock is a mafic rock.
It's going to be less dense than the surrounding rocks from which it's being produced from,
and also very hot, so it rises.
It rises and gets erupted through the overriding plate to form small, basaltic islands.
These have probably been the first seeds of continents.
You could imagine an earth with lots of little dotted volcanic islands all over it.
No large continental land masses at the moment.
If you want an analogy for it, again, we go to our old friends over here in Alaska, the Aleutian Islands.
That's probably what most of land area look like, way back in Earth history.
Over time, those little islands, as they move around on the plates,
would collide and amalgamate, making larger and larger land areas.
As the continents grew, they would become thicker.
But how are we producing that ffelsic material?
So far, all I've described is the production of mafic basaltic islands.
But we think that the way that we produce the ffelsic material, the granitic material,
is again due to subduction, but this time, subduction below those growing thickening volcanic islands.
As the magmas generated by this subduction rise into these islands,
a process called magmatic differentiation would go on.
These produce magmas of lighter composition.
Now, unfortunately, we don't have enough time in this series to go through that,
but that process actually produces magmas of different compositions, including ffelsic magmas.
Now, once we produce these ffelsic magmas and they cool to form granites and similar rocks,
they're far too light to be subducted.
They can't be subducted into the dense mantle, so they just sit around and accumulate over time.
Now, the origin and style of early plate tectonics is very much debated.
We're talking about extremely remote times in Earth's history there,
but we do have evidence for the existence of continental rocks at a very early period in Earth's history,
and we mentioned them in a previous lecture.
The oldest rock we have, of course, is our old friend, the Acasta nice that we saw last time,
at around four billion years old.
But remember I said we had earlier evidence of crust from rocks that were derived from earlier progenitors.
These fragments of earlier rocks are actually these things.
These are zircons, they're crystals.
They had been eroded, not these particular ones, but eroded from a very, very old rock indeed.
They are from Australia and they've been incorporated in a sedimentary rock that is called a conglomerate.
When these zircons were radiometrally dated, we came up with a date of 4.4 billion years old.
That means there must have been some sort of solid surface way back then in Earth's history.
Today, ancient continental fragment cores can be found in many areas.
They often found the central portion of many of today's continents.
Very often the shield areas, for example, the Canadian shield is one of those old continental fragments.
These seed continents would continue to grow by continental collision and accretion over all of geological time.
It's still going on today.
The first really big one, first continental landmass, we think, was one called Ur.
It formed around about 3 billion years ago.
We can still find fragments of Ur, though, preserved on present-day continents in Australia, Antarctica, India and Madagascar.
Many continents would form fragment and recombine over time.
For example, here's the supercontinent of Rodinia.
This formed around about 1.2 billion years ago and fragmented just 650 million years ago.
It would fragment through a period that we call the lower Paleozoic,
and then recombine around about 200 million years ago to form the supercontinent of Pangea, Wagner's supercontinent.
But let's forget the crustal areas for a while, and let's think about something a little more airy.
What was the nature of the first atmospheric sphere on the surface of the Earth?
How about that atmosphere?
Well, we know that our planet grew out of a nebula of gas, of hydrogen and helium,
probably not unlike the Orion Nebula that we can see in this image here.
So there would have been initially, in that very early forming Earth,
a loose association of those like hydrogen and helium gases.
We also know that after fusion had initiated in the sun,
there would have been a release of a lot of solar radiation.
A strong solar wind would have been generated.
We can see some of those strong solar winds today.
We call them solar flares.
When they occur, they release energy the equivalent of billions of hydrogen bombs in just one event,
and they wreak absolute havoc with telecommunications on Earth.
But there are other issues associated with them as well.
In January 20, 2005, one flare from a sunspot named NOAA 720 caused a coronal mass ejection, or CME.
It released a mass amount of solar radiation speeding towards the Earth near the speed of light.
If humans had been present then on the moon, or in a spacecraft above the Earth's atmosphere,
they would have been subject to severe radiation poisoning.
TV audiences were obviously not really well aware of that when we saw those ghostly figures dancing across the moon in 1969.
So why are we safe on Earth?
Well, we can get a hint from a really spectacular feature in the night sky.
The aurora borealis, or the aurora australis, if you're in the southern hemisphere.
What we're looking at in these auroras is the interaction of the charged energetic particles from the solar wind
interacting with the Earth's magnetic field.
It's an indication that the Earth's protective shields are in operation.
We call this protective shield the magnetosphere.
We've been protecting the biosphere from solar storms for billions of years, fortunately,
but where did it come from?
It goes back to our previous lecture, the fact that we live on a differentiated planet,
the fact that under gravity all those metals sank to the centre of the planet and gave us a metallic core.
We think we have a solid inner core, but around it is a layer of mobile rotating liquid metal.
Because that area is rotating, it sets up a dynamo effect,
and it's that that generates, we think, Earth's protective magnetic field.
Before that differentiation, the Earth had no magnetosphere,
so all the hydrogen and helium that was loosely associated with that rockfile
would have been blown away into space when the sun switched on.
But if you want to look at a planet that today doesn't really have an active magnetosphere,
go to one of our close neighbours, go to Mars.
Mars is a wasteland.
It has an atmosphere that's less than 1% of Earth's atmosphere.
There's an indication that it might have had a thick atmosphere,
and potentially they could water sometime in its past.
So as we discuss with the story of Venus, what went wrong with Mars?
Mars, we think, is probably too small to maintain a molten interior.
At least that's what some scientists think.
So how do we explain the fact that it possibly had a strong magnetic field,
and therefore perhaps a molten interior in the past?
It probably had a strong magnetic field for perhaps billions of years.
So what was happening there? What kept it intact?
Well, a clue comes from the different landscapes that we can notice on Mars.
They're very different in the southern and northern hemispheres.
In the south, it's very rough. There's a lot of cratering.
That speaks to an old crustal area. It's received an awful lot of history.
However, when you look in the northern hemisphere of Mars, it's fairly smooth.
Why is that?
Well, it's been suggested that potentially what happened in the northern hemisphere was a massive impact.
It caused the melting of the surface of Mars,
and effectively resurfaced the planet in that area,
melting northern hemisphere.
Is it possible that Mars had a large moon-like Earth?
If it is, then if Mars had this large satellite orbiting around it,
the gravitational forces from this moon could have squeezed and massaged the interior of Mars,
keeping that interior molten, and therefore allowing a magnetosphere to develop.
But if that moon was in a decaying orbit, ultimately it could have impacted on the surface of Mars,
melting that northern hemisphere, resurfacing it, and, of course, causing the magnetosphere to die.
And with it, the atmosphere over time was just blown away into space.
The Earth has a very active interior. It has a very strong magnetosphere.
It's been keeping our atmosphere intact, fortunately.
As I said, the first atmosphere of hydrogen and helium was removed before the magnetosphere was in place.
But where, in that case, did that second atmosphere come from?
And to answer that, we turn to volcanoes.
Volcanoes are a feature of the planet that allows for planetary degassing.
Our planet is continually trying to lose heat.
It's one of the reasons why we have plate tectonics,
but volcanoes are a product of that heat loss as well.
That heat loss process, they release an awful lot of gases as well.
And we think that that initial Earth atmosphere that developed after the formation of the magnetosphere
would have been probably fairly similar to current volcanic emissions.
Lots of water, carbon dioxide, hydrogen, nitrogen, sulphur-based gases and chlorine.
The proportions of the gases might have varied,
but there was probably quite a lot of water and a lot of carbon dioxide in those gases.
Today, the atmosphere is 78% nitrogen and 21% oxygen with a variable amount of water vapor.
Obviously, there's been an awful lot of change going on in the Earth's atmosphere.
I'm not going to take this story further at this particular point,
but we are going to deal with how we change an Earth with an atmosphere developed by its volcanoes
as the current atmosphere we see today in a little later time.
But for now, let's have a look at an origin of another one of those Earth-major systems.
Let's consider the hydrosphere.
So, where did all the water come from?
Well, initially, the water was probably produced by the same process
as we produce our second Earth atmosphere by volcanoes.
There's a lot of water vapor in volcanic emissions.
And that water vapor was probably held in the atmosphere for quite a while.
The Earth was probably initially just too hot to allow for condensation,
to allow rainfall to initiate.
But there would have been a time, a time when the Earth reached that critical temperature
when the first raindrop started to fall to the surface of the planet,
and it probably rained for centuries.
You can imagine the deluge.
However, when we look at the amount of water that we think could have been produced
by such volcanic emissions, we think it doesn't account for all the water
that we find on the surface of our planet today.
There must be another source, and we think that other source is extraterrestrial,
and we think it comes from these things, comets.
Now, comets range from a few hundreds of metres to tens of kilometres in size,
and they're generally composed of various ices and debris.
You can think of them as being a bit like dirty snowballs in composition.
We know quite a bit about comets now.
NASA has sent quite a number of missions to them.
For example, January 12, 2005, there was the deep impact probe to Comet Temple.
Now, NASA had done flybys, but this time NASA decided
it was going to do something somewhat different, and I might say a little spectacular.
This really appeals to the nerd in me.
When I was a kid, I liked inventing various despicable ways
in which I could destroy some of my less favourite toys,
and so when NASA announced that they were going to engineer a high-tech road collision in space,
I was hooked.
On June 29, part of that spacecraft detached from this probe
and moved rapidly towards the comet.
It impacted on a very auspicious day, July 4.
This is actually an image of the impact.
It caused a crater that was about 330 feet across,
but more importantly, a large plume of material,
and within that plume, when it was analysed by the spacecraft,
was around about 11 million pounds of water.
It would appear that the early solar system had an awful lot of water in it.
The early solar system probably had an awful lot more comets
than we see in the solar system today as well,
so the Earth was probably receiving an awful lot of impacts.
Some of it cometary delivering water,
and even though the moon was there protecting the Earth to a certain extent,
it couldn't catch them all,
and the Earth was definitely receiving water in this manner.
Initially, those oceans would probably have been fresh,
but the erosion of rocks and the introduction of minerals at volcanic vents
eventually turned the ocean salty.
But when do we have the first liquid water?
Well, the oldest sedimentary rocks that we can tell were deposited in water,
and some of the oldest features on some igneous rocks that we can tell were deposited or erupted in water,
come from the issue of complex in Greenland,
dated to about 3.8 billion years old,
and we'll see more of those in the next lecture.
But again, we have earlier evidence,
and once again, it's back to those zircon crystals from Australia.
Now, the specific area where we get those zircon crystals from is called Jack Hills,
and as I said, they were dated to being around about 4.4 billion years old,
but some of the oxygen isotopes that are found in those crystals
suggest that the parent rock that formed them
developed in an environment that had liquid water.
If this is true,
it pushes back liquid water as a reality on the surface of our planet
around about 4.4 billion years old.
That means we have a potential cradle of evolution
way back then in geological time,
standing water in which life processes can potentially start to get moving
and start moving along.
This is really kind of revolutionary information.
It was thought that the early earth way back then at 4.4
would have been completely inhospitable to life,
or even the precursors of the generation of life,
but from the evidence that we've seen,
it would appear that the earth might have been open for business
a lot earlier than we thought.
So, we now have in terms of our story of moving towards a biosphere,
a thick atmosphere.
We have a magnetic shield which is keeping our atmosphere in place
and stopping the earth receiving deadly solar radiation,
and we potentially have oceans in which life can develop and evolve.
I would say that the stage is now set.
