Hello again. A few questions I felt so deeply by most people, whether you're a scientist
or not a scientist, than where we come from. By the we though, I don't necessarily mean
human species, I mean we as part of the biosphere. What are the origins of life on our planet?
In this lecture we will be looking at a number of possible scenarios for the origin of life.
Did life emerge as Darwin supposed in some sort of warm little pool? Or should we be
looking to the deep ocean environment for life's origins? Or did life, or at least
the building blocks of life, have a more extraterrestrial, exotic origin? And what
were the first stirrings of life like? The origins of life have intrigued humans ever
since consciousness dawned probably. Every culture that you could turn to has its own
particular creation myths. And where I now live in Vancouver and British Columbia, the
First Nations people there have a particularly wonderful creation myth. This is from the
Hyder people. It goes like this. It says, long ago there were no divisions between humans,
animals and spirits, but there was the raven. And the raven was a trickster. He stole the
sun from his grandfather, and from it he made the moon and the stars. Raven created lakes
and rivers. He filled the lands with trees, and he divided the night and day. He pulled
tides into a rhythm and filled the streams with fresh water and filled them with salmon.
And he filled the forest with animals. But also he found the first humans that were hiding
in a giant clam shell. Raven released them onto the beaches and gave the humans fire.
It's a beautiful story, isn't it? It really resonates with the dramatic and fantastic
countryside that you can find in British Columbia. The magnificent mountains and the gloomy
weather at times really speaks to this story of the raven. Science has its own accounts
of the origin of life, though, and there are probably far too many scenarios for us to
go in in this short lecture. And I'm just going to cover a selection. So firstly, one
of my heroes did life emerge as Charles Darwin, suppose, in some warm little pool somewhere.
By a warm little pool, Darwin was thinking of some sort of volcanic pool. You've probably
seen them in Yosemite and places like that. These pools bubbling away, volcanically producing
gases and full of choking smells, hydrogen sulfide in the life. Could it be in these
locations where chemicals were brewing and cooking up life? He wrote a letter to botanist
Joseph Hooker in 1871, and he said this, regarding the origin of life, we could conceive in some
warm little pond with all sorts of ammonia and phosphoric acids, light, heat, electricity
present. Basically what he's thinking of there is the brew from which potentially proteins
could form. And from proteins, we could then move on to potentially the progenitor of all
life. Some now doubt this volcanic pool origin for the origin of life itself. They say that
it's probably too hot and too acidic for life chemicals to come together to form life.
Some though are still in favour of it. But what's important here, though, is not the
methodology that Darwin is thinking about in terms of getting life going. It's the fact
that Darwin is suggesting that life emerged inorganically. Life being an emergent property
of the evolution of a developing earth system. Before the 19th century, there were very different
views regarding the origins of life. I'm not talking about here the biblical account,
but other than the biblical account, people tended to believe in what we call spontaneous
generation. Let me give you an example. If you were to leave clothes around on the floor
or just a general mess, putrid matter, as they'd call it, fleas would spontaneously generate
from that. Here's another example of spontaneous generation. Crocodiles, it was thought, spontaneously
generated from drowned logs. You can kind of see where they were coming from. A crocodile,
especially in this image, does look a bit like a log. And there lying on the river bottom
or on the bottom of a lake, they would somehow, through some magical process, spontaneously
become crocodiles. Maggots, it was thought, generated from meat. You leave meat out on
a table somewhere, and lo and behold, almost magically, maggots will form after a number
of days. Of course, this could be easily disproved if someone took the care to cover your pot
chopped with some sort of glass lid. But anyway, spontaneous generation has now been replaced
in the scientific community by evolution, by natural selection. But there is still one
part of life story where spontaneous generation kind of still plays a part. And that's right
at the beginning. But we don't really call it spontaneous generation anymore. We call
it abiogenesis, effectively, life from lifelessness. Abiogenesis was very popular with this gentleman.
This is Alexander Operin. He was a Russian biochemist who was very active in the field
between the 1920s right through to the 1970s. He was also doing his research at a time where
we were starting to understand the planetary atmospheres of those Jovian planets that we
mentioned in an earlier lecture. We were able, for the first time, to actually read the gases
that were actually present in those massive planets. Operin noted that a lot of those
gases were carbon based gases like methane, but also there was water vapor present, ammonia,
and quite a lot of hydrogen. He surmised that potentially these gaseous giant atmospheres
could perhaps be analogues for Earth's primitive atmosphere. He also noted something as well
which is kind of getting towards Earth's system science. He said, as inorganic systems
get complex, think of, say, fundamental particles in an atom, protons in a nucleus, then forming
atoms, then atoms falling molecules, they demonstrate increasingly more complex properties.
As I said, this is Earth's system science. We've already covered this. Systems are arranged
in hierarchies of increasing complexity, but what Operin was suggesting is that perhaps
life is just one extra level of chemical complexity of a system. These increasing layers of stuff
demonstrating more complex behaviours ultimately leading into the most complex chemical organisation,
life itself and organisms. Perhaps life should be expected in a developing Earth's system.
The idea that we could move towards some sort of life would have to wait to be tested until
1952 by these two gentlemen, fairly famous gentlemen now, Stanley Miller and Harold
Urie at the University of Chicago. They decided that they were going to recreate the conditions
on the early Earth in the now very famous Urie Miller experiment. They took the gas
giant atmosphere as an analogue for the early Earth atmosphere as Operin suggested, so
they were using water, ammonia, methane and hydrogen in their experiment, and this is
the Earth they created. This is a closed system. Remember again, Earth's system science,
so they're recreating the closed system of the Earth, but this time the closed system
is closed due to the glass tubes that they're doing their experiment in. One vessel there
at the bottom, full of liquid water, represents the early oceans. That water is going to be
heated and as it heats it's going to be evaporated and rise up into the vessels that you can
see, simulating the atmosphere. Eventually that atmosphere passes into the large bulbous
object at the top. In that object you can see two prongs. Those are delivering electricity
and creating a spark. That's simulating lightning in the early atmosphere, an energy source
in that atmosphere. This atmosphere moves around the system and cools and ultimately
condenses and is returned to the ocean where it's heated and recycled through the system
again and again and again. So, what's the next stage? Well, basically, just leave it
and see what happens. And that's what they did. They left it for a week and then came
back to see what they found. What they found was that system no longer looked like an
inorganic system. It was blackened full of some dirty black muck and when they analyzed
that dirty black muck they found it contained some fantastic news. It contained organic compounds
including amino acids. Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins. It contains sugars.
Sugars are vital to all life. They form important food sources for some creatures but also they
form important parts of DNA and also important parts of cell membranes. They also contain
very important DNA related components. The estimation of the composition of the early
earth atmosphere has changed as science has developed. Some now prefer that the atmosphere
in the early earth might have had more hydrogen sulfide or perhaps sulfur dioxide. In fact,
there's lots of possible scenarios that you could come up with for an early earth atmosphere
but even so, if you still run the Urimila type experiment using different chemical compositions,
you still generally produce useful life molecules. It would appear that the early earth atmosphere
in a primitive earth state was an easy way by which you could form life molecules. There's
also interesting supporting evidence for this hypothesis, at least for the generation of
these molecules. And it comes from the studies of what you could call old genes. Those are genes
that are common to most life forms on the planet. So in other words, they share a common ancestor.
And you find these old genes are rich in the Urimila type of amino acids that are produced by
their experiment. So it's possible that the earliest life was using the organic molecules that were
produced in a similar manner. It is intriguing. But how about an alternate carbon source or
carbon molecule source to the earth's atmosphere? Should we be looking elsewhere? Well, there's
lots of places we can look. So let's look next to the deep ocean potentially for life's origins.
This is an ocean ridge. It's a constructive plate margin. We dealt with that when we were
talking about continental drift. It's here that new oceanic crust is being created. We can see
in this slide here the pillow larvas that are generated in this environment. But it's not just
pillow larvas that we generate there. That rock is hot still, especially when it's close to the
ocean ridge. And it remains hot for quite a long time. Ocean water seeps into this crust through
cracks. And as it descends into these hot crustal areas, it heats up. As it heats up, it starts
to circulate through the crust, dissolving minerals as it goes. Then eventually, it's returned to the
surface in these kind of geyser-like structures. You can see them here in this image, this black
material being returned to the ocean. In fact, we call these black smokers. The chemical composition
of this is kind of a nasty brew. It contains lots of metals and sulfides in very hot water. But
when we find that brew comes into contact with ocean water that's charged in carbon dioxide,
it catalyzes reactions that, again, form lots of useful, biologically useful organic molecules.
Now, Gunther Wexerhouser, a German biochemist, suggested that this is one possible environment
where life might have been first synthesized. Perhaps we don't need to turn to the atmosphere.
Perhaps life origins truly are in the oceans, not just for life itself, but for the actual
chemicals of life. But did life, or at least the building blocks of life, have a more exotic
origin? And here I'm talking about the possibility of life from extraterrestrial sources. So
what about a non-Earth source? Well, take a look at this. This is the Murchison meteorite. It
impacted on our planet at 11am on September the 28th, 1969. In fact, that's not too long after the
first moon landing. It was found close to the town of Murchison in Victoria, Australia, which it
gets its name from, of course. The meteorite was fragmented, but one piece, a 24 ounce piece,
smashed through a roof into a halo and fell onto a load of hay. So it wasn't smashed up any further,
and they had a really nice lump of this material that they could study. When it's analyzed, and
it's been re-analyzed a number of times, it's found to be a particular class of meteorites that
is called a carbonaceous chondrite. That means, as its name suggests, it's very rich in carbon. But
the carbon that it is rich in is somewhat surprising. It's not just any old carbon or graphite. It
contains amino acids. Amino acids, the building blocks of proteins from space. But not just that.
It contains alcohols and phosphonic acids and nucleobases, some of the basic components of
molecules like DNA. This is fairly astounding. Recent evidence of other organic material in
space has come to light as well from some fantastic missions from NASA. In particular,
I'm thinking here of the Stardust mission. The Stardust probe was sent to encounter the
comet Vilt-2. You can see here an image of Vilt-2. It's ejecting a lot of material from
its surface. That's because comets are full of volatiles, and as they get close to the sun,
those volatiles evaporate and are removed from the comet in streams. It's basically the solar
wind acting upon the comet itself. Now those jets of gases are also carrying with them
material from the surface of the comet itself. The idea was that we'd take that probe and see
if we could capture some of that material from the comet on a substance called aerogel. You can
see the aerogel here. It's a material that would basically grab the dust particles coming off
the comet and embed them in its structure. The encounter occurred in 2004. The probe returned
in 2006, and when the aerogel container was analysed, again we found some wonderful news. You
can see here a little picture of the aerogel with some of the pieces of the comet actually
embedded in it. Analysis of that yielded a lot of hydrocarbons, including the extremely important
life chemical, the amino acid lysine. Earth was bombarded with comets and meteorites early
on in its history. We've already discussed that. So it's likely that organics were being
received from space quite frequently, but it's also quite likely that we were generating organics
on the earth as well. Why not from all places, in the atmosphere and in the ocean too? So it
seems like getting those life chemicals is no problem. However, it's still not life. So what
were the first stirrings of life going to be like? Well, in order to do that, we have to ask a
question which might seem a little strange. What is life? It's not as strange as you might think.
Once you get to the simple forms of life, it becomes a little bit fuzzy. So here's my attempt
to defining what life is. Well, first of all, I think it has to demonstrate some sort of organisation,
some sort of structure. Secondly, it probably has to be separated from its external environment.
So we're talking about some sort of membrane. Thirdly, it has to generate energy. It has to be
able to metabolise in some way. Fourthly, probably most importantly, it needs to be able to replicate
itself. It needs to be able to preserve its kind and pass copies of itself into the future. The
Urimilleria experiment, however long you left it switched on, didn't produce any bug-eyed monsters.
That would have been fantastic, as Carl Sagan said, to see some monster crawling out of the vessel.
But that didn't happen. So we're obviously missing a missing factor in this particular experiment.
And I'm afraid the factor that we are missing is one that we really can't account for experimentally,
because that factor is deep geological time. So what are we going to need in a thought experiment,
then, if we can't use time and just keep the Miller experiment running over and over and over again
until it actually produces life? What are we probably missing in our understanding of the
generation of life? Well, we can create these simple, important life molecules, as I've discussed,
sugars, amino acids and so on. But we need to get these organic molecules together. We need to
polymerize them into more complex organic molecules. In order to polymerize something, generally,
you can just add energy to the system. You can make longer changes of these molecules. A way you
could do that potentially, if you had a pool full of amino acids, is to just heat them up,
evaporate that water. The problem is, heating would also break apart a lot of the longer chain
molecules that you've formed. So you're not really probably going to gain very much from doing that.
So how do we get around this? Well, the answer is to catalyze that reaction. Use something that is
going to independently help these molecules get together and generate longer chain molecules. A
common way that you can catalyze things biologically is to use polyphosphates. In fact, one of the
most common catalyzing agents or energy generators you might want to call it in life itself is ATP.
It's a molecule that really does drive ourselves and drives me effectively. But how about other
sources of catalyzation of getting these molecules together? Well, there's possibly clay. Clay is
a fine-grained sedimentary particle. When it's in the oceans, though, it takes on specific charges
along its length, positive and negative charges electrically, and that can attract organic
molecules to its surface, which can then align up along the surface of the clay, the clay acting
a bit like a template. It's possible then that those organic molecules could form linkages to
form longer chain molecules. It's possible, but a lot of people have criticized this recently,
saying that once you've got those organic molecules on the surface of the clay, it's very
difficult to imagine how you get them off again. What about radioactivity? That might sound like
an odd one. Well, it's thought that back in the early earth, there was probably an awful lot more
radioactive minerals swooping around in the earth's system, probably a lot of phosphoric-based
radioactive minerals as well, and they would tend to be concentrated on beaches. If you've ever
walked along a beach, you might often see dark patches in the sand. Don't worry, those aren't
radioactive minerals. Today, it tends to be heavy iron minerals. It's just the action of the waves,
hydrodynamically sorting those minerals and concentrating them. It's possible, though,
that some of these radioactive minerals back in the early earth times were concentrated in the
same way, and the phosphorous and the radioactivity providing energy could have also helped catalyze
the reaction. Again, this is a very fanciful possibility, but it's not out of the realms of
possibility. What I'm basically just trying to say here is that there's likely many mechanisms
by which we can make longer-chain complex molecules from those widely abundant organic
molecules in the early earth system. But it's not just any old long-chain molecules that we're
after. We need something special. We need a self-replicating molecule. We need something that's
going to pass copies of itself down through time, and of course, the most famous of those self-replicating
molecules is this, deoxyribose nucleic acid or DNA. But we have a problem. DNA needs a hand in
replicating itself. In me and you, there's no problem. We have some very handy enzymes like DNA
polymerase. This reads the DNA and builds copies of new DNA, but DNA polymerase is coded for by
DNA. Can you see the problem we're getting through in here? Unless you have DNA polymerase, you
can't copy DNA. And unless you have DNA, you can't have DNA polymerase. We've got a chicken and egg
scenario. We've got a paradox. This is no small problem. If you don't have self-replication,
you can't have future copies passed down into future generations. So how do we get out of this?
Fortunately, there is a way out of this, and the way out of this paradox is related to a similar
molecule to DNA called ribose nucleic acid or RNA. There are a whole number of different forms of
RNA, and I'm just going to go through a few of them here. There's messenger RNA or mRNA. This is the
RNA which goes into the nucleus of cells where our DNA is stored and makes copies of the coded
messages on the DNA. It then takes a copy of that message out into the cell to help code for
proteins that are being built in the cell cytoplasm. There's transfer RNA or TRNA. TRNA brings
specific amino acids to these assembly points to help build these proteins. And then there's ribosomal
RNA or R RNA. This is the one that is of greatest interest to us because it's this RNA that helps
catalyze the formation of proteins, but possibly even more significantly, R RNA can also self-replicate.
Now Walter Gilbert of Harvard University in 1996 proposed from this the existence of RNA world,
an early planet dominated by self-replicating naked genes of RNA before the emergence of life
that was based on DNA. In RNA world, RNA molecules would be competing for component
molecules for the nucleotides that make themselves up. These forms that could catalyze their own
development would have a selective advantage. So we see that evolution by natural selection had
been initiated potentially even before life had really got going at all. Evolution by natural
selection preceded almost the evolution of life itself, which is again pretty amazing. But we still
got to develop more structures before we can actually say we've got life. We might have self
replicating molecules now, but we need to enclose those self-replicating molecules in a membrane. We
need to separate all the stuff inside the cell from the stuff that's outside the cell. How are we
going to do that? We need to figure out some way that we can chemically evolve a cell. And again,
there are many, many ideas as to how the first cells evolve. And again, here are just a few. Our
Russian biochemist, Operan, suggested that inorganic materials can form cell-like structures that he
called co-acivate droplets. These are organic molecules surrounded by a skin of water molecules.
They look a bit like cell membranes. They are 1 to 100 microns in diameter. And potentially,
perhaps these could be the first precursor cells. Another biochemist, this time a U.S. biochemist,
Sidney Fox, suggests that under certain conditions, proteins and amino acids will form droplets. And
these droplets exhibit an ability to divide and bud into new cells. They're not cells yet. Well,
perhaps one of the most intriguing recent suggestions comes again from Gunther Vektus
Heuser, who suggested perhaps that these cells actually developed within the vent systems,
where we said potentially the organic molecules were initially developing. If you were to take
one of these vent system rocks and look at it, you would see that it has, at the microscopic level,
a fairly honeycomb structure, structures of inorganic iron sulfide minerals producing those
structures. He suggested that it's possible that these honeycomb structures might have provided a
kind of a home for the early cells. A place where organic molecules could be concentrated and cell
membranes could have evolved in these little rock homes. Eventually, as cell membranes became more
robust, they started to move out of the rock nursery and started to populate the early Earth's oceans.
So, is this what the first of life forms look like? A simple membrane of fat molecules potentially
surrounding an evolving soup of RNA. To be honest with you, we're probably never ever going to be
able to tell. Those very earliest parts of Earth's history where life first came into being are, in
all likelihood, lost to us. And all we can really do is make reasons, speculations. There are possibly
multiple mechanisms as well by which life came into being and formed. But what we have to understand
is that this emergence of life would have profound consequences for the Earth's systems. We're going
to see that the evolution of life is going to affect every Earth system that we're going to meet. It's
going to affect the hydrosphere. It's going to radically alter our atmosphere. But it's also going
to alter as well the lithosphere, the solid rock on our surface. It's going to affect the way that
chemicals and erosion occurs within the rock. So it's not just a biosphere in isolation. Remember
Earth system science. This event is going to affect all others. And in our next lecture, I'd like to
look at what is some of the first evidence that we have on our planet for life emerging. Obviously,
it's not going to be that earliest time. It's going to be a little step forward in the story, but
still fascinating.
