Welcome back. In the previous lecture we looked at the possible scenarios that might help
us understand the development of life on our planet and we decided that there were probably
numerous ways in which life could form. In this lecture though, let's stop speculating.
Let's look for evidence. What evidence do we have of early life?
So I want to ask these questions. Do we have to generate life on Earth? Could life have
arrived ready to roll from another place entirely? Also, what are Earth's oldest fossils? And
how did life survive in what is, after all, at that time, a very crowded solar system?
So first of all, do we have to use the Earth? Can we find life from another place and bring
it here? One of the first grown-up books I read was set
in Victorian England. It was set in a scene where the British Isles was being invaded
at the height of empire. Now it wasn't the French or the Germans or some other foreign
power that was invading Britain. It was from a place a lot further away than that. Let
me just read you an extract. Across the gulf of space, minds that are to our minds, as
ours are to those of the beasts that perish, intellects vast and cool and unsympathetic
regarded this Earth with envious eyes, and slowly and surely they drew their plans against
us. It still sends a shiver down my spine when
I hear that. Obviously this is H.G. Wells, War of the World, a very apocalyptic view of
humankind's first encounter with extraterrestrials. It really wasn't though the malevolent aliens
that I really found fascinating, although I must admit, a Martian the size of a bear
with big dislike eyes was somewhat appealing. What really appealed to me was the notion
that there could be life elsewhere, perhaps other civilizations, but if not that, perhaps
other creatures, completely different from the life I was aware of in this planet.
Those kind of ideas also fascinated this man. This is Percival Lowell. He was a businessman,
author, mathematician and astronomer. You can tell he was a kind of a busy guy. He also
found time to build an observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona. It's actually still working today.
From that observatory, Lowell was to produce this, a map that seemed to describe a whole
series of canals on the surface of Mars. Lowell decided that Mars was a drought planet. Well
obviously you could tell that. Mars was red. It was probably a great big desert. And he
thought that water was being moved by some intelligent species from the poles because
even from his telescope he could see that Mars had white poles, probably ice caps. This
vast irrigation project was probably trying to bring water to grow crops in the equatorial
regions or perhaps just supply drinking water. It's in fact this that inspired H.G. Wells
to write The War of the Worlds as well. The Martians were coming to our planet to look
for a world with plenty of water. Probably explains why they landed in England. We have
an awful lot of water in England.
Imagine then our excitement when we sent our first probes to Mars. The first one was Mariner
4. It was launched in November 28th, 1964 and would reach Mars on July 14th, 1965. What
were we going to find there? The images that the probe was going to send back were really
greatly anticipated. Were we going to find evidence of an alien civilization? Would we
see grid-like patterns? Would we see streets laid out alongside Lowell's canals? If not
that, would we see evidence of a biosphere? Would we see plants and forests growing along
areas of open water? Everybody really wanted to know.
So you can imagine the world's disappointment when these images were sent back. It looks
not so much like a burgeoning biosphere. It looks more like the surface of my face when
I was a teenager. These fuzzy images record images of a dead world. It looks more like
the surface of the moon than a planet with a wonderful biosphere. It was decided after
looking at these images that Lowell's canals actually didn't exist at all. They were probably
just optical mirages that he was recording. Unfortunately, I think.
But perhaps we were too ambitious. Perhaps if we don't have a massive biosphere full
of alien structures and forests and other interesting things, perhaps there's the possibility
of life, perhaps underground, perhaps just a little bit smaller, perhaps even microbes.
And it was within this spirit that the Viking mission was conceived at a cost of about one
billion US dollars. There's going to be two landers. And on those landers, there was going
to be a series of biological instruments that were designed to test for the presence of
life on Mars. Viking 1 and Viking 2 were launched in August of September in 1975. I'm particularly
fond of this mission as well because one of the key gentlemen involved in this particular
mission was our own Carl Sagan. These are some of the pictures that were returned by
Viking. You can see it really is a desert planet. I often think that if you didn't know
these were taken by Viking, you could mistake this for being a dry desert anywhere on earth
really. It definitely is a dry desert planet. But what about life? Well, obviously we don't
see any life in crusting on those rocks. We can't see anything that suggests life is
there. So how about in the soil? Fortunately, Viking was supplied with an arm that could
dig into the soil, bring that soil back into the spacecraft and analyze it for key signs
of microbial activity. Unfortunately, none was detected. Further disappointment in 2008,
the Phoenix lander, a recent NASA mission, also examined soil and found that the soil
was very rich in a chemical compound called perchlorite. Unfortunately, perchlorite breaks
down organic material. It would appear that Mars, at least today, is sterile. Aerial in
images did suggest that liquid water had existed. We can see the possibility and suggestion
of river valleys. There's even the suggestion of large open areas of water on Mars at some
times in its past. But Viking had returned images of a world that, much to everyone's
greatest appointment, had died an awful long time ago.
Don't get me wrong. The Viking mission was an incredible success, both in terms of science
and in terms of the engineering to get those, what really are, massive spacecraft safely
to the surface of Mars. But in all honesty, we wanted Martians and we didn't get Martians.
As a result of that, I think the missions to Mars kind of dwindled away and were put
on hold. But that was all going to change when something was found that had previously
fallen from the sky.
In December of 1984, a meteorite was found by a U.S. team in the Allen Hills area of
Antarctica. You might ask, why look in Antarctica? Well, dark meteorites will tend to show up
against the white background of this snowy landscape, as you can see here. Also, meteorites
can tend to get locked up in ice and it removes them from the highly oxidizing atmosphere.
In occasional periods, they can be exposed at a later date and hopefully found by a lucky
scientist like this guy here. The meteorite that was recovered in this instance was about
the size of a softball. It was one of a series of meteorites, which through gas analysis and
other techniques, is thought to have actually come from Mars. All have a similar composition.
And this particular one is from Allen Hills and is called Allen Hills or ALH84001, probably
one of the most famous meteorites in the world.
In 1996, ALH84001 hit the headlines and became an instant international superstar. Why? We
got plenty of meteorites. I showed you a fragment of a meteorite in a previous lecture. Well,
the reason why this particular meteorite became the darling of the scientific community and
of the news media was because it was claimed that fossils were found within this meteorite,
fossils from Mars. This was so stunning that President Clinton made an announcement. I
just like to read you some of his words. He said, It speaks of the possibility of life.
If this discovery is confirmed, it will surely be one of the most stunning insights into
our universe that science has ever uncovered. Its implications are as far-reaching and awe-inspiring
as can be imagined. Even as it promises answers to some of our oldest questions, it poses
still others, even more fundamental. Wow. Wow. What an introduction that is.
So let's look a little closer at this meteorite. How did it get here? Well, let's consider
a possible sequence of events. It's thought that the rock that we're looking at here was
originally a magma, and it crystallized to form an igneous rock around about 4.1 billion
years ago. At around about 3.9 to 4 billion years ago, it was fractured in a meteorite
impact and laid exposed on the surface of the planet. At that particular time, it's
thought that Mars was warmer and wetter and probably had areas of open water. The rock
later became encrusted or invaded with microbes, if you believe that these things are fossils
that we're looking at. Eventually, those microbes becoming fossilized. And around about 50 million
years ago, a second meteorite impact blasted ALH 8001 off the surface of Mars and into
space. At around about 13,000 years before present, it intersected the orbit of Earth
and came tumbling down to impact in Antarctica. Now, these dates aren't fanciful. They've
been determined using various isotopic techniques and something that we call cosmic ray exposure
analysis, and we think that they are fairly accurate. But the question is, is that a fossil?
These are some of the structures that they found. Now, around about 20 to 30 nanometers
in length, that's smaller than the smallest bacteria that's ever been discovered on our
planet. And some people have questioned, is it even possible for biochemistry to work
at these scales? We've also got to be aware that certain inorganic processes can replicate
fossils. They can mimic them in some way. I want to show you something. I want to show
you a fossil plant. Have a look at this fossil fern on the surface of this rock. Actually,
you can't look at a fossil fern on the surface of this rock because there are no fossils
on this rock. This rock is actually covered by a particular mineral, a manganese mineral,
which as it grows, forms these kind of wonderful fractal fern-like patterns. It's a pseudo
fossil, not a fossil at all. So you can see we have to be very careful when we're interpreting
little structures like that to make sure they're just not inorganically generated. This is not
the only evidence, though, fortunately, because if that was the only evidence we had, I doubt
there would have been an announcement made. There's other chemical evidence that hints
towards these structures actually being life forms, or at least previous life forms. One
of those pieces of evidence is the presence of something that we call polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbon, or PAHs. They're a common decay product of bacteria, and they are found within
the meteorite as well. We also find these kind of rosette structures. They have cores
of manganese, and they're surrounded by rings of iron carbonate and iron sulfide, and they
bear very strong resemblance to mineral features that are produced by terrestrial bacteria
today. So we have another possible tie there to life-forming processes, or at least life-generating
processes. But also these crystals of a mineral that's called magnetite. Magnetite, we've
made it before, it's a magnetic mineral, and it was found in the meteor. Now, why does
that suggest life? Well, it's because magnetite is also found in certain bacteria. This is
a magnetotactic bacteria that's called MV1. If you look at this picture, you can see that
there's a kind of a row, almost a necklace of little crystals running through the centre
of the creature. Those are magnetite crystals that have been secreted by the organism itself.
We think that the organism uses it to align itself to Earth's magnetic field, and it helps
the bacteria orientate itself in the water column. We're not exactly sure yet why it's
doing that, but it obviously uses it for some reason. So the magnetites we find in the meteorite
look very similar to the crystal formation that we find in those bacteria as well. It's
a similar type of magnetite crystal structure. Plus we have the PAHs, and we have those rosette
structures of the manganese minerals, and those little fossils themselves, plus some
additional evidence. Contamination of the meteorite appears not to be a problem, although
it's still debated by some. So isn't this therefore really strong evidence that what
we're looking at here is evidence of fossil life on Mars brought to Earth in a meteorite?
Well, there's a problem. There's not one of the pieces of evidence that I've described
here that couldn't be completely explained by some sort of inorganic process. But let's
just for now, given that the jury is kind of out, and some people are very pro-this
being evidence of life from Mars, or the people are more skeptical, but let's just for now
assume that these are real fossils. If they are, it gives us an interesting alternate
to the evolution of life. Because Mars is a lot smaller, it would have cooled a lot faster
than Earth, and because of that it probably would have developed liquid oceans before
Earth did. If that's the case, is it possible that life evolved on Mars before it did on
Earth? Imagine a developing Martian bacterial biosphere. Mars at this time was still receiving
lots of impacts from space, and because Mars has less gravity than Earth, that means when
those impacts occur, it's a lot easier to launch rocks off its surface, and also potentially
if there are microbes on that rock, launch them into space as well. But how could microbes
survive the vacuum of space? Because what I'm thinking about here is the possibility
that perhaps Mars is seeding our planet. Well, think about this. Human survival in a vacuum
is measured in seconds. This is Commander Charles Comrade of the Apollo 12 mission. Unfortunately,
he's wearing a full space suit, so he's doing well there. This is a mission to the Moon
in November 1969, and what he's looking at here is an old probe. It's the old Surveyor
3 probe, which was sent to the Moon as a kind of a reconnaissance mission to proceed the
manned landings. It had landed on the Moon in April 1967. Now, what the Commander there
is trying to receive is the camera from the probe, and when that camera was taken back
to NASA and stood it, it was found that it contained these. This is Streptococcus mitus.
It's a common bug that's often found in the nose of humans. Probably had contaminated
the camera while the NASA technicians were handling it. Now, very strict contamination
procedures had been followed when this camera was extracted from the probe on the Moon,
which means that those bacteria could have only had got to the Moon by travelling from
the Earth to the Moon, and then staying there. Those bacteria were found to be still viable.
Put them in a petri dish, and they start to divide. These bacteria had survived three
years of exposure to hard vacuum, to radiation, and extremes of cold and heat, with no available
sources of nutrition and water. Pretty tough little beasties.
The extreme hardiness of bacteria would possibly also allow them to withstand reentry. In fact,
some technicians at NASA have done experiments where they have a gun which can actually simulate
impacts on the surface of the planet, and it's been found that bacteria can survive catastrophic
impacts events as well. So it is entirely possible, if life did emerge on Mars first,
that bugs were transplanted to Earth. And if that's the case, we are all Martians.
Is it the case? Well, it's an interesting possibility. I must admit, I find it rather
wonderful if it was. And I would volunteer probably for a mission to Mars to work that
out, as long as there was decent plumbing on Mars.
Anyway, we've already seen the story of Mars didn't really work out well in the end. Mars
magnetosphere fails, the atmosphere is stripped away by solar winds, and open water evaporates
away. Effectively, the planet dies a slow death.
We can see this death of a planet from some of the photographs and the data that has been
returned from the Mars rovers, from spirit and opportunity. In analysing the mineralogy
of the sedimentary layers that we can see in these images, the probes have noted that
the sedimentary rocks record oceans that were becoming increasingly saltier over time, representing
the fact that these oceans were starting to evaporate away, concentrating those salts
in the sediments. This idea that life was seeded from elsewhere
is called panspermia. And it is, and was, I guess, regarded by many people as being
somewhat fringe science. It is championed by Sir Fred Hoyle, who is a British astronomer,
and Chandra Ramasinga, who is a biochemist at the University of Cardiff in Wales. But
perhaps giving our understanding of the hardiness of microbes and of the possibility of microbial
life on Mars, at least at some point, perhaps it's not quite as sci-fi as we previously
thought. But what about Earth? What are really oldest
Earth-based fossils that we can be sure of? Well, how about these homegrown ones? These
are the oldest structures that are claimed to be fossils. They come from Australia, and
they date to about 3.5 billion years ago. They're from a rock that we call the apex
church. A church is a fine-grained silica deposit. They closely resemble certain bacteria that
we call cyanobacteria. You probably know them by a more common name. It's ponskum. Ponskum
might not seem exciting, but actually they are incredible creatures. They represent the
development in the biosphere of an incredibly complex process, that process that every high
school student hopefully should know about, the process of photosynthesis. Photosynthesis,
the process whereby sunlight is used to convert carbon dioxide into organic compounds, and
also a rather nasty and rather dangerous little byproduct, the byproduct we know of today
as oxygen. Photosynthesis is a complex process, and if
the first fossils that we're finding, the oldest fossils on our planet, are photosynthetic
fossils, or at least evidence of photosynthetic life at 3.5 billion years ago, life therefore
must have a vastly long history. There must be a lot more primitive examples of life before
we get to this level of complexity. However, as I said, the biogenicity, whether or not
these structures are actually life in the apex church, is highly debated. Even so, there
has been a more recent find in an area called Strelly Pool in Western Australia by Martin
Brasier at Oxford University, where they find fairly convincing evidence of fossils of sulfur
metabolizing bacteria that were living on an ancient beach, and that was 3.4 billion years
ago, still pretty old. What about older than these particular examples? Well, there are
hints of it, and for those hints you need to travel to a place called Isua and Greenland,
and these potential hints of life date back to around about 3.8 to 3.7 billion years ago.
Now, Isua is important for two reasons. It's, first of all, the first direct evidence that
we have open water on the surface of the planet. Now, I know we mentioned the Jack Hills rocks,
which are the suggestion of open water even earlier, but the Isua complex has the oldest
structures that you can positively say and identify as being formed in water, and they're
these things. We've mentioned them a lot of time. They're pillow lavas. I just want to show you a
little part of a pillow lava right here. Now, pillow lavas are basaltic in composition. Remember,
we're looking at lavas that are being erupted underneath water, very commonly underneath the
ocean. When that lava is erupted into the water, obviously, there's a great temperature differential.
The lava is very hot, and it suddenly meets very cold water, so it forms a skin over the
surface of the lava very, very rapidly. Now, that skin chills, but it's still fairly flexible,
but lava is still being pumped into the skin, so it swells a bit like a balloon. Eventually,
though, that skin pops, and another balloon is released to the side, forming these pillow-like
structures. So pillow lavas, like we can see here, are a great indicator of the presence of water,
and pillow lavas just like these are found at Isua, but that isn't all. We also find a rock
like this, a rock that contains these thin, dark bands. These are sedimentary rocks, but those
dark bands have been found to contain particles of carbon, and it's been suggested that perhaps
these particles of carbon have been produced by microorganisms. This is work of Professor
Minnick Rosing and Professor Robert Fry, both of the University of Copenhagen in Denmark,
and they find additional important information to support the possibility that this might be life.
Remember, we talked about carbon. We said there were three isotopes of carbon. There was the
carbon-14, the unstable variety that decays, which we can use there to date radiomatically
relatively recent objects. But I'm not interested in this carbon-14 here. I'm interested in the
two stable isotopes, carbon-12 and carbon-13. Now, photosynthesizing life has a preference for
organic carbon dioxide, which is in the carbon-12 flavor, shall we say. When you're looking
at organisms, they tend to be enriched in carbon-12, and a high concentration of carbon-12
could indicate that photosynthesis was occurring. Rosing and Fry found this signature within
those carbon blobs at issuer. If correct, and this represents photosynthetic life, it
means that life existed photosynthetic-like over 3.7 billion years ago. That really is
quite astounding news. Again, still highly debated though. So, let's ask a question though.
We know that life started fairly early on. How is life going to survive though, in what
is, at least initially, a very crowded solar system? As I said, the apex-chirped fossils
and the issuer evidence have been highly debated, but we're pretty sure about the Strelly-Pool
fossils. So, we have life that is really, really ancient, which probably pushes the origin
of life way, way back into the history of our planet, and that poses a serious problem.
The problem is exemplified by this image. This is the surface of Mercury. As you can
tell, it looks pretty well beat up. The moon and Mars, I guess, have a pretty similar surface.
It records an intense battering between 4.1 to 3.8 billion years ago, and it's termed
the late heavy bombardment period. Impacts during the late heavy bombardment period
were big. I mean, really big. On Earth, evidence of the late heavy bombardment period, like
a lot of the early evidence of that early history of our planet, has been removed by
plate tectonics and erosion. But the other planets certainly do record it, and there's
no reason to expect that Earth would not have also suffered severe and extreme large impact
events, even though we might have been protected a little bit from certain events by our large
moon. We received large hits. There's almost no question about it. The size of those impacts
is estimated to be catastrophic. It would have formed craters that are perhaps thousands
of miles in diameter. That event would have thrown rock vapor high up into the atmosphere.
In fact, it would have superheated the atmosphere to such an extent that any open water, the
oceans would have boiled and evaporated away into the atmosphere. It's also been suggested
in such a massive impact event, the surface of the crust may have also started to melt.
So effectively, what we're talking about in these large massive impact events in the late
heavy bombardment period on our planet, the surface of our planet would have been sterilized.
So here's the paradox. Life is already complex by 3.8 billion years old, presumably, and life
therefore must have existed before this. So how did life survive the late heavy bombardment
period? Well, could life have evolved more than once? That's a reasonable assumption.
But genetic evidence suggests that the origin of life lies way beyond or way before the
late heavy bombardment period, and there's a single train of life to the present. So
where did life go to hide? The answer is probably found in those hot hydrothermal vent systems
that we discussed in the previous lecture. Remember those ones that we find around mid-ocean
ridges. Now the water in these systems is full of toxic heavy metals. It's close to boiling
and there are great pressures associated with those. But in addition, we also find life.
We also find that bacteria can survive in those conditions, but particular bacteria. Actually,
we call them bacteria, but they're simpler than bacteria, and we call them the archaea.
This species, archaeoglobus fulgidus, is found in hot sediments near submarine hydrothermal
vent systems. It exists in temperatures at around about 181 degrees Fahrenheit. Now,
archaea are probably some of the most primitive representations of creatures that we have
on our planet. They're found in many extreme environments, extremes of temperature and
of pH, and that's why we give them the name extrema files. Some live in salty brines,
and some also live at very great depth. And it's these that are interesting. This is some
work of Dwayne Moser and Tollis Onstott of Princeton University. They were investigating
a South African gold mine. This is two miles down. Here, the rock is around about the water
inside the rock is around 140 degrees Fahrenheit. There's no oxygen. There's no light. And
yet when analyzed, they found archaea. Life was pervasive and living at these great depths
in the planet. The Earth's biosphere is therefore not only on the surface, but also moves and
has moved into the planet itself, into the crust of our Earth. So this is the way out
of our late heavy bombardment paradox. Imagine a heat pulse from the impact. The heat pulse
might have melted the very surface of the rocks, but would have never have reached deep enough
to sterilize all those creatures, all those archaea that were potentially living within
the crust. They could survive there until temperatures on the surface of the planet
cooled and the oceans condensed and rained back to the surface. Then life could migrate
back to the planet and start again. Life had a lifeboat. Perhaps therefore, life's earliest
ancestor was not from Darwin's warm little pool. Perhaps life's earliest ancestor is
from archaea deep within the crust of our planet. And in the next lecture, I'd like
to investigate something else. I'd like to investigate the possibility that life almost
destroyed the biosphere, ended its story and encased our planet in a tomb of ice.
