Hello again. Following the events that were described in the last lecture, we now have
a radically altered planet. We have a planet that now has at least somewhat significant
levels of oxygen in the atmosphere, but we have a biosphere that is apparently stalled,
perhaps due to the oxygen causing the erosion of that pyrite and the development of the
sulphidic ocean. Earth was a slime planet with some small multicellular algae. Changes
would occur around 635 million years before the present day, and those changes we think
might have been caused by yet another global glaciation. The snowballs had returned.
In this lecture, we will ask some interesting questions. Just how can we get ice all the
way to the equator? Also, how do we end such a mega snowball glaciation once it has started?
And how could life survive below ice, possibly miles thick, for millions of years? So, how
can we get ice all the way to the equator? In the last lecture, I mentioned a global
snowball event at around about 2.2 billion years ago, but what I didn't do was address
how on earth snowballs occur. To be honest with you, global glaciation is not a really
new idea. They were first suggested by Brian Harland in the 1940s. He was a geologist at
the University of Cambridge, and he was studying a lot of glacial features. He became really
good at it. This is one of the features he studied. It's a glacial dropstone. Now, as
ice moves out across the land, it picks up debris and rock and kind of freezes it into
its under surface. Some of those rocks make scour marks on the rocks that are moving across
those glacial striations that Wagner was looking at. But if those rocks and the ice then move
out across open water, across an ocean or a lake, those rocks can become unstable and
dislodge themselves, fall out of the ice, and fall into the sediments below, producing
a structure like this, a large boulder that really shouldn't be there in finer grain sediment.
And you can see how it's fallen. It's distorted the sediment layers around it. Harland, as
I said, became an expert in recognizing these glacial features, and found glacial dropstones
dating to around 600 million years on virtually every continent. The thing is, he also found
them in the tropics as well. Now, Harland from this suggested the possibility
of a global glaciation. It went down not unlike a lead balloon. It was about as popular an
idea as Wagner's continental drift was. However, it's kind of continental drift that would
be used to explain the presence of dropstones at the equator away. Dropstones it was suggested
when continental drift, as accepted as a theory, had been developed in higher latitudes and
then just due to the drift of the continents moved into the equator. So, no problem.
The last glaciation that we have on our planet occurred about 10,000 years ago. And the tropics
were still warm and ice-free. It would appear that the tropics could not freeze. A global
glaciation was just a preposterous idea. But just as World War II had advanced our understanding
of continental drift by necessitating the development of sonar, echo-sounding and therefore
understanding the profile of the ocean floor, so the Cold War would advance our understanding
of the snowball earth. I grew up in the 1970s and the 1980s. It wasn't just a period of
rather embarrassing music, but it was a possibility in that era of distinct catastrophic nuclear
war. It was on most people's mind. I did spend some sleepless nights thinking about
it. There was a certain Russian chemist and climatologist who was thinking about this as
well. His name is Mikhail Budiko. He mathematically modelled what would happen to a climate following
a nuclear exchange. What you've got to remember is that back then in the 70s and 80s we had
an awful lot more nuclear weapons and so the exchange would have been absolutely incredible.
And he found that earth's climate had a tipping point. The nuclear explosions that would have
occurred would have released particulate material, throwing it up into the atmosphere. Now that
has definite problems for the earth. Not only is it radioactive, but if you think of small
volcanic eruptions, once they erupt and they push ash up into the atmosphere, that is known
to have cooled the planet. Even just a small volcano can cause a noticeable dip and cause
cool summers. But as I said, we're dealing here with catastrophic nuclear exchange, vast
releases of energy and vast clouds going up into the atmosphere. He realised that that
cloud of ash and dust in the atmosphere would block out the sun. We would create what is
known as a nuclear winter. The sun would be hidden and the earth would become dark. But
not only dark, the earth would become very cold as well. But even more frightening,
if you can get even more frightening than that, is that if ice had developed and had
advanced to the present day latitude of Texas, we'd get into a positive feedback loop. More
solar radiation would be reflected back to space than the earth could absorb. We'd start
to go into a runaway freezing event, and ice would advance very rapidly to the equator
and totally cover the planet. But it's even more scary because he realised that once
a snowball had been created, there was no way out. That was it. The ice would continue
to reflect the sunlight back into space and earth would never be free of ice again. It
would be a frozen planet in our solar system until our suns swelled into a red giant, at
which point we wouldn't care anyway. This is why Harlan's idea was rejected. We are
still here, therefore a snowball could never have happened. No problem. The snowball earth
theory therefore remained very much fringe science. That's until a certain Dr. Joe Kershvink
of Princeton University started to think about this hypothesis and started to investigate
it using magnets. Now, we've already discussed that the earth has its own magnetic field.
It has its own magnetic field because the core formed under differentiation. We have
that nickel ion core which is causing the dynamo effect and generating that wonderful
lines of flux that is protecting us from solar radiation and also helping keep our atmosphere
in place. If you were to be able to look at our earth's magnetic field, you would see
that it has lines of flux, not unlike you expect around a bar magnet. You can see that
those lines of flux are kind of vertical at the magnetic poles and more parallel to the
ground when you get closer to the equator and the inclination of those lines of flux
with respect to the earth's surface can give you an idea of latitude where you are on the
surface of the planet. Now, rocks contain lots of iron minerals. We've already mentioned
magnetite and when sedimentary rocks are deposited or a basalt lava for example cools, those
magnetic minerals align themselves to earth's magnetic field. Effectively, it preserves
the inclination of that magnetic field at the time that rock was actually formed, preserving
the latitudinal position of that rock. Kirschvingt used a detector called a magnetometer to read
this inclination in the rocks and decided one of the useful things he could do with that
was test Harlan's hypothesis. Go and find those dropstones and finally put to bed the
idea that it was a global glaciation. Fully expecting that his magnetometer would indicate
that those dropstones presently at the equator had formed somewhere in higher latitudes and
then subsequently moved, you can imagine his surprise when the magnetic inclination indicated
that those dropstones had indeed formed at the equator. A snowball earth had occurred.
How could this happen? How could the earth get so cold that ice can meet at the equator?
Well, we've already dealt with how the first snowball occurred. At around about 2.2 billion
years ago, the earth was kept warm by methane remember from those methanogenic archaea.
The cyanobacteria that would evolve later on would produce oxygen. That oxygen reacts
with the methane removing that methane blanket because we have a young fate son. The carbon
dioxide present in the atmosphere wasn't sufficient to keep the planet warm and we slip into our
first snowball. Okay, but that can't really explain the more recent snowballs that we've
experienced. The more recent snowballs have to somehow be accounted for by removing our
current carbon dioxide greenhouse protection. And we think we do that by considering the
story of a supercontinent called Rodinia. Rodinia formed about 1.2 billion years ago.
At around about 830 million years ago, Rodinia was well on its way to fragmenting. The result
was a series of continents that are grouped around the equator. You can see them here in
this depiction, all separated by ocean. The continental configuration here led to the development
of a particular climatological situation where you get intense evaporation and rainfall,
tropical rainfall, all along these continental areas. Now, when you have warm rain falling
at the tropics, it has a very profound effect on weathered rocks. You can see I'm looking
at a rock here from a tropical area. It's a granite and the tropical weathering has
rotted the rock effectively. That's a granite and you can see I'm actually digging my hand
into it there. This is a product of what we call silicate weathering. It uses carbon dioxide
dissolved in the rainwater. When you have carbon dioxide dissolved in rainwater, it forms
a weak acid called carbonic acid. That then can then react with rocks producing clays,
but also bicarbonate ions which are washed into the oceans. Effectively, this process
of removing carbon dioxide in rainwater and then effectively removing that carbon dioxide
in the form of bicarbonate ions into the oceans is washing carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere.
At around about the same time, around about 723 million years ago, there was a flood basalt
eruption. Our flood basalt eruption is a massive outpouring of basalt lava. We'll meet these
when we're dealing with mass extinction events later on in this series. In Arctic Canada,
there is a massive flood basalt, but at the time, Arctic Canada was at the equator. Basalt
is particularly susceptible to chemical weathering. We have a further contributory factor here
to the massive drawdown of carbon dioxide from our global greenhouse blanket at that
particular time. Carbon dioxide, as I said, was effectively washed from the skies, and
as the carbon dioxide was washed from the sky so the hypothesis goes, the earth started
to cool, ice started to form, and advance towards the equator. Eventually, we get into
that positive feedback effect. More sunlight is reflected back into space than is being
absorbed by the surface of the planet, and ice advanced very rapidly into the tropics,
sealing off the surface with a highly reflective white surface, possibly miles in thickness.
So that begs a very important question. Remember we said that one of the reasons why Harland's
hypothesis was rejected was because if we got into a snowball event, there's no way
out of it. So how do we end such a mega snowball event once a snowball glaciation had started?
How do we get out of it? Obviously, we did get out of it. We're here, so we have a paradox
that we have to explain, and we think that paradox can be explained by these features,
by volcanoes. Even though the surface of our planet might be covered by thick ice, Earth's
internal heat engine is still working. The heat generated within our earth has to escape
and it escapes, as we've already mentioned, through volcanoes. That's where most of the
internal heat from the centre of our planet goes. But it's not the lava that we're talking
about here. We're not talking about lava erupting and melting the ice. There wouldn't be nearly
enough lava for that to occur. But there's something else that volcanoes produce that
it's going to be very useful in ending this snowball situation, and that is carbon dioxide
gas. So we have volcanoes emitting carbon dioxide. Normally in today's situation we
have carbon dioxide being produced by volcanoes, but we said carbon dioxide gets recycled.
By life is one of the processes in the present day, but carbon dioxide is also dissolved
in the oceans, and it's also removed from the atmosphere by eroding rocks, weathering
rocks as well. But now in this snowball situation we have a complete global coverage of ice.
There's nowhere for the carbon dioxide to go, but up. Atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide
would start to increase. We think after about 10 million years carbon dioxide would be around
about 10% of the atmosphere. Today it's less than 1%. This is incredible. Those levels of
carbon dioxide would cause an incredible greenhouse warming event, and there would be a tipping
point, a point where the temperature was so high that the ice would start to melt catastrophically.
It's been hypothesized that temperatures would swing on the planet from minus 122 to potentially
plus 122 degrees Fahrenheit. Ice, even if it's miles thick, under those temperatures
would probably melt in less than about 2,000 years.
Can you see how this is earth system science again? We're looking at activity in the geosphere,
the necessity for the earth to lose heat in the form of volcanoes, having a profound effect
in the atmosphere, producing carbon dioxide, producing a greenhouse effect, which in turn
feeds back and has a profound effect on the hydrosphere, or if you want to call it in
this time, the cryosphere, the ice, ending the snowball. This diagram summarizes a typical
snowball cycle. You can see at the bottom there we start off with general cooling, and
then we get to a point where we get to that positive feedback effect, and suddenly we
have a massive drop in temperature. That's when the ice would have advanced to the equator,
to the tropics. Then we have a period where we have total ice coverage, and then again
at the top of this diagram, the tipping point, the point where carbon dioxide had reached
such incredible levels that we get into a massive greenhouse effect, and the ice melts
catastrophically, giving us a hot aftermath to this snowball cycle.
There would be additional consequences though, as I said, to this snowball event. As I mentioned
from the previous diagram, after the snowball event, we'd expect very hot surface conditions,
because we'd still have the remnants of that carbon dioxide in the atmosphere causing a
greenhouse effect. That would cause warm, less dense, moist air to form at the ocean
surfaces, and that would rise. As it rises, water vapor would condense forming clouds.
In fact, this would probably be the first time since the snowball event had initiated
that we would have seen clouds on the snowball earth. Formation of clouds releases latent
heat of condensation that warms the air, which continues to rise, which draws in more moist
air below it, into a climatological positive feedback system here. The exchange of heat
causes a pattern of wind that circulates like water going down a drain. Now, we all know
this particular weather feature by another name. We call it a hurricane. At about 122
degrees Fahrenheit, those hurricanes wouldn't have been like any hurricanes that we've
witnessed in recent times. They've been termed hyper hurricanes. They would have been absolutely
vast. You would have seen warm, torrential rain for the first time in millions of years,
pouring down into those continental areas. There's a diagram here that tries to, sort
of equation here, that tries to represent what is going on in this particular situation.
I'd just like to go through that in a little more detail. Effectively, what we're looking
at here is, in the end of a snowball earth effect, is rain washing the excess carbon
dioxide out of the atmosphere. So we have carbon dioxide here, combining with water
in the atmosphere to form carbonic acid. That then is going to start eroding rocks
again. You can see there I've labeled rocks and the chemical equation for I've given
there is a kind of a calcium aluminum silicate. So it's a kind of a general formula for rock.
In eroding those rocks, you're going to produce a lot of calcium ions. Those calcium ions
are going to combine with bicarbonate, producing calcium carbonate. Now we know calcium carbonate
by another name when it forms a rock. We call it limestone. So this is a prediction. This
is something we can test regarding the snowball earth hypothesis. If we have a snowball earth
and if it ends in the way that we're envisaging by this amazing greenhouse effect, one of
the net effects should be that lithologically in the rock record, we should see lots of
limestones forming after it. This occurred to Harvard professor Paul Hoffman and he decided
to go and look for these limestones and he found them. He called them cap carbonates
and he found them on the top of cold glacial conditioned sediments. We can see a wonderful
image of it here. The cold glacial sediments are those reddish colored rocks at the bottom.
You can see there's a jumble of rocks in them. It's possibly a glacial tillite or
perhaps some dropstones in there as well. Then above them we have these more whitish
creamy colored rocks. Those are the carbonates. But look at the contact between them. It's
not gradational. It's extremely sharp. It's a very rapid transition. We're going from
indicators in the rocks of very, very cold conditions to very suddenly flipping into
very, very warm conditions. This line here represents, according to Hoffman, the catastrophic
collapse of the snowball earth. It's a nice neat story, isn't it? Demonstrating the interconnectedness
of all the earth systems. How one earth system has a knock-on effect on the other. Not only
in the generation of a snowball earth effect, but also in how it ends as well. And everyone
was quite pleased with themselves for quite a while. But a group of scientists weren't
all that happy and eventually called foul. This group of scientists were the biologists.
They asked this question, how could life survive below ice, possibly miles thick for millions
of years? Well, it depends on what life you're talking about. If you're talking about the
archaea or other life that perhaps exists in hydrothermal vent systems or deep in the
crust, you don't really care. You don't need sunlight. But what about specifically, as
the biologists were referring to, photosynthetic life? Now, photosynthetic creatures, we think
evolved probably billions of years ago. And evolutionary evidence suggests that it evolved
just once. So how on earth could they survive a snowball that could be potentially many,
many miles thick? That is a problem which people scratch their heads about for a long
time. Paul Hoffman came up with the suggestion. He said that when you're looking at ice existing
on two different bodies, one on the ocean and you have ice on the land, they're going
to move in slightly different ways. Ice on the ocean will tend to move a little bit.
In fact, it's constantly moving. But the ice on land is more locked. So where those two
areas meet, you're going to get a lot of tension. And probably you're going to see cracks opening
up, tension cracks in the ice. It's possible that these tension cracks could open up. And
it's these tension cracks that are providing oases of light down to the ocean floor and
allowing the existence, the continued existence, of these photosynthetic creatures. Perhaps
they would open up frequently enough such that young creatures or the larvae of photosynthetic
creatures, if you want to put it, could survive and drift to the next crack and then proceed
on from there. Others preferred a different solution. They suggested, well, maybe we don't
have to have an entire snowball earth. Perhaps we can just have what's called a slush ball
earth. So we do have ice getting to the equator. We can explain that there'll be little lobes
of life going out into the tropical areas, giving us our dropstones and producing our
glacial deposits. But perhaps in general, it was more mushy around the equator. There
would still be areas of open ocean, areas where photosynthetic like in the oceans could
still exist. However, it's been difficult to see or model how the equator could escape
from a complete ice lockup when you get to that level of ice encroachment. That positive
feedback loop would probably, and almost definitely, completely lock up ice right to the equator.
Well, there's been other recent discoveries that might explain, in addition to these cracks,
how photosynthetic life might have survived. We've been getting kind of excited recently
about the existence of what is known as subglacial lakes. It would appear that lakes that exist
under even vast thicknesses of ice aren't really quite as sterile as we used to think.
Now, ice that cools slowly can be very pure. It can be very glass-like. And it can allow
sunlight to penetrate right through that ice, right to the bottom of the body of that ice,
to the ocean floor or to the lake floor. And it's been found that those areas can quite
adequately support bacterial photosynthetic population. So, it's possible that we have
ways around the photosynthetic life problem, both in Hoffman's tension cracks opening up
and perhaps in areas where the ice wasn't so thick that we could allow the penetration
of sunlight. So, what would happen after the snowball? Well, after the snowball, we would
see photosynthetic algae released now into warm oceans. Remember, we've just gone through
a global greenhouse effect in order to end the snowball earth. We had a massive rise
in temperatures. The oceans would have been a bit like a warm bath. In addition, those
oceans are being thoroughly mixed by those hyper-hurricanes. Those hyper-hurricanes are
also causing a lot of tropical rain, which is washing lots of erosion products from the
continent and nutrients into those oceans. If you were to look at the earth, it's been
said, after a failure of a snowball earth event, you wouldn't see blue oceans. You would
see the oceans turning green, effectively turning green with pond scum. After each snowball
earth event, because of this sequence of events, because of this release of nutrients into
a warm bath ocean, we get a proliferation of cyanobacteria, of pond scum, and because
of that, a leap in oxygen. So, these leaps in oxygen are probably a result of the mega-ocean
mixing by the hyper-hurricanes, which themselves are a result of the end of the snowball earth
event. After the first snowball earth event, that increase in oxygen led to the development
of the sulfidic ocean. Remember, it was oxidizing pyrite on the land and causing those sulfate-reducing
bacteria to produce the hydrogen sulfide, putting brakes on evolution, stopping more
complex creatures from evolving. That burst of photosynthesis, though, in the later snowballs,
we think would have a different effect. It would flood even more oxygen into the earth's
system. More oxygen would get into the atmosphere, but also be more effectively mixed into the
ocean systems as well. Now, these are conditions that aren't really favored by sulfate-reducing
bacteria. Their rain over much of the ocean would kind of be over, and because of that,
it would end the sulfidic ocean. We're going to stop the production of hydrogen sulfide,
and therefore, a lot of those key elements, remember, molybdenum and copper, those elements
which are key for enzymatic pathways, would suddenly be available. And perhaps it's this
that takes the brakes off the deadlock of evolution, and evolution can now proceed forward
to produce larger and more complex lifeforms. The actual details of the snowball hypothesis
are still very much debated. Some question the number or the frequency and extent of
the snowballs. Some people still really do prefer a slushable hypothesis and really aren't
happy at all with ice meeting completely at the tropics. Some even question the interpretation
of the geological evidence. Perhaps we've misinterpreted these dropstones. Perhaps we've misinterpreted
the cap carbonates. But there is a certainty. As new lifeforms evolve, it will impact all
the other major earth systems. A snowball is just one possible way in which our planet
can be affected, but a very profound one, a very dramatic example of how changing one
system can have an incredible effect and change all the other systems around it.
What the ice might have permitted is the next great leap in evolution. Remember I said
up until this point, earth had definitely been slime ball earth. It was now going to
be replaced. It's going to be replaced with something that you might be willing to take
an eight year old to go and see. It's not just little pieces of algae or small protozoans.
It was going to be certainly a lot more diverse and a lot more interesting. And we're going
to meet some of those creatures in the next video.
