I took this photograph today just before I came to the studio.
It's actually a very unusual photograph.
A lot of you are probably looking at that and saying,
well, OK, it's a very pretty butterfly,
but I've seen similar butterflies in my backyard.
So what's unusual about it?
Well, it's unusual because what we're seeing here
is a creature that is physically interacting with its environment.
Remember, up until this part in our story,
most of Earth has been a slime biosphere, microscopic.
Following the last snowball, though, things really changed.
The seas were becoming oxygenated.
It ended the sulphidic ocean.
That deadlock had been ended with those sulphate-reducing bacteria.
We had free oxygen available for the first time
and the possibility that life forms could really start to get bigger.
The stage was set for multicellular life forms.
So for this lecture, I'd like to look at why did creatures get big
and what evidence do we have for early multicellular animals?
Also, what was the nature of the first large animal ecosystem
and ask, what would end that early animal garden?
So why did things get big and what evidence do we have for it?
Why bother to get big?
It's important to know that evolution doesn't just happen.
There has to be an advantage to actually getting to be a bigger creature.
Small, after all, had been a very successful strategy.
The majority of the biosphere's mass is still microscopic
compared to creatures that live on the surface of the planet.
So there must be some physical advantage in getting larger.
And here's just a few possibilities.
First of all, as I indicated on that first photograph,
you can physically interact with your environment.
Some microscopic creatures have flagella and can move around.
Amoeba can move around, for example.
But at general, they're at the mercy of ocean currents
or the currents in the pond where they live.
They really can't move where they want to go.
Large creatures are really much more in control of their own destiny.
They can move to places.
But not only that, within the Earth system, they can physically alter it.
They can interact with it, which is an important new development.
In addition, if you're big, you can start to differentiate and specialise functions.
You can perform more complex activities.
For example, just look at the elephant that we've got here.
Imagine all the specialised functions that an elephant can perform with that trunk.
It has a visual system. It has a complex hearing system.
It has legs, which allow it to move around the landscape effectively.
This increases your ability to exploit varied opportunities
and increases your chances, therefore, of passing your genes onto the next generation.
And after all, that's what life is all about.
Well, at least in a biological sense, anyway.
In addition, if you're composed of more than one cell,
you can replace your damaged components.
You're not reliant on just one unit.
I'm replacing skin cells and other cells all the time.
So, potentially, that can help creatures that are composed of more than one cell live longer
and, therefore, maybe pass more generations down to the future.
Before I proceed, though, I want to consider the role of one of our favourite molecules,
oxygen, once again.
As we said, it can power larger animals.
It can power larger, more complex metabolisms.
Increased oxygen levels may have ended the silphidic ocean,
mobilising those key metals which would allow the development of those more complex metabolisms.
Oxygen had probably risen to about 10% of current levels by the end of the last snowball
at around about 635 million years ago.
Remember, before, it was just about 1% when we were looking at the development of the silphidic ocean.
This rising oxygen, though, to 10% is going to be associated with the development of something very important.
And that's not O2, but another oxygen molecule, O3, Ozone.
And that's important because it's going to block ultraviolet radiation.
If you can block ultraviolet radiation,
it means that you can probably get larger associations of cells in shallower water.
It's a good idea to get into shallower water.
It's an area where there's a lot of food resources.
And if you're not having as much UV radiation penetrating to the surface of the planet
and interacting with your cell structure,
you're probably not going to suffer many of the pathologies
which we know are a possible factor of being exposed to UV today.
Cancer and the breakdown of cells and so on.
So that shielding of the planet, BioZone, was possibly another important factor
when considering the importance of oxygen.
But there's something else to consider here, too.
And it's this.
Now, I know this might look like something that you've extracted from your plughole in the shower,
but it's not.
It's collagen.
It's a net of proteins.
It's the scaffolding, basically, for placing cells into.
It's the scaffolding which animals exclusively use to build bigger bodies.
And in order to form collagen, you need relatively high levels of oxygen.
So it's possible that animals had to wait higher levels of oxygen
before they could actually build bigger bodies.
But when do we first see the emergence of large creatures?
This is actually a problem for Darwin.
You see, when we look at Darwinian evolution,
there should be a chain of increasingly more primitive creatures going back into prehistory.
We should see the fossil record demonstrating that,
going back to some sort of common simple ancestor.
But when you look at the fossil record, at least when Darwin's contemporaries did
during the Victorian era, there was a problem.
Because it would appear that life suddenly appeared.
Not particularly primitive, either.
Life appeared like this.
Large stuff, like trilobites.
This was Darwin's dilemma.
Where were the progenitors to this complex biosphere
that appears to appear right there in the Cambrian?
In fact, the appearance of large creatures was so sudden and dramatic
that the early geologists used this to start a whole new group of periods,
starting with the Cambrian that's called the Phanerozoic.
The Phanerozoic means abundant life.
So, how do we get around this paradox?
Well, Darwin, one of my heroes, I admit, had the simple solution.
He said, basically, geology is a long young science.
We've not looked hard enough yet.
And even then, the rocks that were going to find these earlier,
more primitive creatures are going to be rarer and the fossils probably less common.
We just probably haven't found them yet.
And he was correct, because we have now found them.
Consider these recent discoveries.
These are tiny fossils.
They're less than 0.03 inches in diameter.
They're from the Doshanto Formation of Southern China.
And they're dated between 635 and 551 million years ago.
And it's quite considerably before the evolution of all those large trilobites
that we saw previously.
The elements in the Doshanto Formation were deposited in a series of lagoons
that developed as sea levels rose following that glaciation we talked about.
The fossils have been preserved by a process that we call phosphatization.
That's an atom-by-atom replacement of the original material by phosphate.
And the preservation is incredible.
We don't just have a vague, fuzzy image of a fossil here.
We have preservation that goes down to the very cellular level.
These fossils are preserved in carbonate rocks, limestones,
so the surrounding rock has been carefully dissolved with acids
to free the fossils that we can see here.
The fossils are thought to include a variety of creatures.
Some of them are fossilized algae and some things called acrotarks.
There are seaweeds and sponges and perhaps also some primitive corals.
But also some suspect some of these structures are actually embryos,
embryos of a grouping of animals that we call the bilateria.
Now, the bilateria is a broad grouping within animals.
It's a broad grouping that includes everything that isn't a member of the nidaria,
that's the corals, jellyfish and so on, and the sponges.
And if this is the case, it's some of the earliest evidence that we have
that diversification within the animals had occurred
way before the beginning of the Phanerozoic period.
So what was the nature of the first large animal ecosystem?
Before the Don Chateau discoveries, we had earlier evidence of animals.
We actually already had it.
For example, Alexander Murray, who was a Scottish geologist
but became the director of the Geological Survey of Newfoundland,
used this fossil, this is Asperdella, to correlate the rocks of Newfoundland.
Remember, we talked about biostratigraphy and how you use light fossils to correlate between areas.
As we were expanding across North America,
it became important to understand the geology for potential resource exploitation in the future.
So there was a lot of research in this area.
One of the first paleontologists of the Geological Survey of Canada,
one, L. Canna Billings, suggested potentially from what he could see
of the relationships of the rocks that perhaps Asperdella could be from a period below the Cambrian,
from the Pre-Cambrian.
He, as I'm afraid, just been largely ignored.
No one believed it.
Ravings of a lunatic. There was no life in the Pre-Cambrian.
The presence of Pre-Cambrian fossils was regarded as not fossils, as not possible.
Obviously, there could be no life below the Cambrian.
This, in fact, was believed so intently that all the rocks below the Cambrian in some circles
were called the Azoic, as opposed to the Thanerozoic.
Azoic meaning without life.
In 1933, rocks in Namibia were found to contain the same fossil.
The result, these rocks were obviously assigned to the Cambrian,
even though field relations seemed to suggest that they were maybe from early, an earlier period.
Can you see how, at times, what you expect to discover can severely affect the way you interpret actually what you find?
The story then moves to Australia and one Reginald C. Sprig.
He wasn't a paleontologist.
He was a mining geologist exploring the Ediacaran hills of northern Adelaide in South Australia.
Ediacara, incidentally, is an Aboriginal term for Vanelite Spring of Water.
He was eating his lunch in the sunshine just looking around.
He was actually looking for rocks that might be economically significant.
He wasn't looking for fossils.
When he saw on the underside of some sandstone beds some interesting looking structures.
So he wandered over to have a look at them and was somewhat surprised because he understood he was in Pre-Cambrian rocks.
There shouldn't be life in Pre-Cambrian rocks, but what he found was this.
A rich fauna full of strange, disc-like creatures.
Some of them seem to resemble jellyfish.
Others were segmented and looked a bit like worms.
Still, even then, it was doubted that these were Pre-Cambrian.
Instead, they were probably just early Cambrian fauns.
It would take discoveries in the United Kingdom to ultimately convince the scientific community, ultimately, that these were Pre-Cambrian fossils.
A discovery was made by a young boy called Roger Mason.
He was hiking with friends in an area of England called Charmwood Forest in 1957.
And as he was scrambling across the rocks, he came across some odd marks and looking at them in the light.
You know, since they were kind of front light, looked a little like plants.
Roger, who later became a geologist, in fact, took the fossils to one Professor D. Ford at the University of Leicester.
Now, Britain was intensely mapped by that stage.
Remember, one of the first geological maps in the world was produced by William Smith.
And so the UK was really well understood geologically.
And the rocks that these fossils had come from were understood to be undoubtedly from the Pre-Cambrian.
There's no way that there could be anything else.
So we now have the first evidence that we do have Pre-Cambrian fossils.
Ford would name these fossils Chania Masoni.
Chania for the Charmwood Forest and Masoni for their discoverer.
Can you see that structure in the bottom?
We have that kind of a front light, fern-like structure, and then a circular structure at the bottom.
That's what we think this creature was cementing itself to the ocean floor on.
And we think that possibly that whole flast might actually account for some of those asperdelophines that we mentioned a little earlier.
In fact, the story is a little more interesting than that because we think, in fact, we're pretty sure we know,
that fossils like that were discovered earlier and they were discovered by a schoolgirl, Wontina Negus.
She was, again, hiking around Charmwood Forest and found these odd structures.
It's well known to the local community that Charmwood Forest was Pre-Cambrian Age.
So she went and told her geography teacher, I have found fossils.
Come and look at these.
Don't be ridiculous, I guess he told her.
There are no fossils in the Pre-Cambrian.
Very, very wrong.
So we now know we do have a Pre-Cambrian fauna.
And what we've been describing so far in terms of Chania is one part of a fauna that we call the Ediacaran fauna.
It's now been found in many places.
It's been found in 30 localities on five different continents and there are at least 100 species.
So these aren't just isolated little creatures.
This is a very morphologically diverse assemblage of life.
They appear about 580 million years ago,
but they're largely gone by the base of the Cambrian period about 542 million years ago.
The last part of the Pre-Cambrian is actually now named for them.
It's the Ediacaran period.
That's the period that immediately precedes the Cambrian period.
Most Ediacarans lived in fairly well-lit shallow waters.
But some earlier forms, from, for example, here, mistaken point in Newfoundland,
probably inhabited slightly deeper, dimmer conditions.
And it's possible that these forms might not have been photosynthetic.
There's been many interpretations as to actually what the Ediacarans were.
For example, some people say that they're just a whole bunch of giant bacteria.
Other people have claimed that they're some sort of very primitive fungi.
And yet others suggest that they are actually a completely unknown group of animals.
One of the reasons why there is this confusion with the Ediacarans is because, well, they look odd.
They have an odd quilted surface.
They look a bit like an over-inflated air mattress.
In looking at the Ediacaran biota, you find really no evidence of hard parts.
There's no evidence of shells or internal skeletons like you find in more modern creatures.
There's also no evidence of definite evidence, at least, of predators or scavengers in this biosphere.
And it would appear that they only lived on the surface of the ocean.
They weren't burrowing through the sediments.
That's a great contrast to the ocean floor today, where the ocean floor is quite actively
burrowed by worms, clams, and a whole bunch of other creatures.
But let's meet some of our ancient ancestors right now, if they are our ancestors.
Those first creatures to be really actively crawling across the ocean floor.
This guy here is Dickinsonia.
You can see he has a kind of approximate bilateral symmetry.
So one half almost mirrors the other.
You can see those ribs there, or those air mattress-like quilts.
He's about six inches long, and one side, one end, is slightly thicker than the other.
Ahead, possibly.
I believe it's, to be honest with you, difficult to say which way around this creature is.
There have been possible trackways found associated with Dickinsonia,
but as of yet, it's unsure whether or not this represents it was crawling
or it had just been picked up by ocean currents and was tumbling along.
This is Spragina.
He's named for Reginald Sprigg.
Remember our Australian mining geologist?
He definitely does have a front end.
He has a suggestion of a mouth as well.
He's still fairly difficult to interpret, I'm afraid.
You can see he's kind of a longish creature, again, with that definite head at one end.
And it's been suggested because of that and because of the ribbing that you can see
that perhaps he's an early arthropod.
Perhaps he's one of the early ancestors of the trilobites.
We're still not very sure.
Then we have Ocaria.
It's a creature that has a radial five-arm pattern on its surface.
Perhaps ancestor of starfish or sea urchins.
That's the group called the echinoderms.
Or perhaps that honor goes to this guy here.
This is a three-armed tribrocadian.
Again, potentially ancestors of creatures that live today.
And then there's this creature, the creature that Tina Negus discovered in Charmwood Forest.
This is Chania.
As I said, it really does resemble a fern, but it isn't probably a plant.
It's more related, in fact, most definitely to animals than plants.
It looks a bit like this creature.
This is a modern sea pen or a soft coral.
The exact affinities of Chania, like most of the Ediacarum fauna, are still unknown.
We do know that Chania lived attached to the sea floor,
and some of them lived in fairly deep waters as well.
There's no obvious feeding structures, like a mouth or even a gut with Chania.
The deep forms probably couldn't photosynthesize.
It would be too dark.
So maybe these creatures were directly absorbing nutrients from the ocean.
Perhaps the chemistry was slightly different in the oceans there,
and there were nutrients available to be absorbed in this way.
In general, as I've noted,
biological affinities of the whole group of the Ediacarums are just a little hazy.
And that led some, most famously a paleontologist called Adel Sylaca,
to suggest that the Ediacarum forms aren't really related to anything today,
and we shouldn't even try to fit them into modern groups.
Perhaps the Ediacarums are a failed experiment in multicellular animals.
The air mattress qualities are very unusual,
and that's one of the reasons why Sylaca suggested they're not related to anything today.
But they're also preserved generally, especially the Australian forms,
in very coarse, sandy sediments.
And that's extremely unusual for creatures that are basically soft-bodied with no skeletons.
If you're going to preserve soft-bodied creatures at all,
and remember we've already mentioned it's kind of difficult to do that,
it's best if you have very fine grain sediment,
because it's better on taking up an impression and increasing the possibility of getting a fossil.
Preserving soft-bodied creatures in sands, coarse sands, is very difficult indeed.
So Sylaca suggested that this meant that the Ediacarums had an unknown body plan,
a super tough body plan, a bit like leather, not seen in soft-bodied creatures today.
This led Sylaca and others to propose that what we had was another kingdom of creatures.
You know, we have the plants, we have the kingdom of the animals,
how about the kingdom of what he called the Vendorzoa to cover these Ediacarum creatures.
However, there's another explanation to explain the preservation of the Ediacarums.
Remember we've talked about microbial mats and stromatolites and so on?
Well, back in the Ediacarum times, although we are seeing larger creatures,
we still really weren't seeing active grazing of these biofilms.
And the Ediacarums probably lived in environments that had an awful lot of biofilms in them.
We think that when the Ediacarums died, they would fall over and these biofilms, these mats,
would just cover over them, protecting them and therefore helping them in the fossilization process.
It aided their preservation in coarse sediments.
So we think now there's probably no need to infer some sort of super unique body plan.
Support that the Ediacarums are actually primitive forms of today's animals
comes from a number of specimens as well, including the ones that I've already described,
but I'd like to show you an extra one. This is Kimberella.
It kind of resembles a slug, it's about 0.7 to 6 inches long,
and it possesses something that looks like a radula.
Now a radula is a very specific structure used for feeding by the mollusks.
We have trace fossils associated with Kimberella as well.
It moved through the sediment and we think it had a kind of a proboscis
by which it was scraping through the sediments.
You can see these kind of diagonal marks running across this photograph.
It's possibly steering up the sediment, perhaps raking through it for microbes or organic debris.
The relationship of Kimberella to mollusks is still highly debated,
but most scientists now accept that it does belong to that broad grouping of animals
that we call the bilaterians.
If this relationship is correct, it means that divergence within the metazoa,
had the metazoa being the animals, had already occurred.
So the roots potentially of the animals lie well below the Ediacarum for it, if that's true.
Any other way to trace the fuse of the origin of the metazoa?
Well, new fossils would help, but how about going to another discipline?
What do the biologists have to tell us about when the animals started to diversify?
For that, we can turn to molecular biology.
Now, molecular biology advanced rapidly during the 1950s and the 1960s,
and it really increased our understanding of organisms at the minute micromolecular level.
For example, consider hemoglobin. It's a familiar chemical.
It's the key molecule that is used for transporting oxygen in the blood.
And when you look at hemoglobin, you find it's structure is very similar from animal to animal.
There are subtle differences, though, and those differences increase the further you go back
from a potential split from a common ancestor.
So, for example, there's no difference in human and chimp hemoglobin.
Charles Darwin's hemoglobin wouldn't be all that different from Bobo the Chimp's here.
However, there's going to be significant difference in the hemoglobin between human and fish.
That reflects the distance in the common ancestry between fish and humans,
which is way more back in geological time than the splitting common ancestry between chimps and human beings.
It's estimated that differences in hemoglobin occur every few million years or so,
and that can be used as a rough calibration to estimate the timing of divergence between different animals.
It's almost like the radiometric clock that we discussed for dating rocks,
and instead what we have now is a molecular clock for timing the division of various animal groups.
Today, we tend to use DNA and RNA differences to do this, but the concept is basically the same.
And it's an important technique as well because it's a technique that can be tested.
Basically, we can estimate times of divergence using molecular clocks and then go to the hard evidence.
The hard evidence, of course, is the fossil record. See if the fossil record agrees with your estimates.
There are obvious problems with the technique. There is an assumption of a regular mutation rate, that's just one of them.
But when we consider molecular clocks, how does it time the first major division of the metazoans,
the split of the bilateria from the rest of the animals?
Well, you get a range, depending on what's used to calibrate the clock.
If you use the slow rates of molecular evolution of the vertebrates, for example,
you come up with a timing of divergence at around about 900 million years ago.
That's way before the Ediacaran assemblages.
If you use a mean bilaterium rate, you get something a lot more recent, 570 million years, close to Ediacaran times.
I guess if this is true, Ediacaran and its meaning, Vanelite Spring of Water, that's a very strong and important resonance.
But did evolution and radiation occur there in the Ediacaran?
Or is there a much longer fuse, as suggested by Kimberella, if it truly is a mollusk?
These are questions that we're still trying to ask.
New discoveries are definitely going to fill in the gaps.
It's an exciting time to be looking at these early times of animal evolution,
as new sections in Australia and China are providing some remarkable fossils.
But what would end this early animal garden, the Ediacaran experiment?
What happened to them?
Well, we have some interesting isotopic evidence.
We find there's a sudden flush of the stable isotope carbon-12.
Remember, photosynthesis uses carbon-12.
So oceans, generally in ocean sediments, are relatively enriched in the other stable isotope, carbon-13.
So a negative carbon-13 anomaly suggests something.
It suggests the sudden cessation of photosynthesis.
So photosynthetic organisms are no longer taking the carbon-12 out of the oceans.
Perhaps also the death of those organisms, which remember are concentrating carbon-12,
and therefore have then released it back into the environment.
Perhaps there was a mass extinction event in the latest Precambrian.
What caused that extinction?
Again, it's one of those pretty fuzzy times.
And those, hopefully, new exposures in China or Australia and other places
are really going to help us understand what happens to the Ediacarans at that time.
Another possibility, though, is that we're not looking at the sudden death of all of these Ediacaran creatures.
Remember, we said that we think the Ediacarans fossilization was helped by that microbial mantling.
And as we move further into the Phanerozoic, those microbes and the mantling properties that they could provide
were being grazed away.
So perhaps we're looking at the end of a preservation regime.
If the Ediacarans were still there, it's just that they weren't being preserved anymore.
This is still very much debated.
But recent evidence suggests that some Ediacarans actually did survive into the Cambrian.
But, as you can imagine, the Ediacarans, although even if you do believe they had a super-tough body plan,
didn't have any shells.
They were largely defenseless.
We don't even find Ediacarans with claws or teeth.
As new creatures would evolve in the Phanerozoic,
the Ediacarans would be very, very fragile and very, very subject to predation,
and eventually they would dwindle.
But what I'd like to consider in the next lecture are the creatures that did come next,
the creatures that did have teeth,
and the creatures that would maybe drive evolution of animals even further to new, wonderful heights.
We'll see you that in the next lecture. Thank you.
