Sometimes, it's difficult to peer into ancient biospheres. Remember when we talked about
the nature of the fossil record in a previous lecture? We said that the fossil record can
be biased. It can be biased by what is being fossilized. Was the creature soft-bodied?
Did it have hard parts? Also, in what environment was the creature living in? If it's living
on the land, it's going to be much less able to become a fossil than, say, it lived in
the ocean, or if it was living buried in the ocean sediments. It's all going to skew potentially
our understanding of life in the past. What we need are extraordinary finds. If we're
going to paint a better picture of past worlds, and those extraordinary finds or fossil bonanzas
are called conservation lagerstatten. These are areas where there have been certain exceptional
environmental situations that have allowed for unusual and unexpected preservation. When
we find these, we can add an awful lot of vital depth, understanding, and colour to the past.
If you drive for a day northeast from my home town of Vancouver, you will eventually come
to a town of field in British Columbia. It's right on the border of Alberta. If you take
a hike from there, you'll find we're now on a trail that's rising about 2,500 feet in
elevation. The views are going to be spectacular. Well, they will if you've got decent weather.
Our goal is going to be something that really is unexpected, though. Although the mountains
are spectacular and the lakes and the forests around there, we're looking for a rather unassuming
little quarry. Walcott quarry. Once you get to Walcott quarry, you'll find that it's surrounded
by fences, even motion detectors. Yeah, this is an important site. This is because the
Burgess Shale is quarried here. The Burgess Shale provides one of those incredible and
rare windows into a world that was still booming from the Cambrian explosion. So in this lecture,
I'd like to ask, what was the story behind the discovery of the Burgess Shale, and ask
can we paint a richer picture of the Cambrian from it, and what was happening to the genetic
brew of animals during the Cambrian? So, what is the story behind the Burgess Shale's discovery?
Well, our story starts with the political dilemma. Canada wanted to become a unified nation,
and in order to do that, it needed access from the Atlantic to the Pacific. Now, Sir John
A. MacDonald, and I can show you Sir John A. He's right here on the Canadian $10 note.
He was the first Prime Minister of Canada, realized that in order to achieve this, to bring
Canada from ocean to ocean into being, he needed to bring the province of BC,
British Columbia, into confederation. He achieved this on July the 20th, 1871, by promising to
British Columbia that if it would join with Canada, they'd get a railway, linking the Atlantic to
the Pacific. And in 1885, he made good with his promise, with the opening of the Canadian Pacific
Railway. This really boosted Canada's economy, but also opened up the Rockies. Mostly to tourism,
at least initially, you can see here the fantastic Bam Springs Hotel, set in, MacDonald would be
described as absolute splendor. It's fantastic, but it would also open up the mountains to people
as well. But not just the mountains, those fossils that were contained in the rocks in those mountains
were suddenly an awful lot more accessible to all the people. But not just to people,
in general. Specifically, people who were scientists. They started to explore the Rockies
with gusto. I can remember my first time in these mountains. They really are spectacular.
They dwarf the human imagination in their scale. And there's probably still areas within the Rockies
where no human foot has trod yet. That means there's probably an awful lot of areas of rock and
strata that still haven't been picked over by geologists. Which also means there's probably an
awful lot of fossils yet to be discovered. And a lot of pieces of Earth's ancient history
still to be filled in from those wonderful mountains.
One of the gentlemen who took the opportunity to explore the Rockies was a rather remarkable man.
He was Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, the great institution here in Washington DC,
which I really do encourage you visit. But also a whole bunch of other things as well.
He was President of the National Academy of Science. He served on the National Research Council.
He helped found the Carnegie Institute. He was involved with the National Park Service,
and also sat on the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, which is now part of NASA.
You see, he was a remarkable man. Also probably very busy indeed.
Still, his main passion was fossils. At the heart of it, I think Walcott, like me, was just a big
fossil science nerd. And there's nothing wrong with that. And at the tail end of the summer of
1909, he would find himself in British Columbia, close to that border with Alberta. He was collecting
samples of fossils from the Precambrian and Cambrian strata, and made a story which is somewhat
hazy, I guess. It's kind of passed down into the public consciousness. I'd like to repeat it here,
but some of the details are a little, I don't know, maybe not quite so true as one would like to think.
Walcott often travelled with his wife and family, and so the story goes like this.
Walcott's wife, Helena, was on a horse, and that horse slipped during a fairly violent snowstorm.
Walcott, being the gentleman dismounted to see what the problem was,
saw a rock that was causing the horse problems and removed it. And in removing that rock,
examined it and found something glinting on its surface. A kind of a dark smudge that slowly
glinted in the dim light that was there available. When he looked closely at it,
you could see it was a fossil, but not like any fossil he'd ever seen before.
This was a fossil of a species called Morella, a common name, is a lace crab.
They'd be very common in the Burgess Shale. The poplar myth is that he didn't have time to search
any further, so he just noted the location in order to return next year. However,
his diary does tell a different story. It indicates that they stayed there,
in fact, for a couple of days, collecting material from the talus, that's the rock
debris that was all around that area. Whatever the real story, Walcott had made a fantastic
discovery. One of the most rarest of fossil finds, a new species, but probably even more rare than
that, he found a fossil in which the soft parts were preserved. Walcott would return in 1910,
and he had a very logical strategy. Go back to where I found that original fossil,
and then work up the slope. Obviously, in that fossil talus, that fossil debris,
it had come from somewhere higher up, so by tracing it up the slope, he hoped to identify
the original rocks. You'd always find with paleontologists that we're a little uneasy with
picking up fossils that are just lying loose, because what we want is the context of the
stratigraphy from which those fossils come. Context is everything. Eventually, he got that
context. He found the stratum that they came from, and labelled that strata the lace crab
beds after Morella that he found the previous year. By 1911, Walcott has excavated a quarry that was
about 60 feet long, with the floor extending some 10 feet into the hillside. Walcott's discoveries,
though, were going to be tinged with sadness. Walcott would see quite a lot of tragedy through
this time. Helena was killed in a train accident in 1911, and he would lose one of his sons to DB.
In addition, another of his sons was shot down over France during World War I.
However, Walcott, the scientist that he was, continued to publish. His final year of collecting
was in 1917, and by the time he'd finished collecting, he'd amassed over 65,000 specimens
for the Smithsonian. That's an amazing amount of specimens for anybody's career,
let alone the amount of time that the collection from the Berger shale represented.
Of the 170 or more species that had been described from the Berger shale so far,
100 were first described by Walcott. Again, this is an amazing accomplishment.
Walcott died in 1927. There was some additional work carried out on the Berger shale,
but it really wasn't until the late 1960s and early 1970s that the importance of Walcott's
fine was really truly recognised. And it came from a professor, Harry Whittington,
and his research group. Harry was a trilobite expert at the University of Harvard and later at
Cambridge. In 1972, while looking through all the collections that Walcott had made,
Whittington realised that this was a big problem. There was an awful lot of material to look at here.
More than any one person could probably do in a lifetime,
so he realised that he needed some help in examining this material from the Berger shale.
So he employed two graduate students, one Derrick Briggs, who was going to study
the arthropod-like creatures, the creatures that look a bit like trilobites and were trilobites,
and Simon Conway Morris, who was going to describe everything else, loosely classified as worms.
The work started by Walcott would paint a picture of a wonderful Cambrian,
a more colourful Cambrian than we've ever seen before. A strange world, sometimes familiar,
but 60 to 70% of the fauna soft-bodied. It was much more than trilobites and brachypods.
So what creatures did it contain, and why were they so beautifully preserved?
So, can we paint a picture of the Cambrian using this?
Well, let's take a little trip. Let's travel back in time to the middle Cambrian.
That's around 505 million years ago, the time when the Berger shale was being deposited,
and what you'd find is a world that is very different. But let's go close as we can on land
to where the Berger shale is being deposited and land there. If you were to land there,
you'd find an area that wasn't mountainous, like the Rockies where the Berger shale is now exposed,
you'd find a barren desert fairly close to the equator. If you were wandering across that landscape,
you might come across occasional depressions, river channels in this desert, but they'll very
often have no water in them. They're the type of river channel that only fills during flash flood
events. You also might find it a little difficult to breathe, although oxygen levels have been
increasing, and we would have our orangy red sands through the oxidation of the iron in those sands.
Humans would still find it a difficult place to get along. In fact, if you were to be able to
look across this desert without asphyxiating, you'd find there is no grass, no moss, no trees,
no birds, no insects, in fact, nothing. The land surface is completely barren, effectively sterile.
Simon Conway Morris, in his very readable book The Crucible of Creation, imagines a journey
from this place to the world of the Berger shale. Let's take that journey. If you fly across that
barren desert to the edge of North America, you'll find that now the edge of North America
is straddling the equator, but in an east-west orientation, so North America today has flipped
through 90 degrees. As we move out over the shallow ocean, we will eventually come to a line of surf
stretching way into the distance, and possibly you'll see along that line of surf a few islands,
but when you get close to the islands, obviously, you'll find they're barren of life.
Beyond that surf line, the water changes colour. It goes from pale blue to a very
dark purpley colour. That's because you've reached the edge of a feature underwater. It's called the
Cathedral Escarpment. It's a massive submarine cliff, and this submarine escarpment runs all
the way along the edge of North America at this time. Today, we can see it in the rocks. It's been
transformed into limestone, and it marks the extent of one end of Walcott's quarry, in fact.
Next, let's get out of our aircraft and transfer ourselves into a small submarine,
and as we go down the edge of this cliff, eventually we'll hit the bottom at around
about 330 feet. The bottom of this cliff is a whole bunch of sands and muds.
Through the gloomy waters, though, and the light would be a little bit gloomy down here,
you eventually start to see, as your eyes adjusted, the animals of the Burgess Shale.
Some of them are attached to the sediment. Some of them are actually living in it,
and others are moving above it. It's obviously a lot more diverse than the creatures that we
met from the Edea Carren fauna, who were just passively moving about on the surface or attached
to it. These creatures are really exploiting their environment, and let's meet some of the players
in this scene. This is Ottia. He's a pre-apulid worm. He's around about three inches long.
I've got a specimen of one that I'd just like to show you. You can see it here. This is kind of a
typical fossil from the Burgess Shale. They're notoriously difficult to photograph. You need to
get them in the correct light with specific cameras to see all the detail, but when you do,
you can reveal an amazing amount of detail. And remember, this is a fossil of no hard parts.
It's completely soft-bodied, and you can even see on this one a dart line running around
the centre of the creature, which represents its gut. Now, pre-apulid worms like this today
aren't very common, but they are extremely common in the Burgess Shale. It has a long
probosus, which extends probably to grab prey. This thing was living in the sediment, probably in
new-shaped tubes, so as something would trundle along the surface of the sediment, this creature
would detect it, probably from the vibrations, and suddenly shoot that probosus up and grab it in
that probosus, which is armed with teeth. It's kind of a nasty creature, because when that creature
was passed down into the gut, it would come across additional teeth pointing downwards so that the
creature couldn't escape. What was that pre-apulid worm eating? Well, we think it was probably eating
things like this. Hyaliths. How can we tell that? Because not only do we see the trace of the gut,
we can even also identify the gut contents. Now, hyaliths have no modern relatives. They may be
related to the mollusks, and we think they lived in that little conical shell, and probably moving
slowly across the surface of the sediment, grazing perhaps on bacteria and algae, and we think that
they might have kind of raked themselves along using those curved struts that we can see. Again,
this is where comparative anatomy breaks down. It's very difficult to think of an analogy to this
creature today. There are also anilid polychaete worms. Anilid polychaete worms, which are the
ancestor or relatives of today's earthworms. Here's one of the ones we find in the Burgess
Shale. This is Canadia. He probably crawled around on the surface, but perhaps with the age of those
bristles, he might have been able to swim in the water column as well. He's fairly small, though,
is about one inch long. If you're wondering where the bristles are on an earthworm, they are actually
there. You just need a microscope to see them. Something that was very common in the Burgess
Shale were sponges, and one of the very common ones was this species Vuxia. Like all sponges,
it's going to suck in seawater through the sides of its body and expel it from the large opening at
the top, trapping organic material with cilia inside the sponge body there. Sponges, as I said,
were very common, very diverse in the Burgess Shale. Some of them, though, were very close to the
ocean floor, but others were starting to exploit higher niches in the water column. Some of them
were rising to about 8 to 11 inches above the surface of the water surface interface.
This is a member of the Onicophora, or the Velvetworms. We've actually already met one of these.
Helusogenia, remember that creature that we're describing that we got the wrong way up? He's
a member of the Velvetworms, but this is another member of the family from the Burgess Shale,
just like Helusogenia is. It's Achaia. Achaia is around about half to two and a half inches long,
and we often find Achaia associated with sponge spicules. So we're thinking maybe Achaia was
probably eating sponges. That was probably the way it made its living, got its meals.
Also present in addition to these creatures were various brachyepods, algae, creatures we call
comb jellies, sea pens, sea anemones, various mollusks and akinoderms, and also some of our very
early ancestors. The chordates are represented in the Burgess Shale as well, and we'll deal with them
a little later. But probably the most impressive and most dominant representative of the Burgess
Shale are the arthropods. The most common arthropods in the Cambrian are the trilobites. They're also
found in the Burgess Shale. But what we find in the Burgess Shale is there is a much greater
diversity of arthropods than we usually find in other deposits. That's the benefit of a lager
statin. It helps colour in some of the biodiversity that we want to understand in these past times.
And here's just a sample of some of those arthropods. We've already seen this one,
Mirella, Walcott's lace crab. It's about half an inch long and present in really large numbers
in the Burgess Shale. Perhaps they were swimming around in large shoals. They were probably swimming
close to the ocean floor or crawling along the ocean floor, seeking out organic debris and
small creatures to eat. They had odd kind of bristle-like appendages at the front of the creature
by which they probably swept this material into their mouths. This is Canadaspis. If you like
shrimp and lobster, thank Canadaspis. He's possibly the ancestor of many of the crustaceans that would
follow. And this is Santa Charis. He was named Santa Claus for those large appendices at the
front of the creature by paleontologist Desmond Collins. He's about two, two, three and a half
inches long. And we think this guy is a predatory. He was probably an active swimmer. You can see
there's a large tail fluke at the back of the creature. And we think that this creature is
ancestral to horseshoe crabs and the spiders. So we're seeing a lot of the progenitors of
later species here in the Burgess Shale. This is Sidney, about two to five inches in length.
One of the larger arthropods from the Burgess Shale. He was named by Walcott for his second son,
Sidney. We think Sidney was a carnivore, eating hyaliths and probably taking the occasional
snack on a trilobite as well. But another feature of the Burgess Shale is a whole group of creatures
that we call problematica. They're called problematica, because as you can guess,
they're a problem. We can't really place them very adequately or with any great confidence into
any group that we understand. One of the weirdest ones is this. This is Opabinia.
Opabinia has got five eyes on its head. And in the front of its head, it has this odd trunk,
and at the end of it, a grasping claw. It probably swam by the undulations of those odd
lobe-like segments at the side of its body. Opabinia, to be honest with you, is just plain
weird. It's been placed in many different groups, but perhaps it's a primitive ancestor
of a whole number of later groups. Another problematic fossil, this one right here.
The tail of a primitive shrimp-like crustacean, perhaps. In later days, it was thought that
perhaps it wasn't the tail of a shrimp, although I think it really does look like one,
but perhaps it could be the claw or the leg of some unknown arthropod. That would remain
quite a mystery for quite a long time. Here's another problematic discovery.
This is one that Walcott found. It's a jellyfish or so we thought called petoia. You can see it
looks a bit like an odd pineapple-ling structure. On early reconstructions, you'd see this particular
jellyfish kind of flopping its way through the water column in the Burgess Shale. Now that shrimp
leg that I've just described and the pineapple-ring, the problem of those creatures have been resolved,
and it resolved by a fossil that Harry Whittington would find, a fossil that had a series of large
overlapping lobes. The shrimp leg structures were found firmly attached to this creature,
at the front of the creature. Further investigation found that petoia, that pineapple-ring structure,
was found on the underside of the creature. Both the shrimp leg and petoia belong to the same animal,
an animal called Anomalycharis. Anomalycharis got up to lengths of 20 inches. It was most definitely
the T-rex of the Burgess Shale. The shrimp legs are grasping appendages at the front of the head,
and petoia is an odd circular mouth into which probably Anomalycharis was passing its prey.
Anomalycharis is still difficult to place in any existing group, but it's still an incredible,
wonderful creature. One of the features of the Burgess Shale, and the creatures living in it
though, was that they were living in an environment that wasn't stable. We think that that environment
was subject to occasional earthquakes, and when that occurred, because these sediments were on a
bit of a slope, they would start to slump in a slurry of material into deeper areas. We call
such movements of sediment under the water a turbidity current. Think of them a bit like an
avalanche of sediment underneath the ocean. This is significant, because that turbidity current
would push and bring these creatures that were living in the environment
very rapidly into areas that were deeper and contained less oxygen. In addition,
you're transporting a whole bunch of sediment which would pass up into the water column,
and then settle back down slowly, and cover all the dead creatures that had been transported
into this low oxygen environment. Two great ways in which you can start to advance the process
of fossilization. Remove the oxygen and cover them up quick. The Burgess Shale's survival really,
though, is something of a miracle. Remember the Burgess Shale was formally deposited in a
fairly deep oceanic environment. Now the Burgess Shale is on the side of a mountain,
which means the sediments that once made up the Burgess Shale were involved in mountain
building processes, the collisions of continental masses which raised the ocean bed to great heights.
When that happens, it very often cooks and metamorphoses the rocks, and that can very easily
destroy the fossils, turning mudstones into slates and so on. It would appear, though,
that the Burgess Shale was lucky. It was transported from areas of intense deformation
along low angle faults called thrusts to its present location, which escaped a lot of the
intense deformational processes. It's also next to a relatively resistant rock, that limestone
of the cathedral escarpment, and we think that maybe that limestone might have helped shadow
the Burgess Shale, perhaps preventing some of the deformational pressure and preventing
the destruction of some of the fossils. There are many, many more fascinating creatures from
the Burgess Shale, but there are also now additional Burgess Shale faunas that are found in other parts
of the world. They've been found from Utah, in Greenland, Australia, and a very significant one
in Chenjiang in China. The China faunas are similar to the Burgess Shale, similar species with some
different ones, but older. They come from the Lower Cambrian period, and the Anomalycharis that we
find in China, some of them are up to seven feet long, kind of scary. So what was happening to the
genetic brew of animals during the Cambrian? As I said, the Burgess Shale gives us an insight into
another world, soon after the development of all the major animal filer that occurred in that Cambrian
explosion. But what we think was happening at this time was a genetic situation in which the rules
that define what a creature is weren't so set in stone, and perhaps that could account for all the
problematica, those weird creatures that don't seem to fit into any group.
We see this kind of flexibility in form in the Canoderms as well as these
arthropod-looking creatures. Now, a Canoderm genetic rules, there are many of them, but one of them
is that they will have pentameral or five-fold symmetry, or symmetries of multiple of five,
like you can see here in this starfish or this sea urchin. Now consider these guys,
helicoplacus and the homozoa. Both of these creatures are Canoderms, but both are very
different from the Canoderms that we see today. Helicoplacus is about three inches long. He's
found exclusively in North America. We're not exactly sure what he was doing. Was he stood upright
in the sediment or was he rolling around the sediment in some way? Not sure yet, but he do
note that he has a food groove probably along which he was passing some food particles.
The homozoa, again, very strange. What was this thing doing? Did it crawl? Did it swim? Was it
anchored into the sediment by its tail? The jury is still pretty much out on the homozoa.
The structure of the calcite plates that makes up these creatures and makes up all members of
the Canoderms identifies them as being from the Canodermata, but neither of these two that I've
just described displays the key, one of the key features that we understand from a Canoderms today.
Where is that radial symmetry? Now the genetic rules today that govern the organization of the
animal, the number of digits where my eyes are, the fact that I'm going to have feet at the end
of my legs, are controlled by hox genes. Hox genes are pieces of our genes that act a bit like
failsafe mechanism. They ensure that the proper body plan is going to be followed.
It's possible that back in the Cambrian there were fewer failsafe genes. These failsafe have
been added to over time. The result potentially then is that more bizarre forms could come to
term and be expressed. It's likely that most would have never survived, but it's possible that there
might have been some viable forms that might explain perhaps some of these odd species that we're
seeing in the Cambrian. It would explain why the Cambrian is sometimes described as a period of
great evolutionary experimentation. It's also a wonderful period and the Burgess Shell providing a
wonderful insight to that period. The quarry itself is now part of a UNESCO World Heritage Site.
That means it's a site that's recognized as having universal importance to humanity.
That places it in the same grand company as the Grand Canyon, as ancient Thebes and its Necropolis
and also Stonehenge. But before we move on to going to detail about the developing history
of Earth's biosphere, I want us all to take a bit of a deep breath. I'd like us to become
familiar with some of the fossils that tend to get forgotten along the way and we're going to meet
some of those in the next lecture.
