Up until now, we've been talking about the great flowering of life on planet Earth.
We've seen the evolution of the first lifeforms from molecules that might have been generated
on our planet, or perhaps on somewhere more exotic.
We've seen then seen the first creatures to appear on our planet diversify through
the precambrian, from the prokaryotes to the eukaryotes, to ultimately the first multicellular
creatures.
And then we've witnessed the remarkable explosion of life that occurred at the base of the cambrian.
However, it's not always been upwards and onwards with life.
At times, the tree of life gets pruned, and it gets really pruned.
In this lecture, I would like to look at the following questions.
What is the difference between extinction and a mass extinction event?
How has biodiversity changed over geological time?
And how can we classify mass extinction events?
And how many large-scale events have occurred over the past 500 million years?
I'd also like to ask these questions.
What needs to go wrong with the Earth to cause a crisis in the biosphere?
And is it possible that there is a regular periodicity to mass extinctions, a ticking
clock as it were?
It's important to understand that species are going extinct all the time.
Over 99% of the species that once existed are now extinct.
We effectively are standing on the shoulders of former creatures and exotic biospheres.
It's astounding to imagine how many creatures really have passed away until we get to our
current biosphere here.
In general, though, even though we have a lot of these extinctions along the way, there's
a general, fairly even, biodiversity for the planet Earth.
Extinctions being matched by the evolution of new forms.
Consider the dodo.
He was a ground-dwelling bird from the island of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean.
He fed on a diet of fruits.
There were no mammals or other natural predators on the island to really bother the dodo.
So he just wandered about in a kind of a dodo heaven, I suppose.
That wasn't until Dutch sailors reached Mauritius in about the 1500s and realized that there
was a very nice, tasty resource wandering about the island, a tasty resource that really
wasn't scared of humans at all.
Of course, dodo numbers started to dwindle.
In addition, there was a destruction of the habitat in which the dodo lived.
More crisis for the dodo.
It was compounded by the fact that pigs were later introduced and they liked nothing more
than raiding dodo nests, which were obviously on the ground, and eating the eggs.
This ultimately drove the dodo into extinction.
It's a sad case with the dodo in that it wasn't actually noticed that it had gone extinct.
All you really have now left of the dodo are a few scrappy remains in a museum and some
fossil remains as well.
The dodo is a test case for extinction.
The dodo took about, I think, around 80 years for it to first encounter humans and then
to be completely removed from the biosphere.
It was the first time that humans realized that they could drive a creature into extinction.
The dodo is a tragic story, but it's not an isolated or unusual story.
In fact, extinction, unfortunately, is the expected fate of a species, not a rarity.
Even so, the dodo does remain the icon of extinction.
So we need to understand the difference between what you might call background extinction,
creatures going into extinction all the time for various reasons, and then mass extinctions.
Sometimes when in the biosphere you see the destruction of many, many species, and not
just slowly but very suddenly the rapid extinction of large populations of creatures.
So how has biodiversity changed over geological time in general?
Well, the health of the biosphere is generally regarded in terms of the number of species
it supports.
These are two very rich areas, a coral reef.
We've already seen coral reefs in a previous lecture, and we understand that they're full
of many different species of coral, sponges, many fish, probably more invertebrates than
you could probably count.
The coral reefs of the land are the tropical rainforest, and again, their biodiversity is
stunningly high.
In fact, it's probably unlikely that we'll get through cataloging just a small proportion
of, for example, the insects that live in these tropical rainforests.
So how has biodiversity, though, changed over geological time?
Well, there are broad changes in biodiversity that help us subdivide geological time itself.
When we look at a geological time scale like this, we can see that we have the time scale
split into broad periods.
Now geologists haven't just randomly selected those periods, the periods represent kind
of characteristic biospheres, if you want to think of it in that way.
And then those periods themselves are grouped into broader periods, the Paleozoic, followed
by the Mesozoic, then followed by the period we now live in, the Senozoic.
Each of these characterised by groupings of characteristic fossils.
Think of an example here.
The early geologists, when starting to catalogue the fossils they could find across geological
time, realised that something very dramatic had happened to life on earth between the
Permian period and the Triassic period.
It wasn't just that the creatures in the Triassic looked a little bit different from
the Permian, it's that there was a massive difference.
It would appear that there had been a complete overturn in the type of creatures that lived
between the Permian and the Triassic.
This group, this transition was so important that not only do you pass now from the Permian
to the Triassic, but you pass from one entire grouping of periods, the Paleozoic, into the
next grouping of periods, the Mesozoic.
What they didn't realise was that they were actually starting to pinpoint and tie down
some of Earth's great crises, some of Earth's mass extinction events where we do see incredible
turnovers in species.
For now though, let's consider more broad changes in diversity over time.
We'll deal with the sudden, scary mass extinctions a little bit later.
Understanding though of these changes and broad diversity changes had to wait for a theory
that we'd already dealt with earlier on in this series, that's the theory of plate tectonics.
It occurred to two scientists, J.W. Valentine of Berkeley and E.M. Moores of the University
of California in Davis, early in the 1970s when plate tectonics was really starting to
get airplay in the scientific community, that this new theory could explain many things
about changes in diversity over time.
Just think, continents drifting around the surface of the planet, how that is going to
affect the climate on those continents, and also therefore the food supply on those continents.
Also by drifting continents around the planet, you're going to bring species into direct
competition.
You're also going to isolate some species, so they're going to evolve in different but
perhaps equivalent ecosystems.
Just think of the marsupials on Australia, which can be regarded as a large island continent
in which independent, biodiverse evolution is progressing as we speak.
If you plot global biodiversity against the relative fragmentation of the continents,
we can produce a graph a bit like this.
This diagram here represents the relative fragmentation of the continents as these very
crude pie charts, the more fragmented the pie chart looks, the more fragmented the continents
were at that time.
We can see that as we trace biodiversity through time, we get the greatest biodiversity during
times of greatest continental fragmentation.
It's understandable, really, isn't it?
When you have the greatest time of fragmentation, you're going to have greatest climatic variation
and also the greatest possibility of evolution in isolation, so your biodiversity is likely
going to be higher during those times.
This is another nice example, I suppose, of Earth's system science.
Plate tectonics, which is firmly part, I guess, part of the lithosphere, is driving by the
action of the drifting continents, the character and nature of the biosphere.
Now, let's take a very brief tour of biodiversity over about the past 750 million years.
We start with Rodinia, one of those supercontinents that we mentioned a while ago, sometimes people
call it Pangaea 1.
It fragments around about 750 million years ago, and you can see the diagram here represents
its relative fragmentation.
That was following the last snowball, and fairly soon after the fragmentation of Pangaea
we start to see a remarkable fauna occurring, a fauna that we've already dealt with in
some detail, the Ediacaran fauna.
Fragmentation continues then through the lower Paleozoic, and we see a series of new continents
emerging, new continents that have shallow tropical seas around their margins.
Now we have deep oceans between these continents, and those deep oceans can act as much as a
barrier for many marine forms, as well as, if there were at that time, land-based forms,
which there weren't at that particular period.
So we're looking at barriers of oceans here for shallow marine living creatures, in addition
to climatic barriers.
As a result, independent evolution on fragmented continents and biodiversity would really boom
through this time.
Then we move to the Upper Paleozoic, and that fragmentation of the continents of Rodinia
would start to reverse, and we start to see the amalgamation again as some of the continents.
We can see it here in one that I've highlighted, the formation of the all-red sandstone continent
that formed as a few of those fragmented blocks came together in the late Devonian, and associated
with that time is diversity fall, in addition to a few little extinction pulses as well.
At the end of the Paleozoic, the end Permian, we see the consolidation of Pangaea, remember
that supercontinent that Wagner predicted, and we witness a massive drop in global biodiversity.
Everything was in direct competition, effectively.
We'll talk a little bit more about this later.
As Pangaea fragments through the Mesozoic, diversity increases again through the Mesozoic,
but with a few hiccups that we'll deal with at a later time.
Today, the continents are probably as dispersed as they've ever been, and we have unique
ecosystems existing on lots of the fragmented continental areas that we have today, and biodiversity
is considered to be generally high.
So this is a broad overview of diversity change.
We're looking at, in that model, slow changes associated with continental drift.
What that does not account for, though, are the rapid, very sudden and quite frankly scary
drops in diversity that have occurred over geological time.
Those are mass extinction events.
These aren't entirely related to geographical isolation or amalgamation of continents.
For mass extinction events, we have to look for other factors.
So how can we classify these mass extinction events, and how many large-scale events have
occurred over about the past 500 million years?
An example of some of the criteria that you may use to try and classify mass extinction
event are as follows.
First of all, you need to see at least 30% of species going into extinction.
Imagine that.
Imagine taking a walk, and in a notebook, crossing off one out of every three species
that you meet, a third of the biosphere being utterly removed, and that is just the lower
limit of extinction events.
In addition, it's got to be across a wide range of ecologies.
It can't just be in coral reefs.
It can't just be an extinction event that's recorded in tropical rainforests.
It has to be everywhere, from the Amazon to the Great Barrier Reef, from the tops of
mountains to the bottom of the oceans.
It has to be a global signature.
It also has to be short and sudden.
That's probably one of the most scary things about mass extinction events.
Now remember, we're talking geologically sudden here, so we're talking less than a million
years.
But remember, 4.54 billion years of history, a million years is nothing.
There are two camps regarding the timing of extinctions.
You have the catastrophists who believe that extinctions occur between maybe one and a
hundred years, very rapid.
And the gradualists who accept that extinction events are still very rapid on a geological
time scale, but probably occur more slowly, perhaps between half a million years to a
million years.
Mass extinctions probably vary between these extremes, depending on what the vector is
that's causing the extinction.
Mass extinctions, though, are also classified by severity.
A minor mass extinction event, as we've already said, you'll expect to see 20 to 30 species
going into extinction, 20 to 30% of the whole biosphere.
In intermediate extinction event, you're going to halve the biosphere, 50% of species
gone, and then the scary one, a major mass extinction event, around 80 to 95% of species
being removed from the biosphere, perhaps even more.
Those are very scary numbers indeed.
So applying those criteria to the past 500 million years, what do we get?
Well, here's the big five.
We have a mass extinction event recorded from the late Ordovician period.
We have another one in the late Devonian, there's one in the late Permian, another one
in the late Triassic, and perhaps the most famous, because we lose the dinosaurs, the
Cretaceous Palaeogene extinction, or KP.
It was formerly the Cretaceous Tertiary Extinction Event, or KT, but we don't use the tertiary
anymore.
It's now the KP event.
Currently, some people suggest that we're losing species at an unprecedented rate.
If we are, it's possible we could be in the sixth mass extinction event, and if that's
true, then it might have started about 10,000 years ago with the disappearance of what is
known as the megafauna, so that's losing the wonderful mammoths and saber-toothed tigers,
and we do see a callback in those megamamals at that time.
It's been suggested that even in these times, though, we can witness a vast loss of species.
It's been estimated by some that we're losing about 140,000 species every year.
This is the marsupial wolf.
This is thylakynus.
It was last seen in Tasmania in the 1950s, so this is a recent casualty, and just one
example of species that have recently disappeared from our biosphere, never to return.
There are some estimates that are around about 6,000 square miles of Amazon rainforest
being lost every year.
A football-sized field of forest can contain many unique species, probably a whole bunch
of new insects and beetles that we're currently not aware of and may never well be aware of
now.
Coral reefs and fish stocks are showing signs of definite stress.
These are kind of worrying times for the health of the biosphere, so it behooves us, I guess,
to try and understand what tips a biosphere into a mass extinction.
So what needs to go wrong with the Earth to cause a crisis in the biosphere?
Well, we're going to go into the minute details, as it were, in some case studies in later
lectures, but I just want to go over some of the broad potential causes here.
So first of all, how about biological causes?
We can just have competition between creatures.
Creators occupying the same ecological niche, perhaps they're brought together by continental
drift.
There'd be competition for resources and only the most adaptable would survive.
In other words, there's going to be winners and there's going to be losers.
In the lecture that's going to deal with the Great American Biotic Interchange, we'll
see how this played out when North and South America joined by the Ismoth of Panama.
Again, there were winners and there were losers.
You could also imagine excessive predation playing a role.
Creatures coming into an environment where the creatures they're moving into just don't
have any defenses, natural defenses like the dodo that could potentially cause extinctions,
or perhaps pathogens, introducing disease from one area to another.
Biological factors probably aren't the only cause of extinction events, but if you want
to think of an area where biological factors played a large role in a particular area for
populations, think of New Zealand.
New Zealand, like Mauritius, had a rather spectacular ground-dwelling bird fauna and it was devastated
with the arrival of human hunters.
Then later, when Europeans arrived, bringing cats, rats and dogs, there was another downturn
in the population.
Ground-dwelling birds basically had no time to evolve defenses and suffered very badly.
Sadly, creatures like the giant mower would be gone forever.
Over 750 years, New Zealand vertebrate fauna would be almost halved.
That's really incredible.
But perhaps more usual in terms of potential causes of mass extinctions are those that
are generated by the Earth itself.
I'm talking more here than the movement and distribution of the continents, because plate
movements will have other effects as well.
Moving the plates around on the continents will affect weather patterns.
Moving the configuration of the oceans is going to change ocean circulation and the
productivity of the oceans and of course, as you're moving plates around, you're also
going to be generating volcanic activity.
All these potentially can have a fact, major environmental effects and global warming
and global cooling effects and we're going to see examples of these in those case studies
that I mentioned.
But I guess the most popular cause of mass extinction events, the one that everybody
turns to, are extraterrestrial impacts and of course, if you take a large rock and throw
it to the surface of the Earth, you're going to have serious environmental implications
and we'll see how that worked out in the Cretaceous Palaeogene a bit later.
But probably for my part, I think the most reasonable explanation for mass extinction
events is a combination of many factors.
You see, the biosphere is not the delicate little fragile snowflake that you might think.
It's pretty tough and will withstand some pretty serious abuse.
Mass extinction events for me are a combination of lots of things going wrong, all at the
same time, to such an extent that the biosphere can't adapt.
The study of mass extinction events, as well, is a fairly new concept.
It only really dates back to the early 1980s, but it's generated an awful lot of interest.
People want to know how large were the mass extinctions, what creatures were mostly affected,
but they also want to know how often do they occur.
Are they regular?
Is it the case that there might be a ticking clock of doom on Earth regarding its biosphere?
So is it possible that there is a regular periodicity to mass extinction events?
Well, this idea was first published by David Raup and Jep Setkowski of the University of
Chicago in 1984.
They looked at the paleontological record of biodiversity and applied various statistical
techniques to account for imperfections in the fossil record.
Remember that bias that we talked about, the fact that soft creatures won't fossilize
as well as hard-parted creatures.
It will depend as well upon the environment of fossilization.
And also, there are parts of the geological record which are just missing fossils.
So using various statistical techniques, they took account of that and graphed what the
biodiversity of the planet was like.
They came up with something like this.
I'm worryingly noticed that every 26 million years or so, it would appear that biodiversity
took a serious downfall, even if it wasn't an absolute mass extinction event.
Now this caused quite a stir.
We want to know what's causing this tick.
So we started to look around the planet.
Is there any Earth-based cause?
Is there any plate tectonic feature that has a 26 million year periodicity?
Answer, no.
Is there any climatological effects that have a 26 million year periodicity?
Answer, no again and no for the oceans as well.
So the next place they had to look was look to the sky.
They suggested that this periodicity might be related to this feature.
This is the orc cloud.
The orc cloud is a cloud of comets in the outer reaches of our solar system.
By outer reaches, I really do mean outer reaches.
It's only just weakly associated with our sun.
Think of it as kind of a soap bubble of comets surrounding our solar system.
They're almost a light year away from our sun.
It's mostly the material that's been left over after the development of our solar system.
And we think, well, they think that it's probably from here that the comets would emerge falling
into the inner solar system, some of them with Earth-crossing orbits causing extinctions
or downturns in the biosphere every 26 million years.
So every 26 million years, something happens to that cloud.
Probably some sort of gravitational effect to cause them to fall out of that weak orbit
around the sun and start to careen in towards the centre of the solar system.
So the question is, what causes that gravitational effect?
This is where paleontology gets the opportunity to be a bit sci-fi.
They suggested that perhaps there was a companion sun to our star, and they called it nemesis.
I guess because it sounds kind of cool.
Now, dual star systems aren't uncommon in our galaxy.
You can have many stars orbiting one another in a kind of a dance through the galaxy.
So it suggested that perhaps we have a companion star as well, but a rather faint one and a
small one called a red dwarf star, which would explain why it isn't that apparent, because
it is dimmer and smaller than our own yellow sun.
However, if we do have a companion star, we now have pretty good telescopes.
We have Hubble, surely we would have seen evidence of a companion star by now, or at
least noticed some of its gravitational effects.
And we haven't.
So how about another possibility?
How about a black hole?
Now a black hole was once a supermassive star that collapsed in on itself.
The gravitational forces were so incredible that it created a singularity, and not even
light can escape from a black hole.
Now black holes aren't actually all that large, and they're black in space on a black
background, so you might miss one.
But a black hole even so would demonstrate certain effects, like gravitational lensing
effects as it bends light around itself as it moves across the background of the sky.
And we haven't seen it.
So probably not a companion black hole either.
So what about another huge planet?
How about a massive planet, a Jupiter-sized planet, that exists just inside the Oort cloud?
And that's orbiting around our solar system, and every now and again, 26 million years,
its orbit brings it close to the Oort cloud, and that causes the gravitational effects
and causes comets to come rushing into the inner solar system.
Again, interesting idea, but surely if it was out there and it was so large, we might
have seen evidence of it by now.
So they decided on a larger perspective.
Let's look a little back.
Let's take a few steps back and look beyond the Earth system, beyond the solar system.
Let's look to the next stage of the system up.
Let's look to our galaxy, which is full of solar systems.
This is a picture of our galaxy.
Now, the galaxy isn't static, as you see in images.
It's actually slowly rotating.
About every 225 million years, it completes a complete rotation.
Well, the galaxy isn't a flat pancake of stars either.
It has thickness.
So if you were to take a section through the galaxy, you would see it definitely has a
thickness, and we have a line running through the galaxy that you can call the galactic
plane.
Now, our solar system is moving around and around in the galaxy as it spirals.
But in addition to moving around the galaxy, the solar system is also moving up and down
the galaxy, up and down through the galaxy, through the galactic plane.
And every 26 million years, it's right in the middle of the galactic arm.
That's where we have the greatest concentration of material, and therefore the greatest potential
gravitational effects.
And it would appear every 26 million years, we get a hammering.
So is that the explanation?
We've passed through the densest part of the galaxy, gives the all cloud a good shake,
and incomes the comets, maybe.
So the next question is obvious.
When will we last in the middle of the galactic arm?
Well, you're OK.
It was about a million years ago, so few.
You can come out from underneath the sofa, and yes, you do have to do your taxes again.
But there's a problem.
It takes about a million years for the comets on the outer edge of the all cloud to get
to our part of the solar system.
So some people would say that we're due for the attack right now.
Some people even say it's already started.
Between the 16th and the 22nd of July in 1994, Comet Shoemaker Levy 9 impacted Jupiter.
Before it got to Jupiter, Jupiter's intense gravity split it up into a series of bodies
and it impacted in a series of fragments.
The energy released by the explosion was equivalent to several million megatons of TNT.
If that had impacted on our planet, it would have probably wiped out life to the microbial
level.
But before you go and run underneath the sofa again and barricade all the doors, how reliable
is the data?
Well, when you actually look at the data, remember we're looking at statistics here
that have been used to work out this periodicity and these falls in biodiversity.
The periodicity really only seems to match three of the Big Five mass extinction events.
And also the spacing isn't always consistent.
Some of the statistics are slightly different way and you come up with no 26 million year
periodicity.
Sometimes you get a 62 million impact periodicity.
When you use a 62 million year impact periodicity, though, you miss the Cretaceous Paleogene
extinction event.
The only extinction event that has been positively associated with an impact.
So the jury is out, I guess.
This proposed cycle is still very much a matter of a debate.
But mass extinction events have occurred for various reasons, including impacts.
And in the next lecture, I'd like to introduce you to the first of those major extinction
events, the first extinction event of the Phanerozoic at the end of the Ordovician period.
