In the last lecture, we looked at the evolution of plants and the first animals and how they
would get onto the land. But let's turn our attention to us. Let's look at our family.
Let's look at the chordates and in particular consider where our little bit of the chordates,
the vertebrates, came into existence. The vertebrates are an incredibly successful group.
They inhabit many environments. You can find them from the frigid poles to the hottest
of the deserts. You find them in the highest peaks and right down in the deepest oceans.
Any way you can generally go, you'll find that a member of our family, the vertebrates,
is already there. They're burrowing below the ground and flying above it as well.
So in this lecture, let's look at the vertebrates and let's ask, who is the earliest vertebrate?
Also who are the conodonts and how do they fit into the vertebrate story? And ask, why
do we have skeletons made of calcium phosphate? Also, who were the first fish?
So who is the earliest vertebrate? Well, I guess before we answer that, we have to define
a little bit what a vertebrate is. And in order to stand who a vertebrate is, you need
to understand the larger group into which the vertebrates belong, that is, the chordates.
Chordates are creatures that possess something that is called a notochord. That's a rod-shaped
structure. It's a flexible axis and support structure. Now, in most vertebrates, this
tube has been replaced or mineralized to form the vertebral column or the spine. We
can see the notochord here in this image. It's that thin line that's running down this
zebra-fresh embryo. It's a typical chordate feature. Now, the most primitive of the chordates
that we can find living today are these things. These are the tonicates or sea squirts. They're
filter feeders. Basically, they're just sacs fixed to the bottom of the sea floor. I'm
pretty sure that if you were swimming past these, you really wouldn't think of them as
being a relatively close relative of ours. They exist by pumping seawater in and out
of their bodies and extracting plankton and organic material. They're obviously a long
way off from a horse or an elephant. The larval stage relationship of the sea squirts
to chordates makes it clear, though. The larval stage is a little tadpole-like creature.
It has a tail and a notochord, so definitely a member of the chordates. It's only when
that larval stage settles on a rock head first and loses its tail that it becomes the odd
sac-like creature that we see in its adult stage, but it definitely is a chordate. One
of the earliest organisms on its way to becoming a vertebrate is from one of my favorite localities,
of course, the Burgess Shale in British Columbia. And this is it. If you're actually looking
to find this creature, it's fairly innocuous. It's like a little dark smudge on the rock
about as big as your little pinky. This thin little ribbon of flesh is called pachyre.
Initially, it was thought to just be a worm, but look at these myotome muscle blocks and
that long tube running down the length of the creature. This is definitely a chordate.
Now, not everybody was happy with pachyre's position in the chordates. It said that those
small tentacles you can see around the head are a little odd and not very chordate-like,
but modern hagfish, like you can see here, do possess kind of similar tentacles, so perhaps
they're just marking the position of gill slits. Pachyre closely resembles this creature,
Amphioxis. He's a Lancelot. He's about two inches in length, and they live usually just
buried in the sand. It was just their eyes peeking above the sand surface, but they can
swim if they need to in open water. They possess a notochord and myotomes, and also another
very common chordate feature, a swimming fin as well. There is evidence of some cartilage
around the mouth and gill slits of this creature, but it really doesn't possess a true skeleton.
Desmond Collins of the Royal Ontario Museum, a paleontologist and expert in the Burgess
Shale, when considering the position of little pachyre in the Burgess Shale, stated that
if aliens were found visiting the Burgess Shale, they wouldn't have really thought that
little pachyre would have become ultimately, in its descendants, one of the dominant animals.
If you were a betting person, you really wouldn't put your money on pachyre. Personally, I would
have put all my money on the arthropods, but that's not the way the story turned out.
Pachyre, like the Lancelot, probably hid most of the time in the sediments of the Burgess
Shale, hiding away from predators, far away from being the top dog of the biosphere.
Some scientists have suggested that it spent a lot of its time actually buried in the sediment,
those little eyes upon stalks probably just poking above the sediment surface, or perhaps
pachyre spent most of its time hiding amongst other larger life foams in the Burgess Shale,
hoping not to be noticed by anomalocaris swimming ominously overhead.
We have older Cambrian lagerstatten, though. Remember I mentioned a few in a previous lecture,
but perhaps one of the most famous is the Changiang County Exposure in Yunnan province
of China. Now these are significant because they are from the lower Cambrian, 515 to 520
million years ago. That makes them 10 million years older than the Burgess Shale. It's fascinating
really, because this shows how fast the diversification was of creatures after that Cambrian explosion.
And the depositional setting of these Chinese foreigners, well probably on the bottom of
a muddy ocean. These creatures were rapidly covered over with sediments by turbidites,
similar to those turbidites that we discussed with the Burgess Shale, that slurry and movement
of sediment underwater. The rock containing the fossils, the Mautian Shang Shales, is quite
different though. It's about 160 feet thick, but unlike the grayish rock that we had from
the Burgess Shale with the blackened impressions, we find that the fossils from these Chinese
sections are preserved as a kind of a reddish-brown impression on a dark gray shale, which weathers
to a really attractive yellowish color when it's been weathered. And you can see that
the fossils show up really nicely on them. Like the Burgess Shale, it's dominated by
arthropods. Around about 50% of the fauna is arthropods. Again, if you're a bedding person,
you would think that it was the arthropods that were going to take over the world. But
only 3% of the fauna in these Chinese sections are hard-shelled or have hard bodies. The rest
of it is soft-bodied fauna. Remember that bias we were talking about earlier. In fact,
five species of trilobite, the hard-parted creatures, are actually demonstrating evidence
of their soft parts as well. We're finding traces of legs and antennae on some of these
trilobite specimens. So these Cheng Jiang faunas are absolutely incredible and great for strays.
It's suggested that one in eight of the animals from this fauna are problematica, creatures
that really don't fit into any existing group. For example, it contains six types of animal
similar to that creature Helusogenia. Remember Helusogenia? That was the creature which I
described quite a while ago. It's the one that we got upside down, the one that we thought
was walking on stilts, and those stilts turned out to be protective spines. Well, we have
a whole bunch more of them here in these Chinese sections.
We get other strange things as well. This is the Vetiulicolia. It's an extinct phylum
of creatures divided into two parts. There's the head part. It's kind of a large, bulbous
balloon-looking structure. It has a big mouth in the central portion and possible gill slits
between it. And then there's a kind of a division and then a sort of a few other segments and
perhaps the suggestion of a tail at the back.
There have been numerous interpretations of this very strange creature. Some people have
suggested that perhaps maybe because of the ribbing that you can see on it and the divisions
in it that it might be a primitive ancestor of the arthropods. Perhaps because it looks
a bit like a sack, perhaps it's a member of the sea squirt, so perhaps maybe it's allied
to our history. But we don't know very much about it at all. We don't even know if it
was free swimming. We don't know if it was predator or prey. We have no idea how it was
making a living at all. People have suggested that because of those holes, those gill slits
we can see running down the side of it, it might have been a filter feeder, a bit like
a whale shark, sucking in material or plankton with that large circular mouth at the front
and expelling the water, the wastewater out at the side. Or was it a deposit feeder, chewing
through the sediment, or perhaps a combination of all three? To be honest with you, we really
don't know right now, but it's a fascinating creature. But what about our part of the story
in this fauna? Well, we find some wonderful creatures relating to our part of the story.
This is Milo Caminghia. He's a small creature, but he has a distinctive head and he has myotomes,
so vzvi muscle blocks. He possesses fins and a notochord. And unlike picaya, you can see
definite evidence of gill slits. It's also possible that in this tiny little fossil,
we see the preservation of the pharynx, that's part of the throat, also the digestive tract.
And remarkably as well, there's the preservation potentially of the heart in some of these
creatures. The preservation in this fauna is just absolutely amazing. We think by looking
at the structure of this creature and the arrangement of the muscles, that it probably
swam by flicking its body from side to side. It was sized about the size of a paperclip,
so it really wasn't a very impressive creature in size, but impressive for what it represents.
We also find this creature. This is Haikawikthes. He's about the same size as Milo Caminghia,
slimmer. He has a definite head and some people have suggested that maybe you can see some evidence
of a skull, but there are other definite chordate features similar to those that we find on Milo
Caminghia. We find around 500 specimens of this creature as well, so it's been suggested that
perhaps these creatures were swimming around in large shoals. You can also imagine them there in
the lower Cambrian, existing in those large shoals that you see perhaps in today's oceans of fish
darting around trying to confuse predators. It's possible that some of these Changiang forms may
represent the first true vertebrates, perhaps even the first fish. This, however, is still debated,
but it's showing us here in the early Cambrian that our ancestors were around. They were apparent.
But I'd like to take a bit of a diversion now and talk about a group of creatures called the
conodonts. Who are they and how do they fit into our vertebrate story? Well, conodonts have been
known for a long time. The name conodont was given to them by their discoverer, that CH Panda. He
was a Latvian anatomist and paleontologist. The name comes from 1856. Conodonts are tooth-like
structures composed of calcium phosphate. That's the mineral appetite. That's the same composition
as our bones and our teeth. They're usually fairly small. They're less than 0.3 inches in size. You
could fit, say, five or six of them on the head of a pin. And they're only known from marine
sediments. You find no evidence of conodonts living in freshwater systems. They first appear in the
late Cambrian, but they're extinct by the Triassic period around about 200 million years ago. So
they were around on the planet for quite a long time, a very successful group. Now, as these fossils
are composed of calcium phosphate, we cannot use the techniques of extraction that we described in
a previous lecture. Remember when we were talking about extracting organic world microfossils? There
we were using hydrofluoric acid and hydrochloric acid to dissolve the rock and extract our organic
microfossils. That would just completely dissolve our conodont, so we have to use a different
technique here. Generally, we are extracting conodonts from limestones, but we're using really
large samples. For organic world microfossils, we can just use fairly tiny samples, but when we're
talking about conodont extraction, you have to use a bucket-sized sample. Basically, you have to
remove the limestone that surrounds these fossils using acetic acid, a strong vinegar, which probably
explains why if ever you go to a conodont lab anywhere in the world, it smells not unlike an
English fish and chip shop. The residue, like the last time, is treated with heavy liquids, but this
time the conodonts sink to the bottom of the heavy liquid, and any quartz and material that you're
not interested in floats to the top, and the conodonts can just be tapped off at the bottom of a
special vessel. You then dry that residue out and pick the remaining debris using a microscope and a
paintbrush, or in fact some people use an eyelash using static electricity to pick up these very
tiny little fossils. They're extremely useful microfossils. We use them extensively in biostratigraphy.
They're very important in the oil industry. They're used to date rocks. It's important, of course,
if you're drilling for oil, to know where you are stratigraphically, so conodonts are useful
in that they provide this stratigraphic tie when we're searching for the relevant oil strata,
but they're useful to the oil industry in another regard as well.
Oil forms from organic microplankton, example the dinoflagellates and the acrotarks that we've
mentioned. During times of high productivity of these creatures, they sink to the bottom. In such
quantities, once they're dead, that oxygen is used up very rapidly. More creatures fall to the ground
and there's no more oxygen available to oxidize these creatures, so organic material just starts to
build up. This produces a rich organic sediment. For example, you can see one here. This is the
Chimeridgian shale in Chimeridge Bay in England. Now, once these shales are buried to great depths,
temperature starts to increase and, effectively, you start to cook the organic material in them.
The cooking starts at around about 140 degrees Fahrenheit and will continue to about 302 Fahrenheit
when it becomes too hot and, basically, then you're not going to produce any of the hydrocarbons
that you're wanting. It corresponds to a range of depths of about 1.2 to 2.5 miles in depth.
It's so important to know if you're in an area, if you're looking for oil, that you're going to hit
this oil window. So how can you tell if the rocks that you're looking at have either received enough
heat to start the cooking or have received too much heat and any oil resources would have been,
basically, fried away? Well, the conodonts help here because, like toast, the more you
heat conodonts, the darker they get. They start off as a kind of a white colour, then pass into
pale yellows, ambers, and eventually black, indicating increasing temperatures. It's called
the conodont colouration index and it's an extremely useful way that we can measure the
thermal history of a sedimentary basin if we're looking for oil resources.
So they're really useful creatures, okay, or you're really useful microfossils, I should say,
but what are they? That was unknown for quite a long time, even though they'd been known about
and used for a long time. Some suspected, because of the way they looked, that they were the teeth
of some animal, but that was pure supposition. In fact, initially, each conodont was given a
different species name. That was until something was found. Those were associations of conodonts
on bedding surfaces, bedding surfaces effectively representing the flaws of ancient oceans.
What we found is that these teeth or element were associated in a symmetrical apparatus of
conodonts. So individual components were, and conodonts were individual components of an
articulating assemblage of something. But what were they? We had this articulated assemblage
of conodonts, but how do we reconstruct the creature without any soft parts to go on? Well,
you can come up with any reconstruction, really, once you've got those, that amount of data.
This is one of my favourites. It's proposed to be a filter feeding animal. It'd be sucking in
water from one end and passing it out at the other. It looks a bit like a spiky toilet roll,
I always think. In this model, the conodont elements would be used for a defence purpose.
After 150 years after their first discovery, a student in the United Kingdom was working on a
particular geological horizon in Scotland. It was a geological horizon dated to the carboniferous
period. It's called the Granton shrimp bed. It was deposited in a hypersaline. That's a very salty
water, anoxic legume, so very little oxygen as well. So you'd have a situation where you'd have
some sort of barrier from a main ocean, and behind it was this very warm legunal area. Because the
water is very warm, it means it probably wasn't circulating very well, which means the lower
portions of that legume would be very poor in oxygen. It would occasionally receive storm water
from the open ocean though, and with that storm water would come creatures. Various creatures,
but of course an awful lot of crustaceans as well, hence the name Granton shrimp bed. The
high salinities and low oxygen conditions would kill off those creatures fairly quickly. Also,
it would deter scavengers and stop decomposition. So what we've created here in Granton is a
wonderful lagerstatten again. As I said, lots of crustaceans in this particular fossil bed,
but also an interesting creature. A creature that's two inches long. It kind of looks a bit like an
eel, but when you look at it closely you see it possesses myotomes. It has a notochord, a swimming
fin, and two large googly eyes at one end of the creature. But most significantly, at that end as
well, you find an associated conodont apparatus right by the head. We found lots of other conodont
animals now, not just from this horizon, but from many other places around the world at many important
paleontological sites. So we're pretty sure that what we're looking at here is the conodont animal.
Some of the elements we think of the conodonts were used in a kind of a grasping manner. They
were projected forward out of the conodont mouth to grasp the food, either a living creature or
perhaps a food particle, and that would then be pulled back into the mouth cavity of the conodont
and then shredded by other conodont elements. Now, I know that sounds fairly gruesome, but remember
conodonts weren't that large. They were about as big as your little pinky.
Conodonts are not our direct ancestor. They're probably not a vertebrate, but they provide
interesting color to that early time of the evolution of the core dates. We think their
lifestyle was similar to modern-day hagfish or lambfries. Now, hagfish are really nice creatures.
They're pretty nasty. They are found often in dead or sometimes near-dead bodies of larger
marine animals. They burrow into them and basically eat them from the inside out, and in order to
lubricate themselves into this creature, they produce copious amounts of slime from glands that
run down the side of their body. That slime is also used as a defensive mechanism. If they're
attacked, they'll release lots of this slime, which could potentially clog the gills of your
attacker or at least give you a big mouthful full of nasty foul tasting slime.
Lambfries are a jawless core date. Some people think they might be one of the basal vertebrates,
but they too have a diverse lifestyle, but some of those fairly nasty as well. Some of them
attach themselves to living fish and basically just suck them dry. Whatever the mode of life
of conodonts and our early ancestors, something is obvious though. We were not the top dog.
It's useful because it gives us a little bit of perspective. We haven't always been the glorious
vertebrates. We haven't always been there in regard to the top creature of an incredible
biosphere, not that we are anyway. It's important, I think, to gain that perspective. Take a look
back in the Cambrian, little Pachyre scurrying away from Anomalycharis. Then when we move into
the Silorian, the top dog was not a vertebrate or a core date. It's going to be the Nautiloids.
Then we move into the Silorian. We still aren't really there as a major player, as the major
predator. It's going to be the Eryptorids, those sea scorpions that we mentioned earlier.
Probably one exception though. For that, we need to go to South Africa, to Cape Town. You can see
Table Mountain just in the background. If you walk across Table Mountain, you might be able to find a
particularly important deposit. It's called the Sum Shale. The Sum Shale was deposited in the
Ordovician during the Hernancian. Remember, that was the time of the glaciation at the end of the
Ordovician. We're looking at around about 435 million years ago. It was deposited in front of a
retreating ice sheet. So that ice sheet was busy eroding rock, but providing a lot of sediments
from the runoff from it. Glacial periods are also fairly dry periods, and there'd be lots of winds
blowing silt, and both these features were fertilizing the oceans in the area of deposition of
the Sum Shale. That caused a bloom of microplankton. In this case, back in the Ordovician, that
microplankton would be the acrytarchs. These acrytarchs sank to the ocean floor, and as we described
before, used up all the oxygen, grating an anoxic environment in which creatures, wonderful creatures,
could be preserved. We've created yet another Lagerstatten. And these are the things that I'm
interested in for this story. These are described as the oldest plants in the world, the oldest
potential land plants, perhaps. They come from the late Ordovician, obviously, so that would kind
of undercut our Cooksonia. They're called Prombus and Polkrum, or beautiful promise. Now, my PhD
supervisor, Dick Aldridge, was a conodont worker, a very famous conodont paleontologist. And I think
when he saw these pictures, he almost fell off his chair. Because what he realized was here, he
wasn't looking at a plant. He was looking at conodont elements. But these are giant conodont elements.
Professor Aldridge got right on the next plane, effectively, to go to South Africa and look for
the conodont animal. And he found them. He found the animal associated with conodont elements there
in the Soom Shale. The conodont animal that produced these large conodont elements was
possibly as much as 16 inches long. Fantastic creature. But please understand, this is definitely
the exception, not the rule for the early part of our story. Well, why do we have skeletons made
of calcium phosphate? It's the next question I'd like to ask about us as developing vertebrates.
Well, eventually, our ancestors started to grow larger, possibly to improve the efficiency with
swimming. If you're larger, then eventually, you exceed the noticode's ability to act as a
stiffened rod against which muscles can flex and allow a swimming motion. The sharks were probably
one of the first creatures to solve this problem. They developed cartilaginous skeletons, which
allowed them to get larger. Other vertebrates would mineralize that cartilage to produce skeletons
of bone, calcium phosphate, that mineral appetite. But why? Why would they use calcium phosphate?
Why not use calcium carbonate? Calcium carbonate is much more abundant in the oceans. It's been used
successfully by many invertebrates, trilobites, corals, brachyopods, clams. Why use phosphate
rather than calcium carbonate? Well, Richard Cohen at UC Davis in his book A History of Life
suggests an interesting possibility. He said that phosphate skeletons in the vertebrates
probably developed due to the oxygen debt. Now, as vertebrates, we're active creatures. We're prone
to sudden bursts of activities, which breaks down sugars in our muscles faster than we can
acquire oxygen. This is the process of anaerobic glycolysis. The cost of the oxygen debt is lactic
acid. That's fatigue in your muscles. That's the fatigue I feel in my muscles when I've missed the
bus yet again and I've spilled my Starbucks coffee all over the floor. As the oxygen debt is paid back,
the levels of acid in the blood start to increase. That temporarily leaches calcium out of the calcium
phosphate in our bones. That's not a problem. We can cope with that. But if our skeletons were
composed of calcium carbonate, calcite, the leaching would be catastrophic. Effectively,
the acid levels in our blood would dissolve our skeletons away. So perhaps calcium phosphate in
our bones points to evidence that our ancestors were really active creatures. But who were the first
fish? Let's move on in our story of the vertebrates. Well, the first abundant fish appear in the
Silorian and the Devonian. And they're what we call agnathian fish. These are fish without
articulating jaws. Fish with jaws would appear later. Rather than a really stiffened internal
skeleton, these creatures tend to go for stiffening their bodies with plates on external surfaces.
They look a bit like armor plated fish. An early successful group are these, the Hetra Ostracans.
They diverged rapidly in the Silorian, occupying very many niches. You find them in normal marine
conditions, brackish conditions and freshwater conditions. They're probably not very strong
swimmers though. They probably strained micro plankton from the seawater from those slits that
they had in their mouths or dug in the sediment as well. You can see some of them have these long
sword-like predictions that they probably stirred up the sediment with. Another group, the Ostracans,
appear in the late Silorian and they will diversify through the late Devonian. And these are the most
advanced agnathian, most advanced jawless fish. Some of them reach sizes of about 3.2 feet in length.
So these is a substantial creature. Some of them possess suggestions of little pressure sensors
around the armoured head shield that you can see on some of the species. Perhaps they detect
movement in the surrounding water. Most of them probably lived in freshwater environments.
Now, although the Ostracans had some major advantages, they had a really big drawback.
All they had for a mouth was a simple slit. That is really going to limit what they can do in the
environment. For example, it'd be fairly difficult to be a predator with that kind of mouth. The next
development is the evolution of the jaws and that is going to take the vertebrates to the next level.
