In the last lecture, we saw evidence for the origins of our group, the vertebrates, from
tiny myelocomingia, that little tiny creature about the size of a paper cut flicking its
way through those lower Cambrian oceans in China. We also saw the useful and extremely
diverse conodonts, which although really aren't part of our direct story, still provide interesting
colour to the picture of the evolution of our group, and the jawless and heavily armoured
bricks, the hetero-ostracons and the osteostracons, swimming through the oceans of the Silorium.
In today's lecture, though, I'd like to investigate why was the development of an internal skeleton
to the vertebrates such a boon? Also, highlight another fantastic milestone in the evolution
of the vertebrates, that is, the development of jaws and the radiation of fish that would
follow from that fantastic evolutionary development, and also investigate one of the most famous
fish logger statin in the world, that's the fossil fish of the Devonian Arcadian Basin
in Scotland. So why was an internal skeleton such a boon
to the vertebrates? Well, why are skeletons useful? Remember, vertebrates initially were
fairly well sidelined in their evolution and development. Versed by killer arthropods like
this from the Cambrian, this is a relatively recent discovery from the Burgess Shale, but
as you can see, it's a mean-looking beast. This would have made mincemeat of tiny little
ribbon of flesh pecaias. No wonder it was hiding in the sediments. This is a 1.5 foot
long creature. It's called Herdia Victoria, and this was patrolling the Cambrian seas.
It's an animalicarid, like the animalicaris we mentioned in the last time. The agnathum
fish, including the conodonts, would play set and fiddle to other creatures as well
in the Ordovician period, such as this orthoconic nautiloid, this squid in a shell, but a squid
in a shell that could reach lengths of up to 7 feet. And then when we move into the
Silorian, the next period, the vertebrates aren't really doing very much better. The
top dogs here would be those fascinating but rather frightening sea scorpions, the Eryptrids,
again, that could reach a really large lens, about 6 or 7 feet in length at times.
What the vertebrates needed in order to change their position, I would say, in the ecosystem
would be the development of a more profound internal skeleton and jaws. It's these two
things, I think, that really allowed them to become the top dog of the oceans.
The vertebrate skeleton is composed of either bone or cartilage. No, cartilage is unmineralized
and flexible. It's composed of collagen and elastic fibers, which accounts for its flexibility.
Initially, we all have a cartilage skeleton. Human embryos are composed of cartilage, but
over time, as the embryo develops, they ossify, they mineralize over time.
We still have cartilage in our own bodies now. Our noses contain cartilage, our ears
and the ends of some of the bones that we have, like the ribs, contain cartilage. But
we're mostly mineralized, which means, in general, we're going to be leaving more record
of our existence in the fossil record than creatures such as sharks and rays, which have
kept all their cartilage in a skeleton. As a result, the study of sharks and rays is
really hampered by the fact that cartilage rots away very rapidly when compared to bone.
The first skeletons, as well, were probably cartilage in nature, which means looking for
this early period of the development of skeletons and jaws is going to be an area where maybe
fossil evidence could be limited. Bone itself is composed of needle-shaped crystals of a
mineral called hydroxyapatite. It forms in a network of organic collagen fibres. That's
the great advantage of bone. It's strong because of the hydroxyapatite, but that flexibility
of the collagen makes it strong and flexible. Some of the oldest fish that we find adopted
a slightly different strategy, though. They covered themselves in external bony plates,
a kind of external rather than internal mineralization in many cases. This is arondaspis. This particular
species of arondaspis was one of the contenders for perhaps the early vertebrate, depending
where you figure those little creatures from the Cambrian equivalent of the Burgess Shale
in China come from. This is an Ordovician creature. It's about 480 to 470 million years ago and
comes from Alice Springs, which was recovered in 1959. It's fairly big as well. It's about
six inches long. Its body is covered with armoured nobles that we call scutes, and you can see
the head there is protected by a very large plate. It probably swam a bit like a tadpole
and flapping that large tail, you can see at the back. It's kind of streamlined, but probably
wasn't the best swimmer. It looks more like one of those slightly streamlined bricks rather
than the sleek beautiful fish that we're familiar with in today's oceans. The best solution
is definitely, though, to go for an internal skeleton. The reason? With an internal skeleton
you can get big. The skeleton can grow with the animal. For example, compare our growth
to that of the arthropods. Arthropods like the trilobites and the crabs reach an upper
size limit. The size of their shell will limit how much further they can grow. They therefore
have to molt. Now, molting is costly in energy and also leaves the animal vulnerable in that
period where you're waiting for the new shell to become hard. Bones provide other useful
functions as well. They provide protection for our internal organs. The skull, the ribs
are holding my internal organs in my thorax. They also generate and transfer forces and
in that case, they're allowing us movement. Vertebrates have always been rapidly moving
creatures we think. They provide shape to the body, whatever our shape might look like,
and allow for the transfer of sound in the ear by the evolution of tiny little bones
in this area of the body. They have other functions as well. They produce blood in the
marrow and they can also act as a store of vital minerals. They can also store heavy
toxic metals removing them from the blood where otherwise they might damage internal
organs and they help buffer the blood against excessive pH. So you can see they're an incredibly
useful feature, not just for providing support. But what I want to talk about now is the development
of jaws and the effect that that would have on the radiation of fish types. This is the
other factor that I think would really push forward the evolution of vertebrates. But
how do we get jaws? Remember, initially, we were talking about fish that were agnathons,
jawless fish. And because maybe the early record of that transition to jaws is one that was
a cartilage record, there's very little evidence in the fossil record to support it. So what do
we do? Well, we can make some reasoned assumptions. It's likely that jaws developed as structural
supports in the gill systems of those jawless fish. The front sets of these supports migrated
forward to become the parts of the brain case. Count to intuitively, it's likely that jaws
didn't actually evolve for predation. It's likely, in fact, that jaws evolved in order
to aid respiration. If you don't have anything exciting to do on an evening and there's nothing
on the TV, you might sit and watch your goldfish for a while. If you do, you'll see it making
the noise that goldfish make. It's called the buccal pump system. It's the goldfish
gulping system which allows them to force water over the gills. This dramatically improves
the uptake of oxygen for the water. So it would appear that jaws might have evolved for respiration
rather than predation. But once they had been established, obviously, jaws could be used
for other things. And once we had jawed fish, they start to radiate very rapidly into three
major groups. Firstly, there's the placoderms. They're the first jaw fish. They're a very
varied group, but most of them were predators. They also had, in addition to jaws, a brand
new innovation, a neck joint. They could move their head to allow them to snap at prey.
And some of the species had really, really large jaws. This is Duncolostius. He's from
the late Devonian, about 380 to 360 million years ago, and considered by some to be the
world's really first super predator. He could reach lengths of around 33 feet, estimated
to be about four tons. This was a big creature. It did not possess the modern teeth, as you
might understand from sharks or modern bony fish today. Instead, they had these bony plates
arranged around the outline of the jaw. It's been suggested that Duncolostius had probably
some of the most powerful bite of any fish, perhaps up to about 8,000 pounds per square
inch. The mouth would open rapidly, and because it was such a large space, it would cause
a powerful suction and help draw the prey physically into the mouth. Unhealed bite marks
on Duncolostius suggest that he also might have been a cannibal. So, not exactly a pleasant
creature at all. It's thought that perhaps the juvenile forms of this creature had jaws
that were not so well developed. They were perhaps stiff, and the placoderms then would
feed on soft-bodied prey. But as they became older, that would change. The jaws would become
more flexible, adapting them to hold on to struggling prey. Probably very large prey,
indeed, shark-sized prey. Placoderms' providers were another first as well. A fossil from
the Gogo area of Western Australia. It was discovered in 2005 at the Museum of Victoria,
an expedition that was led by John Long. The placoderm that we find in this fossil contains
a fossil embryo, which is rare enough as it is. But what we find in this fossil is that
the embryo is attached by an umbilical cord to the adult. We're looking here at an example
of a fish that is producing live young, an example of vivipary, an internal fertilisation,
possibly the first example of this in the vertebrates. Placoderms also demonstrate early
evidence of sexual dimorphism in the vertebrates as well. The males are found to have clasping
organs at the base of the pelvic fins, probably to allow the direct passage of sperm into
the female. What about another group? Well, we have another group, slightly smaller, that
we call the acanthodians. These are less than eight inches long, and when you look at them,
they're looking a little more familiar than the heavily armoured placoderms. And it's
probably from this group that modern fish would evolve. They're characterised by spines
on their fins and on their bellies. Probably not unlike the sticklebacks that we see today.
They were designed to deter a predator. If you try to chew on an acanthodian, you'd probably
get it stuck in your throat. The head had forward pointing-gay eyes and a lateral line down the
side of the body. That's a sense organ that is used to detect movement. They're also
found fossilite in huge numbers, vast numbers at times. So it's suspected that they swarm
around in large shoals at mid-levels in the water column, not unlike creatures do today.
Probably swimming around in order to, in these large shoals, to confuse predators, particularly
the large placoderms that were moving along slowly on the ocean floor below them.
And then thirdly, the chondrichthes. These include modern sharks and rays. Although the
fossil record of this group is poor, we do have a section preserving some really early
forms in the Cleveland shale on the south shore of Lake Erie. In this remarkable fossil
site, we find traces of skin, skeleton and internal organs. So we can get a particularly
detailed look at some of these early sharks. This is a particularly well-known species.
This is claydosilacti. It's about six foot long. It lived at the same time as duncalosteus
in the upper Devonian. During the upper Devonian, something else would emerge. What we call
the bony fish. That is the most common fish that we found around in today's oceans. They're
a group that has powerful fins. And they're going to be very important in our story in
later lectures because we think it's from this group that vertebrates would make the
move onto land.
These major pulses in evolution that we see are particularly interesting when we consider
the sharks and the bony fish. Because we think we see a pulse in evolution of the sharks
matched by a pulse of evolution in the bony fish. We think what we're looking at here
is an evolutionally arm race. Innovations in one group being countered by another and
pushing on the diversity of both those forms of fish. Oddities would evolve though. This
is helicoprion. He's an odd creature that possesses his bizarre spiral jaw which evolved
in the late Carboniferous about 300 million years ago. It's mostly known from what is
called its tooth wall. It's kind of a bushy saw kind of structure. The creature's cell
probably about 10 to 15 foot long so it was a substantial fish in the oceans. We're still
not sure how this jaw functioned. We're not even, to be honest with you, very sure where
it was located. Possibly like in this reconstruction hanging down in front of the creature but
surely if that was the case it would create an awful lot of drag. So perhaps more likely
that tooth structure was located internally perhaps by the side of the gills. What was
it using this bizarre structure for? Again, it's a good question. Possibly eating soft
bodied animals. Perhaps crunching up the shells of ammonites or perhaps it was even flinging
the jaw out to capture prey. To be honest with you we're going to have to find more
and better preserved specimens to solve this little puzzle. Then we have this guy as well.
This is Steffan Canthus. He lived around 360 million years ago. Smaller, about 2.3 feet
long but just look at those bizarre spikes and predictions on its head. And also what
is that large plate-like structure on its back for? We're not really sure but it could
be that they were used perhaps in some sort of mating ritual. Sharks are a very, very
successful group. There are many different species but they're all pretty well the same
form, the same shape, the same body plan. Obviously they hit on a good idea very early
on and if you've hit on a good idea why bother changing?
Perhaps the scariest of all the sharks though is a shark called Megalodon. He lived relatively
recently between about 25 to 1.5 million years ago and may be the contender for one of the
largest and most powerful vertebrate species that has ever lived. He was about 52 feet
long. He's also known from his teeth which in Megalodon are around about 7.1 inches long.
Incidentally Megalodon means big tooth. The bite force that this creature could generate
was probably about 10 times that of a great white shark and it's thought perhaps that
this creature was preying on the whales that existed at the same time as it did. Megalodon
would become extinct as the oceans cool as we move towards the next ice age, not the
most recent ice age. Whales would move to cooler waters therefore for much of the year
as they pretty well do today but it's thought that perhaps Megalodon was a purely tropical
creature so he couldn't follow his prey and died out.
So do we have a lagerstatn though around about the same period of the radiation of the fishes
that can paint a picture of the environment in which they lived and the answer is yes
in order to look at that we have to travel back to Scotland and look at the Devonian
Orcadian fish of the Orcadian basin. Now the Burgershale had Charles Walcott, the
Rhiney Chirt had William Mackay but for the Orcadian fish beds we have one Louis Agassiz.
Louis Agassiz was a Swiss gentleman. He was a natural historian and professor at Harvard
University. He is perhaps most famous as being the person who was first to propose that ice
ages had occurred in the geological past. Agassiz is also somewhat infamous as well
for his views on polygenic. That is the idea that races were created separately and had
different origins which in his mind made them unequal in ability. This particular hateful
view has been now turned scientific racism and it was something, an idea that was vigorously
opposed by Darwin. Tragically these racist ideas struck a chord with a certain Ernst
Heckel, German promoter of a racist form of evolution. His ideas would be taken up by
a group with views concerning a so-called master race and we all know how that rather
nasty story ends. Aside from his decidedly dodgy views on race though, he did an excellent
job over 12 years of describing the fish from the Orcadian basin in Scotland. Between 1833
and 1844 he published five volumes detailing all this fish which made him a lot of money.
Thank you very much and also catapulted him into notoriety. By the way, he is also the
gentleman who named Megalodon in 1835. Incidentally, he is also famous to historians and seismologists,
people who study earthquakes. Well, at least his statuettes. This is his statuette Stanford
University just after the 1906 San Andreas earthquake. It's been in textbooks ever since.
You can see him here head down in the concrete, maybe appropriate giving his views on race.
But what is the Orcadian basin? Well, it's named, not too surprisingly, for the Orcney
Islands in northeast Scotland. A basin? Well, a basin is a geographical depression into
which sediments can be deposited. If this is in the area of subsidence, vast thicknesses
of sediment can accumulate. But to explain the specifics of the Orcadian basin, I'd like
to step back just a few lectures if you'd indulge me. Remember back here? This is the
middle Devonian, about 385 million years ago. And what we find is a continent that has developed.
It's composed of bits of North America, Greenland, and parts of Europe. It formed the continent
of your America, sometimes called the old red sandstone continent. At this time, Scotland
existed in a semi arid environment south of the equator. And it was close to a mountain
belt that had formed due to the collision of all those different continental fragments.
The remains of that mountain belt we've already dealt with. They formed today the Appalachians,
mountains in Scotland and Scandinavia. In Scotland, those branches of mountains was
called the Caledonian Mountains. And they're now present obviously on either side of the
Atlantic Ocean. Remember, this was part of the evidence we discussed when we were talking
about continental drift. Where continents collide is often represented by fault lines. And a
very famous one is here in Scotland, the Great Glen Fault. You can see it today as a very
linear line of lakes, which includes the very famous Loch Ness. During the Devonian times,
this fault was like the San Andreas Fault is today. As the fault moved, sedimentary basins
would open up along its length, some of them filling up with sediment from the surrounding
Caledonian Mountains, which were rising all around them. Now this is the setting of the
Acadian Lakes. You can see here a beautiful photograph of a feature that is called the
Old Man of Hoy. These are sandstone cliffs on Orkney Island. These sandstones themselves
being formed from the erosion of those rising Caledonian Mountains, the sediment being brought
down from those mountains and deposited in these basins. The red to purple colour that
you can see indicates erosion in a hot, arid and oxidising environment. But back to our
lake. It covered much of North East Scotland and extended into what is the present day
North Sea, and would subside through the Devonian. Subside so much, in fact, that in the area
where we have the Shetland Islands today, around about six miles of sediment would accumulate.
What are the fish fossils? Well, we do find beautifully preserved fish in these horizons.
They're usually composed of black and shiny appetite, sometimes just as isolated scales,
but commonly concentrated into rather beautiful fish beds. The sediments that we find that
these fish beds are contained in represent repeated cycles in sedimentary type, probably
reflecting changes in the level of the lake, which itself might be representing fluctuations
in climate. When we study these sediments, we find that there's a kind of a cycle, a
prominent cycle, every 25,000 years or so. The climatic regimes were probably generated
by long-term variations in Earth's orbit, as the Earth's axis wobbles in space. The
cycles start with dark coloured silt stones. A silt stone is a grain size that is coarser
than a mud stone, but not quite as coarse as a sand stone. If you want to tell if you
have a silt stone, put some on your teeth, and it should feel somewhat gritty. This phase,
we think, represents the deepest times in our lake systems, the colour representing high
preservation of organic material, and it's in these beds that we find the fossil fish.
In fact, it's the dark colour of these sediments that are probably a clue as to how these dark
beds form. Now, during times of war and climate, you will tend to develop warm surface waters.
If you have warm surface waters, you can develop a kind of a warm lid on the surface of open
bodies of water. Now, if any of you have visited Canada and swam in a lake during the summertime,
you might have noticed this. It's all wonderful and pleasant, as long as you're swimming
in the surface waters that have been heated by the sun. But stop for a while and tread
water, and you'll very rapidly put your foot through a very short boundary into very, very
cold water indeed. I'm talking cold. This boundary is called the thermocline. This thermocline
and the lid above it acts as a barrier to circulation in the lower parts and deeper parts of the
lake, which will remain cold and still. The warm surface layers of the lake, of course,
are in contact with the atmosphere, so plenty of oxygen can diffuse into them. It's great
for algae production, lots of oxygen, and it's nice and warm as well. What that leads
to is an algal bloom. Algae proliferate. The surfaces of lakes can turn green. As the algae
dies and decays and sinks to the bottom of the lake, though, the low oxygen conditions
that are already present within those colder waters face a crisis now. The algae is starting
to decay. It uses up very rapidly the oxygen that is there, causing virtually anoxic conditions.
Today, we can see a similar process being caused by fertilizers that might be flooded
into lakes causing this proliferation of algae, the low oxygen conditions causing the death
of fish. We call this process lake eutrophication. Algal blooms are probably responsible therefore
for the fish beds that we're finding in the Akkadian basin. As the oxygen was used up,
low oxygenated waters would encroach onto the lake margins, we think, courting a lot
of the armo-dagnathum fish to die. They'd be swept into deeper parts of the lake by
currents within the lake. The fish swimming in the water column, like acanthodians, would
occasionally get caught in zones of low oxygen. They would die, but not automatically and
immediately sink to the bottom of the lake. We think that they would initially float.
This because as they died, their bellies would swell with gasses as they decayed. Eventually,
they'd get to the surfaces of the lake where they would pop and then they would sink. This
is why many of the acanthodians that we find in these lakes have their rib cages fairly
severely disrupted. The lake would not stay deep though. The hot arid gauze that we find
would continue, and the cycle would end ultimately as the lake starts to dry out. Sedimentary structures
start to record these shallower water conditions. We start to see evidence of fossil ripples
showing us that surface winds across the waters can actually start to move the sediment into
ripple structures. We also find these as well. These are mud cracks. You've probably seen
similar things if you've seen a puddle or shallow pool evaporating in the hot sun. The
mud contracts into these polygonal cracks, and we find these quite extensively as well
at the top of these cycles, indicating that the water is really getting shallow and evaporating
away. The cycle will repeat as wet climates return. The lake fills up and the cycle begins
again. The result? A sequence showing changing cycles in an ancient lake system from deep
to shallow, probably driven by climate change, and also incidentally preserving that fantastic
record of the fish that lived in these freshwater lakes. Some of the fish of the Acadian Basin
though would be living very close to the land-water interface, and some of the fish of the
water interface. They would diversify into a whole bunch of very varied and fantastic
forms. In the next lecture, we're going to take a closer look at some of these fish, because
hiding particularly, we think, within the bony fish that we mentioned earlier, the fish that are
most common in the oceans today, would be one type of fish that would be potentially
pre-adapted to do something very special. That is, make a break for the land, and once the
vertebrates have made it onto land, there would be a whole range of events that would lead
to the population of this group from the highest mountains, from the poles, and to the baking
deserts. We'll meet that next time. Thank you.
