This is a fairly typical scene isn't it? Well, unless you spend a lot of your time
sat on a pole in the Himalaya, but for most of us it's unremarkable. What you can see
here is a whole bunch of human beings purposely striding around, doing what four billion years
of evolution has prepared them for, effectively buying low-foam extra skinny mochiados with
no sugar vanilla. But what is remarkable here, apart from the price that you pay for
twenty ounces of hot, softened milk and a cardboard cup, is the ease with which vertebrates
move around on the land. Not just human beings, I'm talking about all vertebrates, just think
about the grace of a gazelle or the way that your dog will run in the park. In the oceans,
remember vertebrates enjoyed all those benefits of being in the water. They enjoyed the buoyancy
of water, relatively stable temperatures and no problems with drying out. In the previous
lecture we saw how the arthropods were kind of pre-adapted to dealing with the problems
of living on land. They had that exoskeleton, effectively a spacesuit that could keep them
moist if they did move out onto the land's surface. In addition, arthropods had already
developed limbs. They were already crawling around on the ocean bottom, so it's no wonder
that they beat us onto the surface of the land. Perhaps they just wanted that latte
more than we did. In this lecture, I'd like to consider what is for some, though, a kind
of a controversial topic. I'd like to explore the existence of evolutionary transitional
forms and how they may help us understand how vertebrates actually did make it onto
the land's surface. I'd also like to ask the questions, just what did the first land vertebrates
look like? And in addition, we will take a peek at the first tetrapods striding purposely
across the land's surface, or did they? So, what is a transitional form, and why do they
cause so much trouble? Well, possibly the reason why they cause so much trouble, it will become
more apparent when I use a different term for a transitional form. That is, a missing
link. I think I need to dwell on this a little bit longer, because this is a very important
point, particularly becomes, I guess, a topic of hot debate when you're thinking about human
evolution. So, let me shout from the highest mountains at this point that there is no direct
link between a chimp and a human being. We are not in any way descended from chimps. Instead,
we share a common ancestor. A common ancestor is a branching point from which the apes that
would become chimps and the apes that would become humans diverge via numerous transitional forms.
The common ancestor between chimps and humans is thought to lie way back in our history,
somewhere around about, well, seven million years ago or more. In effect, transitional forms
are showing us that evolution happened, and that is perhaps why it is so controversial.
The two ends of the spectrum, I guess, of how evolution is thought to happen by many people
will have consequences also for how we interpret the fossil records, so we really need to deal
with them here. The first of those areas of evolutionary thought is called phalletic
gradualism, and it's related to something that we've already dealt with. It's dealt with Hutton's
uniformitarianism. Remember, Hutton was talking about slow natural processes in the landscape
that occur over millions of years. For example, under Hutton's ideas, the outs will ultimately
be worn down to a flat plain, carried away in sediment by rivers and streams over vast amounts
of that most important factor, geological time. Likewise, phallitic gradualism says that life
also changes very slowly by tiny, tiny little steps over millions of years, species evolving
slowly and gradually. But the fossil record, as we've noted at times, shows the sudden
appearance of species. So how do we account for that if we accept a gradualist model? Well,
under a gradualist model, you can account for them, because under a gradualist model,
they might be an artifact, perhaps produced by the incompleteness of the fossil record.
I'll show you what I mean by that.
Consider we have a sequence of fossils that are being recorded in the rocks. New species under
gradualist models are being deposited and turned into fossils gradually over time. But imagine
then a time when we have erosion of a lot of that record, and then subsequently rocks are deposited
again, but with different species. There would be an apparent leap in the species. It would be odd,
this apparent difference between the two groups. And this, according to the gradualist, explains
why we've seen these sudden emergence of new forms. They're not suddenly emerging. It's just
that we're missing a part of the record. Darwin is often cited as being a gradualist. But consider
this in his writings about a particular fossil creature called lingular. It's a brachyopod.
Lingular actually is still with us today. It's remained virtually unchanged over hundreds of
millions of years. He notes this, the periods during which species have undergone modification,
though long as measured in years, have probably been short in comparison with the periods during
which they retain the same form. This is from Darwin's works in 1869. What Darwin is saying
here is that there are periods of little change, and then sudden rapid change. Now that sounds
a lot more like another type of evolutionary theory. On the other end of the spectrum,
the theory of punctuated equilibrium. Punctuated equilibrium was developed in 1972,
by two now very famous scientists, Niles Eldridge from the American Museum of Natural History,
and Stephen J. Gould from the American Natural History Museum as well, and from Harford. You've
probably heard of Stephen J. Gould. He's a very famous science writer. They said that evolution
wasn't slow and gradual through many minor, minor, minor changes, but punctuated equilibrium
described evolution better, and it described it more like that famous phrase you have to describe
war, long periods of boredom interspersed with brief periods of absolute terror.
Under punctuated equilibrium, species populations don't change much. Every population, of course,
will have variations and mutations within it, but unless conditions change to favor a particular
variation, the genes in that population will generally swamp those mutations, and the population
won't change very much. If conditions alter, though, if environmental changes favor a particular
feature, you could see a population's character changing very rapidly indeed. A common example
to show how this can occur comes from the peppered moth. It's kind of a pretty moth. You can see it
here. It's actually kind of an important story for me as well, because the peppered moth story
was drawn from the industrial history of that town I grew up in, the history of Manchester.
Manchester was the center of the Industrial Revolution in the 1800s, particularly a center
for the cotton industry. You would see manufacturing industry expanding rapidly. The population would
also expand rapidly. If you were to look across Manchester, you would see hundreds, thousands
of smokestacks and chimneys from factories and from home fires, and they'd all be burning one thing,
coal, so the level of atmospheric pollution was incredible. Manchester would go from a beautiful
city of sandstone buildings to a black city as soot settled on them, but in addition to settling
on the buildings, that soot would also settle on the trees. Tree bark in all the parks and in the
surrounding countryside would start to turn black. Now, this was not particularly good news for the
peppered moth. The majority of the peppered moths before the Industrial Revolution were this kind
of white speckledy color, which means they are very camouflaged against tree bark. However, now
they were suddenly very visible. Birds could see them, spot them and pick them off very easily.
But in any population of peppered moths, there was always a number of darker forms,
and now they had the selective advantage. Over 50 years, the dark forms became the dominant type.
An event in London would change this, though. In Thursday the 4th of December of 1952,
an anti-cyclone moved over the city of London. The city of London, if you've been there,
is prone to wide swings in the weather. It's what most of us talk about, to be honest with you.
Now, this caused something called a temperature inversion, where cold air is trapped below
a layer of warm air. Not unlike what we described last time, but in a lake setting. Remember,
we talked about the Acadian Basin and how a warm layer of water can trap a cold layer of water below.
Now, this lid of warm air prevented the smoke from the numerous chimneys in the city to escape.
In addition, the air was very, very still, so the pollutants just weren't being dispersed.
On Friday, December the 5th, an event called a pea super emerged. That is a thick, polluted,
yellowish to green fog, sometimes black in colour. It contained lots of nasty carbon
particulates and also an awful lot of sulfur dioxide. Apparently, visibility was reduced to
to a few yards. People couldn't see where the edge of the road was. They had to shuffle along in
small steps just to see where they were going. All public transport on the surface was halted.
The only thing that could run was the London Underground choose system. The fog as well had
a pungent smell and made people's eyes water. It cleared after about five days, but within that
time 4,000 people had had died as a result of respiratory problems, although estimates have
reckoned that the longer term effects mean that maybe as many as 12,000 people would die as a
result of this ultimately. As you can guess, this caused an uproar in the British Parliament
and in 1956, the Clean Air Act was passed, probably one of the most significant environmental
pieces of legislation in British history. It introduced smoke control areas, areas where
only smokeless fuel could be used. Very rapidly, pollution levels within the cities,
at least from coal, started to drop. And as a result, the trees started to return to their
natural colour. Now the selection advantage flipped in favour of the mottled moths.
They were now camouflaged. The darker forms were being recognised in the birds and the population
would swing back to the mottled varieties. Now obviously, this example does not demonstrate
the evolution of new species. However, it does show how natural selection can rapidly change
the favoured genes in any population. Imagine a population where a component becomes isolated
from the rest, perhaps by rising mountains. We've seen how that can occur or the opening of an ocean
basin. With continued environmental changes, we could see progressive and successive rapid
lurches in the genetic population and character of any population of creatures to a point where
the new population could no longer interbreed with an existing group of the original population.
In effect, a new species would have evolved. If you want a modern example of how these
rapid changes in population can occur, consider the way that the HIV virus reacts to antiviral
drugs. Now the HIV drugs kill off many of the HIV virus, but in any population there will be some
drug-resistant forms. The drug-resistant forms, once all the competition has been removed,
are free to rapidly duplicate. The virus re-establishes itself, but now it's drug-resistant.
We're looking here at a population change caused by changing the environmental conditions,
but this time within the human body itself. The way to treat this, well, stop the drug therapy,
allow the old drug-susceptible forms to return and then hit it hard again with drugs.
Under punctuated equilibrium models, transitional forms are very difficult to find. The evolution
of new species would occur, but very rapidly, and obviously because the geological record,
as we know, is full of gaps, it's likely that we might miss some of these sudden changes.
For example, consider this feature, an unconformity. We've seen unconformities before, haven't
we? I'd like to go through this once again to underline the importance of these features.
This is an unconformity in the United Kingdom. The yellow rocks on the top of this exposure
are a group of rocks called the inferior oolite. They are deposited in the middle of Jurassic,
their marine rocks. They're, let's say, around about 170 million years old. The gray rocks below,
the ones that are steeply dipping, are gray carboniferous limestones and probably date to
some time around 350 million years ago, again deposited in the oceans. So a bit of revision.
What we're going to use here is those tools of relative dating and stratigraphy to just try and
work out how this section formed. Well, first of all, we've got to have the deposition of that
carboniferous limestone. It would have been originally a lime-rich sediment, probably in
tropical conditions, actually, but it would have been deposited horizontally, around about 350
million years ago. Ultimately, that sediment is transformed into a rock and then tilted at depth.
Remember, the principle of original horizontality. Rocks aren't deposited in that orientation.
They're deposited flat and then they're tilted. At some point, those tilted rocks, though, have
been uplifted and exposed at the surface and eroded to an irregular surface. Then sea levels
have risen, the ocean has returned, and we see the deposition of the inferior oolite horizontally
at 170 million years, and that there creates the unconformity between the two rock units.
The unconformity in this case represents a potential gap, missing information, lack of strata
that crosses around about 180 million years. You could imagine the amount of information
coming and losing those gaps, and that is quite an extreme case, but you could see how, in any one
section, we could be missing a lot of the fossil record. But what is really driving evolution?
Well, the scientific community in general leans towards punctuated equilibrium. This is a
this is a gross oversimplification, though, of a highly debated area, and it's known that
gradualism probably does occur in some species and can be demonstrated where we have virtually
continuous sedimentary records. For example, we can see, we think, gradualism occurring
in certain microfossils, which have rapid turn-osas of populations and therefore many,
many generations, very rapidly in a short space of time. But even with punctuated equilibrium,
we still find transitional models, and probably the most famous of all, probably the most famous
fossil anytime from anywhere is this. This is Archaeopteryx. Archaeopteryx is a bird, but it's
a bird that possesses a bony tail. Birds don't possess bony tails today. It also has a beak,
but a beak that is full of teeth, and it also has those odd little reptile claws
on the center of its wings. We're looking here at a wonderful transition between a ground-dwelling
reptile and the birds, the birds that we know of today. We'll see more of this story in a later
lecture. Another classic example, consider the evolution of the horse, the little forest-dweller
Eohippus. Eohippus would have been a tiny little thing, probably wouldn't have come up to your
knee. It was adapted for running around and scurrying in dense undergrowth in forests.
That would eventually, through various transitional forms, evolve into the modern
planes-dwelling horse, Equus, that we know of today. But let's get to the next topic in this
lecture right now. Just what would the first land vertebrate look like anyway? Well, with all
this talk of transitional forms, you can probably see where this lecture is heading. What we're
looking to find here is one of the most holy grails of all transitional forms, a fossil that
demonstrates one of the most important moves that vertebrates would make, the move from the water
onto the land. What we're looking for here is a group of preacher that we call tetrapods.
We're tetrapods. It's all animals that have, or in the case of say whales and dolphins, had,
four limbs. A classic view of the tetrapod would be like this, a pelvis that's attached to a backbone,
a spine with a series of interlocking spurs, a curved ribcage to support and protect the
internal organs. Don't want my stomach and my liver falling out all over the place where I'm
in the land environment. Nostrils for breathing, and also limbs that follow a very specific pattern,
limbs that go from one bone here to two here, and then to five digits at the end, that repeated in
my leg obviously, one, two, and five digits at the end of my foot. So this then is what we're
looking for. Here's our hypothesis. We're looking for something that looks a bit like a fish but
has some of the features of a tetrapod. Sometimes paleontologists referred to this as the elusive
fissure pod. So who is the likely candidate? The candidate of the fish that would become
the land-based tetrapod. Remember fish had gone through diversification of the devonium producing
the modern bony fish, and it's amongst this group that we probably are going to find our
modern tetrapod striving fish, and particularly if we think that's a group called the lobe fin fish
that we should be looking at. They're generally slow swimming. They beat their lobe-like fins from
the side to side of their bodies, but these fins are joined to the fish by one bone. There's one clue.
Lobe fin fish today aren't really all that common. Here's an example though. This is the African
lungfish, not the prettiest of looking creatures, I must admit, but here's an x-ray of one. You can
see there's a single bone joining the fin to the body, so one of the characteristics we're looking for.
Within the lobe fins though is a group called the rifidistia, and these are possibly in the
fossil sense some of the most exciting. For example, here is Eusthenopteron. He's a late
devonium fish, dates to around about 385 million years ago. This guy is of particular interest
because he really does possess a very similar pattern of bones to the later tetrapods. It has
a humerus, an ulna and a radius in the pectoral fins, and has a femur and a tibia and a fibula
in the pelvic fins, so mirroring the pattern in our four limbs.
Eusthenopteron is often shown an illustrator, at least it was, like this, a fish that was already
crawling around on the land surface, so obviously all we need to do is develop some legs and off we
go, we've got the tetrapods. However, this fish probably didn't do this. It was probably
exclusively living in fresh water. Even though, even so though, a fish very similar to this
would probably give rise to all the tetrapods. We're still a long way off though from this image
to a fishapod. So, paleontologists had an idea of the fossil they should look for. It should
probably be like Eusthenopteron, with limbs rather than fins, following a bone pattern like ours,
going from one bone to two bones to five digits. They also had an idea of the environment in which
this fishapod probably lived. It would be the Devonian Desert. The view then was of an area
of barely any vegetation. There would be lakes and rivers, but those lakes and ponds would be subject
to intense evaporation that would be very ephemeral. They wouldn't hang around for like
during the summer months and any vegetation would be restricted to a thin ribbon around the edges
of any open water that happened to be available. So, under this view of the world, what potentially
was driving our ancestors on to the land? Well, the idea was that limbs evolved to drag fish out
of shrinking ponds and pools. Natural selection would favor the fish with strong limb-like fins.
As the pool started to shrink, the fish realized that this was a very bad situation, so would
hawk themselves out of the pond in search for another home to live in. Okay, we have a hypothesis,
but where's the fossil? Where's the fishapod? What about those first tetrapods?
Were they striding purposefully across the land? Well, we didn't find a fishapod until about 1930
when we found a strange, four-legged creature called Ichtheastega. He was discovered in Greenland
by a Swedish paleontologist and expert on Eusthenaptoron, Erik Javik. As predicted, Ichtheastega
was a fish on legs. You can see it has a very fish-like-looking body, and at the end of those feet
were five toes on feet supported by limbs that looked just like ours. According to these
reconstructions of Javik, this creature was clearly adapted to walk on land. He was also quite big.
He was about five feet long from his nose to the tip of his tail. Ichtheastega was a true amphibian.
He was happy in water, but he was also very able and mobile on the land surface.
There was a bit of disquiet in the scientific community after a while, though. Ichtheastega
doesn't look very transition-like. It looks, in the reconstructions, far too much like a fully
developed tetrapod. Scientists also claim that they found it difficult to examine Javik's fossil
material. He was very guarded about it, and only published his material very slowly indeed. In fact,
his last publication was as recent as 1996. This general disquiet led one Professor Jenny
Clack at Cambridge University to realize that we needed more material for study, and so she mounted
a new expedition to Greenland in 1987. She found more Devonian tetrapods, but not just Ichtheastega,
which she did find a specimen of. She found an additional Devonian tetrapod, which she named
a canthastega. This was smaller than Ichtheastega. It was about two feet long. Now, a canthastega
doesn't look very much like what you'd expect of a tetrapod, though, so that was quite a surprise.
For example, a canthastega didn't have five fingers and toes. A canthastega had eight toes.
This is important. It shatters a basic assumption of what tetrapods are all about.
It would appear that early on, the number of digits in the fingers and toes of these creatures
was extremely variable. And also, just look at those limbs as well. Those limbs are right out
at the side of the body. That doesn't make sense for a land-dwelling creature. If you're going to
have a creature that walks about on land, those limbs need to be brought underneath the creature.
If you're going to walk about purposefully on the land's surface. In addition, it didn't really
have any wrists or ankles to speak of. Another feature needed for locomotion on the land,
and it would appear that the hip wouldn't support very much weight. It was only very weakly attached
to the spine. A canthastega's feet, apparently, weren't feet at all. A canthastega's feet were,
in fact, paddles. In addition, the sample of ichthyastega that Clack found had seven digits,
not five, when she started to uncover the rocky material. You could imagine the surprise when
she went past one, two, three, four, five, and those digits kept on coming. Also, when she
reconstructed and her team reconstructed a model of ichthyastega, they realized that it certainly
wasn't a fully mobile land dweller. It could potentially haul itself onto land for short
periods of time, but it certainly wasn't purposely striding. So now we need to make a counterintuitive
leap. Just like Jaws, which remember we said hadn't evolved to bite, probably. Remember we said that
Jaws had probably evolved in the fish to effectively pump oxygen over the gill systems and improve
the respiration of the fish. Perhaps in that case, if we can accept that, perhaps limbs themselves
didn't evolve to walk. Well, if that's the case, what on earth did limbs evolve for?
All the answer would come from a reinterpretation of the Devonian ecosystem.
When I was discussing the Devonian ecosystem earlier, you should have kind of raised a red flag,
I guess, because we've already talked about the Devonian ecosystem. We know it wasn't all a hot,
arid, sterile desert. It's where we see a lot of the times of vast proliferation and development
of the floral systems on our planet. Many areas were indeed wet. As we noted last time,
this is the period where we start to see the first forest by the end of the Devonian.
A new ecosystem was emerging, the new ecosystem that we know of as the swamp.
Plant tangled environments, close to the river's edge. If you see this image here,
the species would have been different than we can see in the photograph, but this landscape,
in all likelihood, would have been extremely common in the middle to late Devonian. It really
wasn't a complete desert planet, as was assumed earlier. This new environment was rich in organic
debris and lots of plants. This is a fantastic environment for exploitation. There would be
invertebrates and small fish, and that would probably attract predators like a canther stager
and ichthyr stager. In addition, this is a good environment to be in, if you are a small tetrapod,
because not far away from these areas, in areas open waters, there was something patrolling,
a very dangerous creature indeed. Creatures like Hyneria here, a large fish over 13 foot long,
which would certainly make a short snack of any little tetrapod. So the current view that we have
of the evolution of limbs is that limbs and digits didn't evolve to help
tetrapods stride purposely across the land surface. Limbs and digits evolved to help
aquatic, mostly aquatic, tetrapods navigate their way through swamp-tangled environments,
around all those fallen logs and roots. It makes more sense to have very flexible limbs to move
yourself around this environment than fins, but we're still missing something in all this story,
as fascinating as it might be. A canther stager and its kin are still tetrapods. We still don't
have the fishapod. And in the next lecture, I'd like to tell a story of how potentially
the evidence for a fishapod, that true transitional form from the water to the land,
