Ok, so we've seen our lobe fin fish, we have the fossils, we've also seen our tetrapod
even though they weren't running across the land surface, galloping in any way, they're
definitely a tetrapod, they've got limbs, but we're still missing the missing link,
we're still missing our fishapod. Of course, given what we discussed last time, remember
we talked about that on conformity, the way that whole packages of sediment can be removed,
it's possible that evidence of this transition, if it occurred very rapidly, could be lost
to us forever. If that's the case we'll only be left with our imaginings of the fish that
was becoming a tetrapod. In this lecture I'd like to develop this story a little further
though by considering what is a living fossil? By introducing you to a paleontological superstar
called Tiktalic and by looking to new finds and possibilities in this story of the tetrapods.
So what is a living fossil? Well, the average lifetime of a species is around about 2 to
3 million years. I guess in our own story, human beings, we've done around about well
maybe a third of that perhaps, we've got a little way to go. But there are some species
that have been around for an awful lot longer than that and through the period that they
have existed on the planet have changed very little indeed. The brachyepod lingula is one
of those and because of this is often regarded as being a living fossil. Lingula we've mentioned
a number of times before is an inarticulate brachyepod. That means not that it can't pronounce
its words very well, it means it can't open its shell and gape like its cousins the articulate
brachyepods can. Even so this creature is still doing what they're doing, it's still
filter feeding, straining the ocean water for probably organic material. It tends to
live though buried in vertical burrows often in brachys head estuaries, unlike a lot of
the other brachypods that tend to just be living on the surface. Lingula is a survivor, definitely
a survivor. The family of brachypods that lingula belongs to has remained relatively unchanged
since the dawn of the Cambrian. It's one of the few creatures to prosper through one of
Earth's greatest crises, an extinction event at 251 million years ago that we'll meet
later. It would appear like the sharks I guess, lingula hit on a very good plan to survival
and so why change? But there's another type of living fossil as well and they're called
Lazarus taxa. Now we're probably all aware of the story of Lazarus. Remember Jesus was
coming to see his friend only to find when he got there that he had died and all the
crowds were mourning for him. Jesus calls forth Lazarus from the tomb. He rises from
the dead. Creatures rediscovered as living forms that were previously thought of as being
extinct are called Lazarus taxa in that honour. A good example would be the Metasecoya. A
dawn redwood is another name for it. I've collected many samples of this fossil from
British Columbia. They're quite prolific in that area. Metasecoya is very common in the
Northern Hemisphere during a warmer period around about 50 million years ago. Extensive
forests spread of these beautiful trees as far as Axel Highberg Island in Northern Canada.
It was considered extinct, a fossil, a curiosity just to be looked at in museums and for fossil
hunters to go looking for until an interesting discovery in 1941 when someone exploring a
canyon in the southern Hubei region of China found something rather odd. They found Metasecoya.
Odd isn't it? That species was on its last legs. If it had disappeared from that canyon
that would have been it for Metasecoya. It really would have been an extinct fossil species.
Realising this, the plant was taken and an extensive breeding programme followed. I mean
really extensive. It's possible that you may even have a Metasecoya in your backyard now.
I know there is certainly one outside my office window at UBC. The fossil truly had really
come back to life. A true Lazarus taxon. Of course, really, it had never really been
dead in the first place. Another Lazarus taxon plays an important
role in the understanding of the origins of tetrapods and it's a very famous lobe fin
fish called a celacanth. They first appear during the Devonian period but they are largely
gone from the fossil record by the end of the Cretaceous. It's thought that these fossils
had suffered in the same extinction that caused the extermination of the dinosaurs.
Just another casualty of the end Cretaceous biosphere.
These fossils though were earmarked as being extremely important in the tetrapod story
and you could probably see why. Just look at celacanth here. It doesn't have the usual
limbs, fins that you'd expect from a fish. They're more like fleshy limbs so it's thought
that these fleshy limbs could provide an important stage in the story of our understanding of
the development of true tetrapod limbs.
Imagine the interest that was generated then when a modern celacanth was discovered. Well
I guess you could more accurately say a modern celacanth was rescued by one Marjorie Courtney
Latimer. Marjorie grew up in South Africa. She was the daughter of a station master for
this state railway at the time but as a small child apparently she was fascinated by the
natural world. Not unlike I was. If it moved was rather gooey. I was rather interested
in it. As a child her ambition was to work at a museum and there to study birds but ultimately
she ended up training as a nurse but by a bizarre twist of fate I suppose just as she'd
finished her training she was asked at the museum to become a curator even though she
had new training, no training, at the East London Museum in the Eastern Cape. She was
just 24 years old.
Marjorie had a good idea. Let's expand the collections to reflect the local fauna and
flora around but also the sea life. So in order to do that she asked local fishermen
if they would contact her if they turned up anything unusual in the nets that could potentially
be used and displayed in the museum. And on December 22nd 1938 she got a very important
telephone call from one Captain Hendrick Goosen. He had just found a very unusual fish. Marjorie
says that as soon as she saw it she knew it was very strange. It was about five feet
long. Nothing odd there but when she peeled away some of the goo and the gunk over the
surface of it she said it revealed a beautiful fish. It was pale blue with white specks and
spots over its surface. It also had a kind of a silver blue green iridescent sheen all
over its body. It was covered in hard scales with four limb like fins and an odd puppy dog
tail. She took the fish back to the museum but after consulting as many books as she
could find really couldn't tie it down to any living species that she was aware of.
Now remember this is South Africa. It's warm and the fish was starting to give off a rather
nasty smell. This is also 1938. So there is no fridge that you can conveniently just throw
it into. She came up with a great idea. Let's go to another place within the town that really
has to be cold. So she contacted the local morgue hoping they'd let her put the fish
in there but they refused. Well you can maybe understand. The only remaining option was
the taxidermist. Obviously in stuffing this fish and mounting it you're going to lose
important soft parts that would be potentially vital in its classification but Marjorie didn't
have any other options left to her. Eventually she would contact a friend James Smith who
taught at Rhodes University who would much to his great surprise and I guess delight
as well identified the fish as being a sealocanth. A fish that was considered extinct since the
death of the dinosaurs 65 million years ago. Sealocanth even back then in the 20s became
an international sensation and was reported in international newspapers all over the world.
Smith predicted giving what he could see of the fish that it probably used those fleshy fins to
walk on the ocean bottom. It was a clear indication as far as he concerned of its direct relationship
to the later Chetrapods. According to what they could deduce from the sealocanth the sealocanth
was pre-adapted for walking on land not unlike we talked about the arthropods whose exoskeleton
that spacesuit exoskeleton and their limbs in the ocean had pre-adapted them to make that first
break onto the land as well. Years later another sealocanth would be found. This time it was a
live one. Unfortunately for this hypothesis though it showed no evidence of walking on the ocean floor
the sealocanth swam. The sealocanth was a fish. Bangos another tetrapod hypothesis.
Even so it's still a fascinating creature. Apparently they're not very good to eat. They're
very oily and don't taste very good. If you do decide to eat a sealocanth apparently the treat
for you for the next evening is really chronic diarrhea. Sealocanths lived in deep water so
they were rarely encountered which is why I guess this was a surprise when it was found.
It's thought that it's likely that it was just the shallow members of this particular group of fish
that went extinct at the end of the Cretaceous but the deep water forms continued happily along.
Today though only two species of sealocanth are known. They're nocturnal. They hunt other fish in
the dark. They tend to hide in caves during the daytime or migrate into deeper darker water.
At night they drift upwards towards reefs snapping at any fish that they come along.
Their eyes are adapted for seeing in these dark conditions and in fact their eyes are shifted
to the blue end of the spectrum. They have a unique style of locomotion as well. They use those
fins to stabilize their movement in the water and also use them for sudden bursts of energy to
thrust to catch prey. Their large number of fins also gives them an incredibly high maneuverability.
They can orient themselves in any direction in the water. It's also been reported that
sealocanth had been found swimming belly up or sometimes doing absolute headstands in the water.
However strange and fascinating they are though they are not on the path of the story we are trying
to tell. So where do we go now? Well we have early tetrapods and we have lobefin fish but apparently
we have no convincing transitional form to link the two of them together. This is where our story
turns to more recent times and the findings of one Dr. Niels Schuben of the University of Chicago.
This is the story of Tiktalic. Schuben will start his research career looking
sediments in New York State and Pennsylvania. He was looking at a particular group of sediments
called the Devonian Catskill Formation. These are mostly terrestrial deposits that span around
about 20 million years of the upper Devonian period. They are similar in colour and look a bit like
those red sediments and sandstones that were described from the Ocadian Basin. There's a
very famous exposure of the Catskill rocks here in Clinton County, Pennsylvania. It's roughly about
half a mile long in a road cut, the red colour providing the name for this section. This is Red
Hill. It was deposited on your America. Your America remember we've described it before,
was formed by the collision of Laurentia, Baltica and the continental fragment Avalonia.
The collision would start in the middle of Devonian and would continue into the early
Carboniferous. Such a mounting building event technically is called an Erogyny. The event in
this particular case is titled the Ocadian Erogyny in North America. In Britain it's known as the
Caledonian Erogyny. Along the east coast of your America through this Erogyny the Ocadian mountains
would start to rise. These mountains would have been vastly impressive. They would have formed
an incredible chain of mountains all along the east coast. They probably would have been an
excellent place to ski. These mountains now of course have almost been completely worn down,
transported as in sediment by rivers and streams. It's now geographically described as a dissected
plateau. It's still very very beautiful. I've travelled through these mountains myself but
they really are a shadow of their former glory. This really is a testament to the slow processes
of erosion and deposition as proposed by James Hutton uniformitarianism in action.
The location of the Red Hill area is shown on this map here. It lies on the edge of a large
inland body of water called the Catskill Sea. It existed around subtropical latitudes about
20 degrees south of the equator. As the Ocadian Erogyny progressed rivers and streams would flow
west carrying sediments eroded from the rising Ocadian mountains. These rivers moved out across
a broad coastal plain and eventually dumped their sediment in a series of deltas in the Catskill Sea.
It's within these delta complexes that the rocks in the Red Hill road cut were originally
deposited as sediments. Perhaps you can imagine this as being something a little light what that
delta would have looked like if you could pass over it in a spaceship at the time. This is in
fact the Ganges delta that empties into the Bay of Bengal. The rivers here are draining the still
rising Himalayan mountains. Mountains that formed in the same way as the Ocadian mountains did
by two continental blocks coming together with nowhere else to go when they met but upwards.
Here's another analogue for the Catskill Delta. This is the Tarara Reero Delta in New Zealand.
You can see it's composed of slow moving river channels running through a low flood plain and the
flood plain itself is dotted with swampy ponds and pools of water.
Rivers on the flood plain form these kind of structures large meander loops slowly migrate
across the land surface. They're occasionally abandoned. The river will cut through the narrow
neck of one of the loops to strand the loop as an oxbow lake. By studying the sediments that we find
at Redhill we can get an idea about the climatic climatic regime as well. We find that the climate
was probably very seasonal. There was very arid climates but they then would swing into very
wet conditions as well. The Redhill section preserves lots of evidence of rivers also the
flood plains that existed. So if you want a standing down and looking out across the delta
analogy for what it might have looked like perhaps a bit like this perhaps a little like
the Everglades but please no grass that wouldn't evolve until a lot later in Earth's history.
The sediments at Redhill are generally red well there you go. This reflects the hot oxidizing
climate under which they were deposited. The course of portions of the section indicate where the
river channels flowed with finer sediments to either side indicating that river flood plain.
You occasionally find green horizons of the section as well thin little green strips of
sediment and we think these are the ponds and pools that lay on top of the delta between the
meandering river channels. The green color would form as the organic material from the plants that
would be growing around the edges of these ponds and pools would fall into the ponds rapidly using
up all the oxygen in the water. The green color therefore representing minerals in a semi-reducing
environment. Now Shubin started to collect fossils from this spectacular section in the early 90s
and subsequently many other scientists and amateur enthusiasts have also made extensive
collections. From this we got a clear picture of this environment. It's an environment as we said
as we've seen physically of rivers and ponds but it's also an environment that contains a rich and
diverse form of fish including spiny acanthodians the heavily armored placoderms also bony fish
and sharks are there as well. A 13 foot monster the one that we described from the last time
looked in the deeper parts of the river channels as well. Hyneria was patrolling the deeper areas
of that environment. You can sometimes even pull teeth belonging to this monster out of the sediments
at Red Hill but something else that you can find which of course Shubin was particularly interested
in are the tetrapods. This is Hynerpeton Bassatai he's a Red Hill tetrapod beautiful little creature
about four feet long. I think it lived in the shallow margins of the river channels and in the
ponds avoiding the large predators probably but perhaps snacking on some of those arthropods that
were already occupying the land surface but this is definitely not a fisher pod look at those
limbs look at those digits on the end of the paddles or feet this is a fully formed tetrapod.
The Red Hill section provides a fascinating insight into a late Devonian ecosystem but
we're still no closer here to finding our transitional form. Shubin realized that you would
have to search elsewhere if you're going to find that elusive fossil. Why should we be looking to
find a fisher pod? Well let's look at this logically. Deltaic environments appear to be good places to
find early tetrapods so let's look for similar environments but in older rocks so how older?
Well we have lobe fin fish at 390 million years so that's probably our lower limit so somewhere
between the emergence fossils of lobe fin fish 390 million years ago and the deposition of the
Red Hill rocks should be our missing link sediments that cover that particular period of geological
time with a specific environmental conditions may hold the clue to the missing link. Shubin looked
for records of upper Devonian deltaic rocks and came up with three possibilities there was the
Catskill range already covered no point in looking at that again there was East Greenland now this
has already been explored by people such as Jenny Clack at Cambridge that left one option the Canadian
Arctic Islands. Shubin mounted an expedition to Ellesmere Island it's in none of it in Canada.
During the Devonian this area was not at its current rather cold and chilly location at 78
degrees north but very close to the equator quite an environmental contrast this is where Shubin
and his team would start their search for the fishapod. Rocks here belong to a group of rocks
called the Fram formation they're from the middle Devonian deposited by rivers and streams so you're
looking at the kind of environment where you might expect to find our elusive fossil it's not an easy
place to get to though there are no roads you have to helicopter everything in your team your
equipment and of course anything you find has to be helicoptered out again helicopters cost an
awful lot of money but one of the advantages of this section is that because it is very cold
there's not much vegetation covering the surface of the rocks don't get me wrong I love plants
but something that geologists love nothing more is a whole area of exposed rock with nothing growing
on it the collecting season would also prove difficult you could only collect during the
summer in this area which in this particular location is only a few weeks long you had to get
in and out quick remember how I described collecting microfossils like chitonazoa and conodonts
basically you go to a section you record that section and then collect samples from it in a
logical way uh recording where you've collected those samples you bag them up you take them back
to the lab it's a little more difficult for fossil hunters of vertebrate fossils first of all you've
got to find the fossil you can't just find the section and start to bag up rock with the hope
you're going to find a vertebrate in it once you find that vertebrate you've got to extract a whole
layer of rock around it and then in case that in plaster to protect the fossil you then once you get
it back to the lab going to expose it using brushes dental picks and little drills over
probably many many months via nistle search in 1999 was not successful I can only imagine how
frustrating that must have been apparently they went too far west they were in rocks that were
actually recording marine strata which obviously is no good for our fisher pod which made the
transition in all likelihood from a freshwater environment onto the land so in 2000 they moved
east and they hit the right strata they found strata that indicated freshwater conditions
both the sediments and the fossils they found indicated that bird quarry was opened up and in
2004 a member of the team found an odd-looking skull sticking out of a rock area this was an odd fish
in fact it was more than an odd fish it was paleontological gold this is a 375 million-year-old
fish he's about three to six feet in length and contains an odd mix of features he has some
features that are very fish like indeed it has fins scales and it has a primitive fish like
jaw there are some non-fish like features as well though it has a flat head like a crocodile
not very much like fish heads such as used the neptarone which has a very conically shaped head
other fish like features that aren't present in this particular fossil are the fact that it
doesn't have a fuse head and shoulder this creature has lost the bones that are in that area
generally in fish therefore giving this fossil a neck also the bones in the limbs or fins conform
to the arrangement of our limbs they go from the one to two to many also there's a suggestion of a
bit of a wrist joint that might allow this fish to do a kind of a push-up on the floor of the
water body in which it was inhabiting the webbing on the fins is also much reduced and the webbing
is absent around the elbow elbow joint the webbing restricted to the wrist and hand area this would
allow this limb fin to be very flexible give a lot of motion it's still likely though to be a very
able swimmer in the water and the name for this fossil well shubin wanted to honor the peoples of
Ellesmere island so he went to the local elders and told them what he was doing what he was looking
for looking for this large freshwater fish and asked them if they wouldn't mind suggesting a name
they did they suggested tiktalic referring to a large freshwater fish in in Uttituk
tiktalic probably lived close to margins of water if you're walking along the edge of one of those
ponds in the Devoni you might have seen tiktalic just partly submerged he was probably eating smaller
fish and invertebrates it's possible that that push-up that we noted would allow it to haul itself
out of the water very suddenly onto land and perhaps snap at a passing arthropod just a bit
like a crocodile in many ways it's awaiting an ambush to ambush its prey at the water's edge
tiktalic just like the sea lacanth before it was an international star it appeared in newspapers
and magazines it's probably the only fossil to ever make it onto the Colbert report tiktalic
was heralded as a true transitional form a true missing link between the fish and the tetrapods
the holy grail of transitional forms had been found what about new finds and possibilities in this
story of the tetrapods stories are never simple are they it's probably why paleontology and geology
are so exciting they're continually changing in january 2010 in the journal nature a paper would
be published which would throw the story of tetrapod evolution potentially wide open all over again
this was in the zakamele quarry it comes from the holy cross mountains in poland what we find in
the zakamele quarry are certain trackways made by some sort of unknown creature when you examine
the trackways we find that that creature probably had four limbs that creature may have been walking
may have been walking this creature may have been a tetrapod we even find on those trackways
evidence of potential toes on the end of its feet pair alberg he's a professor at the university
of upsala in sweden said that the creature probably walked a little like a salamander with a kind of
a swinging gate but not like a salamander that we know today this salamander was eight feet long
but there's also something else that's quite surprising about this find this find comes from
the middle devonian about 395 million years ago this find predates tiktalic if this is evidence
of an animal walking across the land it means that even before tiktalic came into being
tetrapods were around it pushes the timing of the evolution of tetrapods
further back into time it also potentially changes our understanding of the environment in which
tetrapods evolved remember we're saying that tiktalic and its kin evolved in deltaic swampy
freshwater environments the zakamele quarry does not record such an environment the zakamele quarry
is a marine environment poland at this time lay in the tropics the environment would have been
an intertidal mud flat probably baking in the hot sun the tides in these environments wash and
quite frequently concentrate dead fish and organic debris they're a great environment a rich dining
table for anything that can get out of the water and start to exploit it even so though all we have
at the moment are trackways so at the moment i think favours still leads towards tiktalic but
we're going to have to wait and see how this story will develop any further it'll be certainly
interesting if they actually find a real body fossil it's a real exciting time to be a paleontologist
we're finding new and exciting exposures of rocks containing fossils a lot of areas that at one
time would have been almost impossible to get to are now available to the tepeleontologists we
can fly there even if it's just for short periods of time in part because we can access this remote
areas i think the story of the tetrapod is going to develop even further we're going to fill in
more of the gaps and it's going to continue to challenge our perception of the evolution of many
vertebrates in the next lecture though i want to roll the camera forward i want to see a world
where our ancestors were now living quite happily really purposely striding across the land i'd like
to take you to the period called the carboniferous
