Why don't you go take a walk through your neighborhood, but take a notebook with you.
Make a log of all the species that you can find, big or small, I can guarantee you won't
get all of them.
There are thousands that will be hidden from view.
Then imagine removing around 95% of them, all the plants, all the animals, whether they're
in the air, running across the ground, or even burrowing through the sediments below
your feet.
But don't stop there.
Hit the oceans too, from the coral reefs to the clams and the fish and the larger creature,
the whales and the dolphins, all that wonderful diversity, the rich richness of the biosphere
that we see of planet Earth, and then remove it in the blink of a geological eye.
And imagine the impoverished planet that would exist afterwards.
It's kind of a scary thought, isn't it?
A world laid waste, blank?
It implies scientifically the breakdown of all the interrelated Earth systems that we've
been describing so far.
It would probably, in this scenario, take a world millions, millions of years for it
to recover, if indeed that world could recover at all.
Perhaps even more scary is the thought that this actually happened about 251 million years
ago at the end of the Permian.
It's called the End Permian Extinction, or sometimes the Permotrassic Extinction Event.
Basically, we see the feedback mechanisms that maintain homeostasis in today's planet,
all those that were described earlier on in this course, just break down.
Effectively, the planet's environmental health just collapsed.
This is a key point in the evolution of Earth, and I'd like to spend at least two lectures
studying this.
So in this particular lecture, I'd like to look at these points.
First of all, which creature suffered during this extinction event?
And then look at some of the other signals of that mass extinction event, and consider,
could a massive impact potentially explain all this devastation we see at the end of
the Permian?
So which creature suffered in this particular event?
Well, the last time we were describing a rich and diverse biosphere in the Permian, a beautiful
biosphere.
Over on land, we had all that diversification of the amniotes, and in particular, the synapsids,
part of an incredibly varied reptile land fauna, like these Gorgonospians here.
Great amphibians were still extremely common and would be swimming in the rivers of the
Permian continents.
In the skies, you'd find a sky full of insects, and potentially for the first time, the first
gliding reptiles, and also, it was a world full of plants.
In the oceans, too, we had fish swimming through the oceans, thousands of invertebrates, extensive
reef systems.
The earth was complicated, diverse, it was full of bounteous life.
It was a beautiful place to be.
But this would rapidly collapse, an almost complete destruction, the creation of a really
barren planet, dust drifting across a stripped landscape, a shadow of its former richness.
Rocks that cross this Permotriassic boundary on land all tell the same story.
They tell of first what we've just described, a healthy biosphere for most of the Permian,
and then utter devastation in the last part of the Permian and the early part of the Triassic.
In the oceans, some familiar form, some familiar friends disappear, things like the trilobites
and the Eryptorids.
Now, it's fair to note that they had been in somewhat of a decline through the Permian,
but it's at this point that we completely lose them, never to be seen again on our planet.
We also see the Rigoes and Tabulet Corals.
They would be gone, too.
In fact, coral reefs would not recover for many millions of years to come.
The world would certainly be impoverished by this event.
We're losing here the tropical rainforests of the oceans in many cases.
But also things like these, remember them?
The acanthodian fish, an extremely important in the Dovonian and would still be around in
the Permian.
By the end of this event, they would be gone forever, only to be known now from the fossil
evidence that they left behind.
But it's more than that.
There are some more familiar forms as well, clams, that important component of the biosphere
today.
You can't imagine a world without clams.
These are the bivalves.
They would suffer a 59% extinction in this particular event.
And if you've ever been to France and enjoy an occasional plate of escargot with your
wine, well, you almost lost that opportunity.
Because at this time, we see around about 98% of extinction in the gastropods.
That's the snails, a group again, which is so familiar to us today, almost completely
and totally wiped out.
Ecosystems on the land would not be spared either.
We see extinctions in every group, including, for the first time, the insects.
In fact, this is the only time that the insects would ever suffer in a mass extinction event.
Insects are fairly resilient.
They really are.
You'd try getting rid of cockroaches out of your cupboards.
But this extinction event was so severe, it would even hit them.
Of the large stuff, the vertebrates were looking at losing over two-thirds of the theropentropod
faunus at the end of the Permian.
Many of the therapsid reptiles would be gone.
And also, those beautiful, enormous, crocodile-like amphibians, they would suffer mightily as
well.
But it's really not a complete extinction of the plants.
And although it's not a complete extinction of many species, what we do see is an incredible
disruption in the plant ecosystems.
The formerly lush flora that spread across many parts of Pangea would be disappearing,
shrinking.
It's very sudden as well.
Well, of course, it has to be, doesn't it?
This is a mass extinction event we're describing here.
It can't be longer and drawn out.
But it's extremely sudden in the marine fauna.
Now, this dramatic change was even noted by those 19th-century geologists.
Remember that they used this sudden change in fossils to define the end of the Permian
in the start of the next period.
But it also marks the end of the Paleozoic era.
It marks an end of a whole group of periods, a whole characteristic play of fossils.
And in fact, it marks, really, 251 million years of Earth's history.
Well, something that is this large must have other signals.
What are the other signals of those mass extinction events?
Well, there are lots of other signals of a biosphere in extreme crisis.
For example, just take a look at this image.
This is Dr. Mark Sefton.
He's from Imperial College in London.
And you can see him here furthering science by clinging, in my mind somewhat precariously,
to a cliff face.
I don't think I'd have the courage to do that, even in the name of science.
This is an important section because it crosses that Permotriassic boundary, it's in Aura,
in Italy.
And what he's extracting from that particular horizon you can see he's got his hand on are
some important material that he's going to process in the lab.
As he has processed it in the lab, it reveals this under the microscope.
These are fungal spores.
Not too surprising.
We know that by the carboniferous, fungi had evolved.
So what?
Well, what we find in the Permian is an incredible concentration of them in terrestrial sediment.
The Permotriassic boundary in terrestrial sections is absolutely packed and brimming
with them.
Fungi, of course, are decomposers.
They're decomposers of the plant material that falls down in forest.
But such a high abundance over such period of time can only represent one thing, the
destruction of much of the floral biomass in the end Permian world.
There's also something strange about coal as well.
Coal production in particular is disrupted.
You can see here in this image a large coal deposit.
This is in Queensland, Australia.
In the Northern Hemisphere, as we described in my previous lecture, most of our coal is
from the carboniferous period, but not in the Southern Hemisphere.
Most of the coal in that particular part of the world is Permian in age.
Now the material that is producing the coal in these particular forests wasn't like the
carboniferous forest, obviously, but it was the glacipturus flora that was producing these
particular coal horizons.
So there was sufficient plant material, producing sufficient amount of material, to produce
these thick coal deposits.
But coal production suddenly ends, stops at the end of the Permian.
It doesn't kind of peter out, it just isn't there anymore.
To be replaced by redbeds, these are sediments that indicate hot, arid conditions.
It represents a very sudden shifting climate and also, of course, the death of a major
ecosystem.
Given such a complete and utter collapse in the biosphere, though, there got to be signals
of this collapse in other systems, other than the biosphere.
Remember, we've been considering the Earth as an integrated machine, and in that case,
changes in one system were going to severely impact another system.
There must be additional signals preserved in the rest of the geological record, other
than the loss of species as we see recorded in the fossil record.
And we find those signals, quite a lot of them.
For example, consider this, something odd happens in the South African Karoo.
As a sedimentologist, you can read sediments.
They can tell you something about how those sediments were deposited, given the type of
sediment that's being deposited, but also the physical structures which are deposited
as the sediments are being deposited, such as ripple marks or the mud cracks that we
met.
Now, I find sediments in the South African Karoo that indicate that the sedimentary depositing
mechanism were meandering rivers in this area, but they're suddenly, very suddenly replaced
by a different type of river system, a river system called a braided stream deposit.
We think that what is happening here is that these large meander roots that existed earlier
in the Permian suddenly fail, probably because the flora has all died off, and they can no
longer stabilize the banks of these river channels.
Therefore, we get the second type of river system, this anastomosing, chaotic looking
deposition of sediment in rivers.
It would appear that at the end of the Permian, plants in the landscape were just being stripped
away.
We have other evidence as well, isotopic evidence.
Remember back to our origin of life lectures?
We talked about concentrations of the isotope carbon-12 in those odd little black blobs in
the issue of formation.
We said that it's possible that that carbon, given its signature, had been produced by
life processes, so we might be looking at some evidence of the earliest life of the
planet right there.
In the Permian-Trasic boundary sediments, we find a very negative carbon-13 anomaly.
Remember we've also discussed this, a negative carbon-13 anomaly indicates that an environment
has become suddenly flooded with carbon-12, which can indicate the sudden cessation of
photosynthesis.
So it can indicate the death of creatures that are composed of carbon-12 organic molecules,
suddenly releasing all that carbon-12 back into the environment, giving us a negative
carbon-13 value.
The sediments themselves, in addition to this carbon-13 anomaly, also tell a story.
We find remarkable exposures of deep sea sediments that were deposited in the Panthalatic Ocean.
Deep sea sediments, though, didn't remain in the ocean.
Remember we said that we, in general, don't have any sediments within the ocean at the
moment that are older than 180 million years old.
But in some exceptional circumstances, some of these older sediments have been rescued.
They've been moved by thrust faults.
These are low-angle faults onto land surfaces, and we find some of these in Japan.
The sediments there are cherts.
Now we've met cherts before.
Cherts are fine-grained, salacious sedimentary rocks.
But these cherts are produced by the accumulation of the skeletons of a particular tiny microfossil
that are called radialarians.
These are amoeboid protozoans that secrete a silica skeleton around themselves.
They create some beautiful structures.
They almost look unreal, don't they?
I often think that they look like sculpture.
They were first known from the Cambrian period, and they're actually still a very important
part of today's microplankton.
They form many important sediments in the deep ocean environment.
In remote oceanic areas, you really don't get much sediment from the continental areas,
of your sediment being eroded on land surface all the time and transported by rivers and
streams, until eventually it will meet the largest sedimentary basin that there is, the
ocean.
But a lot of that sediment gets dumped around the edges of the continental margins.
There's also something else.
There's a natural sediment trap, those trenches that occur along the edge of the continental
margins, so a lot of the sediment just falls into those areas.
Which means that there's a lot of open ocean that generally receives not very much what
we call clastic sediments from the continents.
Generally these open ocean areas are more open to receiving biologically derived sediment
from microplankton, and a component of windblown dust as well.
There are many other important microfossils, coccolithophores and foraminifera, but these
are composed of calcium carbonate.
Calcium carbonate is more soluble in water at low temperatures and high pressures.
As a result, the most remote and deepest part of the oceans are generally free of these
carbonate sediments, which if they are present are called a carbonate ooze.
I just love saying that word, carbonate ooze.
Silica can still be deposited at these temperatures and pressures though, and the microplankton
like radiolarians and diatoms form silica rich sediments called silicious oozes.
The radiolarian silicious oozes in Japan though record a rather disturbing sequence
of events in the world's oceans.
Initially things appear to be fine.
The rocks are red.
Why are they red?
Well it represents some of the iron also contained as a relatively minor component in those sediments.
Perhaps a component of that windblown dust.
The iron has been oxidized to the mineral hematite.
Remember that from the bandedine formations?
The iron has effectively been rusted by the oxygen.
It indicates that the oceans are healthy.
They're well ventilated even in these deep remote areas with oxygen.
The oxygen had probably come from cold dense surface waters that were forming at high latitudes.
If it's cold, these waters sink and carry the oxygen rich water to deep ocean conditions.
What happens today?
For example, off the coast of Iceland, water is sinking in just the same way, down into
the deeper ocean and dragging warmer water in behind it, a kind of oceanic conveyor belt
system.
We'll see how that operates in LA to lecture.
But then the sediments record a change.
The sediments turn grey.
There's a greater therefore amount of organic content which is accounting for the greyish
colour we're getting here.
That must mean that there's less oxygen because oxygen would just oxidize these organic sediments
away.
The carbon apparently is being preserved.
Finally, the sediments turn black, giving an indication of a high organic content.
If you want a model for that, just think back to when you were a kid.
Remember, you've been probably told that it's time to visit your antibarbara, so you've
been put on your best clothes again and told not to go to that nasty stinky pond right at
the back of the yard.
Which of course you do.
You find the biggest stick you can and dig it right into the pond and you pull up black
gunk.
Oh, wonderful stuff, grateful, flicking at younger brothers or younger sisters, the innocence
of youth.
Now that black gunk indicates anoxic conditions, oxygen free conditions at the bottom of that
pond, but also in this case, oxygen free conditions at the bottom of the entire oceans.
It would appear the deep oceans at this time were suffocating.
But this isn't just a localized event, this appears to be a global phenomenon.
So at the end of the Perm unit would seem much of the ocean just simply died.
So what explains this?
Could it possibly be that a massive impact from space can explain all these frightening
events?
The Permian extinction would remain a mystery and really wouldn't be as understood as the
smaller scale Cretaceous paleogene event for most of the 1980s and 1990s.
And the reason for this is that there was a general lack of sections to study it.
So we need the pages of the book in order to tell the story and we really just didn't
have much rock to tell that story.
As a result, the timing was not really understood.
Some suggested that perhaps the extinction actually represents a very long period, perhaps
as much as 10 million years, those would be the gradualists.
However, if it's a 10 million year period, that doesn't really fit in with an idea of
this being a mass extinction event.
Others thought that it occurred in a blink of an eye, suddenly overnight, within about
perhaps a day or maybe a number of years, these were the catastrophists.
In the early 80s, attention really was focusing on the Cretaceous paleogene extinction or Cretaceous
tertiary extinction as it was known then.
Obviously the reason for this was that it was equated with the death of the dinosaurs.
So a kind of a general idea got around that perhaps all mass extinctions could be very
easily explained by massive impacts from space and the environmental calamity that that would
cause.
Of course, this is very media worthy, the idea of a giant fireball, sudden extinction
from death from the skies, but could this account for the Permian extinction event?
Well, recent impacts have occurred and maybe they can shed some light on this.
Some of those impacts have actually occurred in recent human history and I'd like to take
you now to around about seven o'clock in the morning on June 30th in 1908.
A great fireball was seen in Central Siberia, just north west of Lake Baikal, followed by
a detonation and a pressure wave which was reported to knock people off their feet.
Fortunately, windows were broken in homes that witnessed this event, fortunately the
event occurred in a very underpopulated area.
The pressure wave itself was recorded at weather stations.
Now weather was the new scientific wonder of the time and people were recording lots
of information and that pressure wave was recorded moving across Russia and into north-west
Europe.
Something else happened as well.
In London, well after nightfall, suddenly the skies were light.
People could go outside and read their newspapers at the dead of night.
We think what was happening here is that dust from this massive explosion had been thrown
up into the atmosphere and was reflecting the sunlight back down to earth.
Nineteen years after this event, one Leonid Kulik, the chief curator of meteorites at
St. Petersburg Museum, thought that it was well time that somebody mounted an expedition
to the epicenter.
He was looking for a meteor, but unfortunately he couldn't find an impact crater.
Instead, he found this at Tunguska.
You can see the trees are flattened, just plain flat.
They cover an area of about 800 square miles.
I often think these images are disturbing.
They look a bit like the images you see from Hiroshima.
They returned several times looking for an impact crater.
There has to be one to cause this devastation.
In fact, they drained an entire bog down to a depth of about 105 feet.
They call it Suslov's crater, hoping to find evidence of the impact, perhaps just a little
fragment of that meteorite that caused this.
It was an arduous task.
It was in the summer, thermofrost was melting.
I just couldn't imagine how much that team must have been bothered by black flies.
But unfortunately, they found no evidence of an impact.
Due to this, many hypotheses have been proposed.
It's been suggested that perhaps what we're looking at is not an impact at all.
Perhaps what we're looking at is a massive gas explosion.
Now, if you have magma being generated in the crust or below the crust, some people said,
perhaps this could also cause a buildup of an awful lot of gas.
That could then explode catastrophically, potentially explaining the fireball that
was seen.
Other theories are a little more out there, shall we say.
Some people suggested that perhaps a black hole passed through the Earth, a small one.
But if that's the case, surely there had to be an exit event as well.
We don't record one.
How about antimatter falling to Earth?
antimatter when it meets matter should annihilate you there in a catastrophic explosion.
But of course, my personal favorite is the idea that perhaps an alien spacecraft exploded
over the area.
Perhaps the alien was texting at the time, wasn't paying attention to the road.
The current favored hypothesis, though, is that it was a comet or meteorite that exploded.
But in midair, which explains why we don't get an impact crater, it probably exploded
around about three to six miles above the surface, creating a massive airburst event.
It would be about a thousand times the explosive force of Hiroshima.
I've put a diagram on here, which shows the extent of the trees that are flattened in
this particular event.
And I think rather disturbingly as well, you can see that I've at the same scale included
New York and Washington DC for comparison.
You can see that if this had impacted in a populated area, it would have been probably
one of the greatest natural disasters humans had ever witnessed.
Subsequent investigations have found microscopic silicate and silicate spheres in the soils
and the tree resins in this area.
They have a high nickel relative to iron signature common to extraterrestrial sources.
Also, iridium, very commonly associated with the extraterrestrial of impacts, has been
found in some of the peat bogs in the area, and the layers in which it had found date
to 1908.
So could an impact explain the Permatriassic crisis?
Well, it would have to be significantly, and I mean really significantly larger than
Tunguska.
The Tunguska impact to we think was about the size of an Olympic swimming pool.
The Tunguska event is impressive, but obviously it's not associated with a mass extinction
event, perhaps a few char-boiled elk, but that's about it.
The impact body to create the Permatriassic extinction in that case would have to be vast.
It would have to be bigger than Mount Everest, much bigger probably.
This scale, the body could get to the ground, and would in that case produce an exceptionally
large crater probably hundreds of miles across.
We do find some interesting structures.
For example, 155 miles off the northwest coast of Australia.
We find a structure that is roughly circular.
It's about 125 miles in diameter as well, so it's on about the same, the correct scale.
It's called a Bidu high, and it's been suggested that might represent the remains of an impact
crater that dates to about the time of the Permatriassic extinction, which has then subsequently
been covered over with sediments.
Two oil wells were drilled into this area.
You can see it is revealed here in seismic sections, where it's peering into the earth's
subsurface.
And when they did drill into this structure, they came across melted, fractured rock.
It's suggested that perhaps this is the rock that was melted and cracked during a highly
energetic impact event.
However, this impact breccia has been criticised.
It said it's not probably an impact breccia at all.
It's more likely to be just a normal everyday basalt rock that has been altered by contact
with seawater, and by the high temperatures it was subjected to during its burial.
Also, there's another big problem with this.
If this was an impact crater, where is the ejector?
That's the material that's thrown out of the impact crater.
If this was an impact crater, you would expect masses of material, thick deposits of ejector,
still preserved on the continent.
Now we do find some evidence of impact material in Greenland and in some other areas, but
it's very thin, nothing on the scale that you would expect for a Permatriassic impact.
The Beto High, in all likelihood, is probably just the remains of tectonic rifting, the
faults that would develop as continents started to rift apart, that happened to look a bit
like an impact crater.
But there's another possibility.
It was discovered by a joint NASA and German space agency satellite called GRACE.
That stands for Gravity Recovery and Climate Experiment.
It's been taking measurements steadily of Earth's gravity field since about 2002.
It detected this.
It's called the Wilkes-Land mass concentration, it's found in Antarctica.
It's a large gravity anomaly.
By that we mean that it is either above or below the gravity that we'd expected for
the average of the Earth, and it is concentrated in a ring-like structure.
It's composed, we think, of very dense material, probably mantle material that welled up.
Perhaps if you're thinking of impact, perhaps after an impact, it's 300 miles in diameter.
A 300-mile impact crater would certainly be significant and would be the equivalent of
an impact body that was about 30 miles in diameter.
Problems of course is it's under ice.
It's difficult to date.
It's thought to have formed at some time around the Permitriassic, but we've got nothing precise.
It could be that it's just caused by normal Earth processes, perhaps a plume of rising
mantle material.
Again, though, if this is the Permitriassic impactor, where is the ejector?
The mystery of the Permian extinction event would remain just that for a long time.
However, the story would start to develop in interesting ways in the 1990s, and I'd
like to explore that in the next lecture.
