In the last lecture I left you with a bit of a mystery.
How can we nearly wipe out an entire biosphere, not just any old biosphere, a complex and
beautiful biosphere?
How do we remove over 95% of all life on the planet?
Well a massive impact could account for that.
That could severely disrupt ecological systems and cause a collapse of a biosphere.
But so far in this story we have no definitive evidence to support such an impact.
The greatest problem, as I think we've already mentioned in the Perma-Tracic studies, is
the lack of decent fossil rich rocks.
The pages of the book it would appear for a while had been torn out.
We didn't have the strata to refer to to go and tell what our story was all about.
The timing, duration and character of the extinction event would remain unclear, but
that would change fortunately.
In this lecture I'd like to continue the story and explore further the Perma-Tracic
extinction event and introduce a new potential killer, the Siberian Traps Volcanics.
And then look at new rocks and new information on the extinction event and consider what
is the possible sequence of events that led to what has been described by some as the
mother of all extinctions.
So first of all the Siberian Traps Volcanics.
Metal metals are extracted from this town, this is Norelsk in northern Siberia.
The fact that you can do that has been known for an awful long time.
In fact there are records of people smelting precious metals back to at least the 16th
century.
And it's understandable, this is a relative goldmine of an area if you'll excuse the
pun, it's rich in nickel, copper, palladium.
It also explains why Norelsk holds the record as the most northerly settlement with 100,000
people or more.
There are lots of jobs there, lots of mining activity.
It also holds a less desirable record as well.
Norelsk is one of the planet's most polluted cities as well.
The trees have been killed here that you can see in this image by acid rain and by the
fumes from a nearby nickel smelting plant.
But it's these rocks that hold the mineral wealth in this area.
These rocks if you were to look at them are black, they're volcanic, they're of a type
that we've already met, they're basaltic lavas.
When you date them they date to about the same age as the Permatricic extinction event,
aha you might say, but you also might think well so what.
Basalt rocks are extremely common there, erupted frequently today.
For example, think of Hawaii, you can go and visit a volcano that's erupting right now
and the eruption of all that fantastic basalt, you can see in images like this, has no consequences
for the biosphere.
But what is remarkable about the rocks in the Norelsk area though is the extent of the
basalts and the ashes that we find.
You can see in this diagram the outcrop is marked in green.
Little later the company was exploring for oil reserved and moved a little further to
the west of this area and started to drill and what they found is that this vast area
of volcanic material proceeded much further underground.
In fact in total there's an area about equivalent to the entire area of western Europe.
Originally this deposit probably covered 770,000 square miles, covering that area in
perhaps a quarter to about 1.8 miles deep in material.
The Siberian traps are known as flood basalts, now the word traps is Swedish it comes from
the word stairs or trapper and it refers to the way that the flood basalts commonly form
a landscape with lots of these stair-like inclinations in the side of valleys.
Flood basalts themselves are outpourings of lava that cover vast areas.
Now if you want to have a look at a flood basalt deposit and don't fancy freezing yourself
to death in Siberia, take a trip to Washington or Oregon, beautiful states and also contain
some fantastic evidence of flood basalts.
As you're travelling through a lot of the valleys in these states you'll find the side
of the valleys contain lots of steps in the side of the valleys.
These are the lava flows, each one of them a basalt event.
This particular flood basalt in the United States covers an area of about 63,000 square
miles.
It was erupted much more recently about 17 to 14 million years ago.
Of course the Siberian traps are much older and much, much larger but what causes such
vast outpourings of lava?
Well, we think it's caused by upwellings of hot mantle rocks.
These are generated very deep in the earth and move upwards to the surface of the earth
as they do the pressure drops and when pressure drops it allows these rocks to melt and when
they impact the bottom of the base of the crust they generate huge quantities of magma.
Now the exact mechanics of these plumes are still uncertain but we do know that they occur
and we know that they're always associated with very, very intense volcanic activity.
The Siberian trap probably erupted along really long fissures probably stretching for tens
of maybe hundreds of miles at times.
They would have formed huge curtains of lava that lava eventually moving out across Panjir.
It said that if you were a Gorgon Osbion looking north you might have been able to see for
many hundreds of miles away a very ominous red glow on the horizon and if you had the
brain power to understand it you might realise that there was something very bad going on
indeed.
Lava is actually not the greatest problem, you see Panjir is a really big place.
If a lava flow starts to encroach on your area you move somewhere else, you migrate
away from the affected areas.
In addition if it was lava that was causing the problem how can we account for all the
extinction events that occur in the oceans?
No, there's got to be some other product that's responsible here and we know that there are
lots of other products from volcanic eruptions.
We also get lots of gas, lots of volcanic dust.
In terms of gases we can produce an awful lot of sulphur dioxide that can be raised
into the atmosphere, it can be dissolved in rain and eventually form sulphuric acid.
This can reflect solar radiation and help cause global cooling.
But also you can get global dimming as well by the ash held suspended in the atmosphere
causing more global cooling.
This can disrupt severely photosynthesis both on the lands and in the oceans so volcanic
events of this magnitude could cause serious disruption in the biosphere.
Sulfate aerosols so produced would also cause the destruction of ozone so would have ultraviolet
radiation more readily penetrating to the surface of the planet.
Also those sulfates dissolve in the rain and then start to fall out of the heavens
as acid rain.
Only the greatest problem though for the biosphere in regard to the Siberian traps is the carbon
dioxide that is going to be produced from these eruptions.
Now volcanoes already release an awful lot of carbon dioxide but there's another factor
with the Siberian traps.
You see the Siberian traps are erupted through a particular age of rock, the carboniferous
rocks.
You probably know where this is coming from.
The carboniferous rocks contain awful lots of carboniferous limestone, calcium carbonate
and also an awful lot of coal deposits.
Both of which are incredible sources of carbon dioxide if melted and heated and we are erupting
through them one of the biggest volcanic events the world has seen for a long time so we have
in addition to the volcanoes own CO2, an additional source of CO2 as well.
It is this carbon dioxide that probably caused the intense greenhouse effect that we see
recorded at the end of the Permian.
We think that average global temperatures might have risen by around eight degrees in
some models and this would have contributed significantly to the eridification, the drying
out of the interior of Pangaea.
You would see vast areas just turning to desert, plants would start to suffer as well.
But it wouldn't just be the land areas that would go into crisis, we'd also see the warming
of the upper layers of the oceans, remember this creates one of those lids on an open
body of water and would start to slow down oceanic circulation.
Normally the ocean basins are kept well ventilated with oxygen but in this case that would start
to end would start to see a stress biosphere.
The land and the oceans are both moving into a crisis mode but when you look at the number
of species that go into extinction during the Permatriac event and you calculate how
much of a stress the Siberian traps alone could cause you realise that although an extinction
event probably would have occurred it probably couldn't explain 95% of extinctions in the
biosphere.
It would appear we're missing a significant part of the picture.
What we need are new rocks and new information.
The Permian extinction story would remain open for very many years hampered by this lack
of geological strata of geological information that was desperately needed if we were to
fill in the gaps into what is realised as one of the most severe crises in the history
of life in all likelihood.
Details such as how long was it?
Was it long and drawn out like you'd expect from a period of protracted global warming?
Systems slowly starting to break down and series and pulses of extinctions in species that
were affected in a kind of a gradual step wise manner.
Was it sudden like a giant meteorite or comet impact in which case you'd see almost instantaneous
extinction maybe over a day or maybe a little less than that?
These questions puzzled a lot of people but in particular they puzzled one Paul Wignall
from the University of Leeds in England.
Now Wignall was hunting for a new section that could help clarify some of these real
problems with the end of the Permian.
Where can we find those rocks?
He searched extensively and he found a section in Greenland.
In particular here on the east coast of Greenland in an area called Jameson land.
It has wonderful exposure as you can see it's cold up there so there's not much vegetation
as I mentioned before geologists love it when we don't see much vegetation we can really
get our noses to the rock and we don't have to grub away in the soil.
In addition these rocks span the Permitriassic boundary and wonder of wonders they were very
rich in fossils as well.
Other sections have subsequently been discovered as well there's a section in Mishan in South
China and with sections like these we can start to build a detailed accounting of what actually
happened there at the end of the Permian.
It would appear that the extinction starts on land.
It hits the land flora first and the ecosystem that they supported.
The first effect of this is probably the result of the cooling and the acid rain that was
caused by the Siberian Trax Balkanism all that volcanic ash and sulfur dioxide that
was being released into the atmosphere.
The acid rain would include sulfuric acid from the sulfur dioxide but other gases are
being produced as well so it's likely that we might have got nitric acids and carbonic
acids in the atmosphere as well.
We're not talking about acids that are as powerful as battery acids but just acids that
are in the acid pH range which can still cause severe problems for the biosphere.
These would be washed out of the atmosphere towards the surface of the planet with absolutely
catastrophic results.
You can see the same thing is kind of happening to the trees here around one of those nickel
smelting plants at Norilsk.
It's see evidence of this as well in the Permian by the lack of fossil soils from this time.
Plants were being killed off by the acid rain and probably by the dimming conditions and
without plants the roots weren't able to bind the soils to the land and they were being
washed away to the oceans.
It's interesting to see isn't it that we have a model here of a part of the Permian
extinction event around a plant in Norilsk which is exploiting the very rocks which in
the Permian probably caused a similar effect but on a global scale.
The lush, lush forests that produced the coal in Australia they would be severely affected.
They would be gone fairly rapidly.
The plants that supported those meandering rivers that were described from the South African
Karoo remember stabilizing the banks they too would be gone and we'd soon see the installation
instead of a braided river system and the rich ecosystems of reptiles, amphibians and
remember of course the insects as well would start to go into severe crisis.
The bottom of their ecosystem was being taken away.
After the acid rain though carbon dioxide would remain in the atmosphere and of course
that would initiate a greenhouse effect.
Now Pangaea was already a fairly dry place but now it would start to get drier and drier.
You can imagine walking across the surface of Pangaea seeing an already devastated plant
community and potentially animals still struggling on hanging on around sources of water that
were very very rapidly dwindling.
This phase of extinction lasts about 40,000 years.
Next the extinction shifts.
It moves from the land and we start to record it in the oceans.
Those beautiful reef foreigners, those wonderful diverse rainforests of the oceans, remember
the Guadalupe mountains, the El Capitan Reef system and so on and one similar to that at
the end of the Permian start to go into severe crisis.
They're very quickly and rapidly destroyed.
The destruction here only takes about 5,000 years for it to be completely decimated around
about 40,000 years after the extinction event had started initiated by the Siberian Traps
Volcanics.
Finally the extinction moves back onto the land.
The survivors of the first extinction pulse now get hammered for another 35,000 years.
The flora was already in ruins probably in the first event all you would have seen whilst
walking around through that landscape would be the rotting corpses of forests with fungi
growing all over it.
This is what remained of those beautiful forests in the Permian that produced all that coal.
The first time at the end of this extinction event if you were to walk across the landscape
for the first time since creatures moved from the oceans the land would probably be eerily
quiet.
Total length of extinction?
About 80,000 years.
The Permian Triassic extinction apparently from this evidence was long and drawn out.
It had not occurred suddenly, this is an important piece of information.
An impact event would have caused effects that had been much faster, almost instantaneous
with absolutely catastrophic results in a very short time period.
But please remember we're dealing here with a biosphere that has existed for around about
say 4 billion years if we go right back to the early stories of our planet's history
of life.
So 80,000 years to almost remove all life on the surface of the planet still is a geological
blink of an eye.
The new sections also started to provide additional isotopic data which would add more colour
to the picture of the story we're trying to tell.
Remember we've already described that there is a negative carbon-13 anomaly associated
with the Permian Triassic extinction event.
In fact there's a negative carbon-13 anomaly associated with all the mass extinction events.
It seems to be a common thumbprint that something very bad is going wrong in the biosphere.
But in the Permian here we notice two excursions.
The first excursion is probably related to that first phase of extinction, the end of
photosynthesis.
And so we start to see the death of plants, the lack of photosynthesis and so on, and
carbon-12 being released back into the environment.
So there is a strong second excursion just after the marine extinction event occurs.
And the excursion that we see here is much greater than would be expected by continued
failure of photosynthesis or release of carbon-12 from dead organisms.
So what's causing this?
For the answer we have to consider something called methane clathorates.
Basically methane clathorates is methane trapped in ice.
It can form in permafrost, in land environments, it needs a cold environment to form, but
it can also occur in deeper marine environments along continental margins.
And this is the area that we're going to be concentrating on.
In the ocean these clathorates form by the microbial reduction of carbon dioxide.
These microbes are living in the sediments in deep, cold water, high pressure conditions.
They're converting various substances, carbon dioxide, into the methane gas.
At those temperatures and pressures though that ice, methane complexes with icy structures
and forms these large natural reservoirs of natural gas.
It's been suggested that they might be a potential source of natural gas for us humans.
That's not a good idea.
You see the problem is any change, slight change in temperature and pressure can cause these
things to destabilize quite catastrophically in fact.
The clathorates here are the final piece of the puzzle that we're trying to tell.
And we think we can now provide a detailed, at least a more detailed, accounting of what
went wrong at the end of the Permian.
So let's go through some of the sequence of events that would lead to this mother of all
extinctions.
It starts of course with the mantle plume, that rising hot mass from the earth impacting
the bottom of the crust, causing melting and generating all that volcanism that we see in
the Siberian traps.
The volcanoes would cause the first wave of extinction that we've already described.
Normally acid rain, then global warming by carbon dioxide, and Pangaea starts to significantly
dry out, temperatures rising by around about eight degrees.
Why is this first effect though felt on land?
Why doesn't it equally occur in the oceans if we're seeing the effects of temperature
rise?
Well actually oceans are really great temperature regulators.
In the summer they're generally cooler than the land, and in the winter they're generally
warmer than the land.
It provides maritime areas with a more temperate climate.
For example in Vancouver during the summer we're generally a lot cooler than the interior
of British Columbia.
It also means that in the winter, although not very far away there can be massive falls
of snow, Vancouver is generally snow free.
It also explains that when Vancouver gets snow to about that thickness, the entire city
goes into panic.
So temperature increase on the land took time to be felt in the oceans.
The oceans would lag behind the land areas to record this temperature increase.
Eventually though the oceans did heat up, and remember the case that we talked about
with the Ocadian Basin Lakes in Scotland in the Devonian, forming that warm surface
lid of water.
Water when we get that lid can no longer circulate.
The lower levels start to stagnate effectively.
The supply of oxygen from the atmosphere can't reach the deeper oceans, it's cut off.
This causes the changing colour of sediments of the deep ocean sediments that we recorded
in Japan.
Remember starting off red before the extinction event, but then becoming darker and darker
as the ocean circulation system slowed down progressively and then just eventually stopped.
This is not just restricted to the deep oceans though.
We find that anoxia moves into the shallow areas as well, and this is recorded very well
in the Mishan sections of southern China.
It's a beautiful section, it's about 300 feet thick of lots of sediments with lots
of fossils in them as well.
Because of this it's been designated as the global stratotype for the Permatrassic boundary
by the International Union of Geological Sciences.
As I said, it's rich in fossils, beautiful assemblages, we're looking at over 333 species
of fossils that we've only just recorded so far in 14 fossil groups.
It's a rich, diverse, beautiful ecosystem before the event occurs.
We see lots of static creatures, sponges and other static organisms, and lots of mobile
organisms, a whole host of fish and aminoids and other creatures, and a whole lot of creatures
moving and crawling about through the sediments.
Mishan after the extinction though would see 94% of that particular assemblage going
into extinction.
The remaining fauna could be classified as what you call virtually monospecific.
Monospecific means you're looking at an assemblage that is just dominated by one species.
In this case, specifically in Mishan it was dominated by anoxic adopted, adapted creatures.
Monospecific assemblages reflect the collapse of biodiversity.
A healthy biosphere can support many and lots of varied species, some of them adopting
quite specialist roles that they play within the environment.
A sick biosphere cannot support specialists, for example like the pandas.
Pandas are, as we know, very picky in more ways than one, but they are very picky about
their diet.
They mostly just like to eat bamboo, and if that goes into crisis, we're losing the pandas.
More species like the biorchid, who in some cases can only be pollinated by one specific
species of insect.
These are at-risk species.
A sick oxygen-starved environment like that of the end, Permian, could only support the
very few species that could adapt to those conditions, and as a result, they would multiply
in great numbers following the extinction event.
In the case of the Permian, that included the paparpectan claria, and the brachyepod,
our old friend Lingulae, not told you he survived through this one.
The result, a biodiverse reef fauna at Mishan reduced to black mud dominated by a couple
of clams and a brachyepod.
There are other possible consequences of the trapped carbon dioxide, because you would
see an increase in carbon dioxide levels in the oceans as well.
Animals have to work hard to remove carbon dioxide from their body.
They rely on their respiratory systems to do that, our lungs, our trachea, so on.
As a result, we're kind of pre-adapted to deal with slightly higher levels of carbon
dioxide in our bodies.
That's not the same for marine creatures, though.
They have a very low tolerance for carbon dioxide in their tissues.
It impedes the production of vital proteins.
Also, if you have high carbon dioxide conditions in the atmosphere, a lot of that carbon dioxide
is going to become dissolved in the oceans.
This makes the oceans a lot more acidic, and this impedes the production of calcium carbonate
shells.
This may help explain why corals were hit so hard in this event.
In addition, a lack of oxygen in the oceans may have taken us back to an earlier oceanic
state.
Remember the sulfidic ocean that developed after the Snowball Earth event?
Low oxygen conditions in the oceans allowed for the proliferation of those sulfate-reducing
bacteria.
Low oxygen levels in the oceans at this time as well, the Permian, would allow those sulfate-reducing
bacteria to return once again to the Permian oceans in great numbers.
We think that they were producing, as they did way back in history, lots of hydrogen
sulfide.
Now, hydrogen sulfide is poisonous to animals and plants.
Also, if it escapes into the atmosphere, it can significantly destroy ozone.
So we're going to see another reason why ozone is removed and even more ultraviolet radiation
could potentially penetrate to the surface of the planet.
It's just bad news upon bad news, isn't it?
On top of this, though, the oceans were getting progressively warmer.
Eventually, the deep oceans would start to heat up as well, including those areas along
the continental margins.
This would destabilize those clathrates, which would catastrophically release their methane.
Now, this methane was originally produced by bacterial decomposition of organic material
in those sediments, so that methane would be rich in carbon-12.
This explains that large second carbon-13 anomaly following the marine extinction event.
Now, methane is around about 10 times more effective for greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide.
Remember, that's why the early earth was kept so warm.
Water resources would warm again due to methane, which would destabilize more clathrates, which
would release more methane, which would cause more warming.
Our old friend, positive feedback.
The total methane release may have caused a further temperature increase on land by about
another 8 degrees.
This causes the third phase of extinction, and the culling moves back onto the land.
Carbon water resources would become very, very scarce indeed.
Plants would retreat further.
Animals that made it through the first wave would go extinct here 80,000 years after the
first Siberian trap's eruption.
Another possible consequence of the release of this methane is that that methane would
react with oxygen in the atmosphere.
Atmospheric oxygen levels may have fallen severely on land as well as in the oceans.
What was left over following the extinction event?
Well, a world utterly devastated.
A few remaining species would limp over the Permio Triassic boundary, but enter an environment
with very few competitors.
Survivors would proliferate into the next grouping of periods, the Mesozoic, between 251 and 65.5
million years ago, occupying niches that were now vacant.
The three main reptile types, the anapsids, diapsids, and the synapsids, would survive.
And one of the diapsids would eventually come to dominate the Mesozoic, the dinosaurs, and
will meet them in the next.
