In the last lecture, we saw some really fantastic dinosaur images. We saw pictures of dinosaurs
striding, running across the landscape, interacting with each other with their environment. It
really is a wonderful view of an ancient world. And today, these wonderful reconstructions
of dinosaurs are very common, aren't they? They appear in lots of magazines, on the TV,
they're all over the movies as well. But just how realistic are those images? Are they just
utter and pure fantasy, or do they have a toehold in reality?
I love images like this. It takes me right back to being at school, elementary school
in particular. When there was a rainy day in Manchester, which is pretty much all of
the days, and the teachers decided they didn't want us out there pushing each other into
puddles in the schoolyard, very often we'd be allowed to go to the school library. And
I often found myself by the side of the books on fossils. One of my favourite books was
dioramas, pictures, images of ancient life. And after a perfunctory quick snapshot of
the trilobites, it would launch very rapidly into the dinosaurs. And this was perhaps one
of my favourite images from that book, a brontosaurus here, relaxing in the water. I read the caption
and it told me that the brontosaurus had to do this because it was too massive to support
its massive bulk on the land. In fact, look at the creature at the back, you can see it
laboriously struggling across the landscape, dragging its tail behind it very despondently.
At least that's what we thought brontosauruses used to do. In fact, we now know that dinosaurs
had a very upright posture, they could bring their legs fully capably right underneath
their bodies, so they were quite capable land dwellers and quite ably strode across the
landscape. In addition, giving this other model of the brontosaurus dragging its tail
behind itself, when we come across dinosaur tracks like we see in this image, where's
the long line that would represent the tail? So, we know that dinosaurs weren't really
like that at all, but there's an additional inaccuracy in what I've just described, and
that is, brontosaurus never actually existed. Well, actually its name didn't. In 1877, one
Othniel Charles Marsh published a scientific paper on a dinosaur called Apatosaurus Ajax.
In 1879, he published another paper on a more complete skeleton of a dinosaur that he named
brontosaurus excelsus, which I think is just a wonderful name. On later examination, though,
of these specimens, it was discovered they actually belonged to the same genus. Under
the taxonomic rules of the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature, that's the ICZN,
the older name has precedence, that's Apatosaurus. So, sadly, we no longer use the name brontosaurus.
The seven-year-old paleontologist in me was absolutely devastated. But what can we deduce
about the real living dinosaur? In this lecture, I'd like to address the following questions.
What can we tell about the external appearance of dinosaurs? Where did the dinosaurs live?
Can we tell on what and how the dinosaurs fed? Do the dinosaurs show any parenting skills?
And was the blood of a dinosaur possibly warm? So, what can we tell about the external appearance
of a dinosaur? Well, we can tell an awful lot by just looking at the skeleton. The skeleton
is the framework upon which the soft parts will be added. So, that's going to give us
a basic idea already. Plus, using comparative anatomy, we can compare dinosaurs to other
creatures, tetrapods, and make some pretty reasonable guesses as to what these creatures
look like. In addition, we can look at muscle scars. Muscle scars occur on the bone. They
represent where muscles are actually attached by ligaments to the bone. And depending on
the size of the muscle scar, you can tell how big the muscle was. If it was a large
muscle and it was contracting a lot, it will have a large muscle scar. So, you can get
an idea of the size of these muscles, how powerfully they contracted, how they contracted,
and so on. So, you can get a pretty good idea of the kind of the silhouette, the outline
of the creature. But, have a look at this image here. This image is a lot more than
just a silhouette. You can see that the artist has rendered this dinosaur with texture on
his skin. There's also patterns. It's kind of got a mottled pattern to it as well, in
colour. How much can we actually tell about that? How much of this is just pure fantasy?
Well, in terms of skin texture, we can actually get a pretty good idea. Skin impressions have
been found from a number of species of dinosaur. When dinosaurs died and laid down potentially
in soft mud, you might form an impression of the skin. And sometimes that has been fossilised.
And we find that the scales of dinosaurs were very much like the scales of modern lizards.
They produce various patterns. For example, you can see here the skin of an ankylosaur.
He was a bit like a dinosaur equivalent of an armoured truck, wandering through the Mesozoic
landscape. And then there's a skin here of the hadrosaur. So, skin impressions, fine.
But what about colour? Pigment is really not very well preserved in the fossil record.
So the colouration in a lot of the dinosaur reconstructions that you see is probably just
fanciful. However, we can assume that they weren't just the dull, boring grey of those
reconstructions that I was looking at as a child back in Manchester. Especially when
you consider dinosaurs like this, you can see it has this impressive crest. Other dinosaurs
had frills and fringes and other structures, which we think probably acted as display features.
We can assume, therefore, given other creatures today, like the lizards that also possess
such structures, that these were highly coloured. Makes sense if you're using it as some sort
of display feature. But there's some new and exciting research, though, that has really
started to put some colour onto the dinosaurs. And in particular, the feathered dinosaurs.
We think potentially that feathers might have originally evolved for display, so it's reasonable
to assume that those feathers would have originally been fairly colourful. For example, this is
Cordeptrix. He's about 31 and a half inches, so a relatively small dinosaur from the early
Cretaceous. Recent discoveries of some of the fossils that we find from these specimens
and some of the fossil feathers that have been recovered have given us some incredible
information. Colour is produced by pigment in these feathers by melanin in structures
called molenosomes. Different shaped molenosomes will produce different types of colours. For
example, if you have a round shaped molenosome, it generally produces blacks and greys, whereas
more elongated, sausage-like looking molenosomes tend to produce more russet colours. A group
including Mike Bentham from the University of Bristol performed studies on the early
feathered sinusoropteryx. And what they found, I think remarkably, is when they looked at
the feathers, the beautiful preserved feathers in this specimen, they could actually look
at those molenosomes and work out what some other colours were of this creature. They found
that it had a kind of a ginger pattern of feathers and a striped tail. You could imagine
it couldn't be these creatures meeting perhaps in the forest and performing some sort of elaborate
mating or fighting ritual, but using these striped tails for that purpose, we really
are starting to colour in the dinosaurs. Even more so, this is a more recent study, this
is from a team including Derrick Briggs at Yale. This is the study of the dinosaur called
Anciornis. And you can see it's a beautiful dinosaur here. We've got black, white and
probably red feathers, so an extremely colourful member of the dinosaurs indeed.
Well, let's ask another more fundamental question right now. Where did the dinosaurs live? So
we know that the dinosaur would probably have more colourful skins and feathers than was
usually anticipated, but if you were looking for a dinosaur, where would you look? Well,
it's a great possibility of course that dinosaurs would come looking for you, which you might
not want, but if you did want to go hunting for them, you probably wouldn't go looking
for them in those swampy ponds like the over-reptiles at a health spa that we saw in the earlier
image. Obviously, you'd find them out in open ground, perhaps moving as they shown in modern
depictions, an awful lot more dynamic than the original slow sluggish depictions that
we have. Most had legs that are placed well under their body, so they could probably move
very effectively. In fact, the small bipedal forms could probably move very, very fast.
It's possible though that some of the dinosaurs weren't just restricted to the land's surface.
It's possible that some of them might have even got airborne. This is micro-raptor. We
think that this dinosaur, it's a feathered dinosaur, would be climbing up the trunks
of trees and then gliding in between them. We'll look into the story of micro-raptor
a little bit later. So we have dinosaurs on the ground, and we have dinosaurs above the
ground. How about under the ground? Well again, more exciting finds. We found some dinosaurs
that were potentially burrowers. This is the research of David Veraccio at Montana State
and other researchers as well. They find this creature, this is Oriscytodromius cubicularis,
try saying that with a mouthful of popcorn. It means the digging runner of the land, and
it was found in fossilized burrows in southwest Montana. These burrows are about seven feet
long and two feet wide. They're incredible, not only because you find dinosaurs in burrows,
we had no idea that dinosaurs could burrow, but we also find here an adult and two juvenile
dinosaurs as well. It's possibly here hinting at some parental care in the dinosaurs. So
dinosaurs potentially are a lot more caring than we thought. But there have been more
burrows found as well. Worked by Anthony Marin of Emory University, looking at cretaceous rocks
around 100 million years old in Australia. At this time, Australia was in the Arctic Circle.
It wasn't as cold as Polar regions were today, but it would still probably drop well below
freezing point at night, and there would have been a long, probably cold, dark winter.
So we think that the burrows that we find here, which are pretty much identical to the burrows
from Montana, were possibly developed by the dinosaur to keep themselves warm during that
winter time. We see here dinosaurs exploiting unexpected habitats, also potentially exploring
unexpected climates too. It would appear that dinosaurs were a lot more diverse than we thought.
What about aquatic dinosaurs? We've already established sauropods were not lounging around
in swampy environments. They were actively striding across the landscape. Now, you might be
questioning that. No aquatic dinosaurs. I've seen plenty of images of aquatic dinosaurs. Well,
you might be referring to images like this, but the creatures you can see in these pictures here
are not dinosaurs. Wonderful creatures that they are are all a very different type of reptile
compared to the dinosaurs that are not within the dinosaur group of creatures. All right, so if
not fully aquatic, how about semi-aquatic? Again, this is more recent research, and it was focusing
on this dinosaur. This is Baryonyx walkerii. It is a dinosaur that's generally referred to as a
spinosaur. They come from the low Cretaceous about 130 million years ago, and this guy was big,
about 28 feet long. You can see he's got a crocodile-like snout that was filled though with
piercing, not the serrated teeth you'd expect from a fully meat-eating dinosaur on the land. So we
think perhaps this creature might have been a specialized fish eater. So what? Perhaps it was
just wandering along by the side of rivers or the ocean and just dipping that long snout of its
into the water and grabbing fish. It doesn't make it semi-aquatic. So what makes us question whether
or not it was actually semi-aquatic? Well, this refers to work done by Romain Amio of the University
of Lyon in France. Remember, oxygen occurs in the light. Oxygen 16 and the heavy oxygen 18. Well,
land creatures lose water, as we know, through breathing and evaporation. The light form of
water, the one that contains the oxygen 16, is preferentially evaporated. That means the heavy
18, or 18, in the water, the oxygen isotope actually gets concentrated within the tooth
enamel. Aquatic animals lose less water, so less oxygen 18 is present in the teeth. Aquatic animals
are constantly flushing their water through their bodies, so that keeps the oxygen 18 levels relatively
low. Samples were taken in this study from 133 Cretaceous specimens. Various species were looked
at and the oxygen isotopes were determined. It was found that the oxygen isotope ratio for
spinosaurs was an awful lot more similar to crocodiles than it was for dinosaurs. So are
spinosaurs aquatic then, or semi-aquatic? This is a controversial discovery. People have questioned,
if they were semi-aquatic, why are they not showing any aquatic adaptations? Why don't they have, say,
webbing between claws or similar features? However, work is still going on into this and
it's intriguing because it may continue to expand our understanding of the possible habitats that
dinosaurs could inhabit. But can we tell on what and how the dinosaurs fed? It's a fundamental
question. In the broadest sense, it's fairly easy to tell, isn't it? Look at the teeth. The teeth of
a carnivore or a teeth of a herbivore. You can see here T. rex's teeth. They're obviously designed for
eating meat. They're for piercing flesh. They're like daggers, like steak knives. Then compare it to
the hadrosaur. It looks more like an elephant's tooth. They're adapted for grinding away plant
material on those surfaces, those broad surfaces of the tooth. In the last lecture, we looked at
certain herbivores and we kind of discussed the different strategies that they would use in order
to feed in the ecosystem. Remember we said brachiosaur was probably nibbling the high tree tops.
That was the giraffe of the particular ecosystem, whereas the cantilever diplodocus was more of a
low-level feeder, kind of vacuuming the low-level plants. But what about the carnivores? How did
they hunt? Well, there's a number of possible strategies that you can use. The larger dinosaurs
might have been able to prey upon creatures like the big cats, running down their prey, killing
them swiftly with a single bite, or perhaps ambush. Another strategy that you can use is to
ambush a creature and cause a very large wound and then get out of the way. It's a very good strategy
because animals that are wounded can be very dangerous. Basically, you create that wound,
you withdraw, you follow the creature and basically wait for it to go into shock or die of the wound
from loss of blood. But there's another possibility, of course. Perhaps dinosaurs
hunted in packs like you saw in the Jurassic Park movies. You remember those intelligent
dinosaurs, the velociraptors, stalking humans? It is kind of difficult to tell, I must admit,
though, from fossil evidence. There are possible clues to dinosaur predator behavior that we can
deduce, though, and those clues come from dinosaur brains. Obviously, we don't have the
gooey sticky stuff that we can look at, wouldn't that be wonderful? But what we do have are the
brain casts that gives us some idea as to the structure and organization of the brain, at
least the way it looked externally. These are interesting studies that have been carried out
by Scott Rogers at the University of Utah, and he's been studying the anatomical record of brain
casts of allosaurs. Allosaur was the top predator of the late Jurassic. He could reach about 136 feet
in length. Superficially, you might think he looks a little bit like T. rex. He certainly is. He's a
bipedal dinosaur with a large tail. But what you can see here from allosaur is a major difference.
He didn't have those puny little forearms of T. rex. When you compare the brain of allosaurs
to its closest relatives, the crocodiles and the birds, remember these are all orcasores,
you find that their brains look an awful lot more crocodilian than they do like birds.
The olfactory bulbs, the areas where smell is detected here are represented in green,
and they're very large in allosaurus. So allosaurus probably had a very keen sense of smell.
And then look at the blue area, the cerebrum. That's the processing area. That's the area
where you would interpret smells and decide on what you're going to do next. When you look at that
and compare it to a bird, you'll see in allosaur, they're very, very small indeed. So allosaurus
probably smells something and just grabbed like crocodiles do today. Birds are an awful lot more
discerning than that. So in regards to allosaur, it was an incredible creature, but there probably
wasn't very much processing going on up there. This might explain a most wonderful fossil deposit,
the Cleveland Lloyd dinosaur quarry in Utah. Here, 79 dinosaurs have been identified,
but they're all mixed up, and two thirds of those dinosaurs are allosaurs. That's really odd,
because top predators should be rare when compared to the number of herbivores that you're recovering.
The initial interpretation was one that we were talking about earlier. Perhaps this is proof that
allosaurs actually hunted in packs and they all became trapped. We think that's probably more
unlikely. What we think we probably are looking at here is something which is a very useful feature
in paleontology. It's called a natural predator trap. The area this quarry now represents was
probably originally some sort of watering hole, and it would attract dinosaurs during the summer,
but as the summer progressed, the watering hole would start to dry up and around the edges of
the watering hole. It would probably become very muddy. Animals could get caught in it. Eventually,
animals that were trapped and obviously didn't have a friendly farmer to come and extract them
would die. The rotting flesh would be irresistible to allosaurus and would attract allosaurus to this
area. They would flock to the site and become track 2, which causes more rotting corpses,
which attracts more allosaurs, which traps more allosaurs, which causes more rotting corpses.
It's our old friend again, the positive feedback loop.
In their efforts to free themselves, you could imagine they're moving up and down,
trying to free a leg but get even more stuck, the allosaurs would mix up and distribute all those
bones in the mud, which explains why the bones are so mixed up in that deposit. That's a wonderful
little case study and shows that allosaurs were definitely being led by their nose and not their
brain. But can we tell anything about the softer side of dinosaurs? Do dinosaurs show any parenting
skills? Very often, dinosaurs are regarded like turtles, isn't it? They lay their eggs and then,
thanks kids, I'm off. They're abandoned. The eggs will hatch and the little baby turtles have to
fend for themselves. In fact, a large proportion of those baby turtles will never even make it to the
water's edge. Jack Horner, a famous paleontologist, dinosaur paleontologist, would turn our ideas
about dinosaurs in this regard somewhat around. In western Montana, he found an area which is now
named, very appropriately, Egg Hill. This is going to paint a very different picture of the dinosaurs.
He found eggs. Now, dinosaur eggs have been known about for a long time, but he also found within
those legs, eggs, evidence of juveniles as well, and juveniles I think that had hatched too. And
they also found the nest in which they had been laid. It would appear that these nests had been
built on, of course, above ground, which means they had to be protected. The nests were made by
myosora, that means caring Mother Lizard. The nests themselves were closely packed, less than
seven feet apart. It must have looked like a giant seabird colony. The nests themselves contained
about 30 to 40 ostrich-sized eggs, all arranged in circular and spiral patterns. We think that the
dinosaur didn't sit on the nest, but it used a very clever technique to help incubate them.
It brought vegetation which, as it would rot, would start to give off heat. Any of those of you who
are gardeners know that a large compost heap during the winter time, you can go out if it's cold and
you'll see it steaming away. It's possible that the juveniles after hatching weren't able to walk,
so it implies that there must have been at least some degree of parental care by the myosora adults.
We also have some other remarkable fossils. This is ceticosaur. It's called the parrot lizard,
and it's found in the early Cretaceous rocks of Lianning province in China. It's a small
bipedal dinosaur about the size of a gazelle, and as its name implies, it has a beak, not unlike a
parrot. This specimen though, it really is a wonderful specimen, is found curled up over 34
juveniles. We think that these creatures were potentially living in some sort of burrow,
and there was a flooding event, and they were very rapidly covered over the sediment and suffocated,
but preserving this wonderful little snapshot of a tender moment in dinosaur history.
A big question in dinosaur studies though, is were dinosaurs warm-blooded? Were they endotherms?
It's important to understand, because understanding whether or not dinosaurs were ectotherms,
cold-blooded, or warm-blooded endotherms, will shape how we understand dinosaurs and also how we
view they might have behaved. So, was the blood of a dinosaur warm? This is the traditional
view of the dinosaur, isn't it? Or is it disgusting? Slow, lumbering creatures, dragging their tails
around in a primitive landscape. This is a very reptilian view of the dinosaurs. It's a very Richard
Owen view of the dinosaurs. Remember the guy who first coined the term dinosaur? It is in fact a
very Victorian view of the dinosaurs. Dinosaurs were lizards, slow, lumbering, stupid. Couldn't be
necessarily, it couldn't be in any way considered to be as successful
and as wonderful as the mammals. This reptilian Victorian view was challenged though,
most famously by Bob Backer. We met him last lecture. He would publish a paper in Scientific
American, A Dinosaur Renaissance, and propose that dinosaurs were extremely active creatures,
not the slow, lumbering brutes that they'd been portrayed as before, but he would also suggest
something else. He also suggested the reason they were very active creatures is because they were
warm-blooded endotherms like us. It's an interesting idea, but what evidence do we have to support
this idea? Well, a time machine and a thermometer would be very helpful, but is there anything
about the dinosaur fossils themselves that might be able to provide a clue? How about evidence from
stance, the way the dinosaurs stand? The logic goes a bit like this, so follow with me. Living
endotherms, birds and mammals have limbs brought underneath their bodies. Ectotherms like lizards
and crocodiles have a sprawling gait. Dinosaurs gait is more like endotherms, therefore dinosaurs
are warm-blooded. It sounds like a fairly weak argument, doesn't it? There's no direct link
being proven between posture and metabolism. Also, what about dinosaurs like Stegosaurus?
He has an upright stance in his front limbs and a semi-sprawling stance at his hind limbs,
so where does this leave poor old Stegosaurus? I'm not really sure. Okay, what about isotopic
evidence? Remember, we've already talked about oxygen-16 to oxygen-18 isotope ratios. How would
this shed light on the question? Well, endotherms maintain a steady body temperature, so the ratio
between the isotopes should pretty well much be the same throughout the skeleton, whereas
ectotherms, cold-blooded creatures, should perhaps have warmer temperatures in the middle and perhaps
colder towards the extremities. Analysis of Tyrannosaurus rex skeletons shows that the ratios
seem to be the same as endotherms. Again, case clothes. Isotopic evidence proves dinosaurs
were warm-blooded endotherms. However, studies of mammals and birds have shown that this ratio
can in fact vary quite considerably from the core to the extremities. Okay, let's try something
different. Let's try an ecological approach. Endotherms have to eat more food than ectotherms.
They have to do this because we warm-blooded endotherms have to maintain a high body temperature.
For example, a lion has to eat more food than a similarly sized crocodile, so a lion, when compared
to a crocodile, will have a different predator-to-prey ratio. Given the predator-to-prey ratio,
of a landscape, perhaps we can find some clues as to the metabolic needs of a top predator like T-rex.
And when you do that analysis, it suggests endothermy. It suggests that T-rex was a warm-blooded
creature. The problem, of course, is quite obvious. We've already discussed it quite a long time ago.
Dinosaurs fossils are difficult fossils to find. How come we're sure we're getting a complete picture?
Also, of course, this tells us nothing about the metabolism of the dinosaurs that were prey
and not predators. In fact, it's possible that large sauropods could not have been endotherms.
Their body size might have been just too big and would have generated far too much heat.
In fact, it's possible that creatures like these might have had their own special type of metabolism.
It's called gigantothermy. Let's have a look at this a little more detail.
Mice have a very low volume-to-surface area ratio, so they lose a lot of heat,
which means they eat continuously and employ techniques like shivering to keep themselves warm.
Elephants have the other problem. They have a very low surface area to volume ratio,
so they retain much more heat, so they have the other problem. They have to try and radiate a lot
of heat away from them, which is why they have these great big ears.
Sauropods, due to their great size, probably generated a lot of heat, which allowed them to
be more active than you would expect from the average ectotherm. We can see a similar solution
in the cold-blooded leatherback turtle. It can reach sizes of up to 1.1 tons and migrates
regularly from the tropics to the poles. The turtle has no problems maintaining its heat
at the poles at all. In fact, it has more problems dumping heat in the tropics.
So dinosaurs show a great diversity in shape and behavior.
Why not a great diversity in metabolism as well? Perhaps there were endotherms,
ectotherms, gigantotherms, and perhaps some sort of unknown special type of dinosaur metabolism.
We're only just starting to understand what a diverse group of animals the dinosaurs were.
The evidence is fragmentary, but new discoveries are being made all the time to color in these
magnificent creatures. In our next lecture, we turn our attention away from the land though.
Let's go and see what was happening in the atmosphere.
