This is a dream environment isn't it, it's often what a lot of us think about, walking
down these white sands, holding a drink in your hand perhaps, looking at the beautiful
sea. I must admit when I'm cycling to UBC in the winter, the winds coming at me horizontally
and the rain and my fingers are slowly turning blue on my handlebars, I'm pretty well much
thinking of environments like this. But what if most of the world was like this? In this
lecture I'd like to consider a time when potentially, that's exactly what the world
was like, I'd like to look at a remarkable time, the mid to late Cretaceous, an earth
which could be described as wall to wall Jamaica. In this section we're going to examine
the following. What can we use as proxies that are indicators of ancient climates? Also
how do we model ancient climates and explore just what was driving the mid to late Cretaceous
climatic system and what would be some of the consequences of the Cretaceous hot house?
So what can we use to read ancient climates? How can we tell what they were like? Well
in a way we've already answered that in part through this series but I'd like to provide
an overview here of some of the proxies that can be useful for climatic determination.
In proxy in this sense we're talking about something in the geological record that can
be used as an indicator of the states of past climates. Firstly how about cold climates?
We've met a lot of these already. Think about just the lectures we've done so far on the
snowball earth and other glacial events like the Ordovician glaciation event. We can see
things like glacial striations, remember that's when a glacier moves across a landscape and
physically puts gouges, scratches and the rocks, we've seen glacial dropstones. When
a glacier moves out across an open body of water and those rocks that it contained drop
from the glacier, fall into the sediment below and create these odd structures with the sedimentary
layers distorted around them. And of course the sedimentary deposits, glacial till, this
chaotic jumble sediment with large chunks of rock in a finer grained matrix which developers
a glacier scores its way across a landscape. We've also discussed the ratio of light oxygen
16 to heavy oxygen 18. Remember that helps us when we understand the mechanism of how
water is evaporated from the oceans. For example if you have warm conditions you're getting
a lot of oxygen 16 evaporated from the oceans, that then falls as oxygen 16 rich rain onto
the land and it just runs back into the ocean. But during times of glaciation, colder periods
that oxygen 16 water gets locked up on the land. It doesn't return to the oceans. So
there's a relative enrichment in oxygen 18 in the oceans and that signal is recorded in
the shells of creatures that secrete shells around themselves like Brachyopods for example
telling us that there was a glacial period during those times. But what about warm climates?
Well, extensive red desert blown sandstones are a very good indicator of our conditions.
In this image we can see the Zion Park in Utah, these are the Navajo sandstones. The
structures that you can see, the sedimentary structures, those kind of dipping curved structures
are called cross beds or cross sets. And what you're looking at is the internal structure
of a sand dune. You have sand blowing at one side of the dune and then it tumbles down
the other side. This incidentally also will help us understand the prevailing wind directions
if we can find these structures. So we have a fairly good idea of the prevailing wind
directions during the Jurassic when the Navajo sandstone was deposited, which is kind of
neat. These are another feature that can tell us things are fairly hot and narrowed. These
are calcretes, they're concentrations of minerals. They occur when you have intense evaporation
of soil profiles. Water is then drawn up to the surface and evaporated and through capillary
action water is continually drawn up but as it has evaporated it precipitates minerals
out of that water to form nodules and hard pans of minerals like calcium carbonate. Also
mud cracks might represent evidence of hot conditions. Remember mud cracks occur when
you evaporate a body of water and the mud is exposed and eventually dries out, falling
the very familiar polygonal patterns and cracks. So warm conditions for those.
I remember the lecture on dinosaurs. We talked about stone master on leaves and how that could
tell us something about carbon dioxide levels and therefore potentially greenhouse effects.
The fewer the stone martyr, the higher the carbon dioxide levels because the plants just
don't need that many pore spaces on their leaves to grab the carbon dioxide they need
for photosynthesis. There's another way that leaves can help us actually as in determining
climates as well. It comes down to leaf shape. In tropical areas today we found that leaves
tend to have smooth outlines and in temperate regions the leaves tend to have a jagged outline.
Another thing from plants that can help us are of course tree rings. They can be used
to indicate different climatic states. If you see pronounced seasonality you will see
a variation in the thickness of the rings with thick rings being developed during warm
periods in the thinner rings perhaps representing the winter. And of course there are other
indicators too. We've already discussed the fact that certain corals are very picky in
where they live. They need warm clear water. Also, coals as well, tropical coals and soils
suffice to say there are plenty of climatic indicators that we can use in the geological
record to show us what climate was like at any one time. But how do we model ancient
climates? Well first we've got to define what we mean here by climate as opposed to
weather. These are two terms that are often mixed up. I know that I'm guilty of interchanging
them and I really shouldn't. The difference between the two is a factor of time. Weather
is conditions right now. Go look out the window. You're looking at weather. Is it raining? Is
the sun out? I can tell you what it'd be like in Manchester. It'll be raining. No, that's
not true. It's sunshine occasionally. Climate are the atmospheric conditions over longer
periods, tens of years, perhaps hundreds of thousands of years and beyond that as well
to millions of years potentially. That would be a particular climate. Modelling climate
though is tricky. You have to consider lots of factors. Also at the moment of course it's
a centre of much controversy given the possibility of current climate change. There are though
many potential factors that can affect climate. Remember here, we're dealing with earth system
science. It's going to be a very complex subject to approach. As there are always so many disputes
going on regarding climate models, there are a whole bunch of potential climate hypotheses
emerging all the time. Remember though what we mean by model. Basically models are a way
that we can simplify and make things a little less complex. We're looking at systems that
are extremely complex. So we want to produce a simplified model that we can produce a hypothesis
about that we can test using additional evidence. Think about a non-climatic model. Think about
the model that we made of Helusogenia. Remember that odd creature from the Burgess Shale? Our
initial model had the creature walking on those spines. But then additional evidence helped
us refine that model and we flipped it around. We now have a better understanding of that
creature. Climate models are commonly used to predict climate change in the future but
they can also be used as a model of ancient climates of the past. The best approach is
to create a mathematical model of earth and its climatic system and then use this to run
tests on various hypotheses. The model that is created in this manner is called a general
circulation model or a GCM. Now mathematically modelling the entire planet is a model of
the planet. It is not possible. We have extremely complicated and powerful computers today but
they're not quite at that level yet. So what we have to do is create a simplified model
of the planet. We break the planet down into what we call model grids. This divides the
earth into a series of homogeneous boxes within which the processors and exchange between
all of these boxes can be more easily calculated. Factors such as how much carbon dioxide are
there in this area? How much dust is present here? Obviously dust is going to be very important.
It will help reflect sunlight. Also what are the water concentrations at this level? What
is the input of solar radiation? And also what radiation is being reflected back into
space from the earth? All these are very important factors. But also interactions, interactions
between the atmosphere, the ocean and the land have to be considered. Again I can't
help but emphasise this is earth system science. If we're going to understand something as
complex as the atmosphere we have to understand the atmosphere in the context of a system
amongst many. So what about step one? Well step one is to see if the model that you've
created by breaking up the earth into this simple blocks actually mimics the conditions
that you see today. If the model doesn't mimic the conditions that you see today which you
can obviously test and go and look at then the parameters have to be changed in some
way. Once you have a workable model, a model that seems to reflect what goes on today,
you can start to change various parameters again and try and make predictions about the
future. But also you can see if you can try and mimic conditions of the climate of the
past too. If modelling past climates the model must model ancient geography as well, paleo
geography. Today the distribution of the continent is extremely important in the way that the
climate works. It has an effect on the way that air masses move around. It has an effect
on global oceanic circulation which obviously also are incredibly important in the understanding
of the atmosphere and of climate. So we have to bring that into our model of ancient climates.
What was the ancient continental distribution? For example if we go back to Pangea at about
200 million years ago. But remember we're creating a simplified model of Pangea. It's
more of a simplified version. When you simplify it Pangea becomes a big kind of letter C. Some
people say it looks a bit like a Pac-Man. Again I'm dating myself. This will not provide
a detailed regional view of climate but it may provide a general view of the overall climate
of the planet at this time. If these models are run for the end triassic at 200 million
years ago what do we get? Well we get a precipitation pattern where the interior of Pangea should
be under this model extremely dry, very dry indeed. And this actually matches the evidence
we find in the geological record. Remember we're testing the model now. What we find
at that time are lots of evaporites. Now evaporites are salt deposits that form when
you evaporate an open body of water. The centre of the continent at this time was a great
distance away from the oceans. Remember oceans have moderating effects on climate. It would
appear that Pangea at 200 million years ago experienced extreme seasonal temperature variations.
It had extremely hot summers and very cold winters. During the summer air would rise
over the warm land creating low pressure systems. This would draw moisture from that
tethys ocean, that big kind of gouge in the centre of the continent. As air was forced
to rise over the land it would develop torrential rain. The reverse would occur during the winter.
The land cools which causes cold air to form and then sink. We've created a low pressure
system here. Air and moisture move out over the ocean and so the winters would be dry
and arid. So, very very hot summers, very dry and arid winters. We actually know this
climatic regime by another name. It's a monsoon. And the evidence for a monsoon or climate
at this time? Well the Triassic rocks do support evidence of episodic seasonal rainfall. Floods
during wet times and the development of evaporites in arid times. If you want to kind of an example
of an environment, an example of a place where you can go that might mimic those conditions
in the Triassic, consider this. This is a wadi. A wadi is a dry river bed which only
holds water during the rainy seasons. During the rainy seasons the rocks become heavily
eroded and you get deposits of very chaotic sediments. There are lots of rock and mud
slides and braided river systems are common because there's very little stabilizing vegetation
so you don't get those nice meander loops, you get this anastomosing braided pattern
to the rivers. Then arid conditions, the water gets evaporated. So you start to deposit
salts, you start to see the evaporate deposits. You start to see mud cracks as the water evaporates
away and red oxidized sediments, just like we find in many Triassic sedimentary rocks.
But what of the end of the Mesozoic? Let's go to Walter Wald-Jamaica now, the mid-Cretaceous,
about 100 million years ago. It was an incredible time. There were no ice at the poles and sea
level was considerably higher than it is today. In contrast to the Triassic as well, there
is a much reduced seasonality. Why is that? Well in part due to the fragmentation of Pangea,
you can see the world is starting to look a little more modern now. We can recognize
the continents a little more easily. There are more open seaways which are helping modify
those climatic extremes. Those oceans are able to reach deeper within the continents
so we're not getting that continental mass locked away from the oceans as we saw at the
time of the height of Pangea. But how do we model this? How do we get a planet with no
permanent snow or ice at the poles? How do we produce a true greenhouse world? Eric
Barron, who is currently the president of Florida State University, wanted to know as
well. Eric first defined what's called a target signal. A global temperature at 100 million
years ago. A target signal is the range of global temperatures from poles to the equator
as suggested by the geological proxy evidence. It did this in part by using some of the proxies
that we've already discussed. The proxies suggested, as you can see from this diagram
here, that equatorial regions were only about 2 degrees centigrade higher but between 20
to 40 degrees higher at the poles. That's quite a difference, a massive distance difference.
The next step after this target signal had been set and identified is to adjust the models
to match the mid-Lake Cretaceous world climate. He did this by adding just one new factor
at a time. So let's start with the first model. Let's just use the Cretaceous continental
configuration and nothing else. Let's see if the paleogeography, the way the continents
were set up, could be the driving force in the Cretaceous hot house. And here's the
model. The board band that you can see here is the target signal and the yellow line is
the temperature predicted by just using paleogeography and nothing else. And does it work? Do we
model the Cretaceous target signal? No, we don't. The model works in the tropics but
it doesn't work poleward about 40 degrees. The model is much colder than was estimated
for the mid-Cretaceous times. So how about a second model? Alright, let's introduce
another factor. Let's introduce elevated levels of carbon dioxide. Very likely the main reason
why we have such high temperatures at that time. In fact, it's estimated that the Cretaceous
then saw about four times modern pre-industrial levels of carbon dioxide. The model improves
we see here on the green line. It's a little better at low latitudes but it's not perfect
but the tropics temperatures now are much higher than the proxies suggest. So what is
wrong with the model? Perhaps we're just misinterpreting the geological evidence so
that the target temperatures are wrong. Could it be that the fossil proxies for temperature
are not accurate? It is possible that life today is less tolerant perhaps of cold conditions
than their equivalent Cretaceous forms. For example, could the Cretaceous breadfruit fossils
that we find that are used as indicators of tropical conditions be more tolerant of cold
than their modern forms? Well, it's possible but then it would have to be true for all
the other proxies that we're using supporting a warm Cretaceous and an incorrect interpretation
of all this evidence seems somewhat unlikely. Perhaps then we're making too broad an estimation
of the Cretaceous climate. Many of the rocks that are studied to make this interpretation
were originally deposited along continental margins. Now we know that oceans modify seasonal
temperatures so perhaps it wasn't such a stable climate as we thought. We're just taking
the reading from the edges of the continental mass. Perhaps we're missing evidence of seasonality
in the middle of the continents. Perhaps it got very cold during the winter. However,
the deposits that have been found from areas where this would be occurring don't match
this explanation. So what about oxygen isotope data that's also been used as an estimate
of Cretaceous climate? Perhaps that's giving us false readings. The oxygen 16 to 18 ratios
as I've noted are taken from the calcium carbonate of Shelley creatures. Perhaps what we're looking
at here is a diagenetic effect. Diagenesis are all the chemical and physical processes
that transfer a sediment and the fossils they contain into rock. So might it be the case
that this diagenesis is altering that ratio? Might it be the case that we got varying data
from different areas? But there is a consistency to the values. If we were going to get diagenetic
effects we wouldn't expect this consistency. They'd be all over the place. So the isotopic
data is probably correct as well. Could it be then that Eric Barron's model is just
too simplistic? There's doesn't account for effects of clouds for example, or perhaps
ancient oceanic circulation. And that leads us to the next question. Just what was driving
the mid to late Cretaceous climatic system? Could the answer lie in the oceans? Could
the oceans have worked in an entirely different manner than they do today? Well here's a suggestion.
Perhaps the Cretaceous oceans transported more warm waters to the poles than they do
today. This is called the Ocean Heat Transfer Hypothesis. It's suggested that the distribution
of the continents during the Cretaceous would have led to intensive apparition of the tropically
located tethys ocean, the tethys ocean at this time, laying a kind of a band around
the middle of the planet. This would generate the formation of dense saline waters because
obviously you're evaporating a lot of water and concentrating the salt. We know that this
happens in the Mediterranean today. The intense sunshine in those areas evaporates the waters
and dense saline waters sink. Perhaps this dense warm and salty water in the tropics
during the middle Cretaceous was sinking into the deeper parts of the oceans. And that would
act as a conveyor belt then, moving the warmth from the warm subtropical sources towards
the poles. This would explain why the poles are warmer than they are predicted by the
general circulation model. This is actually kind of the opposite of what drives oceanic
circulation today. Today what we have is cold water sinking at the poles and that drags
in warm water behind it and it's that which drives oceanic circulation. It's actually
a very complicated and quite a wonderful oceanic circulation pattern that we have today, ventilating
a lot of the world's oceans with cold, oxygen-rich water.
But there's something we still haven't explained though. Where is all this extra carbon dioxide
coming from that apparently was making the Cretaceous so warm? Actually it's not that
difficult to explain. Mid-ocean ridge activity was fairly high. We see we've been splitting
up Pangaea and the continents were starting to fragment very rapidly at this time. This
means because mid-ocean ridges are essentially volcanic ridges we're producing an awful lot
of carbon dioxide as well. But there's going to be other volcanic features too. For example
the huge Ong Tong Java Plateau. This is an undersea volcanic outpouring and it's absolutely
vast. It's roughly the size of Alaska. It's lots of basalts that are around 19 miles thick
in some places. It was a peak activity during the mid-Cretaceous and like other vast basalt
uppourings that we've discussed for, you remember the Camp Volcanism and also the Siberian Traps.
This too is probably related to one of those mantle plume events, a movement of hot rocks
from the Earth's mantle. It would be producing an awful lot of carbon dioxide. So what are
some of the consequences of this hot house that we've created in the Cretaceous? Well
as we've said, no ice at the poles, far too warm. That means most of Earth's water exists
in the oceans which of course is going to equate to extremely high sea levels. Sea levels aren't
just high due to this though. There's other factors as well. Remember we said there's
lots of mid-ocean ridges at this time and they're very active. Mid-ocean ridges are
like big mountain chains in the bottoms of the oceans. So they're large structures and
if they're very active, not only are they producing a lot of material, they're also
warm so they tend to be buoyant so they stand very proud. Also we have enormous submarine
igneous features like the Antong Java Plateau. These combined would displace an awful lot
of water. Where would that water go? Yeah, it would slop onto the side of the continents.
Also the oceans are an awful lot warmer at this time as well and warm water occupies more
volume than cold water due to the thermal expansion coefficient. Sea levels were probably
the highest seen in half a billion years with many continental interiors extensively flooded.
The flooding formed warm, shallow continental seas. Large seaways penetrated North America
and Africa. Much of Europe as we've noted was just a series of tropical islands. These
oceans helped moderate the continental climatic effects that would have been more pronounced
in the Triassic and helped produce the wall-to-wall Jamaica of the Middle Cretaceous.
These shallow warm oceans were extensive and often also an awful long way away from continental
input of sediment. This makes them good places for certain tiny marine creatures to flourish.
This is a coccolithophore. He's a photosynthetic algae about 5 to 10 microns across. He secretes
a calcium carbonate skeleton and lives in the photic zone of the ocean. That's the
depth to which sunlight can penetrate. When they die, their skeletons sink to form lots
of sedimentary deposits. The coccolithophore illustrated here is Emiliana Huxleyi. This
is a very common coccolithophore in today's oceans. You find it from the tropics right
through to subarctic waters. They are also very important to the biosphere, forming the
base of the food chain of many of the world's oceanic ecosystems. They can produce an awful
lot of sediment. In those sediments we call calcareous oozes, as that word again, especially
in the mid to late Cretaceous. And the reason? Well, the oceans are shallow and warm, and
they lie above the CCD. Remember that? The carbonate compensation depths. So calcium
carbonate can precipitate out in low pressure warm waters rather than the salacious oozes
that we discussed last time. Also, many of the oceans are a long way from land due to
the flooding, so they're not receiving any plastic sediment input. The result? Chalk.
And lots of it. For example, like we can see here at the white cliffs of Dover, these are
almost 100% coccolith. Chalk seas are a common feature of the Cretaceous oceans, and they
speak to a well-developed greenhouse planet. There are many other features of the greenhouse
world, but I would like to highlight just one more. I mentioned it briefly in a previous
lecture. The fact that warmer temperatures could permit the existence of dinosaurs inside
the Antarctic Circle. This is Dinosaur Cove of South Australia. It's a remarkable fossil
site in Victoria. It dates to about 106 million years ago. It was discovered in 1903 and was
the first dinosaurs to be described from Australia, and it contains a diverse and remarkable
dinosaur assemblage. It represents a floodplain deposit on the developing Rift Valley. This
floodplain was collecting various sands and sills, which preserve a record of this ecosystem.
The Rift Valley is just part of a Rift system that would eventually separate Australia from
Antarctica. Australia would then drift northwards to become the island continent that it is
today. Temperatures, although not glacial, were certainly not tropical, just warm enough
for extensive forests, which the dinosaurs seem to inhabit. It's likely that many species
migrated to warmer locations during the winter, but those large burrows that we described
earlier from Australia perhaps suggest that at least some of the dinosaurs were hibernating
underground through the difficult parts of the year.
There is another possibility as well. This is Leelinosaurus. It's a creature with a very
long tail about three times as long as its body. One still very controversial skull was
found that has extremely large eyes, adapted for seeing in low light conditions during
the polar night perhaps. Is this evidence that these animals were warm-blooded, still
active and foraging for food during the cold polar winter? The polar winter had not been
as long as today's, perhaps weeks to a couple of months, but it would have still been a
long period of cold and dark. Never before or since have creatures regarded as reptiles
been so close to the poles.
In the next lecture though, let's examine the end of this beautiful Mesozoic world.
Let's consider the last major extinction event in Earth's history and also the demise
of the dinosaurs.
