The Cretaceous Tertiary Extinction Event, known simply very often as just the KT, an
extinction event dated to about 65.5 million years ago.
I probably need to give you a little bit of clarification as to what that means.
Well specifically I'm referring here to the KT. Well in German the translation for
Cretaceous is about with a K and that's where Cretaceous sections, a lot of them
are defined and the T that stands for the period to follow the Cretaceous, the
tertiary. Well it's the period that used to. The tertiary has now been removed by
the International Union of Geological Sciences. Now the event is the Cretaceous
Palaeogene or the KP event. Sometimes I must admit I find it difficult to keep
up. Of all the extinctions so far though the KP is probably the most studied.
This is the one as well that is most in the public's consciousness I guess and
the reason for this? Well obviously we lose our favorite monsters, the dinosaurs
and everybody wants to know how big nasty beasts like this finally got their
comeuppance. And also it's a possibility that this mass extinction event could
have ended in a massive fireball. It could be a death from the sky scenario
so it's kind of got that exciting twist to it as well. As I noted this is the
dinosaur killer and that fact often eclipses the fact that many other
species would be lost in this event as well. We're looking at around about 50
percent of all species so effectively kind of halving the biosphere in this
particular event. On land few creatures over 25 kilograms are going to survive.
There are some notable exceptions the crocodiles and the alligators that
existed all the way through the time that the dinosaurs did are going to
persist and are obviously still with us today. The reason well probably the
greatest reason is that they are generalists. They all eat virtually
anything they're not picky eaters and they can also survive for long periods
with absolutely no food at all. Specialists will suffer that's common in
very many extinction events. If you're a betting person I think you better push
your money on rats rather than pandas to survive any extinction event. I think
that pandas are probably in a very bad way after all all they eat is bamboo. At
the end of the Cretaceous it would be the generalist probably that would get
through into the paleogene and many of those generalists would include the
mammals. As mentioned before focus is often placed on what happened on land
that's one of the biases that we've always talked about and it often blinds
us to events that occur in the oceans and in fact the KP is probably even more
severe in the oceans than it is in the land. Up to perhaps 80 or 90 percent of
extinction of species has been suggested by some people. All those
wonderful marine reptiles those plesiosauce, the pliosauce, those creatures
recovered by Mary Anning such as the ichthyosaurs, the ammonites and all the
wonderful sphalopods would be gone forever. For this lecture I'd like to
consider what evidence is there for an extraterrestrial impact at the end of
the Cretaceous? What would the effects of an impact be on the biosphere and is
impact the only possible cause of the end Cretaceous extinction event? So what
evidence is there for an impact at the end of Cretaceous? Well the story of this
extinction event is always going to be linked to a story of a father and son
team that's Walter and Luis Alvarez. This is Luis Alvarez he's a as a
physicist and had a very distinguished career. He started at the University of
Chicago where he did a PhD in cosmic rays. During World War II he would make
very significant contributions in the study of radar and in 1968 he received
the Nobel Prize for physics for work on particle physics. His son Walter would
also follow his father into science but not into physics. Walter became a
geologist at UC Berkeley. During the 1970s Walter's research focused in the
province of Umbria in Italy. You can see the town there is the town of Gubio. I
always tell my research students that if you're going to pick a particular area
of research pick an area that has lots of sunshine, nice wine and a fine
selection of cheeses. Gubio works for that one. Gubio is a pretty little town. It
has a long record of human occupation. It had a somewhat turbulent past at times
and that occupation probably goes way back to the Bronze Age as well. But it's
also an important place for geologists and paleontologists as well as
historians. The limestone cliffs that surround Gubio record the transition
from the Cretaceous to the Paleogene. In other words we have rocks here that
cross that extinction event. You can see that transition here. You can see that
it's generated an awful lot of interest. This isn't a gorge near Gubio. You can
see that people have been picking away at that transition. That's because the
cleft in the rock here marks the exact position of the transition from the
Cretaceous to the Paleogene and it's marked by a very thin plate. It's about
0.4 inches wide. As I said this is the transition point. So at this point marks
65.5 million years and represents one of those major overturns in Earth's
history. So if you were to look at this image the area below that cleft that
would contain in comparable sections dinosaurs potentially ammonites. But
above it they're gone. Gone forever. Obviously therefore this clay layer is a
clay layer of some importance. Walter thought so too. So the next step is going
to be obvious. Well it's going to be obvious if your father is a Nobel Prize
winner in physics. So he took a sample from that section that crosses the KP
boundary at Gubio that include the clay layer and went to his father and said
what can you tell me about this. This position here represents a major event
in Earth history where an awful lot of the biosphere collapsed. Lewis thought
that this was an interesting question and thought perhaps an interesting
question to ask regarding the section that I got is exactly how long did it
take for that clay to be deposited. Obviously as I said it's a clay of
significance. Did it accumulate slowly over millions of years or does it
represent a very rapid event something that was deposited in a geological
instant a blink of an eye. Fortunately there's a methodology that we can use
to calculate the accumulation rates of sediments and it uses the rare element
called iridium to answer the puzzle. Iridium is very rare in the Earth's
crust but the Earth is receiving a continual rain of micrometeorites which
are rich in iridium that vaporize in the Earth's atmosphere. So iridium is
continually raining down to the Earth's surface and the iridium accumulation
rate is known. So if the clay contains a lot of iridium then it represents a
long period of accumulation because the sediments aren't diluting the signal
out the iridium can accumulate a fairly high concentration. He used neutron
activation analysis to determine the amount of iridium in the clay sample
and was astounded by the results. What he found was this massive spike in
iridium levels right at the level of the clay but not in the limestone below it
then kind of just tails off above the clay. The sheer amount of iridium could
not have accumulated by slow rates and slow processes though. There was really
only one reasonable explanation. You have to deliver an awful lot of iridium
very suddenly to the Earth's surface. How can we get such a high
concentration of iridium to the Earth's surface? Well you need to bring something
with a lot of iridium in it. Something like a very large meteor or comet. This
idea of some massive impact from space was further supported by the global
distribution of this clay layer and the iridium. You see it's not just found in
Goobio. In fact it's not just found in Europe. It's found virtually all over the
world. You can see it here in Drumheller in Alberta and also here in Trinidad in
Colorado. It's that thin creamy looking thin layer. Again representing here the
transition from the Cretaceous sediments below to the Paleogene sediments above.
This iridium anomaly is as I said found virtually all over the world and because
of that it became fairly big news. Not just in the scientific community but it
also sparked the public's imagination and the story was rapidly taken up by the
media. The story that they'd taken up of course was that apparently according to
these scientists something really big had hit the earth at the end of the
dinosaurs reign. However scientists are by nature a skeptical bunch and rightly
so. We meant to be skeptical. We meant to question and test everything and a
hypothesis of this scale invoking such massive forces and causing such stress
in the biosphere would surely have many other wide-ranging implications that
would touch all the other earth systems. As such these would be impacted and so we
must be able to find other signals of this impact event. Something beyond just
a thin clay layer which is rich in iridium. Think of how much evidence
Wagner gathered to support his ideas about the drifting continents. Fortunately
for the Alvarez team there was an awful lot of supporting evidence for this. If
you ever travel to BC in the summer something you'll probably see a lot of
are forest fires. It's a very forested area of the world but in the summer
especially in the interior it can get very dry so we have had really enormous
forest fires in British Columbia. After the forest fire had passed through though
of course you have a fairly devastated landscape like you can see here but life
is very persistent and it will start to colonize these five devastated areas.
And one of the first creatures first plants to colonize these areas are often
ferns. They're kind of adapted to get into this fire devastated landscape. Of course
when they do they start to release an awful lot of their sporing bodies as
well and those become incorporated in the sediments around that area. You can
see some of the spores here on the underside of this fern leaf. This is
actually a really good way to investigate the history of local forest fire
activity, the methodology. Go to an area you want to study and find a lake. Take a
vertical core of the sediments in the lake and then using the positions of
superposition that we understand. You know that the core at the bottom will
be the oldest part, the core at the top will be the youngest. You now have a
history of the sedimentation in that area but it will also indicate times
when lots of ferns were producing lots of spores. Each of the spikes that you
find in that core can be a proxy for a forest fire, neat. But just after the KP
boundary all over the world it would appear we find a large spike in fern
spores. One geologist put it this way, given that we're using fern spores here
as a proxy for forest fires it's almost as if all at the same time the entire
world caught a light. There's also further features found in that clay layer as
well though. We find these things, tectites and microspherials. These are
produced by molten material, molten rock, splashing out of an area after a very
large and energetic explosion. The tectites are a regular in shape but some
of them adopt this kind of teardrop shape. It's been suggested by some
it represents kind of an aerodynamic shaping as they pass through the
atmosphere. Microspherials are very small and kind of represent a fine spray of
molten material. Intriguingly we find a lot of these kind of features between
North and South America. That's where we have a concentration. Another line of
evidence comes from quartz. Now quartz is an extremely abundant mineral on the
earth surface. Probably if you're outside and you're picking up a pebble of
something it's liable to either be quartz or have a lot of quartz in it and it
can take on many forms and many different colors. But these cross-hatch lines
that you can see in a close-up of a piece of quartz are very unusual. This
particular quartz is called shot quartz and the cross-hatch lines that you can
see are called shot lamellae and they only develop again in very large
energetic explosions. Again shot quartz is present in high concentrations like
the tectites between North and South America. Further evidence comes from
sedimentary geology. That's the study of how rocks were originally deposited as
sediments. Now certain environments or processes will produce characteristic
patterns and structures in the sedimentary rock record. For example take
this meandering river. We discuss meandering rivers remember in the South
African Karoo. Well a meandering river can be identified in the rock record
because it leaves a particular suite of sediment types and sedimentary
structures. Each sedimentary environment will have its characteristic series of
sediments and sedimentary structures so you can identify deltas, beaches and large
cones of sediments in mountainous areas called alluvial fans. You name it we can
generally identify it. Basically the jollicious can interpret this information
and kind of reverse engineer these rocks to rebuild the ancient environment in
which the sediments were being deposited. With this in mind it's puzzling
that we find at the end of the Cretaceous evidence of a mega tsunami. Sediments
that indicate the passage of a massive giant waves many more times greater than
the very tragic Indonesian or Japan tsunami. The scale though that we see in
the Cretaceous tsunami cannot be explained by any normal earthbound
phenomenon. I mean usually tsunamis are caused by earthquakes. A piece of the
ocean floor being rapidly moved up and causing the water above it to be
displaced. Or volcanoes when a whole portion of a volcano can just basically
fall off in a giant landslide causing an enormous splash. Something that created
these tsunamis though at the end of the Cretaceous caused tsunamis that
penetrated very deep into the continental interiors. Obviously you can see
probably where this is leading to. The evidence of forest fires, tech types and
shock quartz could have been created by a massive meteorite impacting onto the
surface of the planet and given where we find the concentrations of this
material probably somewhere between North and South America. The tsunami evidence
points towards a potential impact in the ocean. But we're lacking a very
important piece of the picture. Where's the crater? Based on the iridium present
in the clay layer Alvarez proposed that the impacting body would be over six
miles in diameter. That's big. This could not have been vaporized in an air
burst like we talked about from Tunguska. This one would have got to the ground.
It would have left a hole. It would have left an awful big hole. So where's the
smoking gun? Where is that crater? This was a problem for the impact hypothesis.
A suggestion was made of course that the impact had occurred in the ocean and as
such there's a potential way to explain the lack of the crater or at least
effectively remove it. Remember that ocean crust is generated at mid-ocean
ridge systems and is being removed by being subducted at the plate margins. So
the hypothesis goes a bit like this. Okay it impacted into the ocean. It
impacted into oceanic crust and it has been subsequently removed by tectonic
processes. It's been subducted away. As you can guess this wasn't the most
satisfying of explanations. Basically just lift up the edge of the continent
and sweep the evidence underneath. You can imagine those people who weren't very
keen on this hypothesis were really not impressed at all. So basically the
evidence has been subducted away. How very convenient. However there was
evidence of the crater that we didn't know about and it came from quite a way
before the possibility of an impact causing the death of the dinosaurs was
even known about. It was in 1951 when the Mexican state-owned company Penmax was
drilling off the coast of Mexico around the Yucatan Peninsula. First of all as
they were drilling they went through the rocks that they expected. Those are
limestones, calcium carbonate rocks. The deeper they drilled though the stranger
the rocks became. They started to see evidence of fracturing and melting of
the rocks and at the very lowest levels of the drill core the rocks were
completely melted. They dismissed it. It's just another igneous rock at depth.
Don't worry about it. Our job is looking for oil. Move on. And the coals were
mostly forgotten about until 1978. And then a geophysicist Antonio Camargo and Glenn
Perrifield who were both working for the company were looking for structures that
which might indicate the presence of oil that could be exploited and they were
using various geophysical imaging techniques to peer below the surface
sediments and see where those structures were. They were intrigued by a large
circular structure that they imaged using gravity and magnetic analyses around
the coastline of Yucatan. They were prevented though from releasing the
data due to company confidentiality until 1981. Coincidentally the same year
that Alvarez and Co published their paper about a possible impact. This
actually is the crater. It's about 112 miles across. All the evidence we talked
about so far or the tech types and the shock quartz all get thicker to this
structure. As I've already said it is now in the oceans at least mostly covered
over with sediment. The southern wall though is picked up by a series of sink
holes and caves in the limestone rocks. As the crater formed the rocks kind of
flexed and opened up lots of fishes parallel to the walls of the crater
which have subsequently been exploited by water. The 1951 drill cores were from
the impact crater. They were recording broken up and fractured rock not igneous
rock. They are recording melting that was caused at ground zero. Analysis of the
crater suggests a fairly shallow entry around about 20 to 30 degrees into the
atmosphere of this body. Any more shallow and we might still have dinosaurs
with us today. It might have skipped out of the atmosphere. The rock that we're
looking at was probably about six miles in size and again for me I really can't
figure that in my head. So again think of Mount Everest suddenly being slammed
into the Yucatan Peninsula. The crater is called the Chicksalub crater and that
is named for a village that just sits on the edge of the crater. Incidentally the
translation from the Mayan is Tail of the Devil. Further evidence is found though
as well. Remember when I was talking about the Permotriassic extinction event
and we have those possible craters but no evidence of the material that was
thrown out of it. The ejector well we find large blankets of ejector
associated with this particular structure. A layer of fractured rock that
was excavated in the explosion. The image you can see here is a typical layer of
ejector from the Yucatan Peninsula. Some of the blocks in these ejector
horizons can be house sized close to the impact crater itself. The impacting
body entered from the southeast which means that most of that rock being
excavated the ejector went out towards the northwest and Texas is blanketed
with a thick layer of crater debris. The energy released is about 6.2 times 10
to the 7 tons of TNT. Again I can't wrap my head around a number that big it's
just a number with lots of zeros after it so if you want to kind of an analogy
for it take all the nuclear weapons that existed in the late 1970s multiplied
them many many times put them all in the same area retire to a great distance
and set them all off at the same time or take the most powerful human bomb ever
made at 50 megatons and multiplied that yield by 2 million times. When you're
talking about that kind of an explosion you don't just fracture or melt rock in
that explosion when it impacts into the surface you physically vaporize it you
turn it to gas. It's estimated that around about 62 cubic kilometers of rock
was literally vaporize in a flash. So what would the effects of this incredible
event be on the biosphere? So what was it like on the last day of the Cretaceous?
Well it's been said that maybe even before the impact there might have been
small meteorites ahead of the main one perhaps the dinosaurs if they've had the
wits about them could have seen the tell-tale science that something bad was
happening shooting stars passing through the night sky but on the day if you were
close enough the first thing you would have heard would have noticed was a
massive sonic boom as it ended into the atmosphere then a detonation a pulse of
intense heat and light vaporizing all that's close by any organic material
that is further away would just start to spontaneously combust. The earth would
ring like a bell with seismic energy and the shockwave from that explosion would
carry superheated rock debris and molten material right around the globe
effectively it would light fires and deposit all that ejector that we found
in Mexico and the southern states. Of course also we know that we're impacting
into the ocean here so it would have generated the largest tsunami seen in
over 600 million years you can imagine the scene can't you in the extent of
the devastation. This is only the start of the impact story though for example if
dinosaurs were far enough away from the impact they might have survived in fact
it's likely that some dinosaurs did survive the initial blast it's
practically very likely but the impact event wasn't over yet this was just the
initial fireworks. Millions of tons of dust and debris have now been thrown up
into the atmosphere some of it is very fine and that's going to stay
suspended in the atmosphere perhaps for many months it's going to cause the
earth to cool it's also going to cause photosynthesis to stop it's a
cretaceous nuclear winter. Eventually though in this particular event the
dust would clear that dust falling to the earth of course is what produces that
fine layer of clay that's rich in iridium that Alvarez would study but even
after the dust has settled things would still be very bad for any survivors.
Firstly you'd had the death of so many plants you had the fireball of course and
then times of cold and darkness plants would be suffering quite badly and might
not recover for a long time so they would been removed to a large extent and
you'd probably see a severe collapse of ecosystems. Herbivore was star for lack
of food then of course the carnivores would follow. Also a lot of that rock
vapor that was vaporized that rock that was vaporized was limestone calcium
carbonate. You can tell this partly from the local geology of where the meteorite
impacted around Yucatan but also from the geochemistry of what are called of
the microspherals. They tell us that the rock that was being melted was
limestone and when you vaporize limestone you get carbon dioxide. Climate
was flip-flopping rapidly from cold dark conditions for months perhaps to hot
conditions that might have lasted for decades or perhaps even longer. Additional
stress on what might have already been a shocked biosphere. Even worse the high
yield detonation would physically burn the air combining oxygen and nitrogen to
form oxides of nitrogen. Those would become dissolved in water in the
atmosphere and then fall to the earth as dilute nitric acid further polluting the
soils killing off more plants and impacting the base of the food chain
even more. You see the biosphere is a bit like this. It's a bit like a house of
cards. It stands on its base and that base are mostly photosynthetic plank
life. If it collapse then everything else will fall in on it and by the time
that this particular catastrophe was complete 50% of the species on the earth
would be gone. Well is impact the only cause of the extinction event? Well impact
is very compelling and very widely accepted but still a somewhat uneasy
uneasy with an impact only extinction hypothesis. Some forms such as the
micro plankton and the dinosaurs correlate exactly with the extinction
event but other groups were already in decline for example the ammonites were
already dwindling. The Cretaceous biosphere has been suggested therefore was
already stressed but what was causing that stress? Well the possible bogeyman
was similar to a lot of other extinction events that we've mentioned. It was a
mantle plume and more flood volcanism this time in India. This is an image of
the Deccan traps in India. Each of those layers is another basalt lava flow. It's
not as large as the Siberian traps but it would have covered at least half of
the Indian subcontinent. We know that volcanic gasses can be associated with
both global clue cooling and global warming effects so the popular opinion
even though it still favors the chixelab impact as being a major contributor
to the extinction event other things were still going seriously wrong there at
the end of the Cretaceous. So in conclusion it's likely that the Cretaceous
biosphere may have already been stressed by volcanic activity. It might be why
we're seeing the dwindling of the ammonites who are such an incredibly
successful group up until the end of the Cretaceous. The KP impact therefore
represents the final nail in the coffin. It removed many of the most
magnificent and wonderful creatures that have probably ever lived the
dinosaurs of course but if the dinosaur origin of birds holes true it's
possible that the KP extinction only witnessed the extinction of non avian
dinosaurs. If so be careful in the park there could be dinosaurs about. In the
next lecture we're going to examine some of the creatures that would
eventually inherit the earth from the dinosaurs of course those are the mammals.
