From 1870 to 1890, the era is generally unjustly called the age of Bismarck.
He was the dominant force of that age, especially since he introduced a new means of diplomacy,
alliances in time of peace, intended to be defensive to isolate France and to prevent
French revenge.
The implications later after Bismarck's death, unfortunately, were mainly negative.
From the 1880s until about 1905 or so, we will cover the radically expanded age of the
new European imperialism, questioning what was new about that imperialism as it ravaged
most of Africa and also many parts of Asia as well.
Serving some say as a safety valve for European energy, and others say as one of the primary
causes of World War I.
The collapse of the Bismarckian alliance system after 1890 and the emergence of Wilhelminian,
Kaiser Wilhelm II, Weltpolitik, World Politics, was a tragedy for Germany and for Europe.
Bismarck understood that Germany was strong enough already and more might become too much.
By 1907, instead of Germany being part of an alliance with a series of states isolating
France, fear of Germany had created a coalition of France, Britain and Russia versus an Austro-German
core alliance, Italy actually allied with Germany but actually being already closer
with France and England.
The breakdown of Austro-Russian cooperation in the Balkans, the parallel increased support
of Germany for Austria, of Russia for Serbia and enemy of Austria, of France for Russia
brought all of the powers to the possibility of ultimate conflict and crisis.
Growing militarism accompanied by a number of violence-prone cultural assumptions, including
a belief that war would be short and therefore cost effective, made the likelihood a reality
in July, August of 1914.
Instead of a brief war that many expected came industrial mass slaughter, verging on genocide,
the greatest tragedy in all of modern European history, this brought on the Russian revolution
by pushing the Russian people beyond what they could possibly bear.
It brought the United States finally into World War I and these two events symbolize
really the political collapse of modern Europe, the modern European state system as it had
existed really from the 18th century and it brought on the beginning of the world in
which we have lived collectively.
Some concluding comments.
In all segments of this course, we will proceed from the general to the specific and from
a series of overview lectures or topical lectures into a series of case study lectures
emphasizing the great powers.
Although the material is inherently complicated, I assume no prior knowledge on your part,
so don't worry about it.
Prepare to be somewhat confused, especially in the beginning, before you become comfortable
and then you'll become enlightened.
The selected course materials and additional suggested readings have been chosen carefully.
The more you engage them, the more you will get.
And they are also very, very carefully layered.
From an overview text to primary source readings to deeper documents to further interpretations
and even to the materials in your guidebooks, use those guidebooks.
I worked hard on them.
Leave them.
Look at them carefully.
Look at the maps.
Think about it a bit, if you can, before you engage me in these conversations.
You will understand our world and your place in it much better having stayed with this
course.
One last additional series of comments.
A final word about our common journey.
I don't claim to fully comprehend the past or to describe it accurately.
What I'm offering are approximations, best guess, analyses, and models, rather than actual
truth.
We can't really know the past.
We hardly know the present, and we only partly understand ourselves and our relationship
with our surroundings.
Still, the search for the actual past is a self-conscious search for truth.
I view it as a secularized spiritual quest of the highest order, since understanding
the past on some meaningful level, recovering as much of our collective memory as is possible
can give additional meaning to our lives, a sense of balance and perspective that facilitates
civilized behavior, the ability to empathize and not to take ourselves too seriously.
Lastly, unknowingly or knowingly, every historian wears colored glasses.
Situations, contexts, prejudices that sometimes cloud our vision and sometimes enable us to
see more clearly.
As far as I can tell, mine are male, Jewish, middle class, liberal, and American, and even
being an expert on modern European history, which makes me emphasize its importance even
more so than the history of other areas.
Since we will not see each other face to face and you have an advantage over me in this
context, it's only fair for me to let you know these things.
I work hard to transcend my context and my limitations.
I do not claim to always succeed.
What is your context?
What are your limitations?
Beware and let's grow and learn together.
Thank you.
Thank you.
