Lecture 1 The Long 19th Century
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
My name is Robert Wiener, and I've been a professor of history at Lafayette College
for longer than I would like to remember, in fact, just over 35 years.
Today, we're going to begin a series of 36 brief encounters on behalf of the teaching
company dealing with the issue of the long 19th century, 1789 to 1917.
The question immediately arises, why 1789 to 1917?
Other scholars might choose 1815 to 1914, or even 1780 to 1919.
I've chosen these dates not because they're absolute, but because, to me, they represent
the best ways of encapsulating the long 19th century, which I think really begins with
the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789, the French Revolution being the most powerful
political force of the first half of the long 19th century, and even beyond.
And because 1917, during World War I, was the time period in which the Russian Revolution
broke out, two Russian revolutions, in fact, in 1917, leading to a Bolshevik victory, but
at the same time, the United States entered World War I on behalf of the Allies, tilting
the balance overwhelmingly on behalf of the Allies, and bringing the war to a final closure.
Some scholars, many scholars, in fact, believe that the dual revolutions of the Russian and
the American entry involve what is known in a book by a historian, Hia Holborn, as the
political collapse of Europe, when modern Europe first lost complete control over its
own destiny, and in that sense, Bolshevik Russia and the United States are both viewed
as somewhat extra-European mechanisms, as indeed they should be given the nature of
the history of most of Europe during the course of the long 19th century.
The long 19th century was, above all, a period of European modernization and change.
And European modernization and change always introduces the themes of continuity and change,
and throughout the entire drama of this course, we will be following the themes of continuity
and change always in tension with one another.
Since most of these, both of these massive historical processes, the French Revolution
in France and the Industrial Revolution in Great Britain, which was the power level revolution
with the French Revolution, occurred in the West, the process generally moved from Western
to Eastern Europe and from Northern to Southern Europe.
That is, political modernization in France and economic modernization and political
modernization in Great Britain occur first, and then pass across Central Europe as they
spread, reaching Russia at the end of the 19th century.
And what that also generally means is that the nations that modernized earlier and more
successfully had an enormous advantage over those nations which modernized later and less
successfully because modernization in the 19th century equaled power, political power,
and above all, military power as well.
So there were radical gaps between those powers which modernized and those which did not,
and there were equally gaps between areas within even modernizing societies, between
urban areas and rural areas, between those that modernized quickly and successfully and
those that did not.
The modernization process was also inherently destabilizing.
Modernization was an agent of change.
Now since modernization itself changed power relationships between classes and states,
not only did the process begin to take on a momentum of its own inherently once it began,
but because those who modernized successfully did best and those who modernized less successfully
were often humiliated and left behind.
Other societies were forced to enter the process of modernization whether they wished
to or whether they did not wish to.
That was true for Tsarist Russia at the end of the 19th century just as it was true for
Japan which was quote unquote opened up by the United States in the 1850s.
Japan is an example, the best example of non-European successful modernization leading to adaptation
and change so that modernizing non-European Japan is capable of defeating poorly modernizing
Russia in the Russo-Japanese war in the beginning of the 20th century or at the end of the long
19th century as we're calling it.
The long 19th century is also known as the heyday or the zenith of modern European history.
