Whether or not Louis XIV said, I am the state, he could have said it because he would have
meant it.
I am the state, the state is me, it is an extension of my person.
A century later, Frederick the Great said, I am the first servant of the state.
At least he understood that there was a differential between his person and the state, but in practice
it didn't make much difference.
Frederick the Great did pretty much what he wanted to do, and most states were monarchies
claiming divine right legitimacy, usually supported by the aristocrats and the middle
classes and certainly by the clergy and the religious authorities in those societies.
Although most monarchs recognized they were subject to some external authority, whether
it was God's authority or natural law, again they viewed their states as an extension of
themselves as proprietary and usually there was no separation between their private income
and the state's wealth.
Again the majority of most people were subjects rather than citizens.
By the 18th century however several important states were more constitutional in nature
with some form of truly shared governments and promulgated law.
The most important of these was Great Britain, which was the best example of a limited or
constitutional monarchy that developed after the glorious or bloodless revolution of 1688.
There was some blood but not much.
Holland was the best example of a republic, a series of elite governments but without
a monarch.
Most Europeans were also enmeshed in a very traditional culture, a very traditional civilization.
Most people were profoundly religious and superstitious as well as illiterate.
Even most of the clergy, especially the village priests were barely literate, deeply superstitious.
The overwhelming majority of people lived in a very localized and narrow cultural environment
based on family, clan, village, face-to-face relationships, anyone outside of that local
area even if coming from a village 10 miles away was a farner, suspected, sometimes mistreated.
However, the 18th century was also the last era in what is called early modern European
history.
It was a time of accelerating change which had actually begun during the Italian Renaissance
in the beginning of the 14th century.
The Renaissance lasted from some time in the early 14th century until the middle of the
16th century to place in parts of Italy and then spread to northern Europe, western Europe
and central Europe.
It placed a greater emphasis on classical learning, textual criticism, secularism, individualism
and humanism.
Now let's get one thing clear.
The overwhelming majority of people who lived during the Renaissance still had relatively
traditional religious beliefs, but what they chose to emphasize and to study, at least
primarily in the Italian Renaissance, was the classics and man and their emphasis on
the well-balanced individual, warrior and thinker in all ways.
And their emphasis on the individual searching for truth using the most modern linguistic
techniques that were possible at that time represented a considerable change.
Now again, the people who took an active part in the Renaissance overwhelmingly were the
elites, those who were wealthy.
In fact, in most of early modern European society you basically have two groups of people,
those who were more wealthy and those who were poor and those who were poor didn't have
time for learning and those who were wealthy had more time for learning.
The Reformation, the Protestant Reformation which began in 1517 and processes until the
middle of the religious wars of the mid 17th century.
The Reformation destroyed one of the main areas of unity of medieval civilization and
that was the general medieval Catholic church, the unity of religious beliefs.
The Reformation shattered that beyond all possible reconciliation.
