It needs to be understood at the same time that Burke, a conservative, would have been
liberal among many continental Europeans, because what he was trying to conserve was
a British system of government, which was already a moderately liberal system of government
of constitutional monarchy, but to real 19th century continental conservatives, even that
was partially anathema, depending on how conservative they were.
So that Burke is the best statement for 19th century utilitarian pragmatic conservatives.
Many others still believe in divine right monarchy.
They may have used Burkeian ideas as a best self-defense, but Tsar Nicholas II, even
to the day he was finally executed, believed he had been placed on the earth by God to
serve as the divine right monarch of holy Russia.
Significant strides were made toward formulating powerful arguments for equal rights for women,
although ironically here, both the revolutionary and Napoleonic eras saw women's rights neglected
indeed overturned, and male dominance made part of promulgated law, especially during
the Napoleonic Code.
So in achieving their own liberty, men did both metaphorically and directly enslave women
for another hundred years or so.
Even in England, women wouldn't gain more absolute rights over their own self, their
children, their property, and England was of course more advanced than most other states.
But we do get powerful early feminist statements from Olampe de Gouge in France and Mary Wollstonecraft
in England, statements about women's equality that would not finally be achieved until after
World War I, and indeed until after World War II, and that famous Napoleonic Code, surely
one of the emperor's lasting contributions to European constitutionalism, unfortunately
reinforced in stronger form male dominance, owing to women's natural, biological inferiority
and maintaining social peace.
The concept of modern nationalism was also dramatically advanced, both in concept and
reality by the revolutionary ideas, and such practices as universal military conscription.
Generally liberal in tone at the beginning, some say nationalism began like sleeping beauty
and ended up like Frankenstein's monster, liberal in tone because it stressed popular
sovereignty, citizenship, and national self-determination of some type.
That was the form of European nationalism that tended to predominate during the first
half of the 19th century, but in any case nationalism became the most powerful secular
ideology of the 19th century.
In addition, revolution itself as a just and efficacious way to achieve historical progress
also became very, very much spread during this process and during this period of time.
Even as millions of Europeans were seeing gains that had been made, being taken away,
and conservative legitimists were attempting to re-impose something like the old order
once again, revolution was seen as a process and as a legitimate procedure by those who
opposed this having been done.
As one scholar of the period talking about the succeeding age of revolution in which
so many revolutions occurred in Europe between 1820 and 1848 said, and he is one of the readings
I'm suggesting that you take a look at, LCB Seaman, Seaman says it's idle to consider
the causes of the various revolutions in the period after 1815 without realizing that the
major cause of them all was the French Revolution of 1789.
Parallel to the French Revolution of 1789 came the first industrial revolution in Great
Britain, a process of tremendous power, which as Hobbesbaum says directly, was probably
the most important event in world history at any rate since the invention of agriculture
and cities.
