Although many other scholars such as C.A. Bailey, in a new book, The Birth of the Modern World, 1780-1914,
just published this year, have shown that Hobbes-Balm's interpretation of the development of modern civilization worldwide
was too Eurocentric. And remember, I alerted you that my view was Eurocentric because that's what I studied.
And that Europeans were also reacting to developments worldwide rather than instigating them exclusively.
There's always an ebb and flow, a cultural interchange.
The overall power of Hobbes-Balm's analysis is a useful way of viewing the development of modern civilization even today.
Indeed, if you want to take that even further and study the short 20th century, which I also teach, one of my favorite ways of doing that
is to take British Marxist historian Hobbes-Balm and his additional book on 20th century world history,
juxtapose it with Paul Johnson, British conservative historian, and use the two as a way to see how this 19th century paradigm continued
and was changed during the course of the short 20th century.
In our next set of lectures on the French Revolution, we will be looking at how the Hobbes-Balm thesis works
under a microscope more carefully, with more detail, and thinking through how each of the particular phases of the French Revolution
led a peculiar legacy for 19th century European thought, aspiration, and behavior.
The Constitution of 1791 again primarily gave us a model and a legacy of 19th century European liberalism.
The Constitution of 1793 under the power of the Jacobins gave us a model of what a constitution would look like under radicalism or democracy.
Universal male suffrage, the right to work, the right to subsist, and the right to rebel even were written into the Constitution of 1793,
all the while excluding women.
And then the Constitution of 1795 basically returned to the Constitution of 1791,
which was the core legacy that the French Revolution bequeathed to the immediate governmental structure of the post-1789 era.
Following that, we'll be looking more carefully at the way in which Napoleon took, molded, expanded, and detracted from some of those core ideas of the French Revolution.
And thereafter, in greater detail, we'll look at the process by which the Industrial Revolution developed, its major impact,
and how the French and the Industrial Revolution combined, set the framework for European history, European society, European life, European culture during the first half of the 19th century.
Establishing some people's dreams and other people's nightmares, some people's hopes, and other people's deepest fears.
I look forward to being with you. Thank you.
