Lecture 3, The Age of Revolution, 1789 to 1848.
During our last series of comments together, we spoke about the Ancien Régime or the Old
Régime, delineating the ways in which European society, even during the late 18th century,
was still relatively traditional in nature, except for the more urban areas and among
the wealthier in those urban areas who had become more engaged in a more modernized segment
of Europe's economy and who had become deeply engaged in the intellectual movement of the
18th century, the broad intellectual movement of the 18th century known as the Enlightenment.
Today, we're going to do an introductory set of comments on the first of the ages of the
19th century, the Age of Revolution from 1789 to 1848, with a semicolon called the Hobbes
bound thesis, perhaps the only time during this whole series of commentaries that I'm
going to subtitle on age by the name of an historian who happened to have written about
that particular time period, perhaps it's because Hobbes bound was one of the first
of the great scholars whose works I read when I entered graduate school in 1965. Interestingly,
Hobbes bound is perhaps the greatest of the European historians of the 20th century, writing
about the 19th century and the 20th century, and he's a British Marxist historian whose
work is so subtle that I've used his work in classes without the students realizing
that he is in fact a Marxist historian. And even though I have not personally been tempted
by Marxism, even though I've been influenced by it, Hobbes bound continues even today to
be a Marxist scholar long after the collapse of the Soviet Union, but his realm of history
is simply brilliant, comprehensive, and on a worldwide scale. And most importantly for
the comments today, he is the first really to recognize and to put in place a powerful
way of understanding the first half of the 19th century, and then indeed of the whole
process of modernization thereafter, using what he calls the dual or twin revolution
thesis in a book called The Age of Revolution 1789 to 1848, first published in 1962. Hobbes
bound first realized how the peculiar interaction of the French Revolution and the Industrial
Revolution acted as the midwives of modern European history, and then indeed through
the process of imperialism, which was the umbilical cord between Europe and the rest
of the world, world history as well. And it's a fascinating way of viewing the development
of civilization globally. The French Revolution and the Industrial Revolution undermine transitional
society wherever they spread in Europe or worldwide. Initially the French Revolution
was the more important of the two, casting a shadow over much of the 19th century, and
especially the years between 1789 and 1848. Now many scholars obviously understood the
importance and the power of the French Revolution, but what Hobbes Bomb did is to center in on
those peculiar ways in which the French Revolution was different from other late 18th century
revolutions, including the American Revolution, and other revolutions that occurred in fact
during the first half of the 19th century. France when mobilized was the most powerful
state on the continent, both materially and culturally. Remember again, the elites, especially
the aristocrats of most of the other countries, except for Great Britain, prefer to speak
French than their own language. Moreover, the French Revolution became immeasurably more
radical than all of the other late 18th century revolutions, including those of the 13 colonies.
