Others have stressed that the French institutions were simply rotten, not functioning well,
in need of some real updating.
Now, at the same time, there were other societies whose institutions were not more developed,
more well developed than those of France, and one can think of Russia and Austria.
But the difficulty in France did pertain most directly to the method of tax collection,
in which the two wealthiest groups, the first estate, the clergy, and the second, the aristocracy,
were exempt from any taxes, which meant that the middle class and sometimes the very poorest,
when they could at least, paid more taxes than perhaps they should have been doing.
In either case, the taxes were collected inefficiently, and sometimes corruptly, by tax farmers.
So much so, that on the eve of the revolution, half of the revenues garnered were used to fund interest
on the accumulated debt, and it was becoming more and more difficult for the French state
to get loans, and they paid a high percent for those loans, double the percent that the British
or the Dutch paid, for example, at the same time.
However, as of 1740, this had not been the case, because the financial minister between 1726 and 1740
had actually left the monarchy a balanced budget by keeping expenditure in tow with requirements,
so that the issue, again, on a certain level, becomes political.
How much does a regime spend versus how much does it take in?
The problem becomes when there's a discrepancy between what you spend and what you take in.
Now, that discrepancy becomes most predominant when a regime enters into a series of wars,
and in fact, that is precisely what happened when the French monarchy in its colonial disputes
with Great Britain entered into three colonial wars between 1740 and 1783.
The first of these wars was the War of Austrian Succession between 1740 and 1748.
The second was the Seven Years' War or the Nine Years' War, the French and Indian War,
or the war that began between 1756 and 1763 on the continent.
And the most important thing about these wars is that France lost both of them,
losing many of its colonies to the British.
Now, this did two things. On the one hand, it was very costly.
On the other hand, it took away from national legitimacy,
because the very most important thing that any regime needs to do is to defend the state against its enemies,
and Great Britain was an enemy, and France did not effectively defend the state, the patrimony, the colonies,
and this took away from the legitimacy of the monarchy.
Plans for reforming the tax code were under consideration during the regime of Louis XV,
which ended in 1774, and also during the regime of Louis XVI after 1774 until the eve of the French Revolution.
These plans, posited by successive finance ministers, continued to be discussed throughout until the very eve of the Revolution,
and were in fact the reasons why the Assembly of Notables was called in 1787 and the Estates General in 1789.
Factions around the king and factions within the Parlement de Paris, the Parisian law court,
which had to register these laws, fighting one another and the weakness of the king in seeing a straight path
and supporting his ministers, almost all of whom came up with similar policies that the nobles in the clergy had to pay taxes,
caused the regime to fail to deal with this increasingly burdensome pressing issue.
That's when the last of the wars broke the bank.
France's support for the American Revolution and its victorious revenge against the British,
between 1778 when France joined in 1783, not only finally bankrupted the monarchy,
but made the vocabulary of the Enlightenment and American Revolutioner ideas the rage of the day.
