The Allies then entered Paris at the end of March, 1814, which was followed by Napoleon's
abdication and his comfortable exile first to the island of Elba in the Mediterranean.
Negotiating with Prince Talleyrand, who now was switching sides, the Allies wisely agreed
on a non-punitive treaty for France.
Even though nationalism was being born during this age, it was not yet an age of complete
nationalism.
The aristocratic monarchies did not have to worry about public opinion when they restored
France to what it was, and in fact even allowed it to have some of its early conquests.
I mean Louis XVIII was placed on the throne, but he accepted a charter, guaranteeing shared
governance and many of the most important gains of the revolution.
And of course this is what is so important about keeping those gains all the way throughout
even with a monarchical restoration, the clock could not be simply turned back.
In this first phase, France kept the early territorial gains of 1792, which is known
as its natural frontiers.
However, alluding the British, secretly Napoleon made a dramatic return to France.
Incredibly the army sent to subdue him when he landed, melted in front of him, including
marshals who embraced him when they were supposed to arrest him.
The person's magnetism and charisma must have been extraordinary, but more overwhelmingly
outnumbered.
Napoleon was defeated on June the 18th, 1815 at Waterloo outside of Brussels, packed off
this time to hard exile on St. Helena in the South Atlantic, and apparently poisoned six
years later in 1821.
Louis XVIII returned to France, now stripped of all of its territorial gains, but staying
whole and the French overwhelmingly were mostly glad to finally be at peace.
And so was the rest of Europe.
At peace, the Allies reached an intelligent post-war settlement at the Congress of Vienna.
However, Europe would never be the same again.
A number of revolutionary changes were maintained in France and even in some parts of Germany
and elsewhere.
Constitutional and national ways of thinking could not be erased even if they could be temporarily
suppressed.
At the same time, parallel to what was going on in France, more subtle, slower changes
had begun to take place in England from the 1760s on the early phase of what's known as
the first British Industrial Revolution.
And by 1815, this change in England was advancing more quickly and it would soon spread to the
continent as well, certainly by the 1830s in Belgium first and then in France and then
in other parts of Germany and Northern Italy and several parts of the Austrian Empire,
Bohemia and Moravia, Czechoslovakia essentially.
In other words, by the time that the Napoleonic reign was ended, but still the impact of the
French Revolution was being felt everywhere, the fuller impact of the British Industrial
Revolution joined it to be the midwives of modern European history for the rest of the
19th century and indeed thereafter.
And so in our next set of comments, we will turn to the second major and even more massive
development in human history, the First Industrial Revolution.
Thank you.
