Significantly, the major property changes that had occurred during the revolution were
also maintained, and this further assured the support of most Frenchmen, including large
members of the middle class who had acquired property, but including also most of the peasants
who had acquired more absolute rights over to their small property, which was just as
important and even more important to them because it was a question of survival.
Equality under the law, another major revolutionary gain, was also maintained and was of extreme
importance.
During this early phase, a number of other state-supporting institutions were created,
such as some expanded secondary education and a university system for the elites as
well as the establishment of the Legion of Honor, especially for promotion in state service
and especially for military service.
Again with his cynicism, Napoleon said it's by baubles that men are governed, and he gave
out over 30,000 of those baubles to people he thought were deserving.
During the early years, France was able to defeat all of its military opponents fairly
easily, even getting the British to sign an unequal peace of Amiens in 1802.
France was now not only at peace, but in a dominant position in Europe, having made considerable
gains along all of its borders, and remember, if those borders are in Switzerland, if they
are in Belgium, if they are in Western Germany, if they are in Northern and Southern Italy,
wherever the French go, their new laws and ways of doing things go with them.
Since a large part of the war costs, at least in the early phase, were paid by the vanquished
and by armies that lived off the land, and since security and order had been restored
and maintained in France, the early phase of combat had been quote-unquote cost effective
and largely very popular in France.
This was not always to be the case, and certainly not at the end of Napoleon's regime.
However, the second phase of his rule from the early years of the Emperor's ship until
the Grand Army invaded Russia in June of 1812 can be divided into two periods.
Between 1804 and 1808, Napoleon continued to experience great success in almost all
areas.
These were the years during which most of the articles of the famous Napoleonic Code
were devised and implemented.
Often seen as the most meaningful gain of the revolution because it encapsulated all
of the previous gains, it in effect guaranteed equality under the law for all men and the
support nation of women, property-like.
It guaranteed contracts, including contracts over women, and the security of property,
and it guaranteed careers in theory open to talent rather than to preferred birth, and
it was many volumes and excruciatingly detailed, and its positive elements were really positive,
and its negative elements were negative.
These laws implemented for free men in French colonies, slavery was reimposed where it had
existed earlier in the French colonies, and in many areas occupied by France or satellite
to it, these laws became the normative goals for male constitutionalists for most of the
19th century, and we need to remember there were already female constitutionalists also
fighting to get their voices heard at the same time, and not having a very good time
of it, although their arguments make complete sense as we look at them today, and we can
wonder at how modern their arguments were, and how sensible they were, and how much
men did not want to go along with them.
Protestants and Jews maintained equal rights, although Jews were shown both the carrot and
the stick by Napoleon.
