Britain had larger farms, more efficient and intelligent forms of cultivating them,
crop rotation, the use of fertilizer and nitrogen fixating crops,
and of course greater agrarian productivity led to higher profits,
and therefore even to more liquid capital.
However, greater agrarian productivity also led to the possibility and the reality
of an increased population and an increased labor supply,
and that labor supply is another one of those essentials for any industrial revolution.
So the agrarian revolution not only facilitated a significant increase in population,
but the capacity to support an expanding urban industrial labor force as well.
Britain was well endowed with such natural resources as coal and iron ore.
Britain already had a relatively well developed internal transportation system,
comparatively better roads, lots of rivers always being close to the ocean,
and so even its smaller size gave it advantage in terms of movement
and in terms of the conjunction of all of these separate forces coming together at one point
and feeding off of each other.
By the mid-18th century, British artisans and inventors were producing a series
of technological advantages, advances, mainly relating to the manufacture of textiles,
while they and other entrepreneurs were putting them to good and wider industrial use,
especially with steam engines and then later with railroads.
So names like Hargraves and Arkwright and Crompton and Cartwright in terms of textiles,
Watt and Bolton and Steffensen in terms of steam engines and the like,
and other industrial processes, and then names like Adam Smith and Malthus and Ricardo,
people who stepped back and thought about what was the meaning of all of these changes that were occurring.
It's not accidental that Wealth of Nations, this great economic tract,
was published by an Englishman in 1776.
So the same was soon to be true in the mysteries of steam power,
which had already been true in terms of the mysteries of expanding textile production
and they were linked in textiles and railroads,
which were the joint sinews of British industrial supremacy.
In fact, most of the First Industrial Revolution occurred mainly in textiles,
in cottons and woolens and things that poorer people also needed,
and they were transported by railroads, which for industrial use began in 1820
and then expanded during the 1820s and those for passengers were first employed in 1830.
In that particular area, the continental Europeans did catch up fairly quickly.
Germany had its first railroads in 1835, but the British still had a lead even in that domain.
And if you want to think about the importance of the railroad and all of this,
pick up any of Charles Dickens' novels, the Iron Horse dominates the age.
Britain first used steam for cross-Atlantic voyages in 1816
and the use of steam boats spread to the continent in the 1820s and thereafter.
Although scholars now emphasize the gradual nature of early industrial changes,
even in Britain, their aggregate impact was becoming important toward the end of the 18th century
and dramatic during the second quarter of the 19th century.
While in 1780, the total value of British trade was perhaps slightly above French trade,
in 1840, Britain's trade was double France's, although France's population was still basically double Britain's.
This signifies a considerable indeed a radical change.
In 1850, Britain was producing about five times the amount of coal
as France and all the states of the Germanic Confederation combined, including Austria,
and was in fact utilizing more steam power, double the amount of steam power as the rest of Europe combined.
