Why do you interfere with free contract between two people?
The answer would be that a boy of immature age cannot secure himself from injury,
and the state is his guardian.
But the property of the poor and young lies in his health and strength and skill,
in the health both of his body and of his mind.
In other words, before 1850 you're beginning to get not only extra-parliamentary beacons
and unions beginning to form, but more responsible, articulate people
within the British Parliament coming out and saying,
this needs to be regulated.
The state needs to get involved, let's say, far, fair, be damned,
at least in this particular instance, even though let's say fair
remained one of the secular religions of Great Britain until after World War I.
Even more important, however, was the simple fact of increasing productivity,
making possible both profit and better living conditions.
The worst thing in a society is disruption caused by rioting, striking,
breaking machinery, and the British figured out a way during the course of the 19th century
to modify and lessen those three things, although they still continued to happen.
If the first phase of the Industrial Revolution was largely a British affair,
during the 1830s and 1840s, it spread to parts of Belgium and France,
the Rhineland and the Ruhr in the Germanies.
Silesia also had become part of Prussia, Bohemia, and Moravia,
which were part of the Austro-Hungarian or Austrian Empire, now Czechoslovakia.
In many cases, aware of the British lead,
continental governments played a greater role in stimulating the process,
particularly in areas with potential military application,
as in the transportation sector, or even in banking and the beginning of protective tariffs,
or anything having to do with military hardware.
The British had an incredible lead in 1850, and this world was more and more interconnected,
and others were aware of that, and their awareness radically expanded
during the British First Universal Exposition in 1851 with that magnificent crystal palace
that showed the world where Britain had come and what they better do
if they want to keep pace in this competitive state system.
The Central European and Western European states understood it quickly, caught on,
and began to press ahead in these areas.
Russia did not because they understood also implicitly that this industrialization
would change the whole very fabric and assumptions of their entire civilization,
based primarily on agrarianism and on tradition and on continuity.
Still, after the 1850s, the British lead was monumental,
and the predominant questions that faced the continent before 1850,
especially in Western and Central Europe, were the unresolved issues
from the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era.
In other words, if in the 1830s and even more in the 1840s,
growing urbanization, the growth of the beginning of factories,
the transference of industry and railroads,
became issues of concern and change in Western Europe,
the most burning issues in Western Europe between 1815 and the revolutions of 1848
were still the unresolved issues of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era,
issues of constitutionalism, issues of nationalism and national identity,
issues of equal opportunity, career-open the talent,
and what place would the middle class have in society during this whole process.
Thank you.
