The famous Monroe Doctrine is also part of that.
Rebellions in Latin America after 1815, especially in the 1820s.
The European states were considering how to overcome those rebellions and restore these
colonies to their rightful European masters.
We issued a Monroe Doctrine, but what backed it up was the power of the British fleet who
wanted no part and made it clear that they did not want and would not countenance any
part of a reconquest because their economic interests were then primarily involved in
maintaining their structure, the newer structure in Latin America.
Following the liberal French Revolution of 1830 in which Louis Philippe, sometimes known
as the bourgeois king or the citizen king, became a constitutional monarch, the French
often sided with the British against the more conservative, Austro-Prussian alliance.
But we should not make too much of this ideology in politics during this time period.
The British and the French also quarreled over issues in Egypt and the Ottoman Empire
so that their liberalism only brought them together just so far.
And politics was not that ideological during this age.
That would be one of the areas in which the revolutions of 1848 would add an additional
ideological resonance separating liberalism and conservatism in the great powers themselves.
However, old Europe could not simply be reconstructed by a series of diplomats meeting in Vienna
or even by a series of diplomats meeting occasionally thereafter.
Even the alliance between throne and altar, monarchy and church and aristocracy could
not always prevent change.
Change was there implicitly throughout and change and continuity and forces of change
and forces of continuity were always in tension and quite frequently during this era in direct
conflict.
The continued impact of the revolutionary legacy, ideas, experiences, myths, memories,
practitioners and the slow impact of industrial changes, far more dramatic in Great Britain
but after 1830 working their way into France and Belgium and Northern Italy, the roar of
the Rhineland Silesia Bohemia also made change and or conflict indeed both virtually inevitable.
Both internally and sometimes externally, European society was loosely divided between
the forces of change and the forces of order.
The active forces of order were symbolized most prominently by Metternich and his system
and it included the monarchs, the aristocrats, most of the clergy although there were liberal
clergy usually told to keep quiet especially on the continent and even more so in Austria,
Prussia and in Russia where this alliance was maintained throughout.
Although moderate conservatives more so in France and Britain accepted slow change, Metternichians
lumped any constitutional or national change into the same basket verboten forbidden and
what they didn't understand and this is really their weakness which is surprising given Metternich's
intelligence is by putting liberals and democrats and socialists and nationalists all in the
same basket, you can't co-opt any of them.
Forces were fairly moderate but they were no more accepted by Metternichans of then were
democrat socialists or radical nationalists so that by failing to distinguish between
their opponents they could not co-opt them they made conflict all the more likely indeed
it occurred.
Forces of order willingly used military and bureaucratic power to repress the forces of
change internally or elsewhere whenever possible.
