For example, Austria gave up the Austrian Netherlands, Belgium, to Holland, but took control of northern Italy, Lombardy and Venetia, a fair trade.
Monarchs were either returned to states or invented for them.
Austria, under Metternich's tutelage, for the whole era until 1848, which is why this era is justly known as the age of Metternich,
Austria was primarily responsible for overseeing security in the states of Italy, both in northern Italy and also in Naples and Sicily.
Austria and Russia, rather Prussia, would provide stability with respect to the settlements in the German states.
And a Germanic Bund was recreated, a confederation of 39 states in which Austria was always the president, and Prussia was always the vice president.
And they worked well together until 1848 generally, accepting that relationship because they had so much in common.
Austria, Prussia and Russia agreed on a settlement to maintain their annexations of Polish territory.
How easy it is to agree when what you're agreeing on doesn't really belong to you.
The powers also agreed more or less on several other mechanisms with which to ensure peace and to maintain the status quo.
The powers agreed to hold a series of congresses in order to further discuss issues and problems that might arise.
The powers formed a loosely defined concert of Europe, of the great powers for the same purpose.
And even after the concert of Europe really ceased to function by the Crimean War in any really important way, as late as the end of the century states when we're still discussing the concert of Europe in their diplomatic dispatches.
As I indicated earlier, the powers created a 39-member Germanic confederation, or a Bund, in order to stabilize the Germanic states where Napoleon had wreaked havoc.
Before the French Revolution, there had been over 300 separate states in Germany, everything from bishoprics to cities to full-sized states.
Napoleon took a look at that madness and reduced it to below 20. At Vienna, they re-established it at a nice number of 39.
Except for Great Britain, the powers placated the more mystical and romantic czar Alexander I, joining in his proposed Holy Alliance, adding a Christian additional dimension to the sacred tasks of peace and stability.
For the British, religious though they were, this was too corny, and they didn't want to be involved in it.
Most decisions reached at the Congress of Vienna helped facilitate a generation of peace between the great powers.
And indeed this peace between 1815 and 1848 is one of the most prominent markers of the entire era, which even held during the revolutions of 1848.
That tells us how much they had suffered from the continuous wars of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic era.
It was not just the wisdom at Vienna, but the clear understanding that war and revolution were to be avoided at almost any cost.
That helps understand how that peace was able to be maintained during the first half of the 19th century.
Still, not only were there disagreements between the powers, but meaningful and legitimate desires of many of the peoples of Europe whose feelings were ignored by the Viennese statesmen or the statesmen at Vienna,
especially with respect to constitutional and national issues.
And here we come to some of the negative elements and even hypocritical elements of the Congress of Vienna.
The feelings of the Belgians were not consulted, nor were the Czechs or the Hungarians or the Poles or the Serbs or the Greeks.
And the feeling of middle class liberals or Democrats for whom the French Revolution had represented hope and a future, they were not consulted either.
The British, who were far more liberal than any of the other continental powers, unsympathetic toward the repeated anti-revolutionary repressions, both in Europe and with respect to the rebellions in Latin America,
soon withdrew from the Congress system because they just really didn't want to be part of it.
Indeed,
