They used spies, they used censorship, they used militias, they used the army, they used
whatever they needed, and occasionally this even happened in England as in 1819 in the
Peterloo massacres when troops charged on horses, a crowd of people demonstrating the
reform of parliament, killing a number wounding 500 and leading the poet Shelley.
To pronounce, I saw the mask of death along the way it wore the face of Castle Ray.
So even in Great Britain, things like this happened, and all the more so in Italy and
in the states of Germany and in Poland.
Depending on the issue or the place, however, even artisans, peasants, workers, or members
of the middle class could also crave order, depending on how one defines it and depending
on what their self-interest was at that particular time.
For example, artisans who generally belong to guilds that protected their terms of labor
were not very happy about the newer mechanization of industry that was beginning to seep into
the continent.
In fact, they like to break those new machines because it cost them jobs.
This once they had some land wanted stability and less contact with the state.
So any group could be conservative or traditional at a particular moment in time.
But generally speaking, the active forces of change consisted of a larger array of elements,
mostly but not exclusively among expanding numbers of the middle class, which continued
to grow even when there wasn't predominant industrial change.
There was continued urban commercial expansion by and large during this time period, at least
until 1847 or so.
Great constitutional liberals, radical democrats, and even they were not so radical, not in
our terms.
Some early socialists sought constitutional changes along the lines of those suggested
earlier in the French Revolution or in Great Britain, and Great Britain continued to be
a model for this change as well.
France, usually liberal or radical, sought either independence from foreign occupiers
or in the case of Germans, middle class mainly and Italians, more middle class, a wider unification
of their compatriots either in a confederation or some form of union that would make Germany
look more like France and Great Britain and give it the power of France and Great Britain
defined by language, culture, and history, and sometimes also in more conservative nationalism
defined by ethnicity.
Middle class elements continued to seek jobs, careers opened to talent, not preserved for
petty nobles and great aristocrats.
Remember when aristocrats controlled the state, it was socialism for the rich or socialism
for the well-born, it was aristocrats and children of aristocrats and petty nobles
who got placement where harder working, newer learned members of the middle class couldn't
get access if they didn't have contacts or if they had improper opinions.
The poor sought more food always, they still lived on the margin, protection, removal of
repressive laws, in Central and Eastern Europe, removal of the remnants of feudalism or of
actual serfdom which continued to exist in Austria and parts of Russia and throughout
the Russian Empire where half the people were still serfs, slaves, bondage.
As a result of the obvious clash of interests and worldviews and the inability of conservatives
to accept in Great Britain to reach compromises, especially with the growing members of the
middle class, including merchants, lawyers, journalists, students, riots and or revolutions
repeatedly occurred throughout Europe between 1815 and 1848.
