On the other hand, it would allow them the freedom to migrate to cities enhancing and
facilitating the spread of a more fluid capitalist economy and a larger labor force necessary
for industrialization.
One of the problems of serfdom that was later realized in Russia at the same time is you
don't have a mobile labor force, it's harder to industrialize, it's harder to achieve economic
development.
And indeed, that's one of the reasons they emancipated the peasants anyway, not just
really to satisfy them and keep them quiet, but because it was recognized that serfdom
should have been a thing of the past.
We were about to fight our wars over slavery and other issues.
King Victor Emmanuel replaced King Charles Albert in Piedmont, Emperor Franz Josef replaced
Francis Ferdinand in Austria, and Napoleonic Restoration occurred in France.
Although a variety of complicated factors explain these limited gains, several general
tendencies are clear.
The initial widespread success of the revolutions was based far more on the weaknesses of the
established regimes, and especially of the kings of France, Prussia and Austria, than
on the strength and unity of the revolutionaries.
Their ideas were strong but fuzzy and they were disunited and they had no power.
The divided revolutionaries were generally more liberal than radical, which means that
they couldn't offer real economic or social programs to the masses, whether the urban
masses, or the artisans, or the rural masses.
Jacobin-like elements did not emerge successfully as during 1792, 1794, and France, which tells
us how unique that Jacobin phase was, whether you like it and think it was positive or whether
you think it was absolutely horrendous and unimaginable.
But when nothing is given to the masses, what you have is middle class revolutionary elites
who are chiefs without Indian followers, and therefore they lack real authority and they
lack real power.
Concerned about disorder and the loss of security for property, the middle classes in fact feared
both the urban poor and the peasants, and liberal members of the middle class, feared
radical members of the middle class, and both liberal and radical or republican members
of the middle class feared socialist members of the middle class.
Especially in the German states and in Austria, most revolutionary leaders in a crunch were
more nationalist than constitutionalist.
The delegates at the Frankfurt parliament had little sympathy for the aspirations of
Slavic, Hungarian, Italian, or Danish claims to self-determination autonomy or having their
grievances dealt with appropriately in any case.
And they supported Prussian and Austrian and Russian repression of these claims.
Not realizing that those same Prussian Austrian and Russian troops could then easily be turned
directly on them.
Especially in Prussia and in Austria, the military and the bureaucracy dominated by the aristocrats
clearly remained loyal to the regimes, anxious to repress the revolutionaries.
While Russia served very, very effectively as the policemen of Central Europe without
asking for any real payment, incredible.
The British, while generally favoring liberal constitutional changes on the continent as
long as they didn't get out of control, and while opposing very much Russian intervention,
did not themselves intervene.
While the French, even during their revolutionary phase, were also content to concentrate on
their own problems, the recreation of order and stability, and when they did act, as I
mentioned before, they intervened to restore the Pope to authority in Rome in the papal
states, in the states ruled by the Pope, who was both a temporal and a spiritual leader.
Moreover, on some basis, and a clear basis, the concert of Europe sustained itself during
this widespread cauldron of disruptiveness.
