In July, the Austrians reoccupied Milan and Lombardy.
In the end of October, our friend General Windisch Graz reoccupied Vienna, while Franz
Josef replaces the weak-willed father in December.
Meanwhile, Hungarian forces trying to make good on their independence invade Austria,
while the Pope was forced to flee Rome following insurrections in November.
Now during 1848 as well, and this was important, in Prussia and in Austria, the regimes did
have the intelligence to free the peasants from serfdom.
Once the peasants were freed, they became a conservative force.
According to the third stage of the revolutions, from 1849 to 1851, reaction really seemed
to succeed almost everywhere, albeit not completely.
In Italy during 1849, the Roman Republic was overthrown by whom?
By the French, because French Catholics didn't want the Pope in exile, while Austria defeats
Charles Albert's Piedmontese forces and Republican forces throughout Northern Italy, taking back
what had been lost.
And Charles Albert has to resign, and his son Victor Emmanuel becomes king of Piedmont.
Within the Austrian Empire in 1849, with the aid very interesting of Russian armies, the
Austrians allowed Russian armies to come in and help them put down Hungarian independence
and other ethnic nationalist movements.
This is the concert, the conservative part of the concert of Europe working, while the
Austrian parliament was then dissolved.
Incredible that the Russians didn't take territory as a result of having been of help, but again
this is the remarkable concert of Europe at that time, at least between the Austrians
and the Russians, although the Russians don't get much thanks for it later.
The very limited Austrian constitution granted in 1849 was abrogated at the end of 1851.
The forces are put down, the constitution is taken away.
At the same time, following a lengthy debate, the delegates at the Frankfurt parliament,
mostly middle class, offer a federal crown to King Frederick William of Prussia, who
turns it down a month later, I would rather chop wood than rain in the manner of the king
of England, he said.
Although his attempt to form a union of North German states on behalf of the princes was
quashed in 1850 by Austria, backed again by Russia, Frederick William maintained the limited
constitution he had granted in 1849.
His word was better than that of the Austrians, and the same was true in Piedmont, the limited
constitution was maintained.
This was going to be important.
Following attempts to change the French constitution, allowing Louis Napoleon to be president for
more than one term, Louis Napoleon established a dictatorship, proclaimed himself president
for 10 years in 1851, an emperor for life in 1852.
Those who had been at Vienna were rolling over in their grave.
One of the primary elements of the settlement of the Congress of Vienna is that no scion
of Napoleon could ever inhabit the throne of France again, and he's there.
And one of the reasons he's there is because the Russians were too occupied, and everyone
else was too occupied to do anything about it, although they did not like it.
Napoleon said, long piece, la pae, the empire is peace, he didn't keep his promise either.
But no one did anything about it, even though he had the struggle to achieve his legitimacy.
Therefore, after several years of substantial turmoil, great instability, fear, not much
appears to have changed, at least not in a very concrete way.
Okay, limited constitutions are established in Piedmont and in Prussia.
They will be important.
The peasants are emancipated from serfdom in Prussia and during the Austrian Empire and
in the Austrian Empire.
That would be important in a different way.
On the one hand, it would make the peasants more of a conservative force.
