Lecture 9, Europe, 1850-1871, An Overview
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
I can't believe it, but we're actually beginning Section 2 in our encounter together.
I hope during the course of our comments dealing with the era from 1850 to 1871, your sense
of the material will be deepened, your comfort will be enhanced, and you will begin to take
ownership of these materials.
In a remarkable way, the period from 1850 to 1871 not only has a coherence of its own,
but one that is relatively different from that of the 1850 to 1848 era.
Moreover, many of the major components accelerated at least for several decades after 1870.
In other words, there will be more continuity between this era and the rest of the course
than between this era and what has preceded it.
There are a number of forces that seem to explain this substantial historical change.
As discussed in the previous lecture, the revolutions of 1848 had a widespread impact
on a number of areas of European life.
As a result of 1848, failure or not, a new generation of statespeople came into power
with a different sensibility, a different agenda, or a different set of expectations.
Constitutionalism was spread, at least, in both Prussia and Piedmont.
The serfs were also freed in both Prussia and in the Austrian Empire, enhancing the
possibility of greater capitalist expansion.
Extremely importantly, national antagonisms were deepened as a result of the revolutions
of 1848 on a number of areas.
In addition to all of this, the cultural expectations of the previous era, especially
the emphasis on the role of ideas, and the mythic sense that change was relatively easy
if you believed in something and were prepared to risk an act, this was dashed in the failed
revolutions of 1848.
Perhaps even more important, expanding industrialization, now often called the second industrial revolution,
began to dramatically affect western and parts of central Europe, and spread continuously
from that point on to the rest of the continent.
This was especially prominent in areas of Germany in the 1850s and the 1860s, but equally
in France and certainly continuously in England and in a number of other areas.
And this spread of industrialism on a deeper, more rapid area, steam and steel, would affect
every element of European civilization.
As with the change emphasis from the period of the 18th century enlightenment to the period
of early 19th century romanticism, there is also a generational thrust in all of this.
In our own day, we should certainly be aware that things change so quickly that what was
new ten years ago was old.
Nunes doesn't really mean that much to us, but every generation or so does see a mood
swing inherent to itself, and there was a very big mood swing that took place from the
first half of the 19th century and into the second half of the 19th century, and then
another one would begin, another cultural mood swing would begin, actually around the
1890s and take up steam thereafter.
And the emphasis would change from the social sciences, humanities, ideas, philosophy in
the first half, to science and social science pretending to be science in the second half
of the century.
A combination of these developments, as well as the further spread of the ideas of 1789
into deeper reaches of Eastern Europe and the Balkans, helps explain the changed nature
of European civilization from 1850 to 1871.
