Although the avoidance of war between the great powers during the revolutions of 1848
reflected these continuous concerns, 1848 surely undermined the concert in several profound
ways.
As mentioned earlier, it raised a number of specific nationalist antagonisms, some of
which became very, very deep, antagonisms between Prussia and Austria, between Prussia
and Russia, between France and Russia.
These national antagonisms also had ideological ramifications, ideological components, resentments,
especially on the part of liberal, British and French opinion, elite, and sometimes
common, against Russian police action in Central Europe, let alone against the Austrian repression
of what seemed to be reasonable aspirations of very, very large ethnic minorities in the
Austrian Empire for some greater degree of autonomy, or saying the conditions that governed
their own lives, after all.
Extremely importantly, once again, it saw the demise of Metternich, the most consistent and
powerful conservative presence in the first half of the 19th century, and the rise of
Louis Napoleon, who became Napoleon III in 1852, whose very name was an affront to the
Vienna system and all that it represented, and who had good reason to resent the Russians
as well, and to resent the Vienna system.
The more he could uproot every memory of that system, the greater his own legitimacy would
be.
Even if the war did not have to occur, what some folks sometimes forget is that even under
the best of circumstances, there was an eastern question.
It already existed.
There was the issue of the growing weakness of the Ottoman Empire near Russia, symbolized
by the successful Greek War of Independence in the 1820s, which was the first of many,
or the first really successful of many, nationalist Christian independence movements in the Balkan
regions, which Russia itself was not opposed to because it wanted more authority over the
Ottoman Empire, an historic enemy it had recently defeated a number of times, and on the other
hand, the British wanted to preserve the status quo of the Ottoman Empire because the Ottoman
Empire was a bulwark against Russia in Constantinople, protecting the straits of the Bosporus
and the Dardanelles, which would allow Russia to pass from the Black Sea into the Mediterranean
Sea, and the Mediterranean Sea was the British lifeline to all of its trade in India and
in other parts of its empire, both the British and the French wanted to either retain, maintain
the status quo in the Ottoman Empire, or to increase their influence there while the
Russians wanted to increase their interest there if any change was going to take place.
That issue already existed and was a subject of continuous discussion.
There were also divergent interests between the Russians and the Austrians in terms of
the whole economic region of the Danube, and so that too was an area of tension and
concern.
Russia now abutted up against the other great powers' self-interest.
During the course of the crisis, leading to the outbreak of war between Russia and the
Ottoman Empire in 1853, followed by an Anglo-French coalition entering the war against Russia
in 1854, short-sighted, inconsistent, willful, sometimes incompetent diplomacy prevailed,
hence the avoidability of this particular war if the state's people and the diplomats
had been more focused, less willful, less ideological, more competent, and more aware
of the dangers involved.
It began really with Napoleon III, our friend, and his concern to please Catholics internally
in France, and his concern to uproot the Vienna settlement, and his concern to gain more
power and legitimacy, successfully pressing the Ottomans to expand the rights of Latin,
Western Christians in the Holy Land, in fact, to give them control over the Church of the
Nativity in Bethlehem, which the Ottoman Sultan did.
Chagrind!
