Napoleon III decides to play again and again and again, mostly because even though there
were some defeats along the way until the mid-1860s, he was still the clear player, the
key player, mainly calling the shots and France in some way seemed to be benefiting.
Most important, both Great Britain and especially Russia, chastened by this experience, hurting
in one way or another, entered into eras of internal stocktaking and reform.
The British, with their vaunted military success, their vaunted aristocracy, the aristocracy
didn't do too well, the army didn't do too well, these people did not seem to be born
to rule as they'd like to think of themselves as being, and England goes into a period of
internal reform, including the passage of the Second Reform Bill giving the rest of the
middle class and the working class to write the vote, military reform and a whole series
of other civil rights actions actually also spurred by the American Civil War, which brought
up deep ideological issues in Europe and especially in England, which was closer to
America.
So Britain goes into a period of relative isolation, relative.
For Russia, it's deeper.
For Russia, it is reform or begin to look like the Ottoman Empire.
It is catch up with industrialization, catch up with internal stability and the capacity
to mobilize your people, or really dramatically fall behind, that's what the war demonstrated.
The British and the French could mobilize their power, their human potential, and then
take it hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of miles away because of technical superiority.
The Russians couldn't really fully mobilize their human potential.
What good does it do to have the largest population if they're not willing to fight to support
the regime?
And if they're willing to fight, you can't get them there.
That doesn't help much either.
So the Tsarist government, the New Tsar, Alexander II, who becomes the only real liberals
are of the 19th century between 1855 and 1881, goes into a period from the late 1850s at
least to the mid-1860s of considerable and significant internal reform, including the
emancipation of the Russian serfs, which was a process of far greater magnitude even than
the freeing of the American slaves, because half the population was serf.
But what this did is create a temporary vacuum of power in Central Europe.
The Russians were the main stabilizer of that vacuum of power in addition to the Austrians.
The British occasionally played a role stabilizing the continent.
The British were semi-isolated, the Russians were licking their wounds and attempting to
reform and to upgrade as best as they could do, and this vacuum of power allowed the new
generation of real poly-teakers in France, Napoleon III, in Piedmont, Cavour, and very
importantly in Prussia, Bismarck, to redraw the map of Europe to their advantage.
Summing up the entire experience, historian David Thompson says it was a fumbling war,
probably unnecessary, largely futile, certainly extravagant, yet rich and unintended consequences.
It broke the spell of peace and it removed the shadow of Russian power from Central European
affairs.
It therefore cleared the way for the remodeling of Germany and Italy by means of war.
Thank you.
