In other words, Mazzini and Garibaldi, full of ardor, courageous, full of idealism, were
pushing the issue farther than it could possibly have gone at that moment in time, and the
moderate, more cautious, more calculating Kavor, by blocking them, saved what had already
been accomplished, because the French could not have tolerated the Pope being thrown out
of Rome at that moment by radicals, and they and the Austrians probably would have had to
do something about it, because of their own public opinion, certainly in France, because
they were involved in the plot process implicitly, and therefore they would have been viewed as
being responsible for what had happened in Rome by their own people. Although seemingly
realized that he had gotten far more than he had bargained for, and that much hard work
remained to be done, Kavor helped proclaim the new Kingdom of Italy in March of 1861,
tragically then dying from illness and incompetent medical treatment three months later, he was
bled to death. Among this final prophetic comments were, now that we have created Italy,
we must first create Italians. Moreover, we are ready to proclaim throughout Italy the
great principle of a free church in a free state. Again, let's just think about those
two concepts. Now that we have created Italy, we must first create Italians. Kavor understood
there were no Italians as a united people. Kavor was a realist, a pragmatist, a utilitarian.
There is a good possibility he would have done something about it, just as he did something
about all of the other issues that he confronted in Piedmont itself, from railroads to industry,
to banks, and most importantly, as we're going to see in a minute, to agriculture. And secondly,
he understood that there was an issue of somehow dealing with the fact of the overwhelming
majority of the people who lived in the peninsula being Catholic, some already being more secular,
but actually the poorer they were, the less secular, and most were still poor. He understood
that something needed to be done. It would not have been easy to have pacified the Pope
after the Pope lost most of his territory during this process. It would not have been
easy, but Kavor was aware that something really needed to be done. The remaining stages in
the completion of the process of Italian quote-unquote unification occurred in 1866 and 1870, after
the death of Kavor, and without much real Italian initiative or glory, they were able
again to piggyback on other nations' battles. During the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, in
which Italy was Prussia's mostly silent ally, Italy annexed Venice from Austria in the north.
During the Franco-Prussian War of 1870, when the French protective forces were forced to
abandon Rome, papal forces were easily pushed aside by the Piedmonti slash Italian troops,
while Rome became the capital of the completed state of Italy, although some Italian patriots
did not really yet see it as a completed state because there were still Italian-speaking
people living in southern Austria and on the Adriatic, and to this day that is a problem.
Given the haphazard and forced process of Italian unification, and later the tragic
emergence of fascism in Italy, and there are elements of fascism and proto-fascism present
even before World War I, it is not surprising that many have emphasized the negative consequences
of this whole process. One of the first articles I read when I entered
graduate school was, did success spoil the Italian Risorgimento? And the answer pretty
much was yes, because the success was not of the type that produced a more unified,
workable nation.
