Italian unification became synonymous with Piedmontese expansionism, the Piedmontistization of the peninsula,
with the northern modernized part imposing many of its laws, its administrative procedures, its taxes, its military conscription,
and its elites on much of the rest of the peninsula, sometimes with terrible consequences.
This was especially so in the underdeveloped south, where the essential needs were primary education,
basic land reform, and development, roads in the context of local culture, and we might even say in today's world, birth control.
Unfortunately, that didn't take place, and that's why we have so many millions of wonderful Italians living in the United States,
because the southern part became so overpopulated that people left Italy not because they wished to, but because they didn't have enough to eat.
And that's why so many Italians went back to Sicily and Naples, or sought wives from Sicily and Naples,
because they had strong cultural ties and feelings of belonging with their past, but the overpopulation was simply too severe.
Moreover, the legacy of a severe church state quarrel was possibly even more damaging to Italy's future as a whole.
Self-besieged in the Vatican by his own choice, the Papacy excoriated the state and for bad participation in its politics on the part of Catholics,
until just before the eve of World War I. This placed even moderate Catholics in a very, very difficult situation, denying the state much talent and much needed legitimacy.
Although the politics of imperialism and hypernationalism might have developed in Italy anyway, the lack of Catholic legitimacy encouraged the state to seek legitimacy and grandeur by other means.
This was common to many, quote-unquote, flawed national experiments in the late 19th century in which national aggrandizement was always easier than state,
always an easier path to state building than the far more difficult and problematic process of social and economic reform and development,
because the reform for one group is something that another group doesn't want, so why not have an empire?
Why not build an army? Why not choose the path to glory when it gets out of control the cost is high?
The path of Italian unification, moreover, both by its example and by further weakening Austria, certainly encouraged a similar pattern in Germany,
especially since Napoleon III still had not learned his lesson well to leave well enough alone.
Things had gotten out of control during this process, both in the north with respect to Austria and with respect to the national societies and in the south with respect to Garibaldi.
Napoleon III should have understood that when a process like this begins, you don't really know where it's going to go.
He pulled out of it, got most of what he wanted, although he also got a lot of what he didn't want, including the anger of lots of French Catholics against what had happened to the Papacy,
but most importantly, he should have learned that when things get out of control, it's dangerous, it would have been better not to have continued to play,
and there is where lots of people say he was a vague and well-meaning doctrinaire, because he really did believe in certain kinds of liberal nationalism,
and he did the same thing when it came to Germany, wanting to see a diminution of Austria's role in Germany, just as he saw a diminution of Austria's role in Italy.
Still, events might have turned out differently, especially had Kavor lived to at least set a more intelligent and steady course for this new state.
And that's why I spent so much time stressing the breadth of the issues that Kavor had already confronted, and the fact that even in the middle of all of this turmoil,
his public statements make it clear that he was aware that there were serious problems to encounter, again, the problem of national integration,
and how can you carry out national integration without basic education, another field that he was deeply, deeply concerned with,
and how can you carry out national integration without transportation and communications, issues he had studied,
and how can you carry out national integration without somehow trying to assuage the feeling of the Catholics, a process he was clearly aware of,
a free church, he recognized the freedom of the church, but also in a free state.
