Austrian refusal to countenance, a Prussian-dominated, Germanic political union of any type, at what
is known as the humiliation of Olmutz in 1850, backed by the power of Russia against Prussia,
inclined these two powers toward a likely collision course at some point.
While Prussia's maintenance of its modest new constitutional system further separated
it even more from conservative and reactionary Austria, which responded to the revolutions
of 1848 by becoming even more conservative and bureaucratic internally and increasing
the police powers of the state.
These tensions were exacerbated during the 1850s by several developments.
Austria's attempt to tighten the reins over the Germanic confederation by introducing
centralizing mechanisms under Austrian control were blocked by Prussia and usually by its
combative representative at the confederation, at the Bund, Otto von Bismarck.
To repeat this, what Austria was trying to do is turn international law between the Germanic
states in itself into more of a functioning national law under its control, and Bismarck
simply said no, and as the jokes go, if the Austrian smoked a cigar, Bismarck's cigar
was bigger.
If the Austrian put his feet on the table, Bismarck had very, very large feet.
He was so confrontational that the Prussians finally got him out of there in 1859 for fear
that he would directly provoke a war with Austria.
Bismarck was dangerous.
If you wanted peace, you had to be careful where Bismarck was found.
Both during the Crimean War, between 1853 and in terms of its central European component,
1854 and 1856, and even more curiously, during the Franco-Piedmontese War against Austria
in 1859, 1860, Prussia continued to oppose any pro-Austrian support within the Bund.
Again, Austria is being defeated by France and Piedmont.
Austria is calling for help from its Germanic allies, and the answer from Prussia is a clear
no.
This is your issue, this is not our issue, and we are not going to pay for your issue
in one way or another.
It's a kind of betrayal, but it's an understandable betrayal given what the Austrians had recently
done to the Prussians by preventing their expanded political structure from coming into
being.
Moreover, both fears of further revolution and concerns about their continued great power
status led both Prussia and Austria to attempt to augment their military and internal police
and other bureaucratic structures during this time period.
Given greater Prussian economic development, and Austria's squandering of so much of its
resources on repressive actions in northern Italy and in Hungary, Prussia was clearly
able to modernize its forces at a greater pace, particularly under the highly talented
military duo von Moltke and von Ruhn, Prussian chief of staff and minister of war, respectively.
Still, the balance of power in Germany was relatively even, especially since the southern
Catholic German states, with Bavaria being the largest of them, had no desire to come
under the direct domination of Prost and Prussia, or any Prussia for that matter.
In other words, the future of Germany was yet to be determined.
Thank you.
