Within Prussia, as I mentioned very, very briefly, a complicated and conservative three-class voting system was maintained.
In which the votes of the elites counted far more than the votes of the masses,
ensuring conservative domination of the Prussian parliament,
and therefore ensuring that those delegates sent to the German upper house would reflect the Prussian conservative sentiments
In accepting these procedures, which clearly demonstrated that Macht, or Power, and Einheit, or Unity,
trumped Recht, or Right, or Freiheit, Freedom, most German Liberals, and many Intellectuals,
either immediately over or over a brief course of time, in some sense, sold out,
either becoming more conservative and or worshiping the state and the military, which represented the state as its most prominent institution.
Although the following assertion needs to be handled cautiously,
over time, what also occurred socially and culturally is what is often referred to as the feudalization of the upper middle class in Germany.
And here's a mouthful, rather than the bourgeoisification of the German and Prussian aristocracy in what is often known as the marriage of rye and steel.
That is agrarian determinants and heavy industrial enterprise.
In other words, the upper bourgeoisie even, the wealthy middle class, the industrialist, were more likely to take on the norms or try to imitate the aristocracy,
rather than the aristocracy affecting any integration into the wider nation.
The great historian, Haya Holborn, says that the second German Empire was founded by blood and iron, military and industrial stress,
and socially stabilized by iron and grain, the power of the upper industrialists and these Junker land-owning magnates.
Furthermore, broad and growing material prosperity often took the fight out of those who still protested on modified, barely constitutional Prussian rule, including the working class on some level.
In the words of H. A. P. Taylor, brilliant and sometimes cynical British critic of Bismarck's impact, the capitalists accepted Junker rule because it gave them prosperity and unification.
The working classes accepted Junker rule because it gave them social security and the vote.
The only loss was freedom, and that is not an item which appears in the balance sheet in a history of trade union benefits.
All of this is not to say that all of the consequences of quote-unquote German unification were negative, or that its future could not have developed more positively than it did.
At least some form of limited constitutionalism now became normative, not only for all of Germany, but for Austria as well.
In the aftermath of defeat in the Austro-Prussian war, Austria reached an historic compromise with the Hungarian Magyar elites known as the Ausgleich or dualism, Austrian dualism, and Austria now becomes officially the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
I'll try to continue to refer to it with its rightful words, sometimes I will use Austria, but it's the Austro-Hungarian Empire properly, also known as the dual monarchy.
