Lecture 18, The Russian Experience, 1789-1881
Having recently discussed the more liberal and modernizing bookend of Europe, Great Britain,
we now turn to the more conservative and traditional Tsarist Russia, diametrically opposed to Britain
geographically, economically, and also politically with Tsarist Russia, although the two states
did share something in common in terms of their relationship with the rest of the continent.
Over the long haul, Russia was partly European and partly Asiatic in structure, never entirely continental.
Culturally and even spiritually, Russia had a love-hate relationship with Europe, wanting
to be respected, wanting to play a major role, while often privileging Russian Orthodox
Slavic spiritual specialness, as opposed to European and especially Western secularism
and soulless materialism.
Although it was a different kind of empire than Britain's, Russia covered about one-seventh
of the globe by the mid-nineteenth century and was still expanding.
Russia and Britain had been the mainstays of the defeat of Napoleon, just as they would
later be the mainstays of the defeat of Adolf Hitler with the essential added power of
the United States.
More significant, however, were their great differences.
During the early modern period, including in the 17th and 18th centuries, the interests
of the aristocracy and the monarchy continued to converge in Russia as they did in Prussia.
The aristocrats owed the monarch loyalty and service, while they continued to enjoy nearly
exclusive local control and support from the crown, particularly over the millions upon
millions of peasants who were still serfs.
Serfdom continued to increase in Russia even under the reign of late 18th century, quote
unquote, enlightened despot, Catherine the Great.
Not that she believed in it, but she needed it to continue to maintain and obtain the
support of the aristocracy and therefore she did it.
Therefore, both politically and economically, Russian society was still highly localized
and highly communal in nature.
The Russian economy was overwhelmingly agrarian with the 90 plus percent of the peasant population
pathetically poor, illiterate, superstitious, and the native middle class far less well
developed than in any of the other European great powers and especially the western great
powers.
In fact, many members of the Russian middle class were Greeks and Armenians and Germans
rather than Russians themselves.
As late as the mid 18th century, Russian czars continued to expel all Jews from their
territory even when the conservative Prussian and conservative Austrian monarchs employed
privileged Jews to help develop their economy and finance their power.
And this decision shows you how religiously based the regime was and how powerful was the
desire to keep it pure.
Again, a large part of the Russian middle class was composed of people who were in fact
not Russian in culture or in ethnicity, continuously expanding on nearly all fronts from the 17th
century onward against the Swedes, the Turks, the Poles, the Crimeans, and into the Moslem
Caucasus, the Russian Empire was a behemoth, a monster with undeveloped transportation
and communication systems and with very little industrial development.
