It led also to a considerable improvement of living standards and of life expectancy
for more and more people, to the development of real and modern medicine, to the concept
of leisure time with Britain leading the way with only a half a day's work on Saturday,
the British weekend, to organize sports, to the ability to breathe on the part of many
workers who got the right to vote at the end of the century or in the beginning of the
20th century, who were protected in the beginning by unions or more sympathetic government and
could live.
And indeed, when we talk about the negative occurrences during the course of the long
19th century, we have to recognize at the same time that more people lived better and
longer with more freedom and more possibility and less insecurity than ever before in human
history.
Perhaps the second dominant overarching dynamic force into this era, again from the previous
one, was nationalism, which not only spread eastward and southward as well, frequently
first in a cultural form and then in a political form, but became less universalist, less liberal
and more aggressive Darwinian and racialist in nature.
Beginning in the previous era, the 1860s, even the 1850s, and definitely spreading thereafter
becoming very common, conservative forces began to learn how to use nationalism, imperialism,
military success as weapons against liberalism and democracy, attempting not only to co-opt
the middle classes, but the masses as well.
And we have to remember that by 1900, England was already 75% or more industrialized or
urbanized rather, France by 1914 was virtually 50%, Germany by 1914 was about 60 plus percent.
So using these techniques to a reading public with a penny press, one had tremendous opportunity
to make contact with the masses.
Bismarck was a master at this technique, although it only worked up to a point, and Bismarck
also knew its limitations, especially with respect to colonialism.
More and more workers continued to vote socialist nonetheless, because the socialist parties
were attuned directly to the precise and immediate needs of the workers more than any other
political group.
So that, for example, when Adolf Hitler named his political party the National Socialist
Party, what he was doing is combining the two most powerful secular religions of the
19th century, nationalism first, socialism second, although his socialism was far more
racial and ethnic than economic at all, and indeed there were national socialist political
platforms at the very end of the 19th century in France before Germany.
The czarist political elites attempted to use this technique with disastrous results,
especially during the Russo-Japanese War in 1904 and 1905.
And in fact, we have the exact discussions in which the choices were made.
The economics minister, who was also the prime minister for a while, Count Vita said
very clearly, Russia needs industrialization and economic modernization.
The other aristocratic elites said, no, that destabilizes everything.
We want to expand, out goes Vita.
And in his memoirs, we have such an eloquent analysis of what Russia really needed and
could have had, but the conservative aristocratic elites blocked it and got him out of power.
The Italian elites tried the same thing with equal tragedy.
The Battle of Adawa, 1896, being defeated by the Ethiopians, having more success against
today's Libyans than the area was known as Tripoli in 1911, but by doing that, sparking
a series of Balkan wars that got out of control and finally led virtually to World War I.
