Now, although the Marxists believe this was bound to happen once the proletariat gained
consciousness of its plight, awareness of its plight and of its possibilities, the process
could be accelerated somewhat by national and international political organization led
by a dedicated and far-seeking group who understood this historical process.
The Marxist regime would spread self-consciousness and would also prevent the class-based wars
that might harm the proletariat, even though war might lead to revolution, workers should
not kill workers on behalf of some imposed false nationalist fatherland because the workers
had no fatherland.
In the end, following a brief dictatorship of the proletariat, after a successful revolution,
the motor of history the class struggle would finally end, freed from the unnatural fetters
of want, oppression, class domination, liberated and reeducated humanity would generate unfathomable
wonders as human potential and creativity was released.
Although if one accepts the axiom of Marxism and the actual system is far more sophisticated
philosophically than my outline, it is capable of being later tied together with newer philosophical
systems as well, such as Freudianism, Marxism obviously suffered from many faulty assumptions.
To name just a few, one of which could be partially adjusted, Marxism was pre-Freudian.
Marxism overemphasized the rationality of the species and therefore its perfectibility
as such it was part of that 18th and 19th century radical belief in the perfectibility
of mankind and in progress.
In a related area, Marxists dramatically under-emphasized the power of nationalism, which in a sense
was going to be the only secular power more powerful than Marxism even during the end
of the 19th century, nationalism in all of its manifestations.
And Marxists not surprisingly, caricatured the capitalists and everything they represented,
calling them as a monolithic, unchanging mold.
Some of the most far-reaching critics of Marxism would eventually come from revolutionary competitors
and later from its own adherents or related fellow travelers.
Developing somewhat parallel to Marxism, though never as well organized or as well
developed philosophically, were a series of varieties of anarchism, stimulated by the
writings of such powerful individuals as Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Prince Alexander Kropotkin,
and Michael Bakunin, who also believed in the destruction of capitalism and in the transformation
of society either by violence, propaganda and the deed, or by moral suasion and volunteerism.
In common with the Marxists, most anarchists believed in the goodness of man corrupted
by property and corrupt institutions, and they also believed the state would wither away
after power was taken from those who held it.
And this would unleash again untold individual creativity, mutualism and human happiness.
Where anarchists disagreed most adamantly with Marxists was in Marx's brief dictatorship
of the proletariat following the revolution.
The anarchists distrusted all dictatorial authority, indeed all real authority, including
Marxists, and they well understood its likely abuses, which in fact did take place.
Most anarchists believed society should be organized in small units or in cooperatives
based on volunteerism.
Although as Barbara Tuchman has commented, these radical individualists constituted a
daydream of desperate Romanics, quote unquote, and further, half hatred of society, half
love of mankind, quote unquote, their powerful propaganda and dramatic but brutal deeds of
violence, including the assassination of six heads of state during these years, helped
raise the consciousness of the proletariat and contribute to collective action by workers
as well as to repression on the part of the state.
