The Industrial Revolution, as we have talked about before, created change in every segment of Europe materially, culturally, spiritually.
It especially was powerful in the urban areas of central and western Europe, but by the turn of the century the same kinds of things were happening in St. Petersburg and in Moscow.
The population shift was occurring from peasants streaming into these new urban metropolis, looking for jobs, being concentrated in large industrial factories, initially under horrendous conditions of labor.
And the same thing was occurring in the United States at the same time, and the United States also had a powerful socialist movement and unionist movement that was developing at that time, although not as powerful as what was going on in Europe because conditions here were somewhat different.
By the middle of the 19th century, a number of powerful voices began to speak on behalf of the workers, even if most of those powerful voices were in fact not workers themselves.
In other words, it was almost always largely middle class intellectuals or liberal aristocrats who were the leaders of all of these movements.
And in fact, if you want to trace the whole structure of these movements, and you want to take on a real big challenge, take a look at Jeff E. Lee's recent book, The Spread of Democracy and Socialism, from about 1850 all the way until the present.
And if you really want to look at it from a different perspective, I would urge you to pick up Emil Zola's wonderful, wonderful novel, Germinal, which does a better job looking from the working class upward and showing how some workers became intellectuals,
learned about socialism, argued with one another, took part in strikes, formed unions, began to become leaders, began to become somewhat bourgeois once they began to become leaders, and then we go on from there.
So by the end of the 19th century, there were certainly a number of working class intellectuals as well.
When all of this is taking place, remember urbanization and industrialization meant primary education, the beginning of secondary education, above all, it meant widespread increasing literacy and newspapers and access to information in these congested areas where the workers were together and could speak to each other.
They began to organize, they began to hear these ideas, these ideas made sense to them once you accept the basic axioms, but these axioms spoke to their human condition.
The fact that the socialists appropriated, more than appropriated, believed in science, gave them additional power. It was not their ethics that was speaking as far as they were concerned, it was the dictates of science and the scientific laws of history that they had uncovered.
And that just demonstrates how powerful these scientific laws of history seem to be during the middle and the second half of the 19th century as the dominant mode of thinking.
Well, of course, we are human, even among great thinkers and near geniuses and geniuses, science, one person's science is another person's prejudice, and one person's absolute understanding is another person's misunderstanding.
And what happens, of course, is that these early Marxists could not predict the future, and we can't blame them for not predicting the future. We can blame them in some cases for their short-sightedness in terms of how they misunderstood their contemporaries and saw all good as being from their view and all evil as being from the view of those who opposed them.
But nonetheless, socialism in its forms did unite with forms of democracy and with well-meaning religious and humanitarian liberals and conservatives to begin to really transform the nature of the reality that the poor and the workers faced at the end of the 19th century.
The legacy for the future would be something else. Unfortunately, World War I, as it did in so many other ways, was to dash the possibility of some form of continued progress and appropriation working together and to leave a world in disarray and to radicalize conditions further,
so that instead of democratic socialism really being more powerful after World War I, radical fascism and Marxist Bolshevism would come to dominate. But that's another story. Thank you.
