This added economic-based resentments to the litany of religious vilification,
and increasingly forced social exclusion of the Jews.
It also garnered Jews the hatred of Christian merchants and early bankers
once the usury laws went into abeyance in England, France and Italy.
So the first expulsion of Jews from England in 1290 was partly a result
of Christian merchants wanting to take the role of Jews in English society.
If we go back to the Roman time periods, the social economic profile of the early Jews
was no different than any of the surrounding populations.
They were peasant-based warriors as well as thinkers, writers.
But that changed during this period of time.
Even more dangerous, if anything could be more dangerous,
was the growth of popular superstitions and fears even when the church
decried them and said they were not true,
that Jews used Christian children's blood for Passover matzah,
desecrated the host, stabbing Christ again,
poisoned the wells as during the black death between 1337 and 1340
when a third of the European population may have died.
These become permanently embedded into the consciousness of the masses.
These deep cultural and psychological superstitions become so deeply rooted everywhere in Europe,
even in Poland where bishops and kings and aristocrats were inviting Jews
to come and live to develop the economy in the 13th and 14th and 15th centuries,
even as Jews were being expelled from large segments of Western Europe.
England in 1290, France in 1394, Spain in 1492, Portugal in 96,
and many literally hundreds of expulsions from parts of Germany and elsewhere
during this same time period, prior to this time,
especially in Spain where Muslims had conquered most of Spain in the 7th and 8th century
and there was a battle between Christians in the north and Muslims in the south
called the Re Conquista that lasted from the end of the 7th century all the way to 1492.
During this time period in Spain, you have the golden age of Jewish life in Spain
in which Jews are the communicators of Arabic Islamic civilization
at that point actually higher than European Christian civilization to the Europeans
because they were the only group of people who lived in both societies
and spoke the languages of both societies with the expulsion from Spain in 1492
of Jews and Muslims reconfirmed in 1603, Spain becomes pure
in a view that was cultural and even racial.
Moreover, during the 16th century, Jews where they were allowed to live
in Central and Western Europe began to be segregated into prison like ghettos,
actual walled ghettos and the dankest areas of cities in Italy and Germany and Austria
even as the large Jewish community in Poland was still living remarkably well
until the murderous Ukrainian Cossack rebellion of the mid 17th century
killing tens of thousands of Jews and disrupting half of their communal life
and their economic wherewithal.
Another turning point where Europe failed to turn was the Protestant Reformation
and especially founder Martin Luther's rabid vilification of Jews
when they refused to hear the purified word of Protestantism
and simply said, please leave us alone and allow us to worship our own way.
This Reformation was an incredible historical experience
breaking down the unity of medieval Christian civilization
which had been one of its major forms of unity.
Popes excommunicated Protestants and considered them to be antichrist.
Luther and many of the Protestant leaders considered the Catholics to be antichrist
and excommunicated the Pope in a sense.
Luther first thought that, wow, the Jews had it right.
If the Pope is antichrist, why should they follow him?
But they should follow me because I'm offering them purified original Christianity
and when they said no thank you, Luther was enraged.
