Lecture 23, England, 1868 to 1914, Liberalism to Democracy.
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.
We've just preceded through three encounters of a general nature in the time period between 1870 to 1914.
We're going to return to our case of going through case studies of the Great Powers in preparation for our final stretch,
the origins of World War I. We're going to begin with Great Britain from about 1880 actually or so to 1914.
Although Great Britain made a reasonable transition from the mid-19th century political liberalism to pre-World War I industrial democracy and mass society,
its exceptionalism within Europe was finally challenged while it faced a number of very, very difficult and complex problems.
Still very competitive with advantages acquired in markets and its preeminent merchant fleet and navy,
British industrial supremacy was yielding to that of both Germany and the United States on the eve of World War I.
In fact, it had yielded basically. German banking, industrial entrepreneurship, science, technology and universities were more dynamic while its industrial plant was newer and more modern.
And it's much harder to replace older industrial plant and to most importantly get capitalists to be willing to do it than to build new industrial plant.
The United States was simply the United States, relatively with untold wealth and scale of enterprise.
Even France and Japan were capable competitors although not on the same level as Germany and the United States.
The vaunted British Empire expanded greatly during these years and by 1900 it was the greatest the world had seen since the time of Rome covering a quarter of the globe
and Japan was a source of pride and economic advantage but it was also expensive and the British would find it was also becoming dangerous to maintain
particularly when the French, the Germans and especially the Russians were pressing for the British for concessions literally around the globe because the British were literally around the globe.
The British, to radically expand their navy, first adopting a two power standard, they would have to have a navy as large as the next two societies
and then needing to go even beyond that level with all sorts of diplomatic, military and economic ramifications.
In as much as modern industrial mass society with universal male suffrage became the norm in 1884 and the simultaneous growing challenge of mass based unions developed and required far more revenue for social expenditures
By 1900 Britain now faced a perennial new problem that we have faced in the United States in the second half of our previous century of balancing guns and butter
and they understood the constraints of the problem but knowing the problem was easier than solving the problem in this particular case because both were essential, both guns and butter
externally the world was dangerous and internally without the butter the world was dangerous too.
In many ways British interests had become overextended finally in an increasingly dangerous and competitive world.
