Still popular and irrepressible, Chamberlain left the conservatives in 1903 in order to
campaign for protective tariffs for the British Empire, to bind the Dominions and even the
United States to the British Empire in order to enable Britain to remain competitive and
also to give work and benefits to the industrial masses.
In other words, he still remained a populist, he still remained a Democrat, he still wanted
better conditions of labor for the poor, he simply believed this could not be maintained
unless England had a wider empire, because it was the empire and England's lead in the
Industrial Revolution that made it possible.
The lead in the Industrial Revolution was gone, the empire had to be protected to maintain
the purchasing power and the standard of living to the British masses.
This conjunction of circumstances brought the liberals, now led by a new generation of
substantial leaders back in the power in 1906 where they would remain until after World
War I, but now facing a troubling accumulation of social, economic and national issues.
Between 1901 and 1903, a series of powerful scholarly studies made it clear that in the
richest country in the world, except perhaps for the United States, one-third of the population
still lived in chronic poverty, poverty that would simply reproduce itself if something
wasn't done to attack it.
While government commissions established that a significant percent of the male population
was unfit for military service, and how did they know this?
Well, they took in volunteers to fight the war, and a large percentage of the people
who wanted to volunteer weren't fit to serve.
Between the 1880s and 1906, a new political party from a variety of strands, the Labour
Party, also took form, composed of a variety of strands of British socialism from reform-oriented
Fabianism to transformative Marxism.
And Fabianism, in a certain level, was an updated utopian socialism, except it wasn't
utopian at all.
It was very, very common sense, let's teach the elites and those in power that everyone
can do better if there is more sharing, making it clear that the country is well enough and
that industrial enterprise is powerful enough to have enough for everyone, and sharing the
wealth is easier than repressing the proletariat.
And it's also just.
Although British socialism was generally more moderate than the continental variety, and
the Labour and Liberal candidates for election often cooperated against Conservatives, the
Labour Party pushed for meaningful social legislation and economic redistribution to
be achieved via the ballot box, to be achieved via democracy.
From the 1880s on, mass-based unions began to form and began also to undertake significant
strikes, often with public support, as in the United States at the same time.
Because in many cases, these unions were full of women.
These strikes were for women and the protection of young adolescents.
Only to be incensed, then, and undermined by that taff veiled decision that kept them
restricted and by a further decision by the House of Lords in 1909 that mandated that
the unions could not use union funds for political purposes since those funds came from dues.
Now, if unions can't use funds for political purposes, but the elites have plenty of funds,
where does power lie in an increasingly modern political system in which campaigning costs
money?
Having gained more control over their bodies and somewhat more control over their property
and their children during the second half of the century, as well as the right, finally,
to take university degrees, the women's suffragette movement became more well-organized and more
militant as well.
