Between 1911 and 1914, facing increasing agitation from unions, suffer jets, and the Irish, and
also more syndical strikes, the Liberals passed a number of significant pieces of legislation.
The most important of these was the National Insurance Act of 1911, an omnibus bill dealing
with sickness, accident, and old age insurance, which expanded after World War II would become
the infrastructure of the British welfare state, and which on the eve of World War I
essentially brought Britain up to the level of what Germany had really reached somewhat
earlier.
That was finally introduced for members of parliament in 1911, and unions were permitted
to use funds for political purposes in 1913.
What that meant is that all of the pieces of the earlier chartist agitation in the 1830s
and 1840s had come to fruition except the annual election of parliament, which wouldn't
have been a very good idea because people need experience, and an annual election of
any legislature is not a good idea.
A third Irish home rule bill was also introduced in 1912, and it would have become law in 1914
being passed three times in two years had war not broken out in late summer 1914.
The bill was suspended for the duration of the war.
Women's suffrage might also have been introduced but for the war and did become law in 1919,
although not at the same age level as for men, that had to wait until 1929 at which
men and women of the same age had the right to vote.
So in other words, with any amount of fairness, we have to indicate that full British democracy,
political at least, was not achieved until 1929.
Although Britain on the eve of war was a far more turbulent and conflicted society, a
clear transition to political democracy was well underway, and a responsible Labour Party
was poised to have a greater say in structuring the nation's future as well.
All of these changes from the 1880s through 1914 had been achieved with some public disruption
to be sure, but without a threat of actual revolution.
It was an incredible transition when compared with anything that other societies, large
societies in Europe had to face during the same period of time, especially since for
the first time the British were now playing on a more even playing field, before the playing
field was clearly balanced in their direction with respect to the rest of Europe.
But by 1900 or so, it's a far more even playing field economically, which has such a tremendous
impact on what is possible in every other sphere of society and of politics.
England faced a number of serious, serious challenges.
The challenge of Ireland was deep, complicated, and potentially it could have erupted into
a widespread civil war, far worse than what actually took place during and after World
War I.
The issue of the industrial masses, who were clearly the largest single group in Britain
before the war, England and Britain having become more than 75% urban, could have been
far, far more disruptive and was far more disruptive, for example, in France, but it
was handled better on some level over time in Great Britain.
The issue of the development of the Labour Party is a peculiar situation because almost
in the very beginning, the Labour Party and the Liberals began to work together, and if
they looked upon each other occasionally as adversaries, they were adversaries speaking
the same language broadly, so that the Labour Party could grow up within the context of
Liberal ascendancy, gain experience in Parliament, and then make the transition into the war
in the 1920s as the second party of Great Britain without any radical disruption, which
also was a very, very healthy thing.
The issue of women's suffrage had breakaway power, although since it involved more elite
women than average women, it had less breakaway power.
It was something that simply made sense and was long, long overdue, and it's instructive
that the British were the most advanced with respect to this issue.
So that studying the context of Great Britain within the framework of the rest of Europe
one sees more issues that look more continental, but most of them are handled mainly in a British
way.
Thank you.
