On the eve of World War I, another liberal ministry supported by Irish and Labour Party votes was poised to implement home rule, actually running the risk of a civil war in Ulster, which, of course, broke out later, supported by some ultra-nationalist British conservatives.
Ultra-nationalist British conservatives on the eve of World War I were saying that the British army should break the constitution to save the constitution, support the Ulster Protestants against home rule in order to save the empire.
The outbreak of war delayed the crisis and Ireland got both home rule and later full independence and civil war during and immediately following World War I.
The issue has seen some real improvements, but it still remains something that has not yet been settled today.
There are some problems that simply do not have easy solutions, especially when they are four and five hundred years old and when there is layer after layer after layer of reason why the problem tragically came to be.
With the exception of the 1892-94 interlude, the years between 1886 and 1905 were a time of conservative dominance under Lord Salisbury, especially until 1903.
Now a party of big business and aristocrats the conservative party had changed considerably over time. It passed little significant national legislation accepting mild reforms for workers and peasants and some expanded education for the poor.
Rather, issues of imperial expansion and defense took precedence over all else and gained considerable support from the public. These were the years of the greatest public support for imperialism.
This relative loss of time was unfortunate as the clock didn't stop and growing urban social issues did not simply evaporate.
Matters for workers were temporarily made worse by the House of Lords Teff Vale decision of 1901, the House of Lords acted as a Supreme Court which made unions liable for damages and losses incurred by businesses during strikes.
Think about what that would do to a union movement if every action by unions led to their being penalized thereafter based on the amount of funding that enterprise lost during their actions.
This long era of conservative hegemony and dominance was brought to a close by Britain's imperial misadventure during the Boer War 1899-1902 in South Africa, supported and even determined by colonial secretary Joseph Chamberlain, our same friend, who was the most popular man in Great Britain.
It was followed by Chamberlain's bolting the Conservative Party over the issue of imperial preference and tariff reform. After the Boer War, Chamberlain, in order to preserve the British Empire, wanted to knit it together more fundamentally by introducing tariffs within the entire empire as it's against everybody else to make up for the fact that it was clear that Germany was surpassing England industrially
and England should knit together all of its empire and knit together and defend its past to protect its future. The Boer War against the fundamentalist Dutch Protestant settlers and what later became South Africa, rich in gold and in diamonds, initially popular, actually became a kind of British Vietnam.
Extreme measures including the first use of quote unquote concentration camps, camps where people were concentrated to separate men and women and to block off areas were employed against the Protestant guerrillas who bedeviled a large British army of occupation for several years to the delight of Britain's foreign competitors,
an enormous expense in revenue and equally enormous expense in pride. Ironically and tragically, the liberal settlement, the gentle settlement Britain later afforded, the Dutch settlers enabled them to establish segregation and later apartheid in South Africa when it became autonomous and then even later independent from Great Britain.
