Beginning in 1909, suffragettes, frequently wealthy and well educated and well placed,
began to deface property, to set fires in art galleries and public places,
to go on hunger strikes requiring forced feedings,
and to create powerful spectacles at large public gatherings,
including Emily Wilding's death at the Derby in 1909.
Let's just hear their voice for a moment.
This is suffragette Lady Constance Lytton, disguised as a lower class woman,
in forcibly fed Walton Goal in Liverpool in January of 1910,
being approached by the senior medical officer.
He urged me to take food voluntarily.
I told him that that was absolutely out of the question,
that when our legislators cease to resist enfranchising women,
then I should cease to resist taking food in prison.
He did not examine my heart, nor feel my pulse.
He did not ask to do so, nor did I say anything which would possibly induce him to think
that I would refuse to be examined.
I offered no resistance. The procedure continues.
The superintendent Wardrist asked if I had any false teeth,
if so, that they must be taken out.
I made no answer and the process went on.
He dug his instrument down onto the sham tooth.
It pressed fearfully on the gum.
He said if I resisted so much with my teeth,
he would have to feed me through the nose.
And it continues and continues.
Lady Constance Lytton.
Although considerable economic progress had been achieved in Ireland,
it also was simply too little and too late.
Ireland was now a national issue
and it required a national solution.
Faced with this changed reality,
magnified by the growing naval race with Germany
and also the need to expand the army in case of war,
this new liberal ministry, abandoning laissez-faire,
except for free trade, passed a number of reforms
between 1906 and 1910.
The Navy was upgraded and expanded
while a series of army reforms established a British expeditionary force,
a reorganized general staff,
and a larger contingent of reserve officers.
A number of mild social reforms were passed,
including a Merchant's Shipping Act, a Patent's Act,
a Port of London Authority,
and some additional workers' regulatory legislation.
But what began to happen is that the House of Lords,
with law on its side but with common practice against it,
began to veto a number of other pieces of progressive social legislation.
Pressed by increasingly independent Labour Party leaders
and more militant unions,
even after Taft Vale had been overturned by legislation,
especially after it had been overturned,
and wanting to revive the popularity of the Liberal Party
prior to the next general elections,
Finance Minister David Lloyd George, also very powerful and very popular,
provoked a conflict with the House of Lords
in his People's Budget of 1909,
which called for substantial income taxes, inheritance taxes, and land taxes.
And of course, who was going to play most of these?
The rich.
The Lords vetoed this legislation,
but finally passed it after the Liberals triumphed narrowly
in the 1910 election and resubmitted the bill.
Even though Lloyd George had his way,
now he wanted to make it sure that it would stay that way
and even take revenge on the Lords.
Unwilling to allow the Lords to blunt the pace of social change,
the Liberals passed the peerage bill of 1911,
with King George V threatening to create liberal peers
that the Lords would not pass the motion.
In other words, we harken all the way back to 1832
and the first reform bill when the same procedure was necessary.
Although the Lords could now hold up legislation somewhat,
they had actually become an advisory body.
If passed three times in two years,
a law from Commons would become law,
and now British democracy was far more profound.
