Britain also faced a number of other seemingly intractable quote-unquote
domestic issues, including the issue of the Irish national movements drive for
self-rule or complete independence, and that's both an international and a
national issue, as well as the growing militancy of the increasingly organized
industrial proletariat at the end of the century, and the growing militancy of the
suffragette movement as well. Women had finally had it, especially well-born
women, aristocrats and middle-class, the elite, fully educated, unable to vote, while
male virtual illiterates could vote. Combined with the greater stridency and
overall political discourse at the end of the 19th century and all of those
social Darwinian and racialist cultural imperatives that also were part of
British discourse, in a world impregnated with all of these ideas, attitudes of
tolerance and compromise seemed on the decline, even in liberal Britain. Still,
our analysis of selected issues in British politics from 1880 to 1914 will
indicate that the quote-unquote British way had not been totally compromised and
that progress and intelligent adjustments were being made, although the bumps in
the road were sometimes substantial and sometimes even more substantial than they
had been before. Returning to form a liberal ministry between 1880 and
1884, W.E. Gladston not only enfranchised the last group of excluded men, the rural
labor force and some of the rest of the proletariat, but again attacked the
festering problem of Ireland. At first, primarily through further land reforms
and some repression when necessary. The problem of Ireland was no longer simply
a religious, cultural and economic issue. It was all of those things and had also
become a national problem with racial overtones as well and severe
implications for British politics inside Britain and the British Empire as a
whole because there were perhaps a million Irish people living in Great
Britain in England proper, let alone in Ireland, and there was an Irish political
movement that had representation in the House of Commons. And if Ireland became
independent, what about the rest? Ireland, in fact, had become a typical colonial
problem which no longer could be finessed just by reform or by repression. The issue
was complicated and remains complicated to this very moment by the fact that
northern Ireland, the provinces, the counties known as Ulster, had a majority
of Protestants militantly against political concession to Catholics while the
growing, overwhelmingly Catholic nationalist parties in Ireland were sending a
goodly number of delegates to the British Parliament where their votes were
sometimes essential, especially for Liberals, so that they could put pressure
on the political system just as they were putting pressure on the ground.
Returning briefly to power in 1885 and then once again between 1892 and 1894,
Glaston twice introduced home rule bills for Ireland, bills that might have
worked similarly to arrangements made with the white dominions of Canada in
1867, Australia in 1900, New Zealand in 1907, and South Africa in 1909. Both bills
failed with chose of Chamberlain and his group bolting the Liberals in 1886 and
establishing a relationship with the imperial oriented conservatives. Remember
our friend Chamberlain had been mayor of Birmingham doing wonderfully progressive
things in Birmingham, but he was an empire pusher and he believed that
England's future, Britain's future rested with the empire and so he left the
Liberal Party taking a number of people with him to have a relationship with a
conservative party in order to defend empire and he would later do the same
thing with the conservatives over another issue related to that.
