The Panama scandal, however, involved the bribery of numerous members of parliament by a number of Jewish financiers.
And it made the foundation of the Republic much more unstable because it gave credence to all the things that Drumeau was saying the Jews were doing to France.
It was also believed by many conservatives and Catholics that Jews, notably the Rothschilds, were purposely responsible for the Catholic Union General Bank's failure in 1882,
and that Jewish power was behind the Republic's anti-clerical legislation and its parliamentary rottenness.
Claims such as these were the stock and trade of Drumeau's popular anti-Semitic newspaper, the Libre Parole.
But unfortunately, they were also the stock and trade of Lacroix, one of the most powerful and anti-Semitic Catholic newspapers.
And remember, this is a time of radical change, it's a time of urbanization, it's a time of psychic and cultural disruption and secularization.
It's the time period when the church built Sacre-Cœur in Paris to as an act of penance for the Civil War and the loss in the war, and people were really, really very, very disrupted.
These two successive crises collapsed into the mother of all crises, the Dreyfus Affair, between 1894 and 1905, often referred to as the Second French Revolution, or just the Affair.
It began in 1894 when Drumeau threatened the military elite who believed they had a culprit, a Jewish captain, who they believed was spying for the Germans.
And he threatened them that if he didn't bring Dreyfus immediately to trial, that he would make this public.
Well, they thought Dreyfus was the guilty person, he was on the French General Staff.
He could have been guilty because he was in a place where he could have had access to doing this, except that he wasn't guilty.
And in order to convict him once they accused him, they both used forged documents and illegal procedures.
When Dreyfus was convicted, and when he was broken in a courtyard ceremony, crowd, the crowd shouted, Abad refus, down with Dreyfus.
But unfortunately immediately after they shouted, Abad le Jouif, down with the Jews.
Dreyfus' disgrace ceremony, after which he was sent to Devil's Island, was seen as the disgrace of the Jews of France by many, many people who were held to be guilty.
Austrian journalist Theodor Herzl was watching the ceremony in total disbelief, and it led him to dash off very quickly in 1896, a pamphlet called The Jewish State, and to call the first meeting of the Zionist movement in Basel, Switzerland, one year later in 1897.
Herzl could not believe his eyes.
Earlier in Austria, troubled by the extreme spread of antisemitism he had written to a Catholic friend, perhaps the answer is for us to take all of the Jewish children of Austria and bring them before a cardinal and have them all convert to Catholicism so we can just end this history once and for all.
The children don't know any better, they're not one thing or another thing, the parents would not convert, the children would convert, and we could end the issue.
And his friend wrote back to him, don't be silly, everybody would still think that they were Jews.
So he had had some past and seeing this happen in Democratic, Republican France, birthplace of Jewish liberty was more than he could take.
Not only was Dreyfus not guilty, but the treason continued.
While a fascinating cast of characters, some antisemitic, some honest, including Colonel Picard, Protestant Senator Sherer Kessner, Emile Zola, Jures Clemenceau played their role.
Picard played by Richard Dreyfus in a motion picture on this issue is in some ways most interesting of all and most courageous of all.
Picard was a typical military antisemite.
Dreyfus was the club breaker of the person who wanted to show his national solidarity by becoming an officer which was the most honorable thing a Frenchman could do at the end of the 19th century.
Picard despised him.
