The Jesuits were expelled, civil divorce was enacted and unauthorized clerical orders lost the right to teach.
If they became authorized, they could teach. If they did not get state authorization, they couldn't teach.
Education was made free and then primary education was made compulsory, so free and required primary education.
Additional teaching, normal schools were established and university reforms were passed as well.
Now here again we come back to that terrible problem in France of the conflict between the church and the state over the issue of who controlled education.
And this was not to abate until really significantly after World War II.
During this era, a number of transportation facilities were modernized, railroads, canals, roads, harbors were constructed.
While France made a number of imperial gains in Asia and Africa, helping to make up for the colonial or rather for the continental lost to Germany
and giving nationalists a replacement for their sense of inferiority and their pride, which however real nationalists recognize was a pale compensation for the loss of Alsace and part of Lorraine.
From the mid to the late 1880s through 1905, the Republic went through and ultimately survived a series of self-inflicted trials and severe challenges,
which again brought the nation to the brink of civil war and in some ways the nation went through a civil war, but won more of words and arguments than bullets,
but ended up strengthening its republican character even further, and it really is a comedy of errors that after a while ceased to be comic at all.
The first challenge to the Republic surrounded the dramatic persona of General Georges Boulanger, an adventurer who became minister of war during the time in which a scandal surrounded the president of France.
Boulanger actually was really pretty much of a scoundrel, as was the president's son-in-law who was selling a legion of honor opportunities, although the president didn't know about it and he had to resign during it.
Because Boulanger was a nationalist handsome, magnificent horse, could speak well, ultra-nationalist monarchists and revanchists hoped that he would perhaps provoke a war with Germany or at least overthrow the Republic in a coup,
since with his nationalist rhetoric he had become the most popular man in France known as General Revanche, General Revenge.
I first come across him in my research when he was actually a younger officer in Tunisia and the particular French minister in Tunisia saw him changing place names at a dinner so he could sit next to more important people and wrote about this to his children and his brother, which really, really was very curious and they ended up having some conflict later on.
Fortunately, Boulanger was much more sound than fury and he became a minister of war, then he resigned from that post, ran for parliament, began to be elected in one district after another, but the minister of the interior had the guts to summon him for conspiracy and treason,
while extreme nationalists were hoping he would pull off a coup d'état and in the moment of crisis Boulanger runs, leaves France and later commits suicide at the grave site of his mistress in Belgium.
So much for Boulanger. The second crisis in 1893, 92, 93, the Panama scandal had deeper meaning since it came on the heels of ten years of heightened anti-Semitic propaganda in France.
Most prominently, Édouard Drumont wrote a book in 1886 called La France Juive, Jewish France and it was a bestseller reproduced and reproduced and reproduced.
