This was both the age of Freud and Adolf Hitler, who shared the streets of Vienna at virtually the same time.
Representing what might be called German cultural schizophrenia on the eve of the Great War.
And the same thing was true within Germany proper itself.
In Hungary, in which 40% of the land was dominated by huge estates, and nearly 20% was still owned by the church,
only 25% of men held the right to vote, and forced majorization of education and major state institutions
continued to be the norm when the majority of people didn't speak Hungarian or read it, a very difficult language to be sure.
Given the demographic realities of Hungary and the powerful expansion of nationalism in the neighboring Balkan states to the south,
with the collapse of the Ottoman Empire there in the late 19th century, this was really combustible material.
What still held the empire together on the eve of World War I was the person of Franz Josef, the army, the church, the bureaucracy,
generally decent economic conditions, at least for segments of the population, and never underestimated the power of inertia.
However, even Franz Josef could not live forever, try though he did, and the collapse of Austro-Russian cooperation in the Balkans essential.
This collapse following the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909 put the empire at great risk, even though it had the support of Germany,
even the increasing support of Germany.
It was actually not unusual for European diplomats privately, at least, to consider what would happen if the empire collapsed in the middle of Europe.
While the Austrian elites, particularly in the military, were willing to risk virtually anything to prevent this from happening,
because again, no one knew what would happen, and if we look ahead, look what did happen, and look at the size of Austria today,
a small nation of 8 million, 9 million people, Vienna with a gorgeous countryside.
And the same is true with Budapest in the eastern half.
If Austria-Hungary faced the nearly impossible task of creating a nation-state out of a multinational empire,
the new Italian nation, in some ways, Piedmont, writ large, also faced severe problems of national integration,
and did not do a much better job of it than did Austria-Hungary.
Following the death of the great Kavor, and also hampered by a monarchy jealous of its privileges and power,
and not really interested in giving much of that up, the so-called Italian political elite functioned until around 1900,
according to a system of political musical chairs known as Trasformismo transformism,
in which the same person could every six months have a different post,
a post that therefore that person was not all that well prepared for, and could not get used to.
The goal was to stay in power regardless of coalition, and regardless of ideology,
and regardless of issue, the goal was to stay in power.
And the country faced a kind of endemic political instability in which not much was accomplished,
and you can even say before 1900, in which a good bit of harm was done,
an endemic political stability that in some ways Italy faces today,
although thankfully most of Italy has finally become truly prosperous, and has joined Europe.
In some circumstances...
