Further complicating the issue was that none of the Balkan states, once they gained independence,
were really very well governed, very well developed economically or culturally,
or willing to be satisfied with their present boundaries.
Some of them had periods of good government, but even in periods of good government,
far more was spent on military issues than ought to have been the case in societies that are underdeveloped
in need of modernization, in need of primary services, including basic literacy.
Therefore, in this region, treachery, rebellion, and warfare, either with the Ottoman Empire,
or between the separate Balkan states, was endemic to the region by the late 19th century.
From the wars over Greek independence in the 1820s, to the Crimean War in the 1850s,
to the Russo-Turkish War in the mid-late 1870s,
and then the Armenian massacres in 1895 and 1896,
followed by the Greco-Turkish War in 1897,
and finally the Italian-Turkish and successive Balkan-Turkish and Balkan-Balkan wars of 1911 to 1913.
The region was unstable, to say the least.
And there were Armenian massacres in the mid-1890s.
That's one of the things that I did my PhD dissertation on.
The person I was writing about was the French ambassador in Constantinople at that time,
and in hundreds of letters, literally, he wrote about the face-to-face massacres of Armenians throughout the Ottoman Empire,
although the Armenians were trying to achieve more autonomy and some of them were radical and even revolutionary.
The Turkish regime allowed and instigated theological students to have their day all over,
and it is blood-curdling to read these letters.
And the reason that it could not be stopped is because Russia also had Armenians in its society,
did not want them to get autonomy in the Turkish Empire, and the Franco-Russian alliance mandated that France not disturb Russia,
and therefore everybody went to sleep and these people died, perhaps as many as 50,000 of them in the 1890s alone,
before World War I when the real massacres occurred.
During most of the century, British and French politicians, diplomats, and sometimes Austrians attempted to stabilize the Ottoman Empire
and to prevent Russia's further weakening of its base of power.
Britain was the most consistent in this attempt, although its imperial adventures in Egypt in 1882 when it occupied Egypt
and its occasional support for embattled Christian communities often worked against Turkish stability.
Once the Franco-Russian alliance was formed, the French placed solidarity with Russia, as I've just indicated,
above support for the Ottoman Empire and also above doing anything to force the Ottoman Empire to do anything that the Russians would not approve of.
Although Germany had begun to become the dominant pro-Turkish voice by the end of the century,
the best hope for stabilizing the region occurred when Austria and Russia cooperated to, quote-unquote,
keep the Balkans on ice, which they did in agreements both in 1897 and in 1903 when it was to both of their advantages to do so.
There were also a number of half-hearted Ottoman attempts at internal constitutional reform and more serious attempts at self-strengthening military reform.
The military reorganization attempts were usually more successful because the regime believed in them.
Indeed, the Empire made a good showing against the Russians in the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-1878,
especially at the pivotal battle of Plevna, giving the Western powers time to intervene diplomatically and prevent substantial Russian gains.
