Lecture 28, Bismarck dominates Europe, 1870 to 1890.
Having recently attempted to make some sense out of the cauldron that was Russia, Turkey,
and the Balkans, we return to that region today, in addition to other regions, in a different context.
And I'm actually sorry to say that we are entering the fourth segment of our course.
Once we turn to Bismarck and his diplomacy from 1870 to 1890, I begin to think about my final exam essay questions.
If you promise not to make me grade them, I promise not to give them, and then we can both rest after finishing this course.
Having united Germany, defeating and humiliating France in 1870, 1871, and most importantly having taken Alsace-Loren from France,
the great historian Sidney B. Fay says of that, history shows it was worse than a crime, it was a blunder, and Fay is generally kind to Bismarck.
Bismarck realized that Germany was largely a satiated power, and that any radical extension of her power in Europe,
or even a serious extension of her colonial power, might undo all that he had accomplished.
It is indeed the sense of perspective and balance on a certain level rather strange for Bismarck that,
given the way he went about the rest of his business sometimes, the intensity and the means that he used to go about the rest of his business,
that really makes him very, very different from either Napoleon before him or Hitler after him.
Bismarck was a European, he was a Prussian, he may have become a German, he remained a European,
but for him it would be a Europe in which Germany and Prussia would be the dominant forces in the context of a conservative monarchical order.
However, as in domestic politics, Bismarck was an activist and an innovator.
As he looked at things, what would he have done if he had been defeated and handled the way he had defeated and handled the French?
He knew what he would do, he would seek revenge at the earliest possible opportunity, and indeed this is what he feared that the French would do.
This is not yet Germany of 1900 with double the industrial productivity passing England in fact and having had another serious population expansion,
building a large navy, having an impregnable army at least unless it overextended itself.
This is a Germany that has beaten France and beaten her badly, but France is still a great power.
Now some of Bismarck's fears, in fact many say that many of Bismarck's fears were imaginary and far-fetched,
and what he was doing is putting his own mindset and obsessiveness in the minds of his enemies.
Be that as it may, fearing French revenge, Bismarck sought to isolate France by means of a series of agreements with Austria and with Russia
for most of the 1870s and a more intricate series of more concrete alliances even from 1879 to 1890.
Now again, most things that Bismarck did had more than one purpose.
If one purpose was to isolate France, and especially to isolate France from Russia, but also to isolate France from Catholic, Austria and Catholic, Italy and the Papacy,
Bismarck also wanted to use the agreements he reached with Russia and Austria in the 1870s, indeed in 1873 known as the Three Emperors League,
to balance Austria and Russia off with Germany being the fulcrum and thereby also preserving stability and peace in Europe.
