Lecture 30, The Diplomacy of Imperialism, 1890 to 1907.
Returning to developments in European diplomacy proper, but developments that have a clear
relationship with empire will be covering today a period between 1890 to 1907 when a
real and very much unexpected diplomatic revolution occurred.
If Germany under Bismarck was the main factor in European diplomacy between 1870 and 1890,
a different kind of Germany continued to be the main factor in this era as well, this
time unintentionally undoing much of Bismarck's post-1870 achievements.
Although Germany's continuing economic and military, including naval precociousness,
distanced it further from any of its potential adversaries, none of Germany's chancellors
or senior foreign policy personnel had either Bismarck's sense of restraint or perspective
or the ability to long constrain bombastic, erratic, power-seeking Kaiser Wilhelm II.
In this era, therefore, Germany's more forceful pursuit of imperialistic expansion, its veiled
politic in Africa, in Asia, and in the Near East, actually becoming the dominant power
in the Ottoman Empire around 1900, Germany's provocative naval building program beginning
in 1898, which over time challenged Britain.
Her saber-rattling treatment of France in the first Moroccan crisis in 1905 and 1906
made possible a diplomatic revolution, capably pursued by French Foreign Minister Théophile
Delcasse from 1898 to 1905, and Germany's isolation except for her Austrian ally by 1906.
No other power could have caused such a radical reversal except Germany by default.
And in terms of the imperial veiled politic, just for fun, I returned to one of Bismarck's
last wonderful quips in 1888, two years before his retirement, something everybody else should
have known.
He said to a friend one day, your map of Africa is very nice, but my map of Africa is in Europe.
Here is Russia, and here is France, and we are in the middle.
That is my map of Africa.
In other words, be aware of the world in which you live in.
If you want to study history, try first to get a sense of the geography and the geostrategic
implications of any issue.
The extent of this transformation could not have been perceived until near the end of
this period, even though Republican France and Arch-Conservative Russia formed a defensive
military and diplomatic alliance between 1891 and 1894.
Although this was precisely one of Bismarck's greatest fears of paranoia, especially once
Kaiser Wilhelm II did not renew the Russo-German Reinsurance Treaty in 1890, believing it conflicted
with the dual alliance of Austria and Germany, all this new alliance began to do was to redress
the radical imbalance of power which became more normative until Russia's defeat by Japan
in 1904-1905.
In other words, between 1894 and 1904, there was a semblance of more rough equivalency
between the German-Austrian alliance and the Franco-Russian alliance, although I would have
bet on the Germans in that confrontation any day.
It required the Brits on top of the French and Russians to balance out Germany because
of how powerful her economy, her industry and her military had become.
