Having first uttered no protest, once the Japanese defeated the Russians, temporarily
making the Franco-Russian alliance virtually useless, Kaiser Wilhelm challenged the French
and Morocco, visiting Tangier in March 1905, proclaiming Morocco independent, and demanding
an international conference to discuss the issue of Morocco.
That is the issue of what the French intended to do in Morocco.
This was extraordinary, because it came out of nowhere.
The outgunned but resolute Delcasse was actually forced to resign in the middle of the crisis
because the Germans indicated they wouldn't even negotiate until he resigned.
He was persona non grata, as long as he was French Foreign Minister, the crisis would
continue.
Delcasse resigned knowing his own Prime Minister, Maurice Ruvier, was double dealing with Germany
behind his back through secret agents.
And Ruvier just didn't believe this was worth all that trouble.
Ruvier believed Germany would go to war.
Delcasse thought the Germans were bluffing as did the British.
Ruvier didn't think so, and again, it was a bad card to play.
Moreover, Delcasse and Ruvier had bad blood because Ruvier was also Finance Minister,
and before the outbreak of the Russo-Japanese War, Ruvier had asked Delcasse, would there
be war?
Delcasse had said no, you can tell the investors to invest.
They invested, war came, the investments plummeted, so Ruvier was not very, very happy with the
stability of Delcasse's forecast, but he was literally stabbing his own Foreign Minister
in the back, working with the Germans through secret agents.
So Delcasse went.
The problem is not that Ruvier was then well treated, but that the Germans began to treat
Ruvier as they had previously treated Delcasse.
Ruvier thought that with Delcasse out, the issue could be settled, there would not even
have to be a conference, and they could just get back to business and negotiate, but Germany
still demanded the conference, and the pro-German Ruvier was treated the way Delcasse was treated
and ceased to be pro-German and became, instead, pro-British.
So the upshot of this was not what Germany expected, which is the collapse of the Anton
Cordial, nor a substantial cut for Germany, somewhere in Africa, either from the French
or the British Empire, but rather, in late 1905 and early 1906, tentative Anglo-French
military conversations.
For the first time, without any prior thought, what good would diplomatic support be if diplomatic
support could not be backed up with the possibility of military support?
And the British Foreign Secretary, Lord Gray, in his memoirs and also in the diplomatic
dispatches during this time period, began to think about what would happen if a war
actually broke out between France and Germany because of German starting it.
The French would never forgive the British if the British didn't do something at that
point, given the previous two to three years of the negotiations and the corner that they
had been pushed in together as a result of bullying German diplomacy.
The conference at Al Jazeera finally took place between January and June of 1906, and
at that conference, a telling series of events occurred.
Only Austria supported the German position.
Even the German ally, Italy, supported the French position, and the United States supported
the French position, and the British supported the French position, and the Russians supported
the French position.
So Germany left this conference with no cut and with the French being given police rights
in Morocco by the powers, and knowing that in a pinch, Austria was its only ally.
