The Russians, meanwhile, would obtain the right to station their warships in the Black Sea and to pass through the straits increasing their power in Constantinople.
Now, we still do not know exactly what was said. We just have several reports on it, either of which that can be untrue.
It wasn't written down. There was no protocol signed at that particular Buchlau meeting.
But what seems to have happened is that the Russian diplomat believed they would move directly together,
and the Austrian Count Erental went along his merry way and announced the Austrian annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
before the Russians were ready and able to make their step and to move forward in the context of the Ottoman Empire.
So the Russians did not have a chance to prepare their ground for their more difficult part of the plot.
Outraged and embarrassed, Count Zvulsky, the Russian Foreign Minister, demanded an international conference,
which the Austrians, backed firmly by Germany, refused to countenance, leaving a humiliated, vengeful Russia with empty hands.
Incredibly, during the very middle of this crisis, the Kaiser made things worse by giving that convoluted interview to the British Daily Telegraph,
in which he claimed he had helped Britain during the war war and would continue to shield Britain from the anti-British sentiments of part of the German people.
A wider war could have broken out in 1908-1909, except that none of the parties was fully prepared politically or psychologically to undertake that war.
By 1914, things would be different.
Conrad von Hotsendorf, the Austrian Commander-in-Chief, was prepared, but no one would go with him.
And the way the crisis finally ended is that German Chancellor Bülow said directly to the Russians,
we expect a yes or no from you in this situation in terms of this conference that you want to hold, and any delaying will simply lead to matters taking their own course.
In other words, if war results as a result of your unwillingness to back off from the situation, Germany will support Austria,
and you, Russia, will be responsible because you did not back off from this confrontation.
This is sometimes known as the first German ultimatum, or the first German blank check to the Austrians during this crisis.
Although the year 1914 itself happened to be a relatively calm year, there were just too many crises during it.
Until the final crisis, from June to August of 1914, matters continued to worsen and become even more complicated between 1909 and 1913.
Seemingly successful attempts to improve Franco-German relations from 1909 to early 1911 suddenly collapsed when the Germans provoked a second Moroccan crisis between July and November 1911.
And let's stop for a moment and step back and just take a look at what had happened.
The French chose one of their most powerful diplomats, Jules Cambon.
They sent him to Berlin specifically to attempt to lower tensions between Germany and France and to talk even about colonial issues with respect to Morocco
or issues in Africa where they had some tensions or where the French could be of some help to the Germans.
In other words, it's very, very clear that France at that moment does not want a provocation from or with Germany.
And the way Cambon was treated makes it clear that at that moment at least the Germans seemed to be playing ball because they didn't want that provocation at that moment either.
