Lecture 31, Europe in Crisis, 1908 to 1914, Outbreak of War.
I believe I forgot to apologize last time for the complicated nature and the intricate
detail that would take place during the narrative and the analysis of European diplomacy between
1890 and 1907.
But guess what?
You ain't seen nothing yet.
It's going to get worse today.
If in the first half of the 1890s, the emphasis tended to be on affairs of Africa, and in
the second half of the 1890s, the emphasis and the trouble was in the Balkans and the
Ottoman Empire.
And in the first half of the 1900s, it went back to Africa.
From the middle of 1907, 1908 until the outbreak of the war in 1914, it took place in both
areas simultaneously.
So the narrative is complicated to be sure, and I'm going to do my very, very best to
make it as clear as I possibly can.
So one can clearly see a number of dangerous tendencies in European diplomacy and culture
by 1907.
It was during the succeeding seven years, indeed, that the die was cast, and the conscious
decision to risk a wider war was made, at least in terms of the actual war that broke
out in the summer of 1914.
As Lawrence IV emphasizes in his fine study entitled The Long Fuse, the main problem that
led to the war that broke out in 1914 concerned a festering and increasingly more severe conflict
between the multinational Austro-Hungarian Empire and the small, irredentist state to
her south, Serbia.
Sentling this conflict once and for all, that is, defending the great power status of the
Hubsburg Empire was viewed as sufficiently essential by the Hubsburg elite and their
German allies at the most propitious moment, and the sooner, the better, that the risk
was worth taking.
Now in stating that, in a sense, I'm stating that I do not accept the interpretation that
Germany willfully caused war in 1914 because of clear plans of expansionism, because I
seem to believe that Germany's policy was not all that well-developed, and that it's
more important to talk about the chaos in German diplomacy and the confusion in German
diplomacy than the clear planning for an expansionist war, although there were those
who wanted an expansionist war and who moved toward an expansionist war once the war did
break out.
While not negating the Le Four thesis entirely, a number of other scholars have emphasized
the dangerous and incoherent nature of German diplomacy and the irresponsible nature of
its political system and leadership, and or Germany's decision to achieve dominance
in Europe by provoking a war seen likely to happen anyway before Russia was able to recover
from its defeat in the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905.
Under any circumstances, the entire nature of European culture and its historical experience
in the decades before 1914 need to be factored in, including extreme nationalism, militarism,
the alliance system, imperialism, a wider European culture impregnated with violent social
Darwinist and racialist assumptions, and the tragically mistaken belief that even a wider
European conflict would be short, glorious, and cost effective.
German historian Emmanuel Geiss wrote a book some years ago called The Short War Illusion,
showing that they didn't get what they expected, but what they expected had a tremendous impact
on what they did before the war broke out.
