Nowhere was the nationalistic, militaristic, Darwinian worldview more evident than in the
imperialist mania between the 1880s and 1905, as discussed in detail several lectures ago.
And what could have been more schizophrenic in nature?
With railroads and Bible and modern medicine came war and domination.
For Europeans, this was a tribal sport at its best, with thousands of European gladiators
and millions of distant, vicarious European spectators and larger numbers of millions
of colonial victims.
Not only was imperialism a function of nationalism and a function of Darwinism and a function
of racism and a function of militarism, but it exacerbated these tendencies and widened
their audience you couldn't avoid what was happening.
It was front page news every day.
Simultaneously, imperialism led to a number of international crises, most of which were
solved without war, as we've indicated, while also facilitating the development of the Anglo-French
Entente Cordial in 1904, colonial settlement, and then the Anglo-Russian Entente 1907, colonial
settlement, as well as hardening the Austro-German dual alliance following the first Moroccan
crisis when Germany first realized that it really was encircled in some soft manner.
It didn't think it was so soft, it didn't feel soft, but really it was soft.
All Germany needed to do is stop pressing forward, but everything they believed and told them
to press forward.
In short, while one can debate whether imperialism was a primary essential cause of the war
or a temporary safety valve and the two can even apply together, it could be a primary
cause after it ceased to be a safety valve.
It certainly played a central role in our last category, the alliance system.
As with imperialism, the alliance system functioned in a variety of ways, and it certainly changed
over time.
Bismarck's alliances devised on one form in the 1870s and then in a tougher, harder form
from 1879 through 1887 from the dual alliance with Austria to the triple alliance with Italy
and then to the reinsurance treaty with Russia in 1887.
All of Bismarck's alliances were clearly defensive in nature and also made it unlikely that in
the immediate sense, France would provoke a war of revenge against Germany so that there
are scholars who take them as being on some level positive or at least not unduly negative.
However, as we've indicated, they were awfully complicated, too complicated most likely to
be maintained in the long haul, and they almost inherently forced excluded nations to either
be dependent on Germany or to form a counter alliance, thereby increasing tensions and
dangers for everyone.
Even when the two blocks came into existence by 1907 as a function of imperial concerns,
international crises, and the Anglo-German naval race, which to repeat was not the primary
cause of British action until the first Moroccan crisis, the Brits were far more worried about
and fearful of the Russians than they were of the Germans.
These alliances did not necessarily have to lead to war.
If they did, the war was going to be widespread, but they did not necessarily have to lead
to war.
For example, the fact that the Austro-German alliance functioned more decisively during
the Bosnian crisis of 1908-1909 than did the Triple Entente helped prevent an immediate
war between Austria and Russia.
With a clear balance favoring Austria as a result of the clear statement made by Chancellor
von Bülow, the Russians backed down and a war did not occur, and a war could have occurred,
although it was early between Austria and Russia for a war to have occurred since they
had been getting along reasonably well before that time.
It was Austria and Serbia who had not been getting along well at all.
