What Modrus Ecksteins called the trenchocracy, the comradeship of the trenches.
The only people who counted were those people who had experienced that comradeship of the trenches.
They trusted no one else. They trusted only their comrades.
And Ecksteins tells us that one of the reasons these people under these extraordinary circumstances
continued to stay where they were year after year and attack was because of the comradeship
and the love they had for their pals, as the British troops were called,
when entire soccer teams would virtually volunteer together and die together with their pals.
Your life depended on the person next to you, his life depended upon you,
and the bond that was formed there simply could not be reproduced anywhere else.
That was also part of the wounding of the mind.
These soldiers were replacement families for these poor young men.
Benito Mussolini was already in power in October of 1922,
while Adolf Hitler, a year or two thereafter, wrote in Mein Kampf while in prison in 1924.
I had the good fortune to fight in the first two offensives and in the last.
These became the most tremendous impressions of my life.
Tremendous because now, for the last time, as in 1914,
the fight lost the character of defense and assumed that of attack.
He continues, once again the songs of the Fatherland roar to the heavens along the endless marching columns,
and for the last time the Lord's grace smiled on his ungrateful children.
Even before, some of these young people with their social Darwinian racialist mentality
had minds that were already wounded and obsessive to be sure,
and the experience that they went through during the course of the war only made them more wounded and more obsessive.
And the imbalance between many nearly absolute post-war pacifists and some post-war addicted extremists
made Europe even more unstable than ever before.
French had a pretty good history of warfare in their long national experience.
The British had a pretty good history of defending themselves after their long national experience.
How do we explain the behavior of Neville Chamberlain in England,
for whom appeasement was still the only route to success,
even after Hitler did one thing after another that should have warned him otherwise?
How do we explain the totally defensive military strategy of the French generals after World War I
when they should have known better how could they be so far off the mark
the experience of World War I had pushed them in that direction?
Many historians also believe that the industrial genocide implemented during World War I at Verdun and elsewhere
had simply lowered the barrier.
To many people, human life had simply lost much of its value.
Poison used on the battlefields would later be used in concentration camps.
And even Hitler said early after World War I, had we just used poison on 15,000 Jews,
they wouldn't have lost the war for us, they wouldn't have given us a revolution.
As Freud feared in an essay written in 1915 during the war itself entitled,
Thoughts for Times on War and Death,
we cannot but feel that no event has ever destroyed so much that is precious
in the common possessions of humanity.
He continued a bit later, it strips us of the later accretions of civilization
and it lays bare the primal man in each of us
and Freud had actually underestimated in these words.
