This military ascendancy was once again demonstrated in 1916 and 1917 when our old friend Admiral von Terpitz, who gave us the Anglo-German naval race, decided to push for unrestricted submarine warfare in an attempt to finally starve Britain out of the war.
That decision took precedence over Chancellor Bachmann-Holweg's pressing concern over America's reaction, which of course led to Bachmann-Holweg's resignation the military had its way.
Although by 1917 and 1918 parliamentary life became more active with protests on the left and even more radical support for the war on new parties on the right, it still was largely meaningless until the collapse of the German army in late August 1918,
the political and psychological collapse of the army that occurred even before its actual military collapse.
Then in the shock and disarray that came with a realization that Germany had lost the war following extreme privations and a starvation experience, three-quarters of a million Germans starved during the war.
We know about the British turnip winner of 1916-1917 when Brits were starving, a larger number of Germans starved in the home front during the war.
Amidst continued lies about the war's outcome and in the hopes that a liberal Germany would get better terms from the Allies, which Wilson seemed to be promising, the monarchy collapsed and a republic was proclaimed in November 1918,
led initially by socialists and other democratic forces. And again, it's noteworthy that most of the socialists at that time were part of the democratic forces. They were revisionists, although others were radicalized by the war and by the Bolshevik experience, which they knew about by that time.
In Britain, the Liberal Party domination continued throughout the war, but also with curious and telling changes of leadership in 1916.
Prior to 1916, Liberal Coalition Prime Minister H.H. Asquith had actually prosecuted the war still using a volunteer army. Volunteer army, no military conscription until 1916.
Women used to give flowers to people who weren't volunteering for the war, flowers of cowardice.
Against the determined belief of David Lloyd George, his successor, that military conscription was now essential. Remember, David Lloyd George had been a semi-pacifist before the war.
David Lloyd George, who became a powerful war leader, further expanded state authority using an inner war cabinet and coping with the more insistent demands of some of the military commanders with his own personal strength.
That's in Britain, civilian leadership continued. In Germany, civilian leadership was essentially lost, even the leadership of the Kaiser.
David Lloyd George, who was an early iteration of Winston Churchill, was essential in developing the convoy system that helped keep Britain afloat during its traumatic turnip winner of 1916 and 1917.
Good old turbulent France continued to have a series of coalition cabinets during the war for, actually, climaxed finally by the appointment of the powerful Tiger, as he was known, Georges Clemenceau, in November of 1917, who both expanded government powers and also maintained the civilian authority over the military.
As President Poincaré had said, as long as we have a chance of winning without Clemenceau, keep him out when all is lost, bring him in. Questioned in parliament concerning his intended policies, including domestic, Clemenceau retorted, je fais la guerre, I make war, I make war, I make war.
