Making matters more complex is what Professor Haye Holborn has called the political collapse of Europe in a book entitled simply the political collapse of Europe.
World War I was a pivotal transition point between the historic European balance of power transposed worldwide,
and what came to be called the world political system a kind of halfway point to the more complete globalization in which we live today.
World War I saw two extra European powers among others play a dramatic and even decisive role in determining Europe's fate,
namely and most importantly the United States, but also Japan and the role of Japan is always underestimated and should not be.
However, and this is even more important on a certain level, it was not recognized that this was a permanent alteration among power relationships.
It was not recognized. It was too radical to be perceived and integrated.
The United States especially was unprepared culturally and psychologically to act as the world's stabilizer and we did not do a good job of it after World War I.
We learned from that mistake, maybe we overcompensated after World War II, but we did a much better job.
While the British and the French also did not realize that their position in the world even as the victors would never be the same,
and they feared the Americanization of Europe until it was too late, because that's really what they needed.
They needed somehow to bring America into Europe to add balance to what had happened in Europe.
It gets worse and making this worse is the impact of the Bolshevik coup d'état revolution,
both in terms of what it represented in an absolute way as a result of the Soviet Union and the Soviet Union's subsequent diplomacy,
and in terms of what the Bolshevik revolution represented internally in terms of the Communist parties in each of the European states,
further destabilizing them internally and further also helping to push forward a fascist or a national socialist reaction to communism,
although those things would have happened anyway, but maybe they wouldn't have had the same intensity or the same stress without the fear of Bolshevism.
In a word, the Bolshevik revolution reintroduced a kind of deep ideological component into world diplomacy and an even deeper ideological component into European politics
than had existed before, deeper than had existed since the time of the wars between Protestants and Catholics in the 16th and in the 17th century.
It's impossible to understand either the rise of national socialism in Germany or the success of Hitlerian diplomacy in the 1930s
without realizing that the threat of Bolshevism posed to the European and American elites, giving the Soviet Union a severe pariah status,
made the stabilization of Europe extremely difficult and well-nigh impossible.
For example, in the mid-1930s, up until 1938 even, many of the British elites still feared the Soviets more than they feared the national socialists.
Lastly, for now, diplomats, traditional diplomatic practice and procedures, and even politicians lost some of their credibility and many even lost some of their own self-confidence.
If World War I was the best they could offer, why trust them at all?
The intense camaraderie of those who had been in the trenches, that trenchocracy, especially among fascists and national socialists,
and their hostility of those who had not shared their experience is a case in point.
