The overwhelming majority and a much smaller number of Europeans were illiterate in 1800 while most, and especially in Central and Western Europe, could read by 1900.
The majority had no sense of constitutional or national rights in 1800, while most either enjoyed or were about to enjoy some form of both by 1900 and one could go on and on almost endlessly.
Scholars even debate whether or not Russia could have reformed itself in a more positive way but for World War One without the Russian Revolution, and I think that one you can debate on both sides and I'm not ready to take a position on it.
If one were to break down the issue further, applying it to issues of class, gender, religion, ethnicity within Europe, the record would be similar.
Although the aristocrats in general still lived best of all, even in England and even in Germany, most members of the variegated but continuously expanding middle class lived better than ever and with more expected in the future.
In some way that mid-century positivist sense of science and progress was correct as long as they didn't use those tools to destroy themselves.
The working classes or the proletariat, which became the largest group in most industrialized countries, sometimes suffered horribly and usually worked under different conditions, difficult conditions everywhere.
However, increasingly protected by unions, gaining the vote, gaining some form of social welfare from the state, and gaining more access to the radical increase in productivity that even included some leisure by the end of the century.
Most employed workers were doing better than ever before, even if they were not getting their fair share by any means, and to be sure, they were not getting their fair share by any means.
As for those who worked the land in any capacity in Central and Eastern Europe, most were serfs until the 1848-1863 era, and most still worked under grueling, uncertain conditions until some form of modernized agriculture with mechanization,
and the transportation communications revolutions broke down their isolation and their desperate dependency on the whims of nature.
Life remained difficult for farm labor even in the West, but at least there were urban outlets, emigration, and a greater measure of safety and security, and for the first time, the peasants were being included in the nation.
Eugen Weber writes a magnificent book from peasant to Frenchman, the French peasants at the end of the 19th century through World War I.
As for women, most women were still virtual property and even actual property, including their children, while in 1800, while they had become civil beings in most of West and Central Europe by 1900,
and were about to gain political emancipation in the great Protestant countries after World War I, and in the Catholic countries after World War II, and in Bolshevik, Russia during and after World War I.
