These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled World War II, A Military and Social History, Part
1.
The lecturer is Professor Thomas Childers.
Professor Childers received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University
of Tennessee and he earned his PhD in history from Harvard University.
For over 20 years, Professor Childers has taught in the Department of History at the
University of Pennsylvania.
He has also lectured in London, Oxford, Berlin, Munich and other universities in the United
States and Europe.
Professor Childers is the author and editor of several books on modern German history and
the Second World War.
He is currently completing a trilogy on the Second World War.
The first volume, Wings of Morning, the story of the last American bomber shot down over
Germany in World War II, was praised by Jonathan Yardley in The Washington Post as a powerful
and unselfconsciously beautiful book.
Chapter 1, The Origins of the Second World War.
Hello, I'm Tom Childers.
Welcome to this set of lectures on the Second World War.
It's just over 50 years since the guns fell silent and the instruments of surrender were
signed and the Second World War came at last to an end.
Fifty years and yet we are still caught in its powerful thrall.
Books, films, magazines, museums are devoted to the war and assault us from all sides daily,
whether we live in the United States, in Great Britain, in Germany, Japan or Russia.
They summon us to remember, to bear witness to a momentous conflict that shaped very contours
of life in the 20th century.
The complex of interrelated conflicts, we call the Second World War, is the most widely
researched and exhaustively documented conflict in the modern era.
And even so, its sheer scope is staggering.
Between 1937 and 1945, we estimate, no one knows for certain, 55 million lives were consumed
by the war, dead, millions more remained, wounded, physically and mentally, while they
simply vanished, were missing, never accounted for.
The war was contested across all the world's oceans and seas, leaving few corners of the
globe unscathed.
It was fought in Europe, in Africa, in Asia, and drew combatants from North America, Australia
and South Asia.
It was, quite simply, the single greatest, largest event in human history.
Its political consequences were profound.
It fundamentally altered the balance of power in the world, leading to the eclipse of Europe
and the emergence of the United States and the Soviet Union's superpowers.
It ushered in the Cold War, the ideological and strategic hangover from which we've suffered
until this very decade.
And it accelerated the retreat of European colonial empires throughout the world, intensifying,
and in some cases, even generating movements of national liberation.
It was, like none before it, a total war, a people's war, leaving no element of society,
regardless of which society, immune from its demands.
It demanded the total mobilization of the nation's industrial, agricultural, financial,
and human resources.
And when it ended, it had brought fundamental economic and social changes in all of the
combatant nations.
After 1945, when the millions of veterans began returning home, people expected the states
for which they had sacrificed and suffered to provide more in the way of health and homes
and education.
In Europe, the Second World War marks the real beginning of the welfare state, one
of the most important social developments of the 20th century.
Historians have devoted a great deal of attention to and can speak with some confidence about
the diplomatic origins, the underlying causes of the Second World War.
We know a great deal about the economic mobilization for war and the social and political consequences
of the war.
We have numerous works and very good ones about the war's major statesmen, Franklin
Roosevelt, Churchill, Stalin, Hitler, Tojo, and so on.
We have great works about the leading military figures of the conflict, Eisenhower, Montgomery,
Rommel, Yamamoto, Chukov.
These are important topics, key issues in understanding the war, and we will certainly
address them at some length in these lectures.
But there is, for my money, more, another dimension that we ought to explore and that
we will explore.
Well very recently, we've had surprisingly little about the actual experience of war,
the soldiers, the workers, the loved ones left at home, how they experienced the conflict.
And so in these lectures, we will examine the origins of the war.
Why was it fought?
The politics and diplomacy of the participants, what were their goals, and what were the military
strategies they employed to reach their objectives?
We'll attempt to explain the war's outcome.
What did the allies win?
Did the Germans and Japanese have prevailed?
We tend to over-determine the outcomes of these things, but I think for anyone who lived
through the war, the outcome was anything but obvious, and certainly at the very beginning.
We'll look at the role of economics.
There's a growing tendency, I think, to believe that we simply out-produced, the allies simply
out-produced the axis, that economic production doomed the Japanese and the Germans from the
very outset.
This is the case.
We'll also look at the changes in culture and society, primarily in the United States,
but in the other combatant nations as well.
But in all of this analysis, we don't want to lose sight of, indeed we will not lose
sight of, the grim reality that war is about fighting and about dying.
It confronts us with the most elemental human emotions and experiences, love, loss, fear,
courage, sacrifice, cowardice, cruelty.
It reveals humankind at its stunning best, ordinary men and women, called upon to and
performing extraordinary feats of bravery, of devotion to duty, and it also confronts
us with humankind at its barbaric bestial worst.
We think only of the great crimes of the Second World War to be reminded of that.
In this regard, it seems to me the Second World War confronts us with a peculiar irony.
It is, after all, what Studs Turkle called in quotation marks, the good war, fought
by the allies to defeat the evil of Hitler's Third Reich in the militarism of Imperial Japan.
But as time has passed, we seem to have come to the historical conclusion that the war,
because it was fought for a good and just and even noble cause, that the fighting of
the war was somehow itself ennobling, elevating, even glamorous, that the combat did not bring
with it great agonies and sufferings, that post-traumatic stress syndrome, MIAs, POWs,
were somehow unique features of the Vietnam experience.
I think this is a view that subsequent generations of the war have, certainly not those men and
women who actually lived through the war.
We have this kind of Vietnam syndrome, it seems to me, as we look back at the Second
World War, and we have this sort of Mekong Delta-sized body of work about the Vietnam
War, that the Second World War and the nature of it, what it meant in human terms, has somehow
been lost.
We want to address ourselves to that experience.
And so in these lectures, we will try to probe the full range of wartime experiences.
For the Second World War, for the meaning of the Second World War, to see it not simply
from the perspective of those who directed the conflict, but from the perspective of
those millions upon millions who did not make policy or formulate strategy, but found themselves
and their families caught in the great and terrifying machinery of war.
Let's begin this Odyssey then by turning our attention to the origins of the war in
Europe, and especially the legacy of the First World War.
A hundred years from now, if there are people still around watching films from the teaching
company or reading books and thinking about the past, we hope that there will be, and
they look back at our own troubled, star-crossed century, they may conclude that the two world
wars of this century, in fact, constituted one great conflict, a kind of second 30 years
war, like that of the 17th century, with a 20-year truce between the end of its first
installment in 1918 and the beginning of its second in 1939.
Now certainly there are differences, important differences in motives, objectives.
In the nature of the regimes involved, the Soviet Union after all was not Tsarist Russia.
The Third Reich was not the Imperial Germany of the Kaiser and so on.
There were differences in the means with which the war was fought.
The nature of combat, the machinery, the technology, the weapons.
And we will analyze those differences down the road in subsequent lectures.
But it might be said with some justice that the origins of the Second World War in Europe
are to be found actually in the Hall of Mirrors at the Palace at Versailles, in the way the
Great War, as the First World War was commonly called after 1918, was concluded.
In the summer of 1918, the German public was led to believe that victory was within sight.
It was light at the end of the tunnel.
After four long years of suffering, enormous casualties, immobilization of resources that
had never been seen before in Europe, that the great offensive that the German army launched
in the spring of 1918 was going to bring the long-awaited and ultimate victory of German
arms.
Everyone was tightly controlled.
Censorship was in place in Germany, as it wasn't all the combatant countries during
the First World War.
Over and over through the course of the war, the public, despite the long list of casualty
figures in the papers underneath the black iron cross that appeared with frightening
regularity, there was the sense that the war was going very well, that victory was within
their grasp.
And certainly this last great offensive in the spring of 1918 was to be that victory
that was going to deliver the ultimate victory to Germany before the impact of the Americans
could be felt on the war in Europe.
Then, in October, the High Command made a startling announcement, an announcement that
Germany had in fact surrendered.
The country was in shock.
How could this be?
How could it be that the offensive that was going to bring Germany and the Kaiser's victory
had led instead to an armistice, that the Germans had asked for an armistice?
The sudden collapse left many in Germany believing that the army had at the last moment
been stabbed in the back, that some sort of combination of domestic enemies, left-wing
social democrats, the Catholic center party, the liberal parties dominated the right wing
in Germany believed by Jews, had somehow stabbed the victorious army in the back at the crucial
moment just as victory was within their grasp.
That was the only possible explanation.
After all, in 1918, in the fall of 1918, Germany, German troops were deep inside France, Russia
had surrendered, the war on the Eastern Front had been won.
We tend to think that Germany could not, and this is important as we think about the Second
World War and the German invasion of the Soviet Union, that the Germans could not have prevailed.
Somehow, this was a great folly, but of course, the German experience was they had triumphed
on the Eastern Front in the First World War at great cost, certainly.
But in 1918, the war in the East had been won.
The peace had not been won.
The Bolsheviks were running amok in the East, the Germans didn't know what to do, but they
had prevailed.
The war there had ended successfully.
German troops were still deep inside France.
Indeed, Paris was still within marching distance of the German lines.
And Germany itself was untouched.
Its industries were still intact.
There was no foreign soldier anywhere close to the German frontier for the German public.
This was a triumphant Germany, and yet suddenly, in November, an armistice had been signed,
asked for by the Germans.
The Kaiser had passed into exile in Holland, where he would be passed in 1940 by German
troops on their way into Belgium.
The war was over, and the proud German Empire, the greatest military power in Europe, possibly
in the world, in 1914, had not only not seized their objectives, they'd apparently lost the
war.
And a revolution had been proclaimed, overthrowing the old imperial regime, and a democratic
republic had been established by a coalition of social democrats, liberals, and the Catholic
Center Party.
The outsiders of the old empire were now the insiders.
The world had been turned upside down.
Then, in early 1919, the Germans were summoned to Versailles, to the ornate palace of the
Bourbons just outside of Paris for the peace treaty.
It was a convening of the diplomats of the combatant nations along the lines of the Congress
of Vienna, which had ended the Napoleonic Wars a century before.
The German representatives were summoned to Versailles not to negotiate, this would be
no negotiated settlement, but rather to hear the terms of the victorious allies.
For their part, the allies, after suffering for long years of untold casualties, were determined
to weaken Germany and to provide for some sort of international system of collective
security.
Pedro Wilson, the American President, David Lloyd George of Great Britain, Clemenceau
of France, Orlando of Italy, all came to the conference, determined to make the world
a safer place.
This, after all, was the war to end all wars, the war to make the world a safer democracy.
And for the Europeans, certainly, what this meant above all else was to find a way to
provide for collective security and to weaken Germany at the same time.
Germany, after all, had held Europe at bay for four years, came very close to winning
the Great War, and now something simply had to be done.
Woodrow Wilson arrived with a more idealistic agenda, certainly his idea that one of the
causes of the Great War had been that was frustrated nationalism, that what was needed
was the national self-determination of peoples, allow the individual nations of Europe, the
peoples of Europe to have their own states, their own nation states, and that this would
provide for some sort of stable peace.
But they were all agreed that Germany somehow had to be weakened.
They began with a series of actions.
The first was to detach territory.
The Germans simply had to lose something from the Great War, so a portion of Germany, of
German territory in the east, was taken to create the new Polish state which came into
existence, a state which hadn't existed at the outset of the war.
A Polish corridor established between East Prussia and Germany proper to give this new
Polish state access to the sea meant that Germany had lost territory to this new successor
state, as it was called, successor to the old Austro-Hungarian and German empires.
Donsig, the largest German city in the area on the coast, the port city of Donsig was
to be given over to the League of Nations to administer.
Mamel on the Baltic was handed over to Lithuania, Alsace and Lorraine, the two provinces on
the border of Germany and France, bounced back again to France in 1919.
They had been taken from France by the Germans in 1871.
So that territory in the west was lost.
The mineral-rich, industrial-rich Tsar region on the German-French frontier was also to
be administered by the League of Nations for a period of 15 years.
So these losses in Europe meant that the German state that would come out of the First World
War had suffered significant territorial losses.
They also lost territory in Silesia, a coal mining area in eastern Germany that was important
to them.
One doesn't usually think about this in terms of the First World War, the Treaty of Erzheim,
but Germany also lost overseas territories.
The German colonies in Africa were distributed to the British and the French, while in the
South Pacific, Japan would be the heir to Germany's South Pacific colonies.
The Marshall, Gilbert and Mariana island chains were German, sort of always strikes
one I think is somewhat odd to think about a place in the South Pacific called Kaiser
Wilhelm's Lund, but it certainly existed.
There's the Bismarck Archipelago, and these island chains, the Marshalls, the Gilberts,
the Marianas, went over to Japan as a result of the outcome of the Great War.
In addition to these territorial losses, the Germans were also forced to pay reparations.
All of the Allied Victor states, particularly France and Great Britain, had begun the war
as creditor states and ended the war as debtor nations.
They had gone heavily into debt to the United States.
We had loaned money to the Allies before our entry into the war, so that the British,
the French, approached the Treaty of Erzheim with the notion that the Belgians as well,
who had suffered under German occupation for the entire duration of the war, the Germans
now were going to have to pay.
Lloyd George had run a campaign just prior to the domestic campaign in Britain, just
prior to the convening of the Versailles negotiations, in which he said they were going
to make the Germans, it was going to squeeze Germany until the pipsqueak.
This was the so-called khaki election where Lloyd George talked a tough line about just
exactly what they were going to extract from the Germans.
The Germans were going to have to pay.
There was no final amount set.
It was an effective blank check, but the Germans were going to be required to pay billions
upon billions of dollars.
This reparations issue would become, I think, the most poisonous issue in European politics
in the interwar years, at least down to the early 1930s, poisoning relations between France
and Britain on the one hand, and Germany on the other, and also complicating relations
between the United States and its former European partners.
The Germans' insult was added to injury because not only was Germany forced now to pay reparations,
but the Allies added a new clause to the treaty, the so-called Wargilt Clause.
The Wargilt Clause was added as a justification for making Germany pay.
Germany now was forced to accept full responsibility for the outbreak of hostilities in 1914.
There was a lot of difference of opinion about who was ultimately responsible and so on,
but as far as the Treaty of Versailles was concerned, the Germans were responsible.
There was a Wargilt Clause, and this was the basis for Germany's payment of reparations.
So the loss of territory, payment of reparations, and then a series of military clauses were
added to the treaty, which also were meant to weaken Germany's position.
The Great German Army, this German army which had been the pride of German society, which
had fought successfully for four years during the course of the war, was now to be reduced
to no more than 100,000 troops, just enough to maintain domestic stability in Germany.
The Germans were not allowed to have an air force at all.
There were to be no tanks, no heavy artillery.
The German army was to be stripped of its ability to make war.
It was there to maintain domestic order, pure and simple.
A German navy was certainly allowed to exist, but could have no more than six warships and,
most important for the Allies, no submarines.
The U-boats had been one of the great problems for the Allies during the war, and they were
in no mood to tolerate the existence of this arm of the German military, so no submarines.
All of these aspects of the treaty were bitterly resented by the Germans, and would all become
quite controversial during the course of the 1920s and early 30s.
And many believed, in fact, almost before the ink was dry, that the treaty probably had
been too harsh, and yet there's a curious thing about the treaty.
There was no occupation of Germany.
After four years of bitter combat on a scale that the Europeans had never experienced,
the war ends, the Kaiser goes into exile, a new German government is declared, and there's
no occupation.
Allied troops were certainly sent into the Rhineland for a sort of temporary occupation,
and then the Rhineland, this area of Germany west of the Rhine River on the border of Belgium
and France, was to be a demilitarized zone, but no real occupation, and no Allied troops
marching off to occupy Berlin and so on, one of the major differences between the outcome
of the First War and the Second.
Finally, a system of collective security, seen as absolutely crucial, was to be provided
for by a new institution, and this was one of the brain children of Woodrow Wilson, and
that's the League of Nations, an international organization which would help to negotiate
differences between the nations of the world, which would hopefully prevent the outbreak
of great tragedies such as the war that the world had just endured.
So the League of Nations would be present to mitigate trouble after the end of hostilities.
But this wasn't going to be enough, the French in particular were concerned.
After all, the Germans were still just across the river.
What were they going to do?
The English could go back across the channel, the Americans could drift off back across
the Atlantic, but the French had the Rhine, and that was it.
And so for the French, and this is the underlying story of French policy through the 1920s and
into the 1930s, is a search for security.
There were still 20 million Germans too many, as far as the French were concerned.
And so what were they going to do?
Well at the meetings at Versailles, Wilson and Lloyd George pledged to the French a
guarantee of French sovereignty and French territory.
There was to be an Anglo-American guarantee.
So when the conference came to an end, these attempts to weaken Germany and then to establish
a system of collective security were all in place.
And yet there was trouble, trouble almost instantly.
Indeed, problems with the treaty and the system of collective security emerged at once.
Predictably, this was a surprise to absolutely nobody, the Germans regardless of their political
affiliation where they were on the radical left from the communists or on the radical
right or the conservatives, the monarchists, all German political parties thought the treaty
was a dictated peace, that it was unfair, that it was an abomination.
The treaty alienated the Germans, they saw it as a diktat, was the German term, it means
a dictated peace.
They resided all the provisions, not some of them, but all of them, particularly I think
the Wargill Clause and the reparations.
So the way the war ended in this curious fashion, the German army was successful, remarkably
successful in diverting responsibility for the armistice away from the army itself.
It had been the army that had called for the armistice.
And yet the army managed to distance itself from the actual surrender and then certainly
from the Treaty of Versailles.
The responsibility for Versailles was the new Republican government that had been established
by the revolution.
And so as the Germans came home from the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles where the treaty
was negotiated, the stab in the back legend had already taken root, a sense that the German
army, there had to be some explanation, Germany had been sold out, the army stabbed in the
back.
The right wing in particular in Germany was convinced of this.
And this stab in the back legend, the way the war ended, the Treaty of Versailles served
to delegitimize the new democratic government.
The Republican government in Germany was born with a heavy burden of responsibility for
something that it had not, in fact, it had not been in power during the war, whereas
the Kaiser, the army and so on, managed to sidestep that responsibility.
Although Germany in the late 1920s would try to fulfill the treaty, it was never accepted
in Germany.
It's validity was always questioned.
It became simply a mantra of all political parties.
That was predictable.
What was not predictable and what came as a great shock and a blow to the treaties and
the international system of collective security was that the United States Senate failed to
ratify the Treaty of Versailles.
The United States would not become a member of the League of Nations.
There was a preview of American isolationism that would dominate American policy in the
1930s, so that at the very outset, one of the major pieces foreseen at Versailles of
this great puzzle, this great system, was absent.
The United States failed to participate and not only did we fail to enter the League
of Nations to ratify the Treaty of Versailles, the Senate also failed to approve the Anglo-American
guarantee to France.
There was an entangling alliance.
We didn't want any part of being involved in European problems.
The upshot of this was that when the United States failed to ratify the guarantee to France,
so did Great Britain.
Britain was not going to do it without the United States and so at the very beginning,
already by 1920, these key factors in the international system, the anticipated international
system were absent.
The anticipated collective security system was gravely weakened, if not utterly undone
almost from the beginning.
The United States would remain heavily involved in European financial affairs in the 1920s,
but resolutely refused to enter into any sort of collective security arrangement.
Security was also further weakened by a growing British conviction in the 1920s that the Treaty
of Versailles had been, as the Germans maintained, too harsh and that the real problem for stability
in Europe wasn't the Germans who were defeated, but rather the French, the vindictiveness
of the French, that the French were now going to use this opportunity to establish their
hegemony on the continent.
This is a theme we'll come back to in the future, but cooperation between Britain and
France was not something that one could take for granted, despite the cooperation during
the Great War.
And with over a million dead and wounded in the First War, the British were extremely
wary of being drawn into a new conflict.
That was especially the case since the Dominions, Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa
had become separate members of the League of Nations and were even more reluctant to
be drawn into continental affairs.
Britain therefore favored accommodation with Germany.
The British saw the League of Nations not as an instrument to enforce the treaty, but
as an instrument for reconciliation, to manage conflict rather to enforce the treaty.
Italy was embittered because it had not been rewarded with territories in the Adriatic
or in North Africa.
The Italians wind up technically a victor state in the First War, although they had
suffered grievous losses fighting the Austrians in the South.
Italy came away from the Treaty of Versailles, also unhappy, unhappy that it hadn't gotten
these territories, former territories in North Africa or in the Adriatic.
If Republican Italy, which had fought the war, was disappointed with the outcome, fascist
Italy, Mussolini would come to power in 1922, was infuriated by this turn of events.
There was also one other absentee at the Treaty of Versailles, an important one.
The new Bolshevik regime in Russia was not invited to the negotiations at Versailles.
The Bolshevik regime in the new Soviet Union was a pariah state, an outsider.
Not invited.
It's the beginning, along with the Allied intervention, the attempt to roll back the
Bolshevik Revolution, to keep the Russians in the war.
It's the beginning of a conviction on the part of the new Bolshevik leadership that
the Western Allies couldn't be relied upon, that the West was not interested in real security
with the Russians involved.
What this meant then, at the conclusion of the decade, was that France was compelled
to assume responsibility for enforcing the treaty.
What had begun as an attempt to weaken Germany and to provide for a system of collective
security had already, even actually by the mid-20s, resulted in the situation in which
France alone felt responsible for finding some sort of workable solution to what it
saw as the ongoing German problem.
