Lecture 3, The Failure of the International System
Hello and welcome to our third lecture on the Second World War.
In this lecture we're going to focus on the reasons for the failure of the international
system to meet the threat of German foreign policy in the 1930s, will examine the dilemmas
of British, French and Soviet foreign policy, as well as the problem of isolationism confronted
by Franklin Roosevelt in the United States, then finally we'll conclude with the treatment
of the major international crises of 1938 and 1939 as Europe moved relentlessly toward
the outbreak of war.
In 1936, with the Olympic Games, the remilitarization of the Rhineland, Germany had announced its
return as a major power in Europe.
In addition in 1936, Hitler would introduce the so-called four-year plan, an economic
plan to make Germany self-sufficient within four years, economically self-sufficient to
confront the dangers of an increasingly challenging international situation.
And as I said in the last lecture, I think it's extremely important to understand over
and over and over again in 1936, 1937, 1938, Hitler would constantly emphasize his desire
for peace.
Anyone who thinks that I want war, he would routinely say, doesn't understand anything
at all about me personally.
After all, unlike some of the other states under the period, I was a soldier at the
front during the First World War, during the Great War.
I know what it was like.
I know what the suffering of the trenches was like, and I don't want to plunge Europe back
into anything like this.
All I want is for Germany to be restored to its rightful place in the international community,
for Germany once again to be the major power that it should be and to be treated like an
equal.
By 1936, he had gone a long way toward restoring Germany, and with each of these steps, which
certainly led to the piecemeal dismantling of the Treaty of Versailles, each was couched
in this same defensive, reasonable sort of demeanor of his.
One tends to think of Hitler as this sort of ranting maniac if we see the film clips,
especially if one doesn't understand German, it just sounds sort of like this high-pitched
shrieking where the point is to say, Deutschland as many times in 30 seconds as he possibly
can.
But invariably, Hitler had a set routine the way he would speak.
It was always he began, he would warm himself up, and it would always begin when he was
talking about foreign policy.
There would be a long list of the various privations of Germany, the unfair treatment
of Germany, and his very reasonable, peaceful determination to see justice prevail.
By 1936, it was clear that the momentum was running all in Hitler's direction.
The wartime alliance against Germany had certainly was badly fractured, and France especially
found itself in an impossible situation.
Confronted by Hitler's relentless pressure, France cast about for allies, cast about
for some sort of workable policy to confront this growing German threat.
But France in the 1930s was paralyzed in very important ways.
There was political polarization in France during the Depression.
The Depression in France was not as dramatic as it was in the United States or Germany
with massive unemployment, runs on the banks, failing businesses, and so on.
It was a long, protracted economic agony.
French political life fragmented in the 1930s.
The popular front government had come to power in 1936 on the left.
It was confronted by a right wing in France that was convinced that the Third Republic
was simply corrupt, incapable of managing French affairs and so on.
And so while there was a clear perception of a German challenge, a fear of German revival,
there was simply a lack of any kind of political consensus or political will to meet that challenge.
No agreement about the necessity of rebuilding the armed forces or modernizing the armed
forces, of adopting any sort of new strategy to meet changing times.
In fact, it is in the 1930s that one sees what might be called the Maginot mentality
really come to the fore.
The French in the late 20s had embarked upon a defensive scheme to protect the eastern
frontier of France from German invasion.
They had begun to erect extraordinary fortifications, a line of fortifications basically from the
Swiss frontier up the borders of Alsace and Lorraine over to the Dutch frontier.
These concrete pillboxes, it was state-of-the-art static defensive positions that the French
were creating.
This Maginot line, as it came to be known, was in fact symptomatic of French problems
in the interwar years.
French military thinking was fighting the First World War, was fighting the Great War of
the trenches, a war in which he who occupied the defensive position had the advantage.
There was no sense at all of the possibilities of mobility.
There was a great deal of discussion in France, in Britain, and in Germany about the use of
armor, the use of aircraft to create a more flexible battlefield.
Charles de Gaulle, a young colonel in France, had already written, talked about this.
It had been a tank commander in the Great War, had talked about the need to move beyond
this defensive mentality that the French military seemed to be mired in.
But it was to no avail.
France was simply unwilling, at this point, to embark upon any more ambitious military
program to confront this German challenge.
An interesting aspect of the Maginot line, of course, too, is that the Maginot line runs
up that frontier of Germany over to the Ardennes Forest and stops.
It does not continue all along the French frontier with Belgium.
This is a kind of curious thing.
After all, the Germans had invaded France twice since 1870.
Neither time had they tried to come where the Maginot line was constructed, but instead
had used this avenue through the Ardennes and then through Belgium during the First War.
But the French did not build the Maginot line, did not extend the Maginot line across the
Belgian frontier.
There are several reasons for this that are, I think, important.
One is that France had an ambiguous relationship with Belgium.
France had guaranteed Belgian sovereignty.
It was not a military alliance in the sense that there was not an exchange of information,
not an exchange of military or a plan for coordinated military response to a German invasion.
France simply had proclaimed its determination to guarantee Belgium.
So for the French politically, extending the Maginot line across the frontier with Belgium
was a problematic thing.
What would your Belgian allies think if what you'd done was to build a fortification along
their frontier so that you would simply withdraw behind it?
So politically, this was seen as a problematic thing for the French leadership.
There were also engineering problems with it as well.
As any soldier who had fought on the Western Front in the First World War understood from
the experience of trench foot, the water table in Northwestern Europe in this area of the
low countries is very high.
You dig down a little bit and you hit water.
The idea of sinking these enormous concrete fortifications into that terrain was a problem.
It was certainly solvable.
They could have done it, but it was going to be an engineering feat to do it.
It was going to be expensive to do it, and there simply was not in France the will or
the determination to do it.
France had in the 1930s the largest army in Europe, west of the Soviet Union.
The French army still enjoyed a tremendous reputation as being the great military force
on the continent, and the French, on the one hand, in their foreign policy, constantly
strove to find some sort of collective security arrangement that we've been talking about,
but militarily there's no follow-through.
There is a sense of, well, we know there's a threat, but what is one to do in the end?
They mistrusted the British.
British-French relations from the 20s into the 30s were strained for a variety of reasons.
The British in particular, as we talked about in the last lecture, had become increasingly
convinced that the Treaty of Versailles was too harsh, that it was unenforceable, and
that the best thing to do was to meet legitimate demands of the Germans for change, for revision
of the treaty.
But each one of those was one more nail in the coffin of the collective security arrangements
that the French had hoped to see.
The French then were looking for allies, someone they could trust, someone that they could rely
upon in this context.
In 1935, a new opportunity presented itself.
In 1935, the Soviet Union decided that it too was directly challenged by the revival
of German power.
Stalin was ready for some sort of arrangement with the Western powers, especially after
1934, when Germany had signed this 10-year non-aggression pact with Poland to the Soviets.
This looked like the Germans encroaching into Eastern Europe.
Why were they making a deal with the Poles?
Was this to be a spearhead for some sort of Polish-German alliance that could be directed
against the Soviet Union?
In this sense, Stalin, being trustful, was not one of Stalin's great strong suits, I
think.
Stalin was convinced that something no good was afoot here.
He saw this as a threat, and the Soviet Union reversed its position.
It would enter the League of Nations.
It would seek to break its status as an outsider state, a pariah nation, and he named as his
foreign secretary, Maxim Litvinov, who became a major advocate of collective security.
Litvinov, more than any other Soviet leader, was associated with building bridges to Western
Europe, maintaining some sort of collective security arrangement that would protect the
Soviet Union and Western Europe from German aggression.
The Soviet Union also, in the same spirit in 1935, signed an agreement with Czechoslovakia,
in which the Soviets pledged to come to Czechoslovakia's aid if it were attacked by another party.
Well, the other party was clearly Germany.
This is what everyone understood.
But Stalin did not trust the French or the Czechs terribly about this.
France had an agreement with Czechoslovakia, so Stalin wrote language into the agreement
with the Czechs, which said the Soviet Union would come to Czechoslovakia's aid if France
first honored its obligations to the Czechs.
Stalin was worried that what the West was trying to do was to channel German aggression
eastward, and so what Stalin didn't want to do was to pledge to go to Czechoslovakia's
aid along with the French, only to have the French back out and leave them in the lurch.
There was another small problem for the Russians with this aid to Czechoslovakia, and that
is that in the 1930s and until after the Second World War, there was no common frontier between
Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union.
They were going to have to pass through Polish territory, and the Poles were not terribly
keen on the idea of the Red Army passing across Polish territory to aid the Czechs.
Nonetheless, this agreement with Czechoslovakia in 1935 indicated that the Soviet Union was
interested in becoming the counterweight in the east that France had been seeking.
In addition, Stalin instructed the common turn to urge Communist parties in Western
Europe to cooperate with Socialists and Liberals in forming popular front governments.
Up until this point, the official common turn position, the official Soviet position, was
that the greatest danger in the Western European states was not fascism at all, but rather
corrupt social democracy.
Now in 1935, they reversed themselves on this and said, well, now what we need to do is to
build bridges to the Socialists, even the Liberals, form popular fronts in order to meet this
mounting fascist threat.
So one has an uneasy Soviet-French relationship evolving in the mid-1930s as each mistrustful
of the other, but concerned about Germany, tries to find some way through this thicket.
Italy was another possibility for the French.
Italy had initially been a likely candidate to help France defend the treaty.
Mussolini, who wanted to think ideologically certainly a brethren of Hitler, Mussolini
was in many ways Hitler's model.
Hitler was always very fond of him, respected him, but Mussolini in this period was concerned
about German penetration of the Balkans.
In 1934, the Nazis had attempted to overthrow the Austrian government, the Austrian Nazis
had.
Whether Berlin was involved directly, one doesn't know, but certainly the Germans weren't unhappy
with this.
It had led to the assassination of the Austrian dictator Dolphus.
It was a fiasco, the Austrian Nazis were put down, but the French, the Italians, and
the British all rallied to Austria's support, to support them against the possibility of
German encroachment here.
So there was some real possibility that Italy could be seen as a counterweight.
The Italians didn't want to see German influence extend down into the Balkans.
But in late 1935 Mussolini invaded Ethiopia, and when he did, England and France condemned
his move, and in the following year, their opposition to his involvement in the Spanish
Civil War, Mussolini came to the aid of Francisco Franco.
When this occurred, it simply drove a wedge between fascist Italy and the Western democracies.
By 1936, Mussolini was already talking about a Rome-Berlin Axis, and in 1937 Italy would
actually sign the anti-common-turn pact with Nazi Germany.
So by the mid-thirties, Italy has already removed itself as a possible counterweight
to the Germans.
The Soviets are a possibility, but still problematic.
The Germans, meanwhile, were hardly standing still.
In November of 1937, Hitler called the top secret beating of his top foreign policy advisers
and military men.
It was a discussion about general aims and objectives of the regime and foreign policy.
During what was a typical sort of Hitler rambling discussion that went on for some time, Hitler
talked about the need for Laban's realm.
He talked about the need for expansion to the east, that what his job would be would
be to isolate his opponents diplomatically, and that Germany should be prepared in the
future to deal with a situation in the east, an attack on Poland, and also to face the
possibility of a French attack in the west.
In other words, what Hitler told his diplomats and his generals is, at some point in the
future, it was not clear exactly when, Germany ought to be prepared for a move into Eastern
Europe, which would probably bring it into conflict with France, hopefully not with
Great Britain, but certainly with France.
No notes were allowed to be taken at this meeting.
It was top secret, but one colonel did keep notes, a man by the name of Friedrich Hossbach,
and this has gone down into the record as the Hossbach Memorandum.
It's important because, on the one hand, it looks like in 1937, before the great turmoil
of 1938 and 1939, that Hitler was already thinking very consistently about precise moves in foreign
policy.
The debate is whether or not this was sort of typical Hitlerian rhetoric, he's talking
about taking a sort of tour of the horizon of possibilities, or whether this really does
represent a blueprint for action.
But I think what's interesting about it is that, within months, in fact, within weeks,
the minister of war, General Blumberg, was removed, the chief, the commander in chief
of the army, General Fritsch, was removed, and the foreign minister, Baron von Neurop,
was removed.
All three men had voiced their, not opposition to Hitler's plans, this would have been too
much, one simply didn't do this, even in 1937.
But had raised concerns, in effect, saying, mine, Führer, do you really mean to suggest
that we're going to enter into the possibility of a two-front war, or are you really talking
about war against Poland, and then possibly war with France, possibly Britain, what about
the Soviet Union?
They raised all sorts of perfectly reasonable, legitimate sorts of concerns that you would
expect foreign policy and military advisors to do.
And within two months, they were all gone.
Removed.
Joachim von Ribbentrop, a Nazi with no real background in foreign policy, was named foreign
minister.
Hitler himself would move to consolidate the military positions in his own hands.
And so, as 1938 began, Hitler was in exactly the position that he hoped to be in.
The horizon seemed relatively clear.
He had a potential friend in Mussolini, the West seemed to be in disarray.
And then in February of 1938, a situation fell into his lap, which was ideal for an opportunist
like Hitler to deal with.
The Austrian government, since 1934, had been very nervous about Nazi intentions.
This attempt to overthrow the Austrian government by Austrian Nazis, as we've seen, had been
squashed by the Austrian government.
But there was still concern that the Germans were funneling money to these Austrian Nazis,
that they were fomenting trouble within Austria, and that the Germans had designs on the Austrian
state.
In early 1938, the Austrian Chancellor, by the name of Schuschnig, began taking feelers
with the British and with the Italians about possibly guaranteeing Austrian sovereignty.
This was leaked.
Hitler interpreted this as a breach of any sort of relationship between Germany and Austria,
inconsistent with their attempts to rebuild their relationship after the 1934 fiasco.
And the crisis seemed to be in the offing.
The German ambassador in Austria at this time was a man by the name of Franz von Pappen.
Ironically enough, he'd been the last pre-Nazi Chancellor of Germany.
Hitler earmarked him for assassination in 1934.
The guy had more lives than a cat and survived that.
Surfaces in 1938 as the ambassador to Austria and suggests something that was quite rare,
indeed almost unheard of at the time.
We now take it for granted.
What about a little summit diplomacy?
Why not have Chancellor Schuschnig from Austria come up from Vienna while the Fuhrer is down
at his home in the Bavarian Alps close to Salzburg, have a face-to-face meeting, iron
out these difficulties, and so on?
Schuschnig departed from Vienna, traveling, it's remarkable thinking about this, with
a very small entourage, arrives in Munich where he thinks he's going to meet with Hitler,
and instead is then taken in a large motorcade out through Bavaria, out to Bechtesgaden,
and then taken up to Hitler's house on this Alp that overlooks this extraordinary scene
in Bavaria, close to Salzburg.
But they don't stop at the so-called Berghof, which was Hitler's actual residence, but began
winding their way around this very tiny, typical Alpine road, all the way into a parking lot
right beside just the side of a mountain.
Schuschnig and his just a handful of advisors climb out of the cars, look over and are being
escorted over to these two enormous doors that open into the side of the mountain, and
they see stretching in front of them a long corridor with torches about every ten yards
or so beneath each torch, a uniformed SS man, a schutztoffel man, white gloves, black uniform,
helmet, bayonets, out, they walk down this long corridor into the mountain, climb into
a small room, actually the room is, well it's about like this area here, gold plated, Schuschnig
is standing there not knowing what's going on, and here's a sort of odd humming noise
in the background, and then suddenly realizes that the room is moving.
The room was in fact an elevator, and it was taking Schuschnig, Ribbentrop and company
up, the doors swing open, and there is Hitler standing in front of the elevator doorway,
and behind him is the entire general staff of the German army.
It is, one can actually retrace these steps, all of these things are still there, the road,
this eagle's nest as it was called at the top of this out that literally is perched
right on the peak of the out, one could not feel more isolated, I go into this detail
not simply for the sort of local color of it, but because it was a way that Hitler liked
to do things, it put Schuschnig in this position of vulnerability, he thought he was going
for a discussion, a typical sort of diplomatic discussion that would take place in offices
in Munich, suddenly discover he's going to Hitler's residence in Berchteskot, no it's
not really that, and there he winds up on top of this mountain with Hitler and the German
general staff.
Hitler didn't waste much time, he demanded, absolutely insisted upon Austrian acquiescence
in freeing all the Austrian Nazis, coordination of German foreign policy, military policy
with Austria and so on, in effect what Hitler was talking about was the absorption of Austria
by Germany.
Schuschnig managed to collect himself, to get off the out without committing himself
to anything, so they had to go back to Vienna obviously, went back and then to Hitler's
great astonishment Schuschnig announced plans for a plebiscite to be held on March 13th.
This was too much, at this point Germany demanded that Schuschnig call off the plebiscite or
face war. Schuschnig did call off the plebiscite, the German troops poured across the front
here into Austria and Hitler returned to the country of his birth, passing through Braunau
where he was born, Linz where he grew up, and then into Vienna where he had spent the
unhappiest years of his life to a cheering throng and announced the annexation of Austria.
The international response was mild to say the least. How did Hitler justify what he
had done with Austria? It was clear. This was perfectly consistent with the principles espoused
by Woodrow Wilson and the Allies at Versailles, national self-determination of peoples. In
1918, 1919, the Austria, the sort of rump Austrian state populated by ethnic Germans had
wanted to be part of the new German state. Only the Allies had said no, this can't happen.
France and Britain had not fought for four years in order to make Germany larger than
it had been in 1914, and so that linkage, this union of Germany and Austria had been forbidden.
So what does Hitler do in 1938 and March? National self-determination of peoples. This
is not an aggressive act, it is not a demand of German foreign policy run rampant, it is
simply a justified act of national self-determination. Hitler was not through in 1938. The summer
would pass with a mounting crisis over Czechoslovakia. The Allies had been hamstrung in their response
to the Austrian case, and now it seemed as if Austria was resolved, but now Czechoslovakia
had been moved onto the front burner. The mountainous area around Bohemia, this part
of Czechoslovakia that extends into Germany and the east, the Sudetenland, it was called,
was populated to a very large extent by ethnic Germans. And in 1938, in the spring and summer
of 1938, encouraged by the Nazis in Germany, Konrad Hinlein and the Sudeten Germans began
demanding autonomy for the ethnic Germans in Czechoslovakia, arguing that they were
being repressed by the Czech state, that all they wanted was national self-determination
of peoples. They wanted to come as the term was Heim ins Reich, to return to the Reich.
This term, this policy, was clearly supported by the national socialist regime. The Czechs,
fearful of a replay of the Anschluss, this linkage of Union, of Germany and Austria, the
Czech government mobilized its forces to go to fight. Czechoslovakia, certainly Bohemia,
with its mountainous terrain, was a very tough area for an invasion. The German military
was not keen on the possibility of an invasion at all. And the Czech army was well trained
and well equipped. So Hinlein was furious. He had been shown up now by the Czechs. He
wasn't ready to push the situation. And so the summer elapsed without any sort of solution
to this mounting, what was now being called the Sudeten, crisis of the Sudetenland. But
in the fall, late summer, early fall, Hitler told his military people, prepare for an invasion
of Czechoslovakia by October 1st, while publicly stating all he wanted was to defend the rights
of ethnic Germans in Czechoslovakia. At this point, in the fall of 1938, two people
stepped in to save the day, to save the peace. One was Mussolini, who was nervous as a cat
at this point. Having rattled his saber, I suppose more appropriately for Mussolini
would be to pound his chest, since he was found ripping off his shirt there at the
Palazzo there in Rome. Despite all of this, despite his invasion of Ethiopia's involvement
in the Spanish Civil War, Mussolini was not at all keen on being dragged into war, possibly
with France, maybe with the Soviet Union, maybe with Britain over what? The Sudetenland?
No way. So he found an ally in the British prime minister, the name of Neville Chamberlain.
Chamberlain had become prime minister in May of 1937. And he was, he was a member of the
United States, would become the foremost exponent of a policy that we've come to know as appeasement.
It was not his policy, he was not the originator of the term, or of the policy. It had been
in fact British policy almost since the end of the First World War, to meet reasonable
German demands for revision of the treaty, to deal with the Germans from a position of
strength, yes, but to realize that the treaty had probably been too harsh, and to therefore
meet what could be argued were reasonable demands. As far as Chamberlain was concerned,
this was the only alternative. The French, he viewed, were weak, unreliable. The French
army might be huge, but he had no confidence whatsoever in its ability to actually pull
off a defense of Czechoslovakia. The Americans were worse. The Americans were unreliable.
We were wallowing in isolationism. And the other thing for Chamberlain, this is an important
point that we'll come back to. Chamberlain was mistrustful of American interest in the
long haul. This angle, this special relationship between the United States and Britain is largely
a creation of Churchill and Roosevelt. It certainly was not Chamberlain's policy.
In 1938, Chamberlain was afraid that if a war came, any war, that it would lead to a
decline of the British Empire and an emergence of real American power. So, Britain would
be reduced to the status of a second class citizen behind the United States. And then
finally, Chamberlain had also learned his lessons from the fall of December of 1914.
What would be worth another war? What issue, what problem would justify throwing Europe
once again into this great cataclysm where millions of young men and women would die?
The Sudetenland in Germany, in Czechoslovakia, you couldn't probably have found a room full
of people in Britain who could have found it on a map, maybe even in the foreign office.
And so, for Chamberlain, the point was, meet reasonable demands, deal with the Germans
honestly, deal with Hitler from a position of strength, certainly, but be ready to compromise.
The result, as we all know, was the conference held on September 30th of 1938 in Munich,
in which Chamberlain, de la Dieppe of France, Mussolini, and Hitler presided over the annexation
of the Sudetenland by Germany. That conference was a major turning point in the prelude to
the Second World War and the implications of which we will take up in our next lecture.
