Lecture five, Blitzkrieg.
Hello and welcome back to our series of discussions on the Second World War.
We are going to be dealing in this lecture with the actual outbreak of hostilities, with
the German assault on Poland in September of 1939, and with the Blitzkrieg, this new way
of warfare that the Germans introduced to the world in Poland in September of 1939.
We'll look at Blitzkrieg not simply as a military policy, a military strategy, but also as a
political and economic policy.
It was all three.
We'll look at what the components of that strategy were, why they were revolutionary.
We'll talk about why Blitzkrieg was of a political and economic advantage to Hitler.
And then we will trace the campaign itself in Poland, what lessons were learned from
it.
And then also look at the conclusion of the lecture at the Russian invasion of Finland
in the winter of 1939, 1940.
So let's begin with the Blitzkrieg.
We certainly tend to think of the Blitzkrieg.
It's a word that has now gone into the political lexicon of Blitzkrieg, lightning wars, obviously
what it means.
We all know this, I think.
What I think is less frequently known about Blitzkrieg was the extent to which it was
not simply a military policy, but was part of a general approach of the Nazis, especially
Hitler, to political and economic problems.
The idea of lightning wars, quick wars, to be fought against diplomatically isolated
states was key to Hitler's thinking.
Hitler, the idea of knocking out an opponent, to destroy the opponent before it really had
time to get itself mobilized, was important because Hitler wanted to be able to conduct
business as usual.
He had been tremendously impressed by his experiences during the First World War.
At the end of the First World War, as you'll recall, the old regime, the imperial German
state, was overthrown by revolution at home, all the way through the war, particularly
after 1916.
Germany was under tremendous pressure, economic pressure, pressure to provide food, housing
and so on for its citizens.
Germans were forced to live with great privations in the last two years of the First War, and
this had made a tremendous impression on Hitler.
He believed that the regime had toppled in November of 1918 precisely because the old
imperial regime had been unable to deal with the demands of its population, had not been
able to feed it, to clothe it, to provide fuel for warmth during those last two grisly
years of the war.
It sounds ironic in a sense, or almost counterintuitive, but Hitler was very much attuned to public
opinion.
I think here's this totalitarian dictator who certainly by 1939 can snap his fingers and
get what he wants.
But in fact, Hitler was very, very sensitive to public opinion.
The Gestapo, the secret police in Germany, had to submit reports every two weeks on what
was called Stimmung Ende Befolkerung.
It's not public opinion, but opinion, they would go off and listen to overhear discussions
in bars, on street corners, in the bakeries and so on, and then write up reports, how
did this policy play, how did that policy play, and these things were taken quite seriously
at home.
What Hitler wanted to be able to do was to, certainly to go to war, but against an opponent
that he'd carefully picked, they would be diplomatically isolated so that that opponent
could be knocked out in rapid fashion.
What this would do would be to allow him to conduct military operations without a total
mobilization of the economy, without the privations of the First World War, without
the dislocations of moving from a peacetime to a wartime economy, and it allowed him to
pursue a very rapid military buildup.
We're talking about a country that in 1935 had basically no armed forces.
By 1939, Germany had extraordinarily well-trained and well-equipped armed forces.
They did this by pursuing what was called a policy of armaments in breadth, but not in
depth.
That is, rather than mobilize the economy for full wartime production, rationing, allocation
of scarce resources, and so on, armaments in breadth meant build armor, build aircraft,
equip your infantry, but you don't do this as if you're planning to go to war for a year,
two years, three years, four years, five years.
These were to be lightning campaigns.
You could do this not on a shoestring, but certainly would not require the kind of full
commitment of the society, the total mobilization of society that the First World War had required.
It was evident in 1939 that this was precisely the policy that Germany had pursued.
Despite the increasing awesome displays of military hardware and the four-year plan,
especially in Nazi Germany by 1937, 1938, 1939, Hitler would review at the grandstand
there on Unterdein Linden, just across from the chancelry, every year there would be the
enormous display of military hardware, the German tanks, the new equipment, the heavy
artillery all rolled by, the soldiers goose-stepping proudly by.
Despite all of this, despite all of the talk in the four-year plan about putting Germany
on footing to be economically independent by 1940, Germany was certainly not prepared
for any sort of protracted conflict in September of 1939.
Much of the four-year plan had been devoted to developing synthetic materials, especially
oil and rubber, but only 20 percent of Germany's oil needs were actually produced domestically,
and less than 15 percent of its rubber could be produced by these synthetic methods.
Germany also still imported about 20 percent of its food in 1939, so Germany was hardly
prepared to launch a major war against powerful enemies in the fall of 1939.
What it could do was to launch, Hitler believed, a surgical attack against an opponent like
Poland.
I see, you said diplomatically isolated now, it's obvious that Poland has agreements with
both Britain and France, but as you'll recall, Hitler was absolutely convinced that his agreement
with the Soviet Union would act to deter British intervention, that France would fall into
line, and so he would have his war against Poland, it would be over, no mobilization
of the economy, no big international repercussions, the regime would move on.
This would obviously not be the case, but the Blitzkrieg strategy that had been developed
in Germany was ideal in a military sense for this type of thinking.
Well, what was that, that Blitzkrieg strategy, and how did it come about?
First of all, it began with an emphasis on offensive operations.
The great lesson of the first war had been that these massive battles, the first battle
of the Somme, in which the British lost 40,000 troops in a single morning, charges across
no man's land, the pulverizing of positions at Verdun, also in the course of 1916, where
heavy artillery, machine guns, automatic weapons of all sorts could be brought to bear against
charging infantrymen, that this static war, in which all the advantages seemed to lie
with those on the defense, could be avoided.
How did one get around having another replay of the same kind of trench warfare, a war
of attrition which Germany could not win?
The point was movement, was offensive operations.
How to do this?
Well, it was to take advantage of powerful armored forces, tanks, to smash border defenses
and encircle large concentrations of enemy troops.
Following the panzers, the German term for tanks, would come motorized infantry, traveling
in trucks and tracked personnel carriers.
These highly mobile infantry forces would consolidate the gains made by armor, while
the tanks would then move on deeper into enemy territory.
Just on the scene, would come the massive traditional infantry who would free the motorized
units to pursue the advancing armor, so you have this big encircling movements by the
armor, motorized infantry following it in, and then the traditional infantry following
it.
In the meantime, the panzers would then be off and running again, and another great
pincer movement moving deeper and deeper into enemy territory.
All the while, these maneuvers would be supported by a massive application of tactical air
power.
The Luftwaffe, the German Air Force, was to be employed for close support of ground
operations.
Its first responsibilities in a Blitzkrieg operation would be to destroy the enemy Air
Force so that it would not be able to play a role, to disrupt enemy communications on
the battlefield, and of course, to provide close air support for the attacking units
themselves.
Mast, armor, motorized infantry, and air power would deal a devastating blow to any sort
of enemy it was felt.
The emphasis would be on movement, on speed, on flexibility, all of the things that one
does not associate with the terrible operations of the First World War.
The man most responsible for developing the Blitzkrieg strategy in Germany was a general
by the name of Heinz Guderian.
He had become a general quite late, only in 1938.
He was a veteran of the First War, an intelligence officer in that conflict, where he had witnessed
firsthand the unbelievable slaughter at Verdun, the battle where the Germans had mated, well,
if we can't break through French lines, we'll simply bleed them white, so that this year-long
battle was one of enormous attrition, unbelievable bloodshed.
Guderian was so powerfully affected by this that he was determined to avoid static warfare
at all costs.
Movement had to be the key.
I didn't want to break out of this dilemma.
During the 1920s, Guderian was influenced by a number of British military thinkers.
Guderian was himself not an original military mind, but he certainly picked up ideas from
others and was able to develop them to give them additional life.
He was particularly influenced by General J. F. C. Fuller, who had been the commander
of the Royal Tank Corps in 1918, a British officer who had made these very same arguments,
basically movement, use of armor, close air support, all of the sorts of basic elements
of the Blitzkrieg.
He'd also been influenced by Captain B. H. Littleheart, who also forcefully advocated
aggressive armored warfare and an offensive strategy using mass concentrations of tanks.
Littleheart and Fuller had been largely ignored by the British High Command, but Guderian
had taken these ideas on, as had a number of others within the German High Command.
The general staff in Germany, although it certainly had taken Guderian's ideas on board
to a certain extent, remained dubious.
This is about what they saw as a revolutionary move in strategic thinking, but Hitler was
quite impressed.
It was exactly the sort of thing that would appeal to him for any number of reasons, for
the political and economic reasons that I've already mentioned, but also I think just the
sense of daring, the sense of the unpredictable, the sense of the aggressive, the dynamic.
All of these elements were present in Guderian's thinking, and all of them appealed certainly
to Hitler.
In 1937, Guderian published a book outlining what would amount to a blueprint for Blitzkrieg.
Guderian would not only be a theoretical thinker, a military strategist in that sense, he would
also become an operational commander of considerable skill, executing the Blitzkrieg in Poland,
particularly in the campaign against France, and then also later in the Soviet Union.
As the war began, Germany was operating with this Blitzkrieg strategy at these different
levels, political level, economic level, and military level, all based on the presumption
of quick war, no full mobilization, and then one would move on to the next diplomatically
isolated opponent, one after the other after the other.
The problem, of course, was that the British and the French had not played ball.
They had not behaved the way Hitler anticipated that they would, and as a result, Hitler found
himself dealing with potentially a two front war.
We're going to talk in the next lecture about the attack in the West.
Of course, one of the things that one discovers instantly about the war in September of 1939
was that although Britain and France surprised Hitler by honoring their obligations to Poland,
there was nothing practical that Britain or France really was in a position to do to help
Poland in the fall of 1939.
French strategic thinking, as we will see, was still very much mired in defensive conceptions.
There were no real plans for an attack on Germany, which would relieve the pressure
on Poland, and so the Poles were left to fend off the Germans by themselves.
The period during which Germany is technically at war with Britain and France in September
of 1939, all the way to the spring of 1940, of course, would be known as the phony war,
the droll de guerre in French, or the Germans call it the zitzkrieg, not the blitzkrieg.
Hitler, aside from being astonished at the British response, he has supposedly turned
to Ribbentrop, who had assured him that Britain would not honor its obligation to Poland,
and when the announcement came in that they had, Hitler supposedly turned to Ribbentrop
and said, what now, completely caught off guard.
Another reaction surprised him on that morning of September 1st, 1939.
Germans awoke that morning to a radio news bulletin, in which they discovered, as their
radio announcer told them, that Polish forces had attacked a radio station on the German
Polish frontier, and that since daybreak German forces had been responding with force.
I don't think very many people in Germany thought that Poland had attacked Germany on
September 1st, 1939, but there was considerable disappointment in Germany at this news.
On that day in the morning of September 39, September 1st, 1939, great convoys of troops
began moving through the center of Berlin, tanks, trucks, and so on. Crowds gathered
along to Dane Linden to watch the troops moving eastward. It was not a replay of the summer
of 1914, when cheering throngs had tossed flowers at the departing troops. There was
a sense of enormous depression. Hitler's popularity had been based, to a very large
extent, on the fact that he had made great foreign policy victories, had great foreign
policy victories, and he'd done it cheaply, no war. He'd managed to not only revise but
destroy the Treaty of Versailles with not one drop of blood being spilled.
The Gestapo reports are very clear about this. There was disappointment with the German people
about this outbreak of hostilities, and Hitler himself commented later in the day how disappointed
he was. That is, this convoy of German military vehicles moved eastward through the center
of Berlin that the crowd had stood, not applauding, not cheering, but in stony silence, watching
the troops move east. The days of easy victory were apparently, diplomatic victory were apparently
over. The campaign in Poland, on the other hand, was a terrific success. It was the first
Blitzkrieg, and it worked according to the blueprint, the game plan. It was called Case
White, and from the very beginning, of course, the Poles were frightfully overmatched. The
Germans committed 52 divisions, one million men, into the assault on Poland. This from
a military establishment that had had 100,000 troops five years before. The Germans possessed
a great advantage in armor, 1,500 tanks to only 310 possessed by the Poles. Aircraft,
the Germans had 850 bombers, 400 fighters, versus 400 Polish aircraft. Most of them, the
old World War I vintage double-winged planes, almost all of them obsolete. The German plan
called for a two-pronged attack from Army Group North, and then one from the south. The
one from the south was headed by a general who would play a very important role in the
course of the Second World War. He was 64 years old at the time. His name was Gephrin
Rundstedt, among the most distinguished and important of the German military commanders
of the Second World War. The plan was to smash into Poland, into two great pincers, trap
the Polish Army west of Warsaw, and annihilate it. It wasn't to take territory, it was to
destroy the Polish Army in western Poland, but for Warsaw. The plan had been drawn up
by the German High Command, and it worked with even greater speed and fewer problems
than its most wildly optimistic planners had believed it could. Warsaw was reached by September
8th, a week after hostilities began. The city resisted, although there were calls the Germans
had hoped that the Poles would surrender Warsaw, the Poles refused, and in what was to be an
ominous preview of the conduct of the Second World War, and one of the things that would
certainly distinguish it from its predecessors, the Germans launched a massive air attack
against the civilian center of Warsaw. The Polish Army fought tenaciously, but was, of
course, overwhelmed. I'm sure that we've all seen still photographs or even some of
this footage of, at one point, Polish troops on horseback, the old cavalry units charging
across an open field, in some cases almost with lances, certainly with flags flying into
the teeth of these German armored units, cut down and annihilated. The Poles fought, and
fought very tenaciously, but then on September 17th, the other shoe dropped. The Soviet Union
moved across the eastern frontier of Poland to occupy its slice of territory, attacking
from the east, this Soviet onslaught sealed Poland's doom. In this confusion that prevailed
on the battlefield in these weeks, about 90,000 Poles managed to escape from Poland, going
through Romania, through Lithuania and Hungary. Many ultimately reached Great Britain, where
the Poles, I think this is also one of those things that one doesn't often hear very much
about, the Poles would represent the largest army in exile of the Allied forces during
the Second World War, far larger, for example, than the Free French units that would go ashore
and participate in the Normandy invasion. There was something else, the contribution
that the Poles made in 1939. As the conflict broke out, the Poles had been working on something
called the Enigma Machine to break the German military code. It was a highly complicated
piece of machinery, and the Poles thought they'd done it. One of those Enigma Machines
made its way out of Poland and wound up in a place where it would not be used very effectively,
unfortunately, and that was into the hands of the French High Command in the west, but
that would be shared with the British. And this, although it had played no role in the
operations in 1939, the Allies would take from that Enigma Machine the beginning of
the breaking of the German military codes, which would allow us over the course of the
Second World War, as we worked these things out, the British primarily, to anticipate
German moves, to understand what the Germans were up to, and that, I think, has to be seen
as a contribution of the Poles to the war effort.
Well, by the end of September, the Blitzkrieg had done its job. Poland had been devastated,
forced out of the war. Britain and France, as we've seen, were unable to do much of
anything. Calls by the Poles for some sort of help, for the British, the French to launch
some sort of offensive into Western Germany, at least to pull the Germans back. They left
the frontier virtually unguarded, went unheated. The French were simply, their entire strategic
concept was defensive, it did not call for operations in Germany, and although there
were a few exchanges, a few air attacks along the frontier, there were no operations launched
by the British or the French to save Poland. By the end of September then, Germany and
the Soviet Union had completed yet another partition of Poland, the war in the east was
over. In the west, then a strange lull would follow. Hitler would use this period from
the end of the war in Poland in October, really down to the spring of 1940, to launch one peace
initiative after another. Over and over again, over the course of December, January, December
of 1939, January, February 1940, Hitler over and over again keeps trying to bring the British
to their senses. He keeps believing that if he can just, if he can just make the British
understand that they have a place in his world view, they have a place, he doesn't have any
real issue with them, he doesn't want a war in the west. He's succeeded in what he wanted.
He doesn't want to go to war in the west, he's not prepared for a war in the west. But of
course, the starting point, the Ausgang's point, as the Germans say, for any discussion
with the British or the French was, the Germany keeps what it's gotten in the east. And this,
the British were absolutely unwilling to do. And so they waited. In the east, the war however
didn't come to a complete standstill. Poland had fallen, but now came an odd interlude
in a way. The Russo-Finnish war in November of 1939 that would go on to March, middle
of March 1940. Stalin was concerned that Finland would fall under German influence so much
for the cooperation between Germany and the Soviet Union. Finland was too close, it was
too dangerous, he was afraid that the Finns would fall under German influence. Leningrad,
the Soviet Union's second largest city, was only 20 miles from the Finnish frontier.
The Soviets demanded that the Finns cede territory on the Carillian Isthmus, which would put Leningrad
out of range of potential attack from the north. A number of possibilities were open,
exchanges of territory and so on, but ultimately the Finns refused all of these overtures from
the Soviet Union. And the Soviet Union finally launched military operations on November 30th,
1939 against Finland. In all of the history of overmatched opponents in warfare, you probably
could not find a better example than the Russo-Finnish war. The Soviet, the Red Army outnumbered the
Finns by 50 to 1. Enormous advantages in equipment. The Finns, everyone believed would be utterly
unprepared, certainly not be able to deal with the Red Army. But the Finns, under Field
Marshal von Monnerstein, Monerheim rather, fought with great skill and tenacity. One
always thinks about the winter being the ally of the Russians. In this instance, it was
the Finns who made use of it, wearing white uniforms, outmaneuvering the Russians, fighting
very well in very heavy bad weather. One thinks, one of the things the Russians probably should
have learned from this is that you don't launch military operations in this part of
the world in the winter time. They would do it against the Germans later on with equally
dubious results. They found themselves really surprised with the situation in Finland. The
Red Army very quickly bogged down. The Finns fought with great tenacity. The Soviets were
bogged down in the snow, in the swamps, in the dense forests of the area. They suffered
humiliating defeats and heavy casualties all the way through this campaign, which was covered
with great delight in the West. In the end, of course, the Soviets would prevail. But one
of the upshots of the, and one of the most important ramifications of the Russo-Finnish
War was that it seemed to seal the bad reputation of the Red Army internationally. Everyone
looking at this said, well, if the Soviets can't defeat the Finns, if it takes them this
much time, this much energy, with these advantages, then the purges of the Red Army have really
been even more devastating than we thought. This was a lesson that was certainly not lost
on Hitler and Berlin. The Germans, when they approached the Soviets in 1941, would have
this as a background to their thinking about Soviet military preparations and the status
of the Red Army. One of the most astonishing aspects of this at the time is that the French
and the British, particularly the British, actually considered sending aid or even troops
across Scandinavia to help the Finns. Churchill was very keen on this idea. This was one of
those ideas. He was not yet Prime Minister in Britain, but it was one of the ideas which
also gave him the reputation of being a kind of loose cannon floating around. One can only
think of how the war might have looked different if, for example, the British had been able
to project power across Norway, Sweden, and into Finland. It was only really because the
Swedes maintained their neutrality, refused to allow any sort of overflight or passage,
and because getting troops across through the Baltic with the German Navy patrolling
there was difficult, that the British were dissuaded from this. But Churchill was very
enthusiastic about this prospect. This, I think, along with his idea of attacking through
the, quote, soft underbelly of Europe, close quote, were military ideas whose time still
has not come. At the conclusion of this campaign in the middle of March 1940, Soviet standing
in the West was at an all-time low. The assessment of the Red Army was low, and anti-Soviet sentiment
was rampant in Britain and France and in the United States. Here was this bully nation,
this bully state, this communist state, which had now attacked small Finland, and the heroic
Finns had fought with great skill to, to fend them off. The great question as March turned
to April of 1940 was not what was going to happen, though, in Finland or in the East.
The question was what was going to happen in the West. Would there be a campaign in
Western Europe? Hitler still had not given up reaching some sort of accommodation with
the British, with Chamberlain, and so one waited. Would the phony war become a real war,
a shooting war? Would the droll de guerre be over? Would the Zitzkrieg turn into Blitzkrieg
in the West? That answer would come in May of 1940. We'll take that up next time.
