Lecture 7, Their Finest Hour, Britain Alone
Hello, welcome to our seventh lecture in this history of the Second World War.
In this lecture, we're going to begin a set really of two, to deal with the situation,
the very perilous situation of Britain in the summer of 1940 after the fall of France.
It is the period when Britain stood alone against the Germany which had become easily
the dominant power in Europe, the masters of the continent, when Britain now faced the
very real prospect of a German invasion of the British Isles.
During this first lecture devoted to this set of topics, we're going to deal with the
German plans for the invasion of England, Operation Sea Line as it was called.
What did the Germans think they were doing?
How are they going to go about planning this invasion?
We're going to look at the British situation.
Certainly there was a sense that this was a dire and very, very dangerous set of circumstances
in which the British found themselves, but they also had some assets, strategic assets
with which to confront the Germans.
So we want to examine Britain in this period which Winston Churchill would refer to as
their finest hour.
With the fall of France suddenly in the summer of 1944, the shock of this was just overwhelming.
No other surprise was greater in the entire history of the Second World War than this
sudden collapse of France between May and June of 1940.
It had been anticipated that France would be able to maintain its defenses against the
Germans.
The French had the largest army in Western Europe.
Certainly there was a sense that, well, France would be able to defend itself with British
help.
It might be something of a replay of the First War which would certainly drag out for some
time.
No sense at all.
No one was prepared for the utter collapse of France after 35 days of combat.
Churchill addressing the British public in the summer of 1940 after the fall of France
would say the following words, words which would become hallmarks of this period of British
resistance.
And I quote, What General Vagan called the Battle of France is over.
I suspect that the Battle of Britain is about to begin.
Upon this battle depends the survival of Christian civilization.
Upon it depends our own British life and the long continuity of our institutions and our
empire.
The whole fury and might of the enemy must very soon be turned on us.
Hitler knows that he will have to break us in this island or lose the war.
If we can stand up to him, all Europe may be free and the life of the world may move forward
into broad, sunlit uplands.
But if we fail, then the whole world, including the United States, including all we have known
and cared for, will sink into the abyss of a new, dark age, made more sinister and perhaps
more protracted by the lights of perverted science.
Let us therefore brace ourselves to our duties and so bear ourselves that if the British
Empire and its Commonwealth last for a thousand years, men will say this was their finest hour.
For the British in June, July, August of 1940, there was no aid to be expected.
They were without allies.
The United States still on the sideline with the Roosevelt administration chafing to find
ways to send material aid to Britain.
But Britain, indeed, as Churchill suggested, now stood alone to confront the German menace.
The British chiefs of staff in this situation were in utter agreement that Britain could
not win the war, indeed could not even continue the war, without considerable support from
the United States.
There was too much to expect that the United States would actually enter the conflict but
certainly material support, which was already flowing back to some degree to Great Britain.
Still they believed victory could be attained by a combination of certain factors.
On the one hand, the British believed in the policy of strategic bombing that we talked
about in a previous lecture.
So a bombing offensive against Germany, a naval blockade of Germany was something that
was still considered a possibility, and Churchill was very keen on this option, was the support
of resistance movements in occupied Europe, leading to insurrection all over the continent.
The first of these instruments, weapons to be used against Germany, strategic bombing,
we've already talked about, the systematic destruction of Germany's capacity to make
war attacks on its industries, on its transportation system, on its sources of energy.
This policy of strategic bombing was recognized as the only practical way for the British
in 1940 to hit the Germans, and indeed for the foreseeable future.
The British army was still extraordinarily weak in no position, especially after Dunkirk,
to think about any sort of offensive operations, but the bomber, strategic air power was one
way to bring the war home to the Germans.
The RAF, as we've seen, had been independent since 1918 and had begun already to plan for
such a campaign.
Churchill would give great impetus to bomber command, as it was called in 1940.
The construction of heavy bombers, large four-engine planes capable of taking significant bomb loads
as far as Berlin, were already under construction and some already operational, the Stirlings,
the Blenheims, and then finally, as we will see a bit later on, the gigantic Lancasters,
which would wreak so much havoc over occupied Europe in the coming years.
So strategic bombing was the one offensive option that Britain had, this offensive arrow
in the quiver of the British government at this point.
Another element was what Churchill had called insurrection, setting Europe ablaze.
In 1940, he would organize what was called SOE, Special Operations Executive.
Special Operations Executive was to be a covert operation.
It was to send agents into all of occupied Europe.
It was organized according to national sections, it was an F-section for France, a section
for each of the occupied countries, including Germany.
Agents would be sent into these individual countries, arms would be delivered to these
agents and resistance forces, which they would organize, and then these resistance
forces would carry out sabotage, espionage, anything to cause trouble for the Germans.
These operations began very early on, really by 1941, they were in full swing.
They would continue on very effectively all the way through the war.
The important thing about SOE, this was not an intelligence gathering organization.
This was an organization for sabotage.
This was to conduct covert operations against the Germans everywhere, to cause them trouble,
to recruit resistance fighters in all of occupied Europe, to organize them and then to provide
them with the weapons necessary to carry out their operations.
And already in 1940, the British had begun to plan sending small aircraft to deliver
these agents.
They were delivered by submarine, they were delivered by parachute, dropping into occupied
Europe to cause trouble for the Germans.
Now at this point, of course, SOE, this is a pinprick, this is something that will cause
the Germans irritation at this point.
In the long run, of course, Churchill had far greater hopes for this organization.
The last option for the British, one more element of their policy at this point, was
naval blockade.
This had been extremely effective during the Great War.
From 1916 onward, Britain had slowly starved Germany to death in the Great War.
And this was still seen as an option for Britain.
The British Navy was still very strong and Germany was quite weak.
There were some worries about what would happen if the Italian and French navies were to be
brought under German control, particularly the French Navy.
So this was of some concern and indeed in July 1940, the British took the extraordinary
step of issuing the French, there was a call for the French to send their ships to British
ports or to French North Africa, out away from the Germans.
Churchill did not want the French fleet to fall into German hands.
When the French in July wavered on this a bit, an ultimatum was issued to the French fleet
at Mir's Alcabir in North Africa.
The British saying sail these ships out or scuttle them yourselves or we're going to
have to take drastic action.
And indeed in July 1940, British planes attacked the French fleet outside of Iran in Mir's
Alcabir, killing over 1,500 French sailors.
What had begun of two allies fighting the Germans now by July 1940, the British had
launched an air attack against the French fleet.
It was the low point of Anglo-French relations obviously in this troubled period.
The problem about this for Churchill was that the effects of the naval blockade would be
negligible as long as the Soviet Union and Germany continued to cooperate economically.
Part of the deal that Hitler had struck with Stalin, the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, was an
economic agreement that the Soviet Union would provide Germany with raw materials and other
necessities needed for the German war effort.
And indeed Stalin was very, very scrupulous about this.
Regular supply trains arrived across the frontier into Germany.
It was considered essential.
So the idea somehow that Britain would be able to blockade Germany, this was a long
shot I think.
It could not be a replay of the first war.
The German position was far stronger economically in this instance.
They had now really in 1940 the Germans had the resources of all of continental Europe
at their disposal.
So a naval blockade, that didn't strike anyone as really particularly effective, but the
British Navy was Churchill's strongest weapon and he needed to be able to find a way to
use it.
In fact in 1940 the Royal Navy had to devote considerable energy simply to preserve, to
maintain the sea lanes to Britain so that Britain would not be blockaded or starved
by German U-boat activity.
More pressing than ways that Britain might win the war in 1940 was the stark problem of
how was Britain going to survive.
It's one thing to talk about war winning strategies, another in the summer of 1940
to talk about survival because now as Churchill had said in the address that I quoted at
the outset, a German invasion of Britain seemed imminent.
In July of 1940 the Germans seemed poised for a cross channel invasion and Britain was
woefully unprepared.
The army was small and it was still reeling from the disaster on the continent.
Three hundred thousand British troops had managed to escape from Dunkirk but all of
the heavy equipment, all the heavy artillery, the tanks, vehicles had all been left behind
so that the British army, certainly the soldiers had survived but the army was the British
expeditionary force had come back in complete disarray.
During the summer of 1940 there was no real fighting force, organized fighting force that
would be capable of dealing with the triumphant Wehrmacht.
Local defense volunteers were organized but they were under-equipped, weapons from the
first war, muskets, all sorts of things drawn out, pitchforks issued to British farmers
to be prepared for a parachute invasion and so on.
The government publicly exhorted the population to stand firm, Churchill talking about we
will fight on the beaches, we will fight in the streets, we will never surrender defiant
language certainly but at the same time privately the British government began shipping Britain's
gold, foreign exchange reserves and negotiable foreign securities to Canada.
In June and July 1940 over 5 billion in gold bonds and securities crossed the Atlantic and
the British war effort could now be financed from North America if necessary.
In other words the British government had already begun dealing with the very real prospect
that Britain, thus the Germans could launch a successful invasion and the world would
have to be continued from abroad.
Indeed evacuation of the government to Canada was already discussed and plans were made
secretly to organize guerrilla resistance inside Britain in the event of a successful
German invasion.
Meanwhile, feverish work was done along the coast, beaches were mined, tank traps set,
all sorts of civil defense arrangements made, paramilitary training conducted.
The British government at this point, the British cabinet secretly entertained plans
for the use of poison gas if necessary to thwart the German invasion.
That decision was okayed by the cabinet, the British were prepared to use poison gas if
necessary in an extreme situation to prevent a successful invasion.
It was clear to everyone in the summer of 1940 that the future of Britain would be decided
in the next few weeks, possibly months and it would largely be decided in the air.
It was the ability of the RAF, the Royal Air Force, to deny German superiority over
the channel in the invasion beaches that was going to be the key and everyone certainly
recognized it.
In order for the Germans to launch this cross-channel invasion they were going to have to maintain
air superiority, establish and maintain air superiority, something they had been unable
to do at Dunkirk.
The Germans for their part, now looking at the prospect of a cross-channel invasion,
on the one hand were enormously confident, the Wehrmacht was at the high point, the highest
apex of its reputation, there is hardly any way to describe the euphoria in Germany as
a result of the victory over France.
It was the high watermark of Hitler's popularity for Germans who had spent four years during
the First War attempting to subdue the French to take French territory to reach Paris and
had been denied.
This was finally the complete reversal of fortunes that the Germans in the interwar
years had sought.
The plan, the invasion of France had succeeded beyond the high command's greatest hopes
and now they had to confront the possibility of a cross-channel invasion of Great Britain.
Hitler had largely assured his high command that after the fall of France that Britain
would finally see the light and make a deal, that even Churchill, that great war monger
as Hitler liked to call him, would have to be brought to his senses and realized that
there was no point in Britain continuing the struggle.
When this did not happen, however, the high command was given the responsibility of planning
to think about an invasion of Great Britain and for the first time the Germans confronted
the realities of what that would mean, what an invasion across this body of water would
actually entail.
Unlike the German operational plans for the invasion of France or the invasion of Poland,
both of which had been the result of months of staff planning, very careful planning,
logistical calculations and so on, Operation Sea Lion, as the German plan for the invasion
of Great Britain would be called, was from the very beginning an improvisation.
Not even the most rudimentary plan for an invasion of Britain had been drafted when
France fell in June of 1940.
High command had no contingency plans for this and then on July 16, after numerous peace
feelers to Britain had been rejected, Hitler authorized the high command of the army to
begin plans for a cross channel invasion.
He gave them a target date.
That target date was August 15th.
One month, one month for an operation whose success would require extraordinary coordination
between the army, the navy, the air force, which would require logistical planning, logistical
feats that the Germans had as yet not accomplished.
These were the problems confronted then by the German high command.
Their original draft, the army's original draft, and it was the army that did the planning.
What's interesting about this one sees what thinks about the Germans as being terrifically
organized, but the way Hitler approached this was he gave the chief of staff of the
army, Halder, the plans, the order to begin planning.
The army did this without consultation with the navy, without consultation with the air
force.
They simply began to plan.
Looking at the map of Britain, how would we like to proceed?
The plan was drawn up by the army and called for 500,000 German troops to land along a
200-mile coastal front in the south and southeastern parts of England.
This plan, you think about this, a 200-mile wide invasion beach, in effect, front, revealed
that the army completely lacked faith in the German Luftwaffe.
They'd seen Dunkirk.
They had no real desire for a more compact landing area because they were afraid that
Göring's air force would not be able to achieve the necessary air superiority there, and so
by dispersal of forces would protect them a bit more from the RAF.
When this plan was presented to Admiral Rader, the head of the German navy, he was mortified,
absolutely mortified.
First of all, he pointed out that he lacked the ships necessary to transport troops.
There were not adequate naval forces to deal with the Royal Navy.
How was he going to protect a cross-channel invasion force against the largest navy in
Europe?
And the question of transporting troops, how are these 500,000 troops going to get across
the channel?
The Germans had no real landing craft, no amphibious craft had been developed, nothing
like the Higgins boats that the United States would develop and employ in the war against
the Japanese in 1942.
They'd given no thought to this whatsoever, no logistical planning, no technological
planning for this.
Rader initially came up with the idea, well, they would try to transport troops across,
well, they obviously weren't going to take ports, the British weren't going to allow
them to sail into ports and unload, so without amphibious craft, what were they going to
do?
Rader came up with the idea of using tugboats to tow barges that had been used on the Rhine
and Mosul and mine canals in Germany literally to pull German troops across the channel.
This of course was not something that the German army was very happy about.
I think anybody who's had any adventure, any experience at all with going across the English
Channel realizes that this is not a terribly calm or tranquil body of water, so one can
only imagine what it would be like to tow barges, these long Rhine barges across the
channel.
General Halder of the army, when confronted with Rader's objections, believed that an
invasion on a more concentrated area would simply be suicidal and although he never directly
confronted Göring, it was perfectly obvious that he believed that the Air Force simply
couldn't do its job.
But the army could not budge Admiral Rader, he said it can't be done, we don't have the
ships, we don't have the landing craft, if you want an invasion for over 200 miles,
this is beyond our capacity to do this.
Rader convinced Hitler then to postpone the invasion to September 15th, to give him a
little more time, another month.
By which time Rader hoped somehow to scrape together enough landing craft to ferry the
army across the channel.
When one considers the amount of planning, minute planning that went on for months and
months and months by the Allied forces for the cross channel invasion going in the other
direction in 1943-44, one sees just exactly how slapdashed this whole thing was, this
was an improvisation, this was something that Hitler never had intended to be confronted
with, he didn't want an invasion of Britain, if Churchill would come to a sense as well
then alright, there was this belief, I think a general belief that the momentum of German
arms would simply carry them across the channel, until of course they actually stopped and
began looking at what this meant operationally.
All agreed that the key to success was the Luftwaffe.
Hermann Göring's forces would have to establish air superiority over the channel, Rader and
Halder both agreed about this.
The Luftwaffe would be charged with driving the Royal Navy from the scene and destroying
the RAF.
It was also called on to break the initial resistance of British land forces and annihilate
reserves behind the lines.
This was a fairly tall order.
Göring believed, however, that the Luftwaffe would be able to subdue the RAF as he confidently
told Hitler within five weeks.
This after his failure at Dunkirk, indeed I think his failure at Dunkirk spurred Göring
to probably promise more than he could deliver.
Göring, with his usual bluster, was quite confident but the Luftwaffe was going to confront
some very daunting problems, problems every bit as daunting as that confronted by the
Navy in the Army.
We talked about this a bit briefly in a previous lecture, but it's important to underscore
it again at this juncture.
The German air force, the Luftwaffe, was essentially a tactical air force.
It was built, it was constructed, its planes were therefore tactical ground support.
It had built a fleet of fighters, dive bombers and medium bombers that were very well designed
for that mission, but not for strategic bombing, not for long range operations, not to attack
industrial centers, not for a sustained campaign of bombing.
Its pilots, their training, their equipment were all geared for close support of ground
operations and not for the sort of task that it was now being asked to do.
The German bombers were two engine planes, they had limited range, limited bomb loads
and I think the Luftwaffe personnel who were actually charged with thinking of how to deal
with this believed that this was going to be a difficult job for them.
The Stuka used with such terrifying effect in Poland and in France, this German dive
bomber which roared out of the skies with its landing gear down, there was an air vent
underneath it so that as it dove down toward the ground, wind howled through that vent
shrieking so that as one after the other after the other came down, it had a terrifying effect
on ground troops.
It had worked remarkably well in the Polish campaign where it didn't have to confront
an air force.
On the western front against France the Stuka still sounded terrifying, but they were shot
out of the air by faster British planes with terrifying regularity for the Germans.
So now the Stuka was slow, it had a little armament and would be terrifically vulnerable
in the skies over Great Britain.
The top German fighter aircraft, the Messerschmitt 109, a very good aircraft indeed, had an effective
range of about 125 miles.
So for the Germans, thinking about this cross channel invasion, there were very real problems
to confront.
Hitler still at this point hoped that it would be possible to bring the British to their
senses, this would not be, this invasion would not be necessary.
One sees I think in his thinking, his operational planning, if one can call it that, for the
invasion of Britain, that this was this, we see the fruit of this improvisation.
We see the Germans had not planned for this war in the west, this had come as a shock.
The fall of France which had a terrific psychological effect, terrifying psychological effect, it's
the fall of France that finally jump starts the United States for example, into drastic
production schedules and so on.
Maybe it thought that France would hold out for a long time, there would be time to gear
up and so on, but now this was not going to be the case.
The Germans stood at the channel and yet, I think as one reads through the British documents
and through the German documents in the summer of 1940, it's a fascinating thing to see.
It really is this duel as the historian John Lukash has called it between Churchill and
Hitler.
As you begin to read through the British documents, there's a real sense of panic, panic.
They've been, the French have let them down, they've signed a separate peace with the Germans.
The Germans seemed absolutely unstoppable.
The Wehrmacht was at the height of its prestige and Britain seemed absolutely vulnerable.
Its army basically destroyed, largely defenseless and this is when one begins to get the British
begin to send their gold reserves and so on abroad to Canada and yet as Churchill begins
to look at the situation more closely, they begin to think about the prospects of how
to defend Britain against the German invasion and they think about it in reverse, what would
the Germans do, how are they going to approach this, then suddenly you begin to see it's
almost a day to day thing after about two or three weeks.
Even in this desperate situation, there's a growing confidence coming out of downing
street, a growing confidence from the British government that even with this unbelievable
juggernaut that the Germans have created, that that channel is a very big barrier indeed
and that Britain did enjoy certain great assets of geography and of training and technology
that could be used against the Germans.
The flip side of that is with the Germans who after the fall of France in this euphoria
of thinking the world, the Europe is at our feet as it certainly was, they now have to
confront the operational realities of this cross channel invasion and the initial enthusiasm.
There's a song that was sung in the German military in the summer of 1940, I don't think
it was heard very often after that, it's called Vifarengegen England, don't worry I'm not
going to sing it, but it was filled with this confidence, this jaunty goodbye my dear, we're
today, we're Vifarengegen England, we're going against England, but then when one looks at
Admiral Rader, when one looks at Franz Hall or the Chief of Staff of the Army, when one
looks at Göring, it's only Göring who's talking very confidently at this point and no one
was taking him terribly seriously.
For the Germans, the operational realities of an invasion of Britain were daunting and
as we will see would prove to be impossible to overcome.
We'll take this up in the next section, in the next lecture when we look at the Battle
of Britain, one of the major turning points of the Second World War.
