Lecture 10, the Germans Before Moscow.
On June 22, 1941, the Germans launched Operation Barbarossa against the Soviet Union.
It was the largest military operation in human history.
It was, without question, Hitler's greatest gamble of the Second World War.
For 24 hours, the National Socialist Plan, the Nazi Plan, worked to perfection, capturing
over tens of thousands of Russian prisoners, inflicting terrific casualties on the Soviets,
and the operation, this great three-pronged attack in the Soviet Union, was off to a tremendous
start.
In this, our 10th lecture of the series on the Second World War, we're going to examine
the German campaign in the Soviet Union in the summer and fall of 1941 to try to determine
whether or not the Nazis could have won in the Soviet Union in this initial phase of
the campaign, whether their failure to take Moscow in this summer and fall campaign would
prove to be fatal for the regime, whether it marks a terrific turning point in the war.
Certainly, in those first days, the campaign went spectacularly for the Germans.
Army Group North drove 155 miles through Lithuania and into Latvia in five days alone, movement
on a scale unprecedented in European history.
By July 10, German armor was within 80 miles of Leningrad in the north.
Army Group Center carried out two gigantic encirclements of large Russian forces, one
near Minsk, the second near Smolensk, 200 miles farther east, in mid-July, capturing
almost 500,000 Russian prisoners, and inflicting horrendous casualties.
On August 5, the last resistance in the city of Smolensk came to an end.
The Germans in Army Group Center had covered 440 miles in 23 days and were only 200 miles
from Moscow.
Army Group South found the going a bit slower, encountering fierce resistance in the Ukraine,
but still German units were moving steadily forward.
General Frantz Halder, the Army Chief of Staff and the man most responsible for the
planning of the campaign, wrote on his birthday, June 30, quote, the Russians lost this war
in the first eight days, close quote.
And just a few days later, on July 3, he noted in his diary, and I quote again, on the whole,
one can say that the task of smashing the mass of the Russian army has been fulfilled.
It is probably not too much to say when I assert that the campaign against Russia has
been won within two weeks.
But the Germans, despite their astonishing gains, were confronting some disquieting problems.
The Army Groups, particularly Army Group Center in North, had begun to distance their supplies
and were encountering mechanical difficulties, especially the armored units.
The roads and the terrain in the Soviet Union were not exactly what they had expected.
Looking at the map, the Germans had, and they'd done reconnaissance.
They thought they understood what they were getting themselves into, but looking at the
map of the Soviet Union, they had what seemed to be major roadways, modern roadways upon
encountering them.
They discovered, in many cases, were nothing more than sort of dirt tracks, sometimes gravel,
hardly the superhighways, the out-of-bonds that the Germans had been building in Germany
since the early 30s.
The terrain was much more difficult, the transportation more difficult, the roads,
far cruder than the Germans had anticipated, nor was the Red Army behaving quite the way
the Germans thought.
The Russians had been roundly defeated, routed.
The Blitzkrieg was working as if by textbook, and yet the Russians didn't seem to understand
that they were defeated.
They weren't playing.
They hadn't read the text.
On the one hand, the sense of tremendous euphoria, the Blitzkrieg hundreds of miles, hundreds
of thousands of prisoners, terrific casualties inflicted on the Red Army, and yet the Russians
aren't behaving the way, for example, the French or the Belgians had before them, or
the Poles.
You can imagine the frustration back at Army headquarters, Hitler's headquarters, looking
as one looks as the pens move in the map, and the lines are drawn on the map each day,
the Army groups move deeper and deeper into the Soviet Union.
Each day, the after-action reports disclose hundreds of thousands of Russian prisoners
of war, Russian surrendering, and incredible numbers, terrific casualties, unbelievable
casualties inflicted on the Soviets, and yet the Russians fought tenaciously, even when
there was little or no hope of prevailing, and they were inflicting terrific casualties
on the Germans as well.
One of the problems that the Germans encountered was the problem of their own making.
We discussed in the last lecture these extraordinary orders given to directives, given to the German
troops entering the Soviet Union, about this was a war without quarter, a fight to the
finish, don't expect humane treatment if you're captured, therefore don't necessarily
take prisoners yourself.
The German behavior in the Soviet Union was so brutal from the very outset that Russians,
despite the fact that the Germans captured hundreds of thousands of them, other Russians,
if there was any option of fighting on, they did, even when there was very little chance
of survival, in part because they didn't want to fall into German hands.
Moving along, and this is not a topic for this lecture's discussion, but we will certainly
come to it.
Moving along almost with the troops in the Soviet Union were special SS commando units
called Einsatzgruppen.
These SS units were given, quote, special orders, special tasks.
They were to move against the saboteurs, guerrillas, and Jews in the Soviet Union.
And so all across the Eastern Front, along with the military operations, which are going
swimmingly for the Germans, these Einsatzgruppen, these special SS commando units were conducting
a bloodbath all over the Soviet Union.
Wherever the German troops moved, we estimate, we do not, no one knows for certain, but it
is estimated that these Einsatzgruppen would kill almost a million Soviets within the first
few months of the war, mostly Jews.
But it was a distinction that for, if you were on the receiving end of this, was not
an easy one to make.
The Germans were behaving in the Soviet Union like the barbarians.
They maintained that the Soviets were.
And as a consequence, these Russian units, if there was any hope, falling into German
hands was death, they assumed.
And so they fought with incredible tenacity against the Germans.
There was a second reason, too.
Stalin, who, as the invasion had broken on his Western frontier, had gone almost in disocclusion
for about 48 hours, afraid of assassination, because he had ignored so much of the intelligence
suggesting a German attack.
Stalin rallied, and the NKVD, the Soviet secret police, and the political commissars in these
army units were also instructed, given very clear instructions, if people break ranks
and begin to run, to retreat, this is desertion, and these people are to be shot instantly.
If you're a soldier in the Red Army, you've got the Germans in front of you behaving in
one barbarous fashion, you've got the NKVD behind you acting in another.
There's a particularly chilling description of this.
This comes a bit later on in this first attack into the Soviet Union, actually from the siege
of Kiev.
But I think it's worth reading to get some sense of the position that these troops found
themselves in.
Speaking about a Russian unit, this is the German's advance in this Russian unit around
Kiev, a German watching this wrote, Stalin presided over their death, for specially trained
electricians had rigged up apparatuses and played recordings of his speeches to the defenders
of key positions, this is around Kiev.
During the fighting, the words of Stalin, magnified to gigantic proportions by the loudspeakers,
rained down on the men, kneeling in holes behind the tripods of their machine guns,
and then in the ears of the soldiers lying amid the shrubs of the wounded writhing in
agony upon the ground.
The loudspeaker imbues that voice with a harsh, brutal, metallic quality.
There is something diabolical and at the same time terribly naive about these soldiers who
fight to the death spurred on by Stalin's speech on the Soviet Constitution.
By the slow deliberate recital of the moral, social, political and military precepts of
the party, about these soldiers who never surrender, about these dead scattered all
around me, about the final gestures, the stubborn, violent gestures of these men who died so
terribly, lonely a death on this battlefield amid the deafening roar of the cannon and
the ceaseless braying of the loudspeaker.
The Russians then would expect a very high price from the Germans as the Germans moved
deeper and deeper into the Soviet Union.
Even the lack of coordination confused and perplexed the Germans.
Communications between Moscow and top military headquarters in the front had broken down
as the Germans made these great advances into the Soviet Union.
As a consequence, a great many military units cut off from the rear by this breakdown in
communication confronting the Germans simply fought on in their own way, uncoordinated
military activity along the front, and this confused the Germans.
They couldn't figure out what was going on.
Was there a plan to this?
Why was this unit moving here or there?
Was this part of an overall plan?
It wasn't, but the Germans certainly did not know that.
What one sees already at the end of the first month of the campaign, that is by the end
of July, is that the Panzer leaders in these three German Army groups are still wildly
enthusiastic about the campaign.
This is going to them absolutely according to the book.
Huge pincer movements, they break through these Russian lines, roar across this flat
Soviet terrain, moving quickly, making closing the pincer movement, the closing the pincers
on these Germans.
So the Panzer leaders remain tremendously optimistic, very keen on the operation, but
the infantry units that were following them in, the motorized infantry and then behind
them at what I often refer to as the bottom of the food chain, the infantrymen who were
walking their way into this, who were having to, quote, clean up the final resistance.
The infantry officers had begun to have a very different view of what the war in the
east was all about.
For the Panzer leaders, it was movement, closed the encirclement, move on for another one.
For the infantry units, these were the people who were closing with and fighting with the
Russians at close quarters, and this was a war that they hadn't anticipated.
It's true that the Russians were being pushed back, they were surrendering, they were being
killed, wounded in massive numbers, and yet as one German wrote homes, this is not like
France, this is not, which was, he suggested maneuvers with live ammunition.
This was real combat and of a sort that was unnerving.
Especially as the Germans drove deeper into Russia, they left behind thousands of enemy
troops, stragglers, partisans, who sniped at them, who made hit and run attacks on them,
small units, platoons, companies of red army units that now became partisans, who simply
lived off the land far behind German lines.
One certainly the Germans didn't know where they would show up or how they would behave.
One sees in the letters written home by German soldiers and also the entries into the German
war diaries, many instances where far, far, far behind what the Germans thought were the
front lines, a company size red army unit would show up and launch an attack.
This was something that made life behind the lines difficult for the Germans, and that
the Soviets were fighting with everything they had available to them.
They may not have had, the Germans had maintained, believed, German intelligence had led the
high command to believe that Soviet military technology was crude, and in these early days
it certainly seemed as if that were the case, the Russian air force and so on.
But even the crudeness of the way with which the Russians fought proved to be unnerving
to the ordinary soldier who found himself confronted with the red army and its remnants
in the east.
One instance of this, which I'd like to read you, an entry from one German who survived
an attack far behind German lines on the main highway from Korosten to Kiev, the map depot
of the 6th Army, it was just taken up a bivouac in a village far as I said behind German lines.
We had no proper centuries, the man wrote, just a few men strolling about with their
rifles slung over their shoulders as the whole of the 16th motorized was meant to be between
us and the Russians.
There was quite a lot of fraternization with the villagers, I remember that some of them
had never seen a lemon before.
Then the inhabitants began to withdraw to their homes.
We thought that seemed a little peculiar and soon the village was completely empty of
Russians.
A short time afterward there was the sound of horses in a dust cloud to the south.
Some people said that it was a supply column from one of the Hungarian divisions, it was
a Hungarian division fighting alongside the Germans in the invasion.
Then they were upon us like an American film of the wild west, sturdy little horses riding
in a gallop through our camp.
Some of the Russians were using submachine guns, others were swinging sabers.
I saw two men killed by the sword less than 10 meters from me, think of that, 80 years
after the Austro-Prussian war.
They had towed up a number of those heavy two wheeled machine guns, after a few minutes
whistles began to blow and the horsemen faded away.
The machine gunners started blasting us at very close ranges with infalled fire.
Soon tents and lorries were blazed and threw at all the screams of the wounded men caught
in the flames.
This kind of behind the lines attack was something that the Germans in their planning
simply hadn't calculated.
The French, the Belgians, the Dutch, all of the others that the combatants that the Germans
had confronted, when the situation required it simply surrendered, this was it, you made
a logical choice, a rational calculation and surrendered.
When it gets the sense with the Germans, even as things are going extremely well for them,
there is this growing sense of what they've got, they have a tiger by the neck.
They're winning, they've got it down, they're holding it, but they can't possibly relax
even for a second.
There's no way to relax because if they do, then it will be upon them.
In addition to the fact that the Russians seemed to be beaten but didn't know it and
that we're fighting against all odds, one begins to see in the Kriegs Tagebuch, the
war diary of the High Command, some other disturbing revelations.
A new weapon had appeared on the front.
The Germans were convinced that they had the best tanks in the world, there had been some
advances since the summer of 1940, and they were also convinced that all of the Soviets
apparently had more tanks than anybody else, that these were technologically crude, hardly
a match for German technology, but the tank that they began to discover a week, two weeks,
three weeks into the campaign was the T-34 tank which was certainly more than a match
for anything the Germans could fit in the field, in fact it was the most technologically
advanced tank of its time.
This was very disturbing news to the German High Command.
Franz Halder, who as you'll recall had been writing in his diary on his birthday and shortly
thereafter that the Russians had lost the war within eight days and he revised it to
say two weeks, now there's this sort of sense of, well now wait a minute, where did this
come from, why didn't intelligence tell us that this was out there?
And it wasn't just a prototype, the French also had good tanks, they had good airplanes
but they hadn't developed them, they weren't there in numbers.
The T-34 began showing up in surprising numbers already in the campaign in 1941 and this was
a great concern.
So the war, the war was already a source of some frustration, on the whole things were
going better than they could have anticipated, tremendous gains, and again the perspective
from back at headquarters, just looking at the map, and especially if one is from a German
perspective where the distances are quite small, now to be thinking in hundred mile
breakthroughs and so on, this was quite amazing.
But these problems had also begun to surface, they were only problems, disquieting problems
at this point, they would come to be major problems a bit later on.
At the strategic level then, as the Blitzkrieg continues to work and to work according to
clockwork, at the strategic level a debate erupts, and it erupts in mid-July, about
a month into the campaign, Hitler proposed at this point, diverting Panzer groups from
Army Group Center to Army Group North for a drive on Leningrad.
Hitler had always favored a drive to the North through the Baltics with Leningrad as
its main objective, and he revives this at this point.
He also wanted to divert another Armored Division from Army Group Center to take Guderion,
Heinz Guderion's division, and send it to Army Group South where another great encircling
movement seemed to be possible.
Halder, Guderion, the other German commanders, most of the other German commanders were quite
unhappy with this, they wanted to keep all, they wanted to concentrate as much as possible
their forces for a drive on Moscow.
Moscow seemed to be there for the taking, meanwhile the Panzers halted, the German advance
into the Soviet Union halted as this debate was sorted out, where were the Germans going
to concentrate their forces.
Not until August 20th were the Panzer groups, the Panzer divisions finally diverted as Hitler
desired, that is the weakening of Army Group Center, and the offensive began to move again.
One of the questions that has certainly surfaced and continues to be debated is whether or
not the Germans could have taken Moscow if they hadn't had concentrated their forces,
if they hadn't wasted this time in late July, early August.
This was good campaigning weather, perfect campaigning weather for them, but at this
point the operation didn't so much stall as simply stop while the Germans tried to decide
exactly what their strategic position ought to be.
One factor that has to be considered in making up one's mind about this has to do with logistics.
The Germans were having all sorts of problems with supply, they had outrun their supplies,
the road conditions that we've described were very bad, the train connections, the rail
lines in the Soviet Union were difficult for them to use, the Russians continued to harass
them, partisans were blowing up the railroad tracks behind the lines and so on.
So there were strains, very serious strains in supply for the Wehrmacht at this point.
The other problem for the Germans too was that the Germans had stretched their own manpower
to the absolute limit.
The Germans were operating at this point really without reserves, they were at the end of their
reserves.
There hadn't been yet a total mobilization of Germany for the war and they were largely
at the end of their reserves and there were some troubling indications that the Russians
were beginning to move troops from elsewhere toward the west, that there were Russian reserves
of manpower available that were being brought to bear on the situation.
So one of the arguments that Hitler used was if we make a spearhead directly for Moscow,
we're likely to outrun our supplies sure enough and if these Russian reserves are in fact
out there what if they cut off this spearhead, we would be opening our flanks, this would
be disastrous, better to move in the way we're doing in this broad front.
Regardless of how one evaluates this, the very debate within the German High Command
is itself symptomatic of the Germans' biggest problems.
What the debate revealed is that Operation Barbarossa had already failed in its original
objective.
The Germans, it had not destroyed the Red Army in western Russia.
The Germans had attempted too much, they couldn't proceed on all of the objectives at once
and they were still 200 miles from Moscow.
Their anticipation that if they inflicted devastating enough casualties on the Russians
that they would surrender or just completely break down had failed to materialize and as
a consequence, this very debate, do we concentrate on Moscow, do we move toward Leningrad, Dikiev,
already reveals that this original objective, the stated mission of Barbarossa had not been
attained.
In September, the offensive resumed.
The city of Leningrad was put under siege, a siege, a cruel siege indeed in that winter
of 1941-1942, 200,000 inhabitants of Leningrad would die as a result of starvation and malnutrition
related diseases would freeze to death in the city in the north.
In the south, Kiev fell to a gigantic encirclement and 600,000 more Russians would go into German
captivity and Kiev finally fell on September 26th.
On September 30th, Army Group Center finally moved on Moscow.
The drive, once again, textbook perfect, 600,000 more Russian prisoners of war, a general panic
in Moscow broke out, Stalin ordered tank traps to be dug, trenches to be dug around
the city.
There were rumors abroad in Moscow that the government was abandoning the city and moving
east, panic began to break out among the civilian population.
It looked as if at this point that indeed the unraveling of Soviet society, of the Soviet
regime which the Nazis had anticipated was finally going to happen.
One of the most extraordinary achievements of the entire Second World War, in fact a
miraculous achievement, also took place in this very same period and that was the dismantling
of Russian factories.
About 1500 Russian industrial facilities were dismantled bolt by bolt as the Germans bore
down upon them, the Germans with complete air superiority, attacking all across the
range of the western Soviet Union.
The Russians dismantled 1500 factories, put them on railroad cars, take them east, move
over a million workers to the east and begin to build new industrial cities beyond the
Urals and in Siberia away from the Germans.
It was an extraordinary achievement by any standard, an amazing achievement, something
the Germans certainly hadn't anticipated.
At the same time that the Russians are doing this, Adolf Hitler gives an order to put the
German economy back on a peacetime footing.
The war in the Soviet Union was over, it had been won, Hitler did not want to strain relations
at home, he wanted to keep business as usual, not a full mobilization of Germany's economic
resources and so the German economy was to be put back on a peacetime footing.
The offensive which had been launched at the end of September, this final move toward
Moscow, ran into trouble with weather, not the snow that one usually thinks about with
the Soviet Union but rain.
It fell steadily through much of October and in many places the tanks and trucks mired
in the mud could not move and the offensive bogged down, in fact stopped until November.
When the frost finally came, when the weather began to get cold, then the Germans were able
to move again and resume the offensive to move toward Moscow at the beginning of November.
This final drive from Moscow began on November 15th when the ground had finally frozen enough
for the tanks to have the necessary foundation they needed but German forces at this point
were badly weakened by losses, their supplies were inadequate, the tanks were having mechanical
troubles and the weather which had been a problem from the beginning, not snow up until
this point but rain now turned genuinely ugly.
The first snow in October, a dusting had been a mere preview, in late November the temperature
simply dropped like a stone.
Temperatures by late November reached 10 below zero Fahrenheit, German troops had been issued
no winter clothing, not even overcoats.
They were operating in the Soviet Union in cotton uniforms and denim.
The vehicles had either little or no anti-freeze available, they were supposed to be already
out of this theater by the time winter set in and progress was agonizingly slow.
The tank engines had to have fires lit under them so the engines wouldn't freeze.
If you opened a can of rations, if you didn't eat it immediately, it would freeze within
30 seconds at the end of November.
The Russians meanwhile were not only preparing a defense of Moscow but planning a major counter
offensive.
Giyogi Chukov who was placed in charge of the defense of Moscow, a general who had earned
his stars out fighting the Japanese along the Manchurian frontier, something we'll talk
about in a subsequent lecture, was put in charge of the defense of Moscow.
He began moving reinforcements from the Far East assured that the Japanese would not attack.
These movements, the Germans had very little knowledge of, troops from Siberia from the
Far East began arriving east of Moscow, reinforcing the Red Army position.
And then on December 5th, 1941, Chukov launched a massive counterattack north and south of
Moscow, catching the Germans completely by surprise.
It halted the German offensive, not only halted it, it threatened to turn the German position
into a complete route, a catastrophe for the Germans.
This counter offensive would stall in January and February and the Germans would resume
their offensive operations in the spring of 1942.
The war wasn't over, the Germans hadn't been defeated, it would be the Germans who would
launch a new offensive in the spring of 1942, not the Russians.
But there was no disguising the fact that the Blitzkrieg phase of the war had come to
an end.
Germany was now in for precisely the long protracted conflict that Hitler had hoped
to avoid.
He had not been able to either destroy the Red Army or seize Moscow and now having just
ordered the economy to go back on the peacetime footing, he was now forced to make the reluctant
admission that this was a war with no end in sight.
Not only that, events all the way across the globe at Pearl Harbor two days later would
transform what until this point had been a European war into a genuine global conflict
and four days after that, Adolf Hitler would declare war on the United States so that a
global conflict was now at last a reality.
That's a story that we will take up down the road.
Thank you very much.
