Lecture 12, The Japanese Gamble
On November 26, 1941, the Japanese carrier force, a large fleet, an attack fleet, set
sail across the northern Pacific headed toward Pearl Harbor. Their departure was cloaked
in secrecy, their trip cloaked in radio silence. The Japanese had decided to undertake the
Great Gamble. Just as Hitler had rolled the dice with his invasion of the Soviet Union
in the summer of 1941, the Japanese would take an equally enormous gamble in the fall
of 1941. In this our 12th lecture on the Second World War, we're going to examine Japanese
thinking behind their assault on Pearl Harbor, the planning for war against the United States,
their options, the role of Admiral Yamamoto, the man, the architect of the Japanese planning
for the attack. We'll examine this daring military venture against the American installation
at Pearl Harbor, examine the reasons for Japanese success, and the American defeat
at Pearl Harbor. The Japanese in the fall of 1941, as we've
seen in the previous lecture, were increasingly convinced that the Americans had left them
with no viable options. In this situation felt, well, there were three possibilities
that they could entertain. One was to abandon their ambitions in the Pacific, simply take
a step back, abandon their ambitions in the Pacific, in Southeast Asia, perhaps even China,
which was the centerpiece, always the centerpiece for Japanese thinking during the war. They
could attempt to compromise with the United States, lead the Americans to resume trade
in exchange for some sort of concession in Indochina, or possibly even China, or they
could take military action. They could resolve this dilemma simply by smashing the European
allies in the South Pacific, in Southeast Asia, and the United States.
The military options that the Japanese High Command considered as they confronted these
possibilities was to strike at the European colonial possessions in Southeast Asia. This
was a very attractive option in the summer and fall of 1941. French Indochina, France
was in no position to do anything about a Japanese attack. Malaya and Singapore, British
possessions, equally Britain at this point, not in much of a position to act. The Dutch
East Indies, all of these were keys to Japanese strategy on largely the Asian mainland. The
Dutch East Indies is important because of its oil. What would the American reaction be
if Japan attacked these European colonial possessions but did not attack the American position at
the Philippines? Could Franklin Roosevelt bring the United States into war against Japan
if the Japanese took a gamble? They would be leaving their military flank open by ignoring
the Americans and the Philippines, but would it work? Could they attack through Southeast
Asia, avoid confrontation with the United States, and emerge triumphant? Would Franklin
Roosevelt be able to bring his isolationist population in the United States into the war?
These options were ruled out largely because of what one could think of as the worst-case
scenario. Japanese military commanders looking at the map said, well, if we attacked only
through Southeast Asia, our supply lines would be vulnerable to an air attack from American
planes stationed in the Philippines on a Luzon, that there would be the Philippines
sitting right in the middle of this avenue of approach, this avenue of attack through
Southeast Asia. What would happen if the United States at the last moment or in the
midst of these Japanese operations simply went to war and attacked Japanese forces?
This would be a military disaster. The worst-case scenario was employed here. Perhaps the US
Pacific Fleet stationed at Pearl Harbor almost 4,000 miles away. What could the Americans
employ this? For the most part, the Japanese decided, it became clear to the Japanese military
leadership that the military option, if the Japanese decided to go with a military option,
it was going to mean an attack on the United States, that there was no way simply to go
into Southeast Asia and avoid an attack on the United States. The key obviously would
be the Philippines, but there was another possibility as well, and that was the Pacific
Fleet stationed at Pearl Harbor. If the American Pacific Fleet were to be attacked, the Japanese
felt that they had two options on this score. One was an old plan of battle in the Western
Pacific, which was to draw the Americans out, attack in the open sea and so on, but this
was an older plan they thought was really antiquated, didn't want to engage in that.
Admiral Yamamoto, the commander-in-chief of the Japanese Combined Fleet, had come up with
his own idea about the prospect of a war with the United States. Yamamoto had good reason
to be familiar with the United States. He had attended Harvard. He had been naval attaché
in Washington. He was an opponent and had long been an opponent of war with the United
States. He had seen American industrial potential. He was quite clear about this, that if war
were to come and it were to be a protracted war, that Japan would have a very difficult
time indeed. He also was among the first to recognize the importance of air power for
naval operations. He'd been instrumental in the formation of the Japanese carrier strategy,
the Japanese in the 1930s would really pioneer the use of the aircraft carrier. Yamamoto
had been key in that. He believed that if Japan were determined to follow a military path
and determined on war with the United States, then Japan would have to take bold action.
The only way Japan could prevail in a war with the United States was to strike a crippling
blow at the American fleet, the Pacific Fleet stationed at Pearl Harbor. If the Pacific
Fleet were neutralized, he said Japan would, and to use his words, run wild for six months,
maybe a little longer, maybe as much as a year, but certainly for six months, securing
Southeast Asia and the Western Pacific. Perhaps then the United States would be discouraged
from the prospect of a long, bloody struggle and would recognize Japanese domination in
East Asia. For Yamamoto, it's a role of the dice. It has to be a short conflict. There
has to be some devastating blow. The Pacific Fleet has to really be laid waste. Then to
count on a very common view among the Japanese leadership that the Americans were soft, that
the Americans were interested in material things, that the United States confronted
with a defeated fleet and no real obvious means of reversing the situation in the Pacific
or in Asia would simply say, well, we're not going to throw bad money after good. We're
not going to do more about this and simply make some sort of negotiated peace with Japan.
Yamamoto's plan called for simultaneous attacks against the American Islands, American-controlled
islands of Wake and Guam, against British Malaya and Hong Kong on the Asian mainland,
with additional attacks on Burma, the Dutch East Indies and the Philippines. But the centerpiece,
the centerpiece of Yamamoto's plan was to be a surprise attack on the U.S. Pacific Fleet
at Pearl Harbor. There were several keys to the plan. Japan had pioneered the aircraft
carrier, especially the use of carrier fleets that would mass over 300 aircraft against
enemy targets. In some ways, this is almost the equivalent of the German armored divisions,
the use of armored divisions on the ground. Not simply having aircraft carriers spread
out across different naval formations, but to concentrate them, to bring to bear great
naval air power on the situation. The United States in the 1930s had also been interested
in carrier operations, had also begun to develop the aircraft carrier. Along with Japan, the
United States and Japan are the two powers which do take seriously the prospect and really
began to build and think in operational terms about use of the aircraft carrier. Great Britain
possessed an aircraft carrier and operational aircraft carrier, as did Italy, both operational
and the Mediterranean. But it was really the Japanese and the Americans who saw the real
possibilities of naval air power. Although the Japanese had built the world's largest
battleship, the Yamamoto, and had another under construction, the aircraft carrier had
become the nucleus of Japanese naval forces. The Japanese fleet were really built around
the aircraft carrier. In 1941, the Imperial Japanese Navy had 10 aircraft carriers in
operation. Their potential opponent, the United States, only three in the Pacific based at
Pearl Harbor. Although the combined strength of the British, Dutch, and American fleets
in the Pacific and East Asia was roughly equivalent to Japan's, there was no unity of command
among those potential allied nations so that their forces were not bound together. There
was no real coordination of planning by the British Americans and the Dutch in this theater.
The largest of these forces was by far the Pacific fleet. There were about 100 ships,
96 actually present in the Pacific fleet at Pearl Harbor, eight battleships, seven heavy
cruisers, three aircraft carriers, and of course numerous smaller vessels. Also in the
Hawaiian islands, the Army Air Corps and naval land-based planes at Hickam Field gave the
United States not only made Pearl Harbor and the Hawaiian position a major naval center
but also an air center for the United States as well. So for Yamamoto, it wouldn't be the
Philippines where the Americans anticipated an attack, but rather Pearl Harbor 4,000 miles
away that would be the key target in his planning. The plan was an extraordinarily daring military
plan. A carrier strike force of six aircraft carriers accompanied by two battleships, eight
destroyers, and three cruisers would launch a surprise attack against the U.S. fleet at
Pearl Harbor. The air fleet that the Japanese would launch against these American targets
consisted of 360 planes, high level bombers, dive bombers, torpedo bombers, and fighters
all to be launched against the American ships at anchor at Pearl Harbor. The ships were
also these Japanese planes were equipped with special torpedoes. This was a surprise
to the Americans. One of the reasons that at Pearl Harbor, the concern about security
of the ships being close together, there was a conviction in the part of naval commanders,
their naval intelligence, that the Japanese did not have the technological capacity to
deliver torpedoes by air. They would need a different setting, they weren't able to
do it, but the Japanese had been working on this and they were equipped with special
torpedoes that they could launch from aircraft. The Japanese also had available to them the
best equipped, best trained naval air force in the world and an aircraft that was highly
effective in these early stages of the war. This was the Mitsubishi A6M fighter, better
known as the Zero. It was a very efficient, very capable aircraft and although it would
be later rendered less effective by American advances in technology, in 1941 it was state
of the art. Surprise was essential for the success of Yamamoto's plan. When you think
about what he was talking about, a surprise attack by Japanese naval forces traveling
thousands of miles across the Pacific to attack an American installation. It required a vast
armada to sail 3,500 miles without detection to catch the Americans by surprise. This meant
strict radio silence would have to be enforced throughout the cruise. The fleet would then
have to adhere to a precise timetable so that ships arrived exactly where they were supposed
to be at the right time. He had charted a northern course across the Pacific, across
a vast expanse of water, well off the usual sea lanes. In October of 1941 a Japanese ocean
liner had tested the route to see what it encountered. It did not see another ship at
all on its voyage nor did it see another airplane. Although Yamamoto was to be in charge of the
operation, to be in charge of the planning for the operation, the man that was actually
going to lead the attack fleet on Pearl Harbor was Admiral Nagumo. He was placed in charge
of the Pearl Harbor attack force. This may have been a fateful decision on the part of
the Japanese. Nagumo was a very, very capable commander, a man with a very strong record
in the Japanese Navy, but he was a battleship man. He was not a naval aviator, and although
he was certainly adept at using naval air power, this was not, I think, his natural
response to things, and this has implications as we will see. So while negotiations in Washington
were grinding to an unsuccessful halt, this Japanese attack force had set sail across
the northern Pacific bearing down on Pearl Harbor.
On December 7th, 1941, the Americans at Pearl Harbor, it was a Sunday, a Sunday morning,
a few Catalina flying boats, scout boats had been sent out. None of the Army or Navy fighters
were on alert or flying patrol that morning. At 7.02, the two radar operators on duty phoned
into the Army Aircraft Warning Service Information Center at Oahu and told them that they had
picked up some aircraft about 137 miles away. This was about an hour's flying time, one
estimated. At the Army Aircraft Warning Service Information Center, the duty officer in charge
that morning told them not to worry. There were planes coming in, a flight of B-17s on
their way to the Philippines. They were scheduled to come in from the west coast of the United
States that morning. That's probably what these were. One can only think the worst possible
job in the world, I think, in the military in peacetime is to be duty officer on a Sunday
morning. One can only imagine what happened to this Lieutenant after telling him not
to worry. Radar itself, the radar installations at Pearl Harbor were operating at a very crude
level at this point. They had only been set up in August of 1941, and they were operational
from 4 to 7 a.m. This was it. In fact, the radar was about to be switched off.
This phone call came in, alerting them that there were unidentified aircraft being picked
up on the radar screen. Nonetheless, additional phone calls were made. At approximately 653,
the Harbor Control Post in the operations office of the 14th Naval District received
a message from the USS Ward, the duty destroyer patrolling the entrance to Pearl Harbor. The
Ward had discovered and attacked a submarine operating just outside the Harbor entrance.
The duty officer had orders to contact higher authorities if he received a message such
as this. But to give you some indication of what his responsibilities were, this is a
different duty officer, fortunately, I suppose. He had to make, to clone six different offices
in order to make a report that something that the Ward had in fact seen a submarine attack
the submarine just outside the Harbor. At 7 a.m., he began making calls. At 7.41, the
first wave of Japanese planes roared in over the tropical hills on Oahu, and 181 dive bombers,
torpedo planes, and fighters began their assault on the American positions there, on the American
ships. At 12,000 feet above Oahu, Commander Fushida Mitsuo, looking down at what he saw,
that was absolutely astonished. He saw the American battleships moored together in groups
of two. As he said later on, and I quote, I had seen all German warships assembled in
Kiel Harbor. I have also seen the French battleships in breast, and finally I have
seen our own battleships assembled for review before the Emperor, but I have never seen
ships even in the deepest piece, anchored at a distance of less than 500 to 1,000 yards
from each other. The picture down there was hard to comprehend. At 7.53, Fushida radioed
back to the waiting Japanese task force and simply said three words, Torah, Torah, Torah,
the code word indicating that complete surprise had been achieved. The Japanese began their
attack with devastating success. They had achieved complete surprise. Japanese planes
had been launched from a point 220 miles northwest of Oahu, and their attacks were devastating.
They sank four of eight battleships and inflicted severe damage on the others. They sank three
destroyers, four smaller ships, damaged three cruisers. 2,400 American service personnel
were killed. At Hickam Field, the Japanese air attack destroyed 160 American aircraft,
disabled 120 other, 28 others. Equally astonishing to the Japanese fliers who were on this mission,
as astonishing as the position of the fleet moored at Pearl Harbor or the position of
the American aircraft at Hickam Field. Because instead of being distributed around the airfield
on their revetments, they found them almost wingtipped to wingtip stacked in the center
of the airfield, away from potential Japanese saboteurs. But it was like shooting fish in
a barrel. The shock for the Americans was devastating, and Admiral Nagumo had reason
to exalt. His own losses had been absolutely minuscule. For all of the damage that the
Japanese inflicted on the American forces at Pearl Harbor, 29 aircraft had been lost.
One of the reasons that more planes were not lost by the Japanese is that a great many
of the anti-aircraft positions did not have live ammunition. The Americans hadn't distributed
live ammunition, despite the fact that there had been an alert, a general alert called
some time before. But while the attack had gone far better and certainly smoother than
he had dared hope, the destruction caused by the Japanese attack was also not as complete
as it might have been. His greatest disappointment was that the three American aircraft carriers
which had been the major object of the Japanese attack were not present. They'd escaped. Seven
heavy cruisers were also at sea, and only two of the battleships that were hit were
really beyond repair. The Japanese attack also failed to destroy the submarine base,
or the fuel storage tanks, or the repair and maintenance facilities at Pearl Harbor. In
short, what the Japanese had managed to do was to achieve a major tactical victory, but
not the strategic knockout punch that Yamamoto had envisioned. Nagumo's air commander, and
a very competent one he was, man by the name of Ginda, urged the Admiral to launch a second
wave of attacks against Hawaii and to locate the American carriers and destroy them. He
was beside himself in dealing with Nagumo. They'd achieved complete surprise. The Americans
were virtually defenseless, and yet Nagumo hesitated to launch the second attack. In fact,
he refused. He had scored a great military victory and at minimal cost, and he did not
want to endanger the carrier fleet of Japan. He ordered a return to base. As a consequence,
Japan had achieved a tremendous victory, but it certainly fell far short of the stunning
victory that Yamamoto needed. And on December 8, 1941, Franklin Roosevelt, addressing Congress,
talking about the attack, would refer to it as a date that will live in infamy in the
United States, rather than deciding that its position in the Pacific and in East Asia
was untenable, responded with outrage and with fury at this Japanese surprise attack.
The failure of the United States at Pearl Harbor, the fact that we had succumbed to
a surprise attack, certainly has been investigated, discussed, and will continue to be investigated
and discussed, one assumes. There was, of course, there is, and I'm not going to spend much
time about this, this is called Roosevelt conspiracy theory, that Franklin Roosevelt,
knowing and understanding the United States sooner or later was going to be drawn into
conflict, was looking for an opportunity to do it, that the American intelligence had
received information, especially through the breaking of the Japanese code that an attack
was coming, and that Roosevelt had suppressed this information so that we would in fact
be attacked and drawn into the war, not anticipating the enormity of the attack on Pearl Harbor.
I don't think there's very much to this. I think the evidence, the most extensive evidence
we have, suggests that the Roosevelt administration did not, certainly knew after November 25
that the Japanese were planning some sort of action, but certainly not an attack on
Pearl Harbor. An alert had been issued to the American installation at Pearl Harbor,
but here one can talk about failures of communication, but not about conspiracy. The breaking of
the Japanese code was at this point, the magic intercepts as they were called, the United
States had been able to break the diplomatic, but not yet the military code, and of course,
one of the key aspects of Yamamoto's plan was that this carrier task force would maintain
radio silences that moved across the Northern Pacific, and the Japanese exercised great
radio discipline in this regard. Had they not, by the way, Yamamoto would have known
that the carriers weren't at Pearl Harbor. It's one of the prices they paid for this,
because the Japanese submarines had been able to pick up the fact that they weren't.
American naval intelligence had begun to penetrate the Japanese Navy code, that's certain, but
at this point really interpret only about 10% of the intercepted messages, and this
was a long and complicated process. There was certainly an anticipation of an attack
in Southeast Asia, probably the Philippines, but not Pearl Harbor. Here, I think one can
talk about certain problems in American thinking about this. In March of 1941, an American
aviator and a naval airman had completed a report on the defense of Hawaii, and it specifically
pointed out that a surprise attack from the air was, quote, the most likely and dangerous
form of attack against the fleet base at Oahu. And also, antists said that if it came
that one of the places it might very well come would be from the Northwestern route,
which was not really guarded. Still, Hawaii, many felt, was the strong point of the American
position in the Pacific and in Asia, and no less a realist than Army Chief of Staff George
Marshall, described it to Franklin Roosevelt in May of 1941, and I quote from this report,
talking about Pearl Harbor, this is the strongest fortress in the world. Enemy carriers, naval
escorts and transports will begin to come under air attack at a distance of approximately
750 miles. This attack will increase in intensity until within 200 miles of the objective. The
enemy of forces will then be subject to all types of bombardment closely supported by
our most modern pursuit aircraft. An invader will face more than 3,500 troops backed by
coast defense guns and anti-aircraft artillery. Hawaii seemed quite secure. In the aftermath,
certainly, well, and finally, let me say this as well, there were security breakdowns, both
at Pearl Harbor and in Washington. That's quite obvious. Washington had ordered the
Pacific Fleet on alert, but there had been so many false alarms since October that one
more alert, this was not backed up, incidentally, by the information that we knew from the diplomatic
code that something was going to happen after November 25th. If that information had gone
to the commanders at Pearl Harbor, both Army and Navy, then it might have added a little
more teeth to this new alert. As it was, this was seen as one more. The last warning had
come on November 27th. There had been no follow-up from this coming from Washington.
Then on December 7th, when a new alert transmitted to Pearl Harbor, it would come on December
7th and it was too late to do any good. There were no torpedo nets for ships at Pearl Harbor.
A general alert had not been issued after the destroyer reported sinking a Japanese
ship near the entrance to Pearl in the morning of December 7th. All of these would have been
too late, I think, anyway. The man who paid the price for this, of course, was Admiral
Husband Kimmel. There were long-range reconnaissance flights off of Oahu, but mostly to the west
southwest. Recon to the north was not done on a daily basis and it was not done on December
7th, 1941. General Walter Short, the American Army commander
there, had to pay the price for having an understaffed radar group. There was conflict
between the Signal Corps and the Army Air Corps so that even the radar operators were
not Army Air Corps operators, but Army Signal Corps. If you'll pardon the illusion, wires
were crossed in the communications between Signal Corps and Army Air Corps. Of course,
the fact that Short had lined his aircraft up in the center of the airfield at Hickam
Field to guard against sabotage by fifth column Japanese inhabitants of the Hawaiian
Islands all meant that severe security breaches had occurred. But the real reason, I think,
for the success of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor doesn't have to do with breaches
in American security or any sort of conspiracy having to do with Franklin Roosevelt. It has
to do with the fact, I think, that this was an absolutely brilliant plan carried out to
virtual perfection by Admiral Yamamoto and the Japanese Imperial Fleet. It was an extraordinary
military accomplishment to sail across the Northern Pacific in secrecy and to catch their
opponents completely by surprise. The Pearl Harbor attack would mark the beginning of
American entry into the war quite obviously and, of course, the Japanese would launch
further attacks all across Southeast Asia. What had begun first as a Sino-Japanese war
in the Far East had now become a war linked to the war in Europe with the United States
since several days later Hitler would declare war on the United States. This was now truly
a world war.
