Lecture 16, War in the Mediterranean, the invasions of Sicily and Italy.
In the spring of 1943, the Allies had emerged victorious from major campaigns in the South
Pacific and in North Africa.
They now confronted strategic options.
And in the European theater, this was largely an option between pressing for a cross-channel
invasion at some point in 1943, or some sort of alternative.
The American position was for a cross-channel invasion as soon as possible, a position
vigorously reinforced by Stalin, who continued to demand that the second front, the second
front, North Africa, in Stalin's view, did not constitute the second front.
The other option was an invasion of Sicily and Italy.
That position was vehemently put forward by the British, and it is that option that we
are going to be taking up in this our 16th lecture.
We'll be examining the Allied invasions of Sicily and Italy, the campaign in Italy, the
strategic debates between the Allies over the proper course of action in dealing with
the Germans in Italy, the extent to which Italy was responsible for a delay in the cross-channel
invasion, and just exactly what the implications of this enormous operation would be.
In many respects, an invasion across the coast to Sicily from North Africa was a logical
extension of the victory over German and Italian troops in North Africa.
Indeed, the American commanders, as we've seen, had been deeply concerned from the very
outset not about a defeat in North Africa, but just the opposite.
What would be the implications of Allied success in North Africa?
If Operation Torch were launched and were successful, then Marshall, Eisenhower, and
other American commanders feared the United States would be drawn irrevocably into a Mediterranean
strategy for which they had very little political enthusiasm, as it might be seen as supporting
British colonialism, or military enthusiasm, since the view was an invasion of North Africa
if it's successful will mean a postponement of the cross-channel invasion.
Indeed, with the defeat of Rommel, the Africa Corps, the Germans in North Africa, this is
precisely the quandary in which the Allies found themselves.
By the success in North Africa, which came only in January, February 1943, and into the
spring, a cross-channel invasion was impossible in that year.
Now then, the option was to cross into Sicily.
Operation Husky then was decided upon, set for July of 1943.
Dwight Eisenhower was named Commander-in-Chief, but as in North Africa, the British General
Alexander was to be the actual Field Commander.
In Sicily, the Allies found Italian resistance to be weak, mass surrender was commonplace,
the Italians clearly had lost their stomach for the war.
One of the arguments that Churchill had put forward about the importance of an invasion
of Sicily and of Italy would be that it might topple Mussolini, pull the Italians out of
the war, who knows, maybe the Italians would switch sides, that this would begin the unraveling
of the Third Reich's position on the continent.
There was great pressure from the very beginning of the operation in Sicily on Mussolini.
Italian troops clearly were not going to fight to the finish for the duce or for this misguided
policy of his, of his expansion in North Africa, which had drawn him into this conflict.
But formidable resistance was provided by the Germans.
While Kesselring had been dispatched to lead mobile Panzer units in Sicily and Kesselring
would bedevil the Allies, both in Sicily and even more so in Italy.
General Montgomery, according to the plan, was to race up the eastern coast of Sicily
and seize Messina, but Kesselring interposed his troops, slowed Montgomery and the American
General Patton, meeting weak resistance, pushed straight across the island.
He took Palermo on July 22nd, and then what was often depicted as a race between Patton
and Montgomery, developed both trying to reach Messina.
Patton would become as a result of his leadership, beginning in North Africa, but certainly in
Sicily, would become a hero in the United States, given the name Old Blood and Guts,
especially when he reached Messina shortly before the British.
Patton's moment of glory was to be short-lived, however, it would be shortly after this that
the infamous slapping incident where Patton, incidents, I should say, too, instances where
Patton, in touring a military hospital, slapped a soldier, an American soldier, whom he felt
was malingering, suffering from shell shock, repeated this again shortly thereafter.
This was covered by the press, and Patton would be removed from command, an irony which
the Germans simply never quite understood.
The consequences of the Allied victory in Sicily were considerable.
First of all, it drew the United States and Great Britain deeper and deeper into Churchill's
Mediterranean strategy.
Indeed, Churchill now renewed his emphasis on the so-called soft underbelly of Europe,
arguing now that having taken Sicily, that the next obvious step, the logic, the momentum
of military operations would be to jump across to the toe of the boot and for an invasion
of Italy proper.
This would then be supplemented by support for the partisans in Yugoslavia who were causing
the Germans trouble across the Adriatic.
It might even be possible to cajole the Turks into joining the anti-Hitler alliance.
In fact, what the Americans saw with great dismay was the emergence, once again, of a
full-blown Mediterranean strategy to which they were supposed to lend their support.
The Americans were skeptical about this emphasis as they had been from the beginning, but they
had no real alternative plans.
It was also quite clear by this point that there was no what was the alternative.
The alternative did would now move troops back to Britain to begin the build-up for
the cross-channel invasion or pursue the military logic of the situation.
We chose the latter.
The collapse of resistance in Sicily and the prospect of an imminent Allied invasion did
indeed lead to Benito Mussolini's fall from power on July 24th.
King Victor Emanuel III removed him as Premier and replaced him with Marshal Badoglio, an
Italian military commander who was certainly unenthusiastic about continuing the war.
Mussolini was rescued by German commandos and spirited away and ultimately set up by the
Germans to run a puppet state, a sort of fascist state in the north to continue resistance
against the Allies.
But this was a resistance that had German support and very little Italian support.
Negotiations with Badoglio were underway.
Badoglio wanted, in fact, pledged that Italy would switch sides, not only withdraw from
the Alliance with Germany, but actually switch sides to support the Allied war effort.
However, the Allies continued to cling to the notion of unconditional surrender.
This was a policy that was very dear to President Roosevelt.
He had announced it at the Casablanca Conference at the beginning of the year.
And this caused some problems.
What unconditional surrender mean, that the monarchy would go?
Exactly what did it mean?
What were its implications for Italy?
Hitler meanwhile sent troops into northern Italy in the area around Rome.
By September 3rd, when an agreement was reached, an Italy was called upon to surrender its
navy, merchant, marine, and air force to the Allies and join the coalition against Hitler.
The Germans were firmly entrenched in northern Italy and all the way south of Rome.
The invasion of Italy began on September 3rd.
It was a three-pronged assault.
The British, led by Montgomery, crossed the straits of Messina onto the toe of the boot,
meeting very little resistance.
A second British force stormed ashore at Toronto, the Italian naval base, meeting no resistance.
And at the same time, the Anglo-American Fifth Army under General Mark Clark, the American,
landed south of Naples at Salerno.
Clark wanted to land north of Naples, but was convinced by the British that this would
be problematic since that was too far north, couldn't be supported by Allied aircraft.
So troops landed at Salerno.
The goal, certainly Mark Clark's hope, was to take Naples within three days.
But Kesselring had rushed troops south, and one Panzer Division was already in place in
the mountains overlooking the Salerno beachhead.
And the result was a near disaster.
The Germans poured down artillery on the small beachhead for some time.
The success of the landing was in grave doubt.
Ultimately, the situation was saved by airpower and naval guns finally allowing the soldiers
on the beach to break out and push inland a bit, breaking the German siege.
This landing, I might add, at Salerno, didn't do anything to win greater support for the
United States and its determination for cross-channel invasion among its British allies.
The sense was this was a problematic invasion.
They had almost been driven back into the sea for a while, looked as if the whole invasion
at Salerno hung by a thread.
So at this point, the two amphibious landings that the Allies had attempted against the
Germans, one at Dieppe in 43, and now the Salerno landings, didn't give great confidence
for the success of a cross-channel invasion.
Naples was not taken until October 1st.
Meanwhile, the British were able to seize Foggia on the eastern side of Peninsula, a
major air base, which was now converted to Allied use.
That taking Foggia was quite an important achievement.
What this did was allow the United States and Britain to move air groups from North
Africa onto the European continent into Italy.
It would bring the Balkans and southern Germany into range for American B-17s and B-24s.
It would begin now, at this time, double pressure on the Germans, attacks from the RAF and the
American Eighth Air Force from Britain, now to be augmented by attacks from the south.
The Germans, finding their position in Sardinia and Corsica in trouble, evacuated those territories
in September and early October.
Things looked like they might turn out very well for the invasion, but Italy proved anything,
but a soft underbelly.
The Italian terrain was ideal for defensive operations, and Kesselring, the German commander,
proved to be an absolute master.
The Apennine Mountains extending down the center of the peninsula created a formidable
barrier.
The numerous rivers were also difficult.
The valleys oozed mud, and in the hills and mountains the men had to deal with raw
cold and snow, and a lack of cover indeed were forced to depend on mules for supplies,
and combat in Italy was frequently hand-to-hand.
Anyone who had been looking at brochures of sunny, pleasant Italy were in for a real shock.
The combat in Italy was among the most difficult anywhere in the Second World War.
The terrain was difficult, the conditions difficult, and a terrain which certainly did
give the great advantage to the German defenders.
During the fall and early winter, the Allies slogged slowly northward, but their progress
was halted about a hundred miles south of Rome, where the Germans had created what
they referred to as the Gustav line.
By January 1944, the front had stabilized.
The Germans had managed to blunt the offensive, and at the end of 1943, Allied command and
strategy had been altered.
The Allies, at this point in the evolution of the campaign in Italy, the Allies really
did have an option.
They could have stopped.
There was nothing now at this point.
One could talk about the logic, the military logic, or the momentum from North Africa to
take them across to Sicily, or then to extend the assault into Italy itself.
But now Mussolini had been toppled.
The British had seized the air base at Foggia.
The Allies were in a position to make air attacks on southern Germany and important positions
in the east.
At this point, it would have been possible, and this argument was certainly made, to
simply halt.
Why batter away at these German positions, these well-entrenched German positions against
this master of the defense in General Kesselring?
Why not now begin to move more troops and prepare for the cross-channel invasion?
In some sense, this is exactly what happens.
There's certainly not a standstill in the Italian campaign, but at the end of 1943, Eisenhower
was dispatched to London to become supreme commander of the forces preparing for the
invasion of northwestern Europe.
General Montgomery would follow as his field commander, and General Alexander, the British
general, assumed command in Italy.
The Allies certainly had now moved to push for the cross-channel invasion, in part because
at this time Stalin had reached the absolute limit of his toleration for this, and at the
Tehran Conference with Roosevelt and Churchill, Stalin absolutely insisted on a firm commitment
from Churchill that Britain was committed to a cross-channel invasion, and Roosevelt
swung in this delicate relationship, triangular relationship that these three powerful leaders
had.
Roosevelt swung his support clearly to Stalin, pushing Churchill in effect to declare, yes,
we are committed, and we are committed to doing this cross-channel invasion at the earliest
possible time, and that would be in the spring and early summer of 1944.
Nonetheless, the campaign in Italy would continue as well under General Alexander.
In a dramatic attempt to break the deadlock, the Allies launched an amphibious landing
at the resort town of Anzio, just 30 miles south of Rome on January 22, 1944.
General Clark was expected to move quickly inland, but his forces did not.
Fearing a quick German response, just as at Salerno, Clark and his commanders had been
cautious, despite intelligence derived from ultra, that made clear that Kesselring couldn't
send troops for about a week, Clark's commander on the scene failed to drive inland, and Kesselring
shifted forces to prevent further expansion of the beachhead, so that instead of threatening
to break communications between Rome and the Gustav line to cut the Germans off by driving
across the peninsula, sealing off the Germans to the south, and then pushing on Rome, the
Americans were bogged down again.
Once again, an amphibious landing had turned out differently than anticipated.
Clark replaced his commanding officer with General Lucian Truscott, but he too was able
to effect a breakout from the Anzio position.
One of the problems at this point now was that with the main bulk of the American forces
south of the Gustav line, Anzio above it, one possibility now was to drive from the south
to link up these forces.
Those forces pushing from the south found that the going was particularly difficult, and
one place in particular, one log jam, was Monte Cassino.
Allied soldiers believed that the Germans were using the old Abbey, the ancient Abbey
at Monte Cassino as an observation post, calling down artillery fire on their positions.
Mark Clark was initially opposed to bombing the ancient structure, but General Alexander
insisted and on February 15, 1944, 200 bombers smashed the Abbey.
The Germans, as it turned out, had not been using the Abbey as an observation post, but
they now quickly used the ruins created by the bombing of the Abbey to rush troops there.
Now they had the observation post and good defensive positions.
The bombing had had the opposite effect as intended.
A second air raid, almost 500 bombers against the town, still failed to break German resistance.
The bitter fighting around Monte Cassino revealed the full diversity of Allied troops.
At this point we've talked about world war in the sense of the geographical spread of
combat from the South Pacific to the Soviet Union to North Africa to Europe, but in the
siege, the attack on Monte Cassino, one really does see now the variety of Allied troops
involved.
There were Indian troops, troops from New Zealand, French troops, and it was to be finally Polish
troops who would storm the town, and indeed it was in mid-May of 1944 that Polish troops
actually reached the summit in Monte Cassino.
In May, French units also broke through the Gustav line and threatened the whole German
position.
British troops would ultimately take Cassino, the Poles, the ruins of the old monastery,
and five days later the Americans broke out of Anzio, and at this point still could have
cut off the German retreat from the Gustav line.
It was still possible, but Truscott received an order from General Clark.
Instead of driving east to cut off the retreating Germans, he was to turn north to take Rome.
Rome was for the taking at this juncture, and if it wasn't a strategic prize, it was a political
prize of considerable import.
Truscott reluctantly complied, he didn't want to do this, and Kesselring was now able
to extricate his troops, pulling them back once again in an effective fighting retreat.
As he pulled back, Kesselring did take, make an important declaration.
Rome was declared an open city to prevent its destruction by the Allied air forces.
This bombing of Monte Cassino was a very controversial matter, I think for everybody
except those Allied troops who were down below Monte Cassino needing to get by it, and I
don't think they had many qualms about what happened to the old Abbey, but for everyone
else it did become an issue, and behind this of course were even greater questions.
What does one do about these great cultural monuments of western civilization?
Do you bomb Rome?
Paris had not the center of Paris had certainly been spared.
The industrial ring around Paris had been bombed by this point, but now this question
of what happens to Rome had loomed before the Allies.
Kesselring made it clear that the Germans would not contest the city, and as a consequence
Rome would be spared.
American forces entered Rome on June 4, 1944, two days before the Normandy landing.
The Germans withdrew to yet another prepared position 150 miles to the north, the Gothic
line replacing the Gustav line stretching across the peninsula beyond Livorno and Florence.
The soft underbelly, one has the impression we'd still be fighting in Italy had the war
gone on, that the slow slogging up through this mountainous terrain, and I think for
those of you who remember the war or were involved in it directly, the Willian Joe cartoons
of Bill Malden are largely from the Italian campaign, they're marvelous, marvelous cartoons
and certainly among the most popular from Stars and Stripes.
What were then were the implications of the Italian campaign?
Again it had been a successful campaign just as North Africa had been.
The Germans were in full fledged retreat.
The Allies had been successful, Rome liberated by the summer of 1944.
Its detractors would maintain however, that the Italian operation delayed the cross channel
invasion on which the world waited.
Did the Italian campaign delay the cross channel invasion?
I think there are a number of ways that one can approach this question.
One is to look, as the British certainly did, at what was required for a successful cross
channel invasion into the teeth of what the Germans were calling fortress Europe, the
heavily fortified defensive positions along the coast of northern Europe.
Could a major offensive have been launched in 1943?
One of the arguments that the British should use, and I think it's certainly a very powerful
argument, was that the German submarine offensive was still a major threat in 1943.
That the safe convoying of enormous amounts of material and so on into England would have
been a difficult task in 1943, whereas by 1944 the submarine threat had largely been removed.
In 1943 it is also clear that the Allies did have shortages of shipping.
They had shortages in landing craft, equipment and troops.
It wasn't that the landing craft didn't exist in 1943, they were all the way across the
world in the South Pacific being used, and we still needed more.
So shortages of equipment, landing craft, shipping, troops.
The American army was not yet at full strength, and, as the British argued, the Americans
who were going to be pivotal players in this alliance obviously had light combat experience
in 1943 and had gotten that experience in the bitter fighting in Sicily and Italy.
On the other hand, one could make the counter argument that the Allies, as I just indicated,
did have the ships in landing craft that they were simply in the Pacific, not in the
Mediterranean and in Western Europe.
It's certainly true that American troops' light combat experience in 1943, it is also
true that German defenses were a great deal stronger in Northern Europe in 1944 than they
had been in 1943.
There were 49 German divisions in France in 1943, mostly second line quality troops.
They were short of armor.
It was a quiet front for the Germans in 1943.
In June of 1944, there would be 58 divisions, much more armor, and the coastal defenses
had been greatly reinforced largely under Rommel's instigation.
There was a claim made over and over again by Allied air commanders that one of the other
key ingredients for the successful cross-channel invasion, air superiority, indeed air supremacy,
had not been achieved in 1943.
That's certainly true.
It was a long way from being achieved in 1943.
The argument the air commanders make was it could have been established in 1943 by the
Eighth Air Force in England if the best of those units and support personnel had not
been siphoned off to North Africa and then ultimately to Italy as well.
I think of these arguments, the greatest threat in 1943 was undoubtedly the submarine,
and it's doubtful that the Allies could have established air superiority in the course
of 1943.
If you'll recall, it was in the summer of 1943 that the Americans launched the two big
daylight raids, the Regensburg-Schweinfurt raid in August of 1943, and then repeated
it again in the fall with disastrous consequences.
The planes got through, bombed the targets, but they had suffered grievous casualties in
those two raids.
The German Air Force was still very, very strong in the course of 1943.
It would only be at the Tehran Conference, which we've indicated, when Roosevelt Churchill
and Stalin all met for the first time, that Churchill finally gave in to pressure and
committed himself to the cross-channel invasion as being the top priority for 1944.
The plan was Operation Overlord, and at Tehran Roosevelt announced his decision to name Dwight
Eisenhower, Supreme Commander.
This was a surprise, and it was not a popular decision.
Both Churchill and Stalin preferred Marshall and were surprised at the choice of Eisenhower.
Eisenhower had demonstrated certainly those characteristics, those political qualities,
the personality that we've described in North Africa and in his participation in the Operation
Husky, but had not yet really demonstrated the ability to take charge of an enormous
operation that was going to be the centerpiece of all of Allied strategy.
Marshall seemed to be the most obvious choice, but Roosevelt said he simply couldn't imagine
a life in Washington without Marshall.
He needed Marshall close at hand for advice, and so Eisenhower was named.
At the end, at the conclusion of the Allied campaign in Italy, the Germans were certainly
pushed back, the frontiers of fortress Europe were shrinking, but the German position in
Western Europe was still enormously strong, and even in 1944, the odds for a successful
cross-channel invasion were by no means great or obvious in favor of the Allies.
It would still be an enormous risk, the implications of which, the stakes of which cannot be exaggerated.
And after turning our attention in the next lecture or two, events on the Eastern Front,
we will return to talk about the planning for that cross-channel invasion.
Thank you.
