Lecture 17, Stalingrad, The Turning Point on the Eastern Front.
In our last few lectures, we've been examining a series of turning points, major shifts in
strategic impetus in the drift of the war in the South Pacific, in North Africa, and
with this lecture, our 17th, we will turn our attention to the great turning point of
the war on the Eastern Front, and that is the Battle of Stalingrad.
We stopped our discussion of the German advance into the Soviet Union with the Russian counter-offensive
before Moscow in December of 1941.
That winter offensive had ground to a halt in February and in March of 1942, the Eastern
Front saw no significant initiatives.
The Russians were exhausted from their winter offensive, the Germans still marshaling their
forces for a new offensive in the summer.
As winter turned to spring, Hitler had developed a new set of objectives for his summer offensive.
He decided to abandon the attempt to take Moscow and to break the siege at Leningrad
and to concentrate instead on the South, on the Ukraine and beyond.
The primary objective was to be the caucus oil fields, to deny Russia's resupply and
to seize this valuable asset for Germany.
The plan was an ambitious one.
It called for a three-phase campaign, the encirclement of Soviet troops west of the
Don River, and then a dash southward along the Volga to Stalingrad.
There General Paulus' 6th Army and a Panzer Army IV would establish a blocking position
near the city to protect the southern force which would drive into the caucuses.
These three then would be the drive of German troops deep into the Soviet Union and to the
south claiming the caucus oil fields.
It was not as ambitious as Barbarossa, but its scale was still extraordinary.
It was over 500 miles from Kiev to the heart of the caucuses, and the German Army and the
Soviet Union was not as strong as it had been the year before.
In fact, it had 350,000 fewer troops at its disposal for this summer offensive than Hitler
had marshaled in the summer of 1941.
The total tank strength of the German Army was less than in 1941, though now it would
be concentrated in the south rather than trying to reach three different objectives.
Hitler was forced to rely in this offensive on Romanian, Hungarian, and even Italian units.
Imagine the poor unfortunate Italian units that had been shipped off to the Eastern Front,
and these were not as well equipped nor as committed to the cause as their German counterparts.
But if the German position was shaky, the Red Army's position was also problematic.
The winter offensive during the worst winter in Russia in 140 years had left the Red Army
absolutely exhausted.
At this phase in this period of the war, the Russians were still far more adept at defensive
operations than offensive ones.
They suffered tremendous losses, astonishing losses in 1941 of both men and armor.
Stalin remained convinced that when the Germans attacked and everyone expected a new German
offensive come spring, that this would be a renewal of their drive on Moscow.
Therefore, the Red Army's best units remained in a blocking position in front of Moscow.
The Germans had planned to preface their offensive in June by eliminating a Soviet salient in
the line south of the city of Kharkov.
But before they could do so, the Russians actually launched an attack themselves.
Kharkov was the hub of the German communications network in the south of Russia in a prime
target.
Stalin and the Russian commander General Timoshenko decided to launch an offensive from the
salient in May over the objections of General Tukhov, who believed that this would be really
folly when the Soviets needed to be concentrating their forces for offensive elsewhere.
Timoshenko began his offensive on May 12th with great early successes, but he had in fact
played directly into Germany's hands.
Five days later, the Germans cut off the Soviet spearhead, capturing 240,000 Russian prisoners
and destroying over 600 tanks of the 840 that had been set into combat in this offensive.
It was, I think for most armies, this would have been an absolutely crushing, devastating
defeat, but the Soviets were resilient.
Timoshenko, I might add, had begged Stalin for permission to retreat to more defensible
positions, but Stalin had refused and so the Soviets were trapped, forced to fight on to
the end.
Thus, the German offensive in the summer of 1942 began almost with a replay of 1941 of
Operation Barbarossa, not in its scale, but with still a smashing German victory.
Hitler was absolutely exultant.
In the south, General Munstein, who had conquered the Crimea in the fall of 1941, began the
siege of Sebastopol in early June, and although the Russians held out for a month, Sebastopol
fell on July 3rd, and over 100,000 more Russians were taken prisoner, 200 Russian tanks captured.
This was the offensive that was going to win the war, the Germans believed.
The main German operation, the main German offensive, began on June 28th.
It made rapid progress against the weakened forces of the Red Army.
The Soviet position was actually made worse by their own misguided Kharkov offensive,
and Stalin's continued conviction that the major thrust of the German attack would still
be directed at Moscow.
He simply couldn't, he wasn't going to shift troops while there was any threat to Moscow.
The 4th German Panzer Army drove 100 miles in 8 days, reaching the Don in the south.
There was a sense this was a replay.
The replay of the great German victories of the previous summer.
But the Russians fought tenaciously there, allowing a withdrawal finally towards Stalingrad,
though it still looked like a rout.
The Russian is finished, Hitler maintained, and his General Halder, Chief of Staff, agreed.
Hitler decided that it was now possible to move directly to Phase 3 of the attack, that
is, the sending of massive numbers of German troops to the south toward the Caucasus, without
first securing his flank at Stalingrad.
Stalingrad was important strategically, it was a blocking position to keep Soviet forces
from the north from being shifted south to meet the German spearheads there.
To strengthen the forces moving south, he diverted the Panzer Army away from Stalingrad, and left
the task of securing that city to General Paulus' 6th Army.
This was an overwhelmingly infantry army with very little armor, and this decision would
prove costly indeed.
The 4th Panzer would probably have reached Stalingrad before the Soviet defenses were
firmly established, and its presence was not necessary to help the forces moving south
across the Don River.
The 1st Panzer Army then streaked southward against weak Soviet defenses.
By August 9th, it had pressed 200 miles southeast of Rostov, and had reached the Maikop oil
fields in the foothills of the Caucasus.
This was the deepest German penetration of the war.
Here another key decision was made.
The Germans split their forces.
One element moved east toward the Grozny oil fields, the other pushed towards the coast
of the Black Sea.
What one sees here is, once again I think, too many objectives for the German army.
The Hitler makes decisions, things are going so well that he jumps the gun, besides the
skipped stages that were absolutely necessary.
But within the German military, just as there had been the previous summer, a real sense
of euphoria seemed to surge from the lowest ranks up to the top.
The commanding officer says the Russian troops are completely broken and cannot hold out
any longer when German wrote home to his wife.
To reach the Volga and take Stalingrad is not so difficult for us.
The fewer he knows where the Russian's weak point is, victory is not far away.
That letter was written on July 29th, 1942.
On August 7th, he wrote again, our company is tearing ahead.
Today I wrote Elsa, we shall soon see each other.
All of us feel that the end, victory, is near.
In September, however, the offensive slowed, the offensive down into the Caucasus.
In October and November, Russian resistance in the mountainous terrain stiffened and the
Germans were now fighting not simply the Red Armies, they were fighting locals, Chechnyan
local resistance forces who were unhappy about the Soviets, but they certainly didn't want
the Germans there either.
So the Germans wind up engaged in combat with them.
The advanced elements of the German army did reach Mount Elbrus, Europe's highest mountain,
and a team of climbers actually were dispatched to place the German flag near the summit.
This was to be literally the high water mark of the German advance.
But while this symbolic action was taking place, the problems for the German offensive
were multiplying.
The Germans were now stretched to the absolute limit of their capacity.
Fly was difficult and encountered shortages of fuel, difficult mountainous terrain, and
tough resistance.
As they moved farther and farther south as well, resistance activities behind the front
mushroomed.
The German army was certainly deep in the Soviet Union, but the front was far more fluid
than it appeared if one drew simply a map.
Army Group South had begun the offensive covering a 500-mile front, now it was stretched over
almost 1300 miles, dangerously thin by any definition.
In September, Hitler was furious.
He fired a number of his top commanders because the offensive, which had been going so well
since it had been launched in the early summer, now was slowing down, the momentum seemed
to be lost.
Hitler was growing impatient of what was the matter.
He obviously believed and argued there was nothing to matter with the plan, the plan
was brilliant.
It was his own, after all.
The Russians were reeling, the Red Army was on the run, and still the offensive seemed
to have lost momentum.
What was wrong?
Well, if there was nothing to matter with the plan, there wasn't anything to matter
with the German troops.
It obviously had to be the generals, and so there's a wholesale firing of commanders
on the Eastern Front, just as there had been, by the way, after the failure of the offensive
before Moscow a year before.
General Halder, who had been Chief of Staff of the German Army since 1938, and one of
the leading, if not the leading strategists within the German High Command, was removed.
He was replaced by a younger and far more pliable staff officer.
With the German Army now stretched deep into the Caucasus, this front of the 1300 miles,
Stalingrad, really the importance of Stalingrad as the hinge of this attack was extremely
important.
The task of taking the city, as indicated, had been left to General Paulus' 6th Army.
It was mostly infantry, and still it had made steady progress throughout August.
On August 22nd, in fact, the Germans had broken through, and a Panzer Corps had fought its
way into the northern suburbs of the city.
The Luftwaffe was called on to seal the fate of the Russians in Stalingrad.
On August 23rd, 1942, the largest German air raid since June 22nd, 1941, was launched
against the city.
Air units from all over were brought to bear on Stalingrad.
Over half the bombs dropped were in cindieres in order to set the maximum number of fires
within the city.
Nearly every wooden structure in Stalingrad, including acres of workers' housing, were
burned in the raid.
The results were absolutely spectacular.
Stalingrad, before the battle had begun, already resembled a devastated city.
The fires were so intense, so vast, that one could read a newspaper 40 miles away by their
flames.
It was a terror raid, pure and simple, to kill civilians, to overload services, and
to create panic in the population, to make it absolutely impossible for the Red Army
to operate within this urban area and to force a surrender.
The whole city is on fire, a German soldier wrote home.
On the Führer's orders, our Luftwaffe has scented up in flames.
That's what the Russians need to stop them resisting.
But the city did not surrender.
On August 25th, the regional party committee of the Soviet Union proclaimed a state of
siege.
Comrades and citizens of Stalingrad, their declaration stated, we shall never surrender
the city of our birth to the depredations of the German invader.
Every single one of us must apply himself to the task of defending our beloved town,
our homes and our families.
Let us barricade every street, transform every district, every block, every house into an
impregnable fortress.
The Russians were determined to hold, and the Germans were determined to take the city.
The battle for Stalingrad was assuming gradually monumental proportions.
It was a ferocious battle of attrition, and it had enormous symbolic value.
The fact that it was named for Stalin obviously plays a role here, and it was fought block
by block, house by house, floor by floor, and room by room.
The city itself was very quickly reduced to a state of rubble and movement, which had
been measured in miles or kilometers by the hundreds over the course of the battle of
Stalingrad would be measured in meters.
There had been nothing like it since the colossal carnage of the First World War.
It was as one historian has called it, Verdun on the Volga.
The Germans were certainly aware of what this meant.
General Der, one of the German commanders, described it in the following terms, for every
house, workshop, water tower, railway embankment, wall, cellar, in every pile of ruins, a bitter
battle was waged without equal even in the First World War and its vast expenditure of
munitions.
The distance between the enemy's army and ours was as small as it could possibly be.
Despite the concentrated activity of aircraft and artillery, it was impossible to break
out of the area of close fighting.
The Russians surpassed the Germans in their use of the terrain and in camouflage and were
more experienced in barricade warfare for individual buildings.
Vashily Kuchakov was in command of the city and in late August Stalin ordered a change
of command.
Georgiy Chukov, the savior of Moscow, now replaced the commander in the south, Timoshenko,
and Chukov began to work his magic.
While the battle raged in Stalingrad itself, Chukov followed the strategy that he had employed
the year before in Moscow.
What he did was to deliberately withhold reinforcements, to keep those reinforcements to the garrison
at an absolute minimum.
There were reinforcements he was building up, but they weren't being funneled into Stalingrad.
The troops in Stalingrad were going to have to hold.
This was clear to the defenders there.
Instead, he began to mass troops north and south of the city.
This is exactly what he had done around Moscow in December of 1941, so that the Germans concentrating
on the front and front, just before them, would not be able to detect this buildup.
Moreover, as Chukov knew, both the northern and southern flanks of the German 6th Army
were held by Romanian troops, understrength and under-equipped.
The Russian preparations for a counter-attack were kept under very tight security.
Still, by early November, the Germans held nine-tenths of Stalingrad.
Hitler, in a very famous speech, the Beer Hall Putsch in Munich had taken place in early
November 1923, and every year this was a big event on the German Nazi calendar.
Hitler would always go back to Munich and address what they called the Alte-Kemp for
the old fighters from the party.
On this date, in early November 1943, he gave one of his patented speeches, in which he
said something of the effect of, well, one can talk about different objectives in the
Soviet Union, but I knew what I wanted.
I've come to the Volga, to a particular point, to a particular place.
Don't think it's because it's named for Stalin.
No, it could have been named for anybody else.
Then he proceeded to reel off all of the statistics, which he always seemed to have at his disposal.
There we will cut off so many tons of manganese.
There we will receive so many tons of scrap iron.
There we will cut off such and such, so many things of oil.
So it is an extremely important economic point for us.
It's a crucial battle, and, you know, he said, we have it, actually.
It's within our grasp.
There are just a few small places left that are beyond our reach, but we are very clever.
We will take them little by little by little and ultimately prove triumphant.
But the German position in Stalingrad was a difficult one.
It formed a salient with long, vulnerable flanks, and this is exactly the situation on
which Chukov was planning.
On November 19th, Chukov unleashed his offensive against the Romanians,
northwest and southeast of Stalingrad.
The German high command was caught completely unprepared.
The Romanians buckled, and on November 23rd, 1942, the two spearheads linked up 45 miles
west of Stalingrad, encircling the entire 6th Army and one core of the 4th Panzer Army.
Paulus, seeing the desperation of his own situation, appealed to Hitler to allow him
to break out of the encirclement and establish communication with German lines beyond the
Russian positions.
Hitler ordered Munstein to break through to Stalingrad, but he certainly refused Paulus'
plea to allow the 6th Army to try to break out.
Instead, he promoted Paulus to the position of Field Marshal, pointing out to everyone
in sight that no German Field Marshal had ever surrendered, and calling on Paulus to
hold on at all costs that help was coming from Munstein.
The whole issue of relief, however, was rendered moot by a second Russian offensive on December
16th, pressing from the dawn toward Rostov with the intention of cutting off all German
forces to the south.
A real catastrophe was now looming for the Germans.
Inside the city itself, though, the battle would continue to rage and rage in ferocious
fashion, to give you some sense of the changing mood in this cauldron that became Stalingrad.
I'd like to read you a couple of series of brief descriptions from a German writing
home about the Russians he's encountering.
On September 1st, he wrote home, are the Russians really going to fight on the very bank of
the Volga?
It's madness.
The Russians literally were pushed up against the river.
Any sort of reasonable military leader would have tried to get them back across the river.
They were trapped.
On September 8th, he wrote, this is insane stubbornness.
September 11th, fanatics, September 13th, wild beasts, September 16th, barbarism.
They're not men, but devils.
September 26th, barbarians.
They used gangster methods.
And then finally on October 27th, the Russians are not men, but some kind of cast iron creatures.
They never get tired, and they are not afraid of fire.
At first, the Germans in the city, with the offensive around them, the Germans in the
city of Stalingrad still thought they had been, they'd triumphed.
Later on, a Russian described the Germans as being almost drunk with victory in the
city.
They had found vodka, were jumping down from their lorries, playing their harmonicas, dancing
like madmen, when Russian said, on the pavements.
But that mood was soon to break.
One of the frustrations, I'm going to read a number of these descriptions of the combat
with Stalingrad, because I think both they're gripping, and they also give you that sense
of the enormity and the brutality and the hopelessness in a way of this struggle.
Of two armies caught in a very small place, with no place to go except the ruins of this
destroyed city, and still fighting in this sort of craters of the moon sort of environment.
You get the sense of frustration from one of the Germans as he rode home.
We would spend the whole day clearing the street from one end to the other, establish
blocks and fire points at the western end, and prepare for another slice of the salami
the next day.
But at dawn, the Russians would start up firing from their old position at the far end.
It took us some time to discover their trick.
They had not communicating holes through between the garrets and attics, and during the night
they would run back like rats in the rafters, and set their machine guns up behind some
topmost window or broken chimney.
The Russians seemed in this situation to be everywhere.
The Russians, on the other hand, with a sense of desperation, I think if you were one of
these Russian troopers in Stalingrad, the sense of there being no place to go, no escape.
There was no help coming.
It was clear that reinforcements, though there was a sense there might be reinforcements
across the river, they weren't coming, and getting across the river was going to be impossible.
So they fought and fought and fought literally as we've seen house by house, street by street,
room by room.
This is a Russian account.
We beat off the next attack with some stones, firing occasionally and throwing our last
grenades.
Suddenly from behind a blank wall, the rear came down.
From the rear came the grind of a tank's caterpillar tracks.
We had no anti-tank grenades.
All we had was one anti-tank rifle with three rounds.
I handed this rifle to an anti-tank man, Beriachev, and sent him out through the back to fire
at the tank point blank.
But before he could get into position, he was captured by German Tommy Gunners.
But Beriachev told the Germans, I don't know, but I can guess that he led them up the garden
path because an hour later they started to attack it precisely the point where I put
my machine gun with its emergency belt of cartridges.
This time, reckoning that we had run out of ammunition, they came imputantly out of their
shelter standing up and shouting, they came down the street in a column.
I put the last belt in the heavy machine gun at the semi-basement window and sent the whole
of the 250 bullets into the yelling, dirty gray Nazi mob.
I was wounded in the hand but did not let go of the machine gun.
Heaps of bodies littered the ground.
The Germans still alive, ran for cover and panic.
An hour later, they led our anti-tank rifleman onto a heap of ruins and shot him in front
of our eyes for having shown them the way to my machine gun.
There were no more attacks.
An avalanche of shells fell on the building.
The Germans stormed us with every possible kind of weapon.
We couldn't raise our heads.
Again, we heard the ominous sound of tanks from behind, the neighboring block, stocky
German tanks began to crawl out.
This clearly was the end.
The guardsmen said goodbye to one another with a dagger might orderly scratched on a brick
wall, but Demsev's guardsmen fought and died here for their country.
The battling in Stalingrad would continue in this vein through November into December
and into the new year.
The 6th Army was given an order finally to fight to the last man, utterly surrounded with
no way of resupply.
General von Paulus surrendered the 6th Army on February 2, 1943.
It was a catastrophe for the Germans.
The suffering in Stalingrad, much of the sense of what we have of the Eastern Front in the
Second World War is from this incredible battle in Stalingrad.
The temperatures had begun to drop again in November and December.
Then froze to death, frostbite was suffered by troops on both sides.
The Germans, terribly still unprepared for this kind of warfare, now found themselves
with a major defeat on their hands and a defeat that could lead to real catastrophe.
There were 200,000 German losses at Stalingrad, 90,000 prisoners of war.
And with the defeat at Stalingrad, the entire front in southern Russia was now exposed.
There was a very real danger when Stalingrad fell in February of 1943, that the Soviet
Army would continue to move west, cutting off those German units that were down in the
Caucasus and that the entire Eastern Front could collapse for the Germans in one great
counter offensive by the Russians.
This defeat at Stalingrad with so much symbolic and strategic importance was the turning point
of the Second World War on the Eastern Front.
It was the great Russian victory that turned the tide and taken in conjunction with the
victories of the Allies in North Africa, the invasion of Italy, the defeat of the Japanese
at Guadalcanal in 1943 would come into being with great optimism for the Allies.
1942, the beginning of 1942, only a year earlier, had been the low point, the nadir of the Allied
position.
And now as 1943 began, before the spring would come in 1943, now the question was where would
the Allies strike, not with the Japanese or the Germans would attack?
