Lecture 18, Eisenhower and Operation Overlord
Hello, welcome to our 18th in this series of lectures on the Second World War.
We're going to be examining the preparations for what was the largest amphibious assault in history.
The D-Day invasions, the invasion that long awaited cross-channel invasion of Normandy and Fortress Europe.
In the course of 1943, as we've seen, the Germans had suffered an enormous setback in the Eastern Front in Stalingrad.
And slowly the Western Allies had slogged their way up the Italian peninsula.
But it was still the great cross-channel invasion, the second front for which Stalin had been clamoring for years.
That was to hold the real key to the success, to victory for the Allies.
This commitment to a cross-channel invasion was quite controversial.
The British had favored a Mediterranean strategy, as we've seen.
Had encouraged an invasion of North Africa, then Sicily, then Italy, while the Americans had impatiently sought the cross-channel invasion.
And of course, Stalin had been relentlessly demanding a second front which would relieve pressure on the beleaguered Russian troops in the East.
It would not be until the Tehran Conference in November of 1943, when Franklin Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin all met for the first time,
that Churchill finally gave way to pressure from Stalin, now reinforced very vigorously by Roosevelt,
and committed himself to make the cross-channel invasion of Northern Europe the top priority for 1944.
Churchill was not happy with this decision at Tehran.
He would be ambivalent about it all the way down to May, really almost to the eve of the invasion itself.
But he certainly at Tehran at last committed Britain to this great undertaking.
The plan was to be codenamed Operation Overlord.
And at Tehran, Roosevelt announced his decision to name Dwight Eisenhower as Commander-in-Chief.
There was a good deal of controversy about this.
Both Churchill and Stalin had expected and in fact wanted General Marshall.
He was by far the most respected man in the American military establishment.
Marshall himself had hoped for the appointment, but Roosevelt insisted on Eisenhower.
On the one hand he argued that he really couldn't imagine his life in Washington without Marshall.
Marshall was his military confidant.
He was the man that the President leaned on for advice, his calm, his steady, his rock solid and steady personality were essential.
His judgment essential in Washington Roosevelt.
And from a military point of view, Dwight Eisenhower had presided over as Commander-in-Chief three amphibious assaults already.
Torch, Sicily and Italy as well.
So there was a good deal of rationale for the appointment of Eisenhower.
British Air Marshal Sir Arthur Teter was to serve as Eisenhower's deputy and Montgomery was given command of Allied ground forces
and really given the responsibility for the actual planning of the ground operations, the invasion itself.
Everyone in Europe understood in the winter and early spring of 1943 that the invasion was coming.
Fortress Europe was going to be assaulted by the Western Allies.
The question was, where and when?
The Allies had decided in their planning the attack would come in Normandy.
Why Normandy?
Well, the reasoning was that it contained two important ports, Cherbourg and Lahav.
Before we supply these were considered absolutely essential to any sort of sustained military operation in the continent.
The projected landing areas lay to the east of the Côte-en-Temps Peninsula, which jets out into the English Channel
and thus protects the beaches from the prevailing westerly winds.
The Germans also of course expected the invasion to come in the Pas de Calais, 200 miles to the northeast.
The distance across the channel was only 20 miles at that point.
It offered the shortest route, both into France and then of course a quick drive through France and into the heart of Germany.
The Germans very clearly understood that the goal of the Allied invasion was to get through France as quickly as possible,
through the Low Countries and into Germany proper and particularly into the industrial heartland of Germany, which was the rower.
An attack across the Pas de Calais would offer the most obvious shortest route to that objective.
But for the Allies, the ports across the channel from Normandy were larger and could handle the massive ship and troop concentrations that were going to be necessary.
And so for these reasons, the Normandy area suggested itself as the best place for this great undertaking.
The plan that would evolve in the last part of 1943 and into 44 called for an invasion of six divisions, three American, two British, one Canadian.
This was to be the seaborne assault force.
The Americans would be commanded by General Omar Bradley and were to land near the eastern base of the Cotentin Peninsula and drive towards Cherbourg, the nucleus of the First Army.
The British and Canadians were the advance guard of the Second Army, the British Second Army, and were to land farther east near the mouth of the Orne River.
Their objective was to seize the city of Caen, which Montgomery believed he could do within the first 24 hours of the invasion.
Caen was a major road and rail junction and a key objective for the D-Day landings.
The troops, the seaborne troops, were to land at daybreak.
But during the preceding night, two American airborne divisions were to be dropped west of the American beach heads to destroy communications and to block avenues to the beach.
This would be the 82nd and 101st airborne divisions.
One airborne division was to carry out a British airborne division to carry out a similar operation east of the British and Canadian landing sites.
While the ground troops fought inland, prefabricated concrete harbors called mulberries were to be towed across the channel in sections and put in place off the Normandy coast.
This was one way of resupply.
It was an extraordinary engineering feat developed precisely for the Allied landing.
The planning that went on through the winter of 1943 and into the early spring of 1944 was intense and secret and was extraordinary in its attention to detail.
The scale of the planning was absolutely awesome.
This would be the largest amphibious assault in history, as we've indicated.
And on its success, Roosevelt Churchill, the Allied command, felt hung the success of the Second World War.
Operation Overlord would be the best kept secret, remarkably enough, given the number of personnel involved, the long run-up, the planning, and so on.
It was an extraordinary feat of security.
It was incredibly tight, but in the spring of 1944 everyone in Europe and the United States knew that the invasion was coming.
The only questions, as we've said, were where and when.
Hitler was certainly very aware of the stakes of this approaching contest.
He believed that the outcome of the battle would be the critical turning point of the war.
And in November of 1943, he issued Fuhrer Order, Fuhrer Directive Number 51.
For the last two and a half years, the directive states, the bitter and costly struggle against Bolshevism has made the utmost demands upon the bulk of our military resources and energies.
The situation has since changed.
The threat from the East remains, but an even greater danger looms in the West, the Anglo-American landing.
In the East, the vastness of space will as a last resort permit a loss of territory, even on a major scale, without suffering a mortal blow to Germany's chance for survival.
Not so in the West.
If the enemy here succeeds in penetrating our defense on a wide front, consequences of staggering proportions will follow in a short time.
It was clear for Hitler what the objective would be, and it would be the ruler.
There was no territory to give in the West.
For that reason, I can no longer justify the further weakening of the West in favor of other theaters of war.
I have therefore decided to strengthen the defenses in the West, he wrote.
Hitler's calculation was largely political.
If the invasion failed, the Western allies would not try again, he believed for at least a year, and the Russians might actually seek a separate piece.
At this point, after the catastrophe at Stalingrad, it was clear that the Germans were going to be on the defensive in the East, but they were still very deep inside the Soviet Union.
So a political coup here one sees, one's no longer talking about a grandiose new order in Europe, and a gross Deutscher Reich, one's talking about survival of the Third Reich.
And here the way to do this clearly was now a separate piece with the Soviets or with the Western allies.
The Russians, though now certainly on the offensive, were still an awfully long way from Germany.
If they reached the start line of 1941, they would still be 2,000 kilometers from Berlin.
So as 1943 turned to 44, the Germans concentrate now on the anticipated invasion of Northern Europe.
Field Marshal Geffen Rundstedt was named to command all German forces in the West,
but Erwin Rommel, the hero of the Africa Corps by far the most popular military figure in Germany, was placed in command of all ground units in the key areas of northern France, Belgium and the Netherlands.
This was an odd arrangement and it would have important implications because the unity of command would be in question from the very beginning with Rundstedt commander in chief in the West,
but Rommel in charge of the defenses of the key areas where the invasion would likely come.
Both Rundstedt and Rommel believed that the invasion would come in the Patekalei.
Looking at the situation from a military point of view and of course Rundstedt thinking back to German plans from the summer of 1940,
believed that this was the obvious place, one had to make the preparations for it, even if the allies should go take a different route.
The Patekalei was so crucial because it was only 20 miles across the Straits of Dover, the narrowest part of the channel, therefore they had to concentrate there.
Hitler, on the other hand, originally believed, looking at the map, that the invasion when it came would come not at the Patekalei but in Normandy.
In part, I think this was Hitler's own, was consistent with his own sense of daring to go, to do the unexpected, to strike where the least obvious place in Normandy certainly didn't suggest itself as an obvious target for the invasion.
But over the course of time, Hitler himself was increasingly convinced by Rommel, by Rundstedt, by his military that the major defensive energies of the Germans should be devoted to the Patekalei area.
And of course, the worst case scenario carried the day, even if the allies, if the allies were to land at the Patekalei, they would simply have a straight shot across Belgium and the Ruhr and that had to be prevented at all costs.
There might be time if they landed in Normandy, but the worst case scenario was an invasion in the Patekalei.
Despite the so-called Atlantic Wall, the German defenses, the defensive network that had been established along the coast, Rundstedt and Rommel were keenly aware of Frederick the Great's dictum that he who defends everything defends nothing.
And as they looked at this western coast of fortress Europe running from Norway all through the Low Countries to France into Brittany, this was an extraordinary defensive problem that they had to confront.
They had to make guesses. They had to make calculations.
Adding to these inherent strategic difficulties, German defensive thinking was also hampered by serious differences about how to defend against the invasion.
Rommel was convinced that the allies had to be stopped in the beaches, hit them as they come off their landing craft, halt them at the beaches that if they get ashore successfully, then the battle is lost.
You have to stop them within the first 24 hours. It was for this reason Rommel argued that first 24 hours of the invasion would be what he called the longest day, the day on which the fate of Germany would hinge.
Rundstedt, on the other hand, believed that trying to halt the allies on the beaches was a virtually impossible task. After all, you would have to build up these defenses all across the likely landing areas over several hundred miles.
The best defensive strategy would be to hold at the beaches as much as possible, but to have a mobile strike force, a mobile defense with a vigorous counterattack after the main thrust of the invasion had been identified.
Both Rommel and Rundstedt, as well as Hitler, all believed that there would be a diversion. There might be some sort of diversionary attack one place, and then the main thrust of the attack would come elsewhere.
So between Rommel and Rundstedt, both charged in different ways with the defense of Western Europe, there are these significant differences.
Complicating these arrangements was another problem, and that was that two important panzer divisions that were going to be key elements of any German defensive strategy,
whether it was Rommel's halt them on the beaches or more obviously Rundstedt's mobile defense position, these two panzer divisions had to be sent to throw back the main allied invasion.
Neither Rommel nor Rundstedt had the authority to dispatch those panzer divisions, which were in the north closer to the Patek Hallé in Paris.
Only Adolf Hitler could release those panzer divisions for dispatch to the front.
So unity of command was not achieved by the Germans as they prepared for this decisive battle.
The Allies certainly planned to invade Normandy, but in early 1944 and right down to the D-Day itself, the Allies did everything they could to convince the Germans that the invasion would indeed come in the Patek Hallé.
The Allies created a dummy headquarters under Patton's command with elaborate radio traffic, supply depots, railroad sightings, inflatable tanks, cardboard trucks.
An extraordinary effort to confuse the Germans who believed that no invasion would come without Patton, the hero of the American army, as far as the Germans were concerned, being a key player.
The British also created a dummy army in the north also with radio traffic with a whole series of ploys to make the Germans believe that an invasion of Norway was in the works, that the British were going to launch an attack in Norway.
And although Hitler did not reinforce the German troops in Norway, the 13 German divisions that were stationed in Norway remained in place even as the spring approached, an invasion season was upon the Germans.
Ultra, the intercepts of the Allied intercepts of German code traffic reported that the Germans had indeed bought the deception.
So the question of where was successfully disguised by the Allies, everyone knew that the invasion would come sometime in the late spring or early summer, and the timing would be largely dictated by weather conditions.
The Allies would need calm seas, they would need clear skies if they were to take advantage of one of the great advantages they possessed, and that was air superiority.
So the question of when, the Germans understood this as well as the Allies, late spring, early summer, this was the time that one could expect it.
Eisenhower in planning had set June 5th for D-Day, and the cumbersome loading process had begun on May 31st.
I always find it remarkable to think that this massive movement of troops, of vehicles, of every sort, trucks, tanks, jeeps, all sort of artillery pieces, all of southern England beginning on May 31st was simply in motion.
As these troops moved by train, some by foot, some in convoys, began moving to the ports from which they would load the ships and begin to move.
All along the route, British civilians were out waving at the troops, it was clear to anyone around that this was the big event, this was the long-awaited invasion.
It was finally coming, and yet the Germans were in the dark about this.
By the evening of June 3rd, the assault waves of the Allied Expeditionary Force were loaded up, all prepared for the invasion on June 5th.
The ships assembled were extraordinary.
2727 ships, battleships, destroyers, minesweepers, huge LSTs, landing ships to carry tanks, heavy supplies, troops, and so on.
931 of these ships were headed for Omaha and Utah beaches, the two American beaches to be hit, the Western Naval Task Force.
The Eastern Naval Task Force contained 1,796 ships bound for Gold, Juno, and Sword beaches, the British, the codenames for the British beaches.
In addition, 2,600 landing craft, Higgins boats, and other smaller vessels that were simply too small to make the trans, the cross-channel trip on their own had been loaded up onto these giant LSTs
so that all together, an armada of 5,333 vessels had been assembled in the south of England to prepare for this enormous undertaking.
By June 3rd, all of the supplies, all of the men, had been loaded.
And then, on June 4th, a major weather front hit, howling winds, plunging temperatures, and rain falling in horizontal sheets.
Still, the thousands of ships in the vast armada had begun to move out of their harbors and to form up into convoys.
Eisenhower got more bad news at his weather briefing at 0400.
The situation he was told by his chief meteorologist is a 28-year-old Scotsman by the name of J.M. Stagg.
One thinks about the responsibility that this man shouldered in these days.
Stagg told Eisenhower at 0400 the situation was deteriorating rapidly, that the weather was going to get worse, and even more, it was unpredictable.
It was not at all clear if the weather would break, when it would break, that predicting the weather for more than 24 hours under these circumstances was almost impossible.
At 0600, Eisenhower gave the order to put everything on hold.
The troops and the ships were miserable, caught in the storm, out in the channel, sea sickness, awful conditions for the troops.
Eisenhower now is confronted with a choice.
To postpone the invasion would mean putting things off until June 19th.
There were only three days in each two-week period in June, when the two conditions he needed could be predicted.
That is, when low tide and first light came together.
Essentially, you had to have these conditions because of German defenses.
They were concentrated in the tidal flats, so you wanted to be able to see them.
The naval people bringing the boats in wanted to be able to see the underwater obstructions that would be obscured at high tide.
Also, the airborne operations required at least a half-moon, and that reduced the availability of days to an even shorter period.
If you postpone to June 19th, and the weather were bad then, then when it's talking about a postpone of an entire month, you'd lose a month of campaigning,
the security might be breached. It was a nightmarish situation for Eisenhower.
Then at 2130, on the evening of the 4th, at Southwick House, a weather briefing suggested that there might be a 36-hour respite after all.
A brief break in the weather on the night and morning of June 5th, June 6th.
A cheer went up from the gentlemen who were present at Southwick House at that meeting.
They were gathered at the mess room there.
As one person who was present said, he'd never seen so many middle-aged men cheer as vigorously at one time as when Stagg brought the news about this possible weather break.
In fact, Stagg was quite certain about it.
The pressure on Eisenhower at this moment was intense.
Lee Mallory, in charge of air operations, urged postponement.
Air Marshal Teder, Eisenhower's deputy commander, agreed.
Air operations, it was simply too dicey to undertake air operations if the weather was going to be this chancey.
Eisenhower turned to Montgomery and asked him, and Montgomery, ever ready for this sort of thing, said, I would say, go.
Eisenhower paced the room and then decided, overlord, the largest, most complex and diceous amphibious assault in human history.
An assault on which the outcome of the war would ride would be launched on June 6th in weather conditions that voted only ill.
It was a gamble of astronomical proportions.
When Eisenhower awoke at 03.30 on June 5th, the wind was literally shaking his trailer.
Rain fell in sheets and the storm continued to rage.
At a weather briefing, Stagg arrived with good news.
He insisted, despite all of the conditions that Eisenhower and everyone present could see,
the howling wind, the rain coming in sheets, Stagg absolutely insisted that the weather was going to break and added a new note.
It would only be a break and then conditions would deteriorate again.
The operation would have, at most, at most, 48 hours of reasonably good weather.
Already, the ship convoys had been forming up since midnight and the men were forced to ride out the storm bobbing in the heavy surf.
At this point, Eisenhower could still have ordered a postponement.
And at a last briefing with his staff while the rain continued to pelt against the window, Eisenhower, supported once again by Montgomery, made the final decision.
Okay, he said simply, let's go.
Eisenhower would draft a message to the troops of the Allied Expeditionary Force, which I think is one of the most powerful and moving documents of the Second World War.
And I would like to read it.
This was to be given to all troops involved in the Normandy landings.
Soldiers, sailors, and airmen of the Allied Expeditionary Force.
You were about to embark upon the great crusade toward which we have striven these many months.
The eyes of the world are upon you, the hopes and prayers of liberty-loving people everywhere march with you.
In company with our brave allies and brothers-in-arms on other fronts, you will bring about the destruction of the German war machine,
the elimination of Nazi tyranny over the oppressed peoples of Europe, and security for ourselves in a free world.
Your task will not be an easy one.
Your enemy is well trained, well equipped, and battle-hardened.
He will fight savagely.
But this is the year 1944.
Much has happened since the Nazi triumphs of 1940-41.
The United Nations have inflicted upon the Germans great defeats in open battle, man to man.
Our air offensive has seriously reduced their strength in the air and their capacity to wage war on the ground.
Our home fronts have given us an overwhelming superiority in weapons and munitions of war
and placed at our disposal great reserves of trained fighting men.
The tide has turned.
The freemen of the world are marching together to victory.
I have full confidence in your courage, devotion to duty, and skill in battle.
We will accept nothing less than full victory.
Good luck and let us all beseech the blessings of Almighty God upon this great and noble undertaking.
Dwight Eisenhower.
Eisenhower in these terribly tense moments on the eve of D-Day also drafted a second message.
He put it in his pocket.
He wrote,
Our landings in the Cherbourg-Lahov area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold,
and I have withdrawn the troops.
My decision to attack was based on the best information available.
The troops, the air and navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do.
If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.
That was a message that he desperately hoped he would never have to print.
At 1900 hours on the 5th of June, Eisenhower would visit the 101st Airborne Units.
They were to be among the first to land in Normandy.
The dye was now cast.
The invasion was about to begin.
The machinery was all in place.
The ships underway.
The great moment had at last arrived.
