In our last lecture, we examined the planning for Operation Overlord, the cross-channel
invasion of Hitler's fortress Europe. That was to come on June 6, 1944. The outcome of
that battle would be decisive for the outcome of the war. Everyone involved was clearly aware
of that. And on the eve of the invasion, as the troops had gathered in the channel, the
seaborne assault forces already in the channel, Dwight Eisenhower, the supreme commander of
the Allied Expeditionary Force, went to visit members of the American airborne units that
would be dropped into German-occupied Europe into Normandy in the night of June 5th, June 6th.
In this lecture, we're going to examine the course of events on that June 5th, June 6th,
and then the Allied movement from Normandy toward Paris in the liberation of that city
and of France. We began with Eisenhower himself. We talked in the last lecture about the loneliness
of the decision that he made when many of his commanders, especially his air commanders, Lee
Mallory, Teter, Teter in particular, whose views Eisenhower respected greatly, were worried, in
fact, favored postponing the invasion. Mallory, Lee Mallory, estimated that under the best of
conditions that the airborne units that were going into Normandy would suffer 80% casualties.
This weighed very heavily on Eisenhower as the decision had been made and he waited
for the invasion to begin. And at 1900 on June 5th, Eisenhower visited the troops of the 101st
airborne. I think many of you have seen the film clip of Eisenhower walking among these airborne
troops. The troops are in their their charcoal faces ready for their loading up to go. Eisenhower
walks around, talks to them. He seems confident. He seems not quite jovial, but just exudes that
sense of confidence, the confidence that he certainly did not necessarily have at that moment.
I think he went because these were the troops that he was sending into combat
and into the most into harm's way first. And I think that that sense of the 80% casualties,
that figure that Lee Mallory continued to press upon him weighed very heavily on Eisenhower as
he talked to those to those troops. There would be about 13,400 American 7,000 British paratroopers
who would be dropped into Normandy, the first Allied troops to land in Nazi-occupied Europe.
Those parachute units were about to undergo an amazing operation.
Standing there waiting to get climb into the C-47s, their equipment alone was daunting.
I'd like to read you the description of what one typical airborne trooper had with him as
he got ready to climb into the C-47 for this flight. One suit of olive drab worn under my
jumpsuit. This was an order for everyone. Helmet, boots, gloves, main parachute, reserve
parachute, May West, the inflatable yellow inflatable life jacket, rifle, 45 automatic pistol,
trench knife, jump knife, hunting knife, machete, one cartridge belt, two bandoliers,
two cans of machine gun ammo totaling 676 rounds, a .30 caliber ammo, 66 rounds of .45
caliber ammo, one Hawkins mine capable blowing off the track of a tank, four blocks of TNT,
one entrenching tool with two blasting caps taped on the outside of the steel part,
three first aid kits, two morphine needles, one gas mask, a canteen of water, three days supply
of K rations, two days supply of D rations, six fragmentation grenades, one gammon grenade,
one orange and one red smoke grenade, one orange panel, one blanket, one raincoat,
one change of socks and underwear, and two cartons of cigarettes.
So loaded with equipment were these airborne troopers. If they sat down or fell over backwards,
they literally had to be helped up by their buddies to climb into the troop transports that
would carry them to their date with destiny in Normandy. The one always thinks of this
extraordinary armada that had set sail from England headed for the continent when one thinks of D-Day,
but this armada of C-47s, these transport planes that would take off on the night of June 5th
into June 6th, was also a sight to behold. And I'd like to read you one description of what
that looked like to those who were taking part. First of all, the pilots, most of the pilots who
would be flying these troop transports were going into combat for the first time. They had not been
trained for nighttime flying remarkably enough or to deal with flak or bad weather. The C-47 was
primarily designed to carry cargo or passengers, not for this sort of operation.
The C-47 was neither armed nor was it armored. Their gas tanks were neither protected nor
self-sealing, so they were extraordinarily vulnerable aircraft. There were so many planes in the air
that the chance of a mid-air collision was on everybody's mind. It took 432 C-47s to carry
the 101st Airborne to Normandy, about the same number for the 82nd Airborne. They were flying in
what was called the V of V formation, stretched out across the sky. It was 300 miles long,
nine planes wide, all without radio communication. Only the lead pilot and each serial of 45 planes
had a Eureka set with a show of lights from the Plexiglas Astrodome for guidance for the following
planes. The planes were 100 feet from wing tip to wing tip in their groups of nine,
1,000 feet from one group to another, with no lights except the little blue dots in the tail
of the plane ahead. It was an extremely tight formation, even by daylight standards,
but to do this at night was very chancey indeed. They crossed the channel at about 500 feet or
less to escape German radar detection and then were to climb to 1500 feet to escape the anti-aircraft
fire along the Channel Islands. 600 feet was the jump altitude. When they crossed the coastline,
heading out across the channel, everything was fine. The formation had been able to come together
to form up, but then as they moved across the channel, they encountered an enormous cloud bank.
When they did, the formation simply came apart. Some dropped below the cloud bank, some climbed
above it, some peeled off to the right, some to the left. It was absolute chaos. Then when they
finally crossed into France, they were widely separated. As they appeared, came out of the cloud
bank over the continent, as one of the pilots said, in fact, many of them said, all hell seemed
to break loose. Search lights, tracers, anti-aircraft fire, everything, and the troop carriers began
to move toward the jump zones. The problems with the C-47s meant that very few of the 82nd
or 101st airborne units actually were dropped where they were supposed to.
Many of the, a number of the units were actually dropped across the, out into the into the sea.
The planes had gone all the way across the Cotantin Peninsula and dropped them on the other side.
Others had come in very low, dropped them at too high a speed, so that the paratroopers were
scattered rather than coming down and they were supposed to come down in sticks.
But instead, they seemed to be, we were scattered everywhere. It looked like a catastrophe in the
making. One American paratrooper who had landed safely, managed to, was looking up and saw a
sea, another C-47 coming across an extraordinarily low altitude. He saw them, a disgorge, a stick
of paratroopers and he wrote later, their shoots were pulling out of the tray packs and just
starting to unfurl when they hit the ground. Seventeen men hit the ground before their shoots
had time to open. They made a sound like ripe pumpkins being thrown down to burst against the
ground. In addition to those who were dropped, actually out at sea, were those who were dropped
too low or were dropped with the planes going too fast. Other paratroopers that night drowned
in water that was two feet deep. The Germans had flooded fields around the Normandy area.
These, the flooding could not be picked up by aerial photographs or allied intelligence because
of reeds, hay and so on. And so when paratroopers came down to what looked like a field in the
dark of course, hit the ground and rolled as they were supposed to do, they wound up with all of
this equipment rolling up in their parachutes in water two feet, three feet deep and were unable
to disengage themselves and simply drown. One other group of paratroopers came down in spectacular
fashion in the absolute center of the village of St. Mary Glees, a critical point in airborne
operations they were supposed to take, they were not supposed to land in the town. As coincidence
would have it, a fire had broken out in one of the buildings in the town. Lights were on,
the huge fire was going, the villagers were out putting out the fire and of course the German
troops were out as well in the village as down suddenly out of the sky after hearing the droning
of planes coming over thinking of course this would simply be another allied air raid. Instead,
the sky was filled with parachutes coming down and the troopers landed right in the middle of the
village and were cut to pieces. One man, a radio operator who landed on that night,
would recall, he landed with his radio, his radio set in a leg bag attached to his leg,
so additional equipment, fell into the water with 140 pounds of radio equipment securely fastened
to his body and a back injured by the opening shock that was when the parachute snapped open.
He lost his knife as he struggled to cut his way out to the surface and was approved,
his last gasp on his parachute collapsed and ceased to drag him along the bottom.
The terror of that first night, he recalled in 1967, remains so vivid even today that sometimes
I wake up in a cold sweat and nearly jump out of bed. What might not have been a propitious
beginning to this most ambitious operation turned out to be a godsend. The Germans began to receive
communications from all over Normandy, from all over the area that paratroopers had landed,
paratroopers had landed, and so even though the French resistance had begun to cut communications
for making it difficult for the Germans to get accurate reporting from the landing sites,
at German high command, they began to say, well, there are paratroopers here, here, here,
and here, it didn't seem to make any sense. What was the actual, what was the actual,
was this simply a diversion? Was this simply a small action? What was going on? It was not at all
clear. As the paratroopers were climbing into their planes, the BBC had broadcast in its broadcast
France, which were done every evening, the second part of Paul Verland's poem, the song of autumn,
which was the code word for the French resistance to know, to say, this is it. This is, this is
the second half of it, the invasion is coming. And so as the paratroopers were getting, flying
across the channel and preparing to land, French resistance groups were out beginning to cut
lines of communication and so on. The Germans decoded this, understood what this meant,
but were unable to act on it. The up there, the German counterintelligence people were
enormously frustrated by this, believing that they understood that this, this was the signal,
but were unable to, to act on it in a forthright fashion. The Germans then were slow to respond
because of the chaos caused by the cutting of communication and also these contradictory or
at least what seemed to be bizarre reports from the front of, of paratroopers.
At dawn on the 6th of June, 1944, the vast armada that had been composed in Britain
approached the shores of Fortress Europe. The Germans there were caught off guard despite
the breaking of the code. Rommel so confident that the weather was, was so abysmal, so terrible
that no Allied landing would come now. It actually left Normandy, left France on his way back to
Germany. It was his wife's birthday to, to visit her. Other key commanders of the German High Command
in France were away from their posts, going to war games because also they were convinced that the
weather would prevent any sort of Allied landing at this particular point.
Gaffard Rundstedt, the German commander for the Western Front, was slow to react certain
when, when finally enough coherence could be achieved about from the reports that a landing
had taken place in Normandy. Rundstedt was still slow to react because he believed this was the
diversion. It was too far away, it was not the Pate de Calais, and he was wary of taking
premature action. Finally, he demanded that Hitler release the two Panzer divisions,
but Hitler would not be awakened, and thus 12 precious hours were lost and several more
before the, the Panzers could actually get underway. A great deal is usually made of this,
of Hitler sleeping through the night, Nero fiddling while Rome burned. But in some ways,
one suspects that even had Hitler been awake and had been apprised of the situation, developing
situation in Normandy, that he would have also been wary of dispatching his Panzers that far south
and would still hold on to them for some time because of the fear that the real invasion would
come at the Pate de Calais. The plan that had been devised for D-Day was that the operation was
to unfold in three stages, what was called the break-in D-Day itself, get the lodgement to,
to, to safely land. Then the build-up, and then finally the breakout. All went well at the Allied
invasion beaches, except at Omaha Beach, where the Navy launched troops too far out in the Chappy
Sea. There was ferocious resistance on the part of the Germans. The Americans were pinned down for
hours. Until late in the afternoon, it appeared that the situation at Omaha might, might really
get out of hand and that the entire invasion front might collapse as, if the Germans could
split the Allied invasion front. But late in the day, the Americans finally were able to
move off the beach and to begin to press inland. The British landing at Gold, Juno, and Sword beaches
moved ahead. Their landings went much more smoothly. They moved inland much quicker,
but they too failed to take their original objective on D-Day. Montgomery had been,
though he would later maintain, this was not the case, confident that he was going to be able
to take Khan the first day in the first 24 hours. This was their objective. But although the Germans
had been caught off guard and had been slow to respond, they put up terrific resistance,
especially as the British began to move inland toward Khan. By the 7th of June, 100,000 Allied
troops had landed on the coast of Normandy. Within 10 days, a half a million Allied troops had come
ashore. By July 1st, almost a million Allied troops had managed to land. It's an interesting,
it's interesting, is when things about what might have happened had Eisenhower decided to postpone
the invasion. Because on June 19th, one of the largest storms in the English Channel in the 20th
century hit, a huge ferocious storm. It destroyed the mulberry off the American landing beaches,
this artificial port that had been established. It would have been an absolute disaster if they'd
tried to launch it then, or it might have been postponed yet again. The D-Day invasion had
succeeded. I think there is a tendency to think in retrospect that victory there was a foregone
conclusion, but it was anything but that, anything but that. And the extraordinary feats of heroism
on that day, I think 50 years after the fact still boggled the mind, I'm struck as I think
about the anniversary, the 50th anniversary of the D-Day landings, when the number of American
rangers who had taken part in one of the most remarkable achievements of that day, the especially
trained group of rangers, were supposed to climb Point de Hoc, this sheer bluff to give these German
guns at the top. They had managed to do it, to climb this against terrific resistance. And as I
looked at the veteran standing there on this 50th anniversary, standing at the bottom, at the beach
looking up at these sheer bluffs, one man turned to one of his buddies and said, would somebody
here please tell me how we did this? It was such an amazing individual feat. The day was filled
with those. There's a second tendency, I think, a second and understandable temptation also to
think of that dramatic day, the longest day, as Rommel referred to it, as in itself decisive for
the outcome of the war. But that epic battle, in which 4,000 allied soldiers would become casualties,
was in fact just the beginning of a long murderous campaign in Normandy, whose outcome
was still in doubt weeks after June 6th. Indeed, the allies were still bogged down in Normandy
a month later, the Americans slogging through the hedgerow country, the so-called Boccage country.
St. Low would fall only on July 18th, and the British were still pinned down before calm.
That unfortunate city had been the British objective for D-Day, but would fall to British
and Canadian troops only after a massive RAF raid virtually leveled the city on July 18th.
What's remarkable in a way about the Battle of Normandy is that one gets almost gets the
impression that the allies were so focused in the planning on D-Day itself, getting the troops
ashore, landing them, being able to supply them, that less thought had actually been given to
the terrain, the conditions of combat in Normandy itself. The Americans, in particular, finding
themselves in Normandy, in this Boccage country, the hedgerow country, Allied intelligence was
unprepared for this remarkably enough. These hedgerows were anything but sort of small decorative
shrubs. These, in many cases, were centuries old, huge hedgerows, mounds that were almost
like bunkers with a deep system of roots so that a tank couldn't even penetrate them,
and each road, each field, was boundaryed by these hedgerows. As a consequence, a German force,
even an undermanned German force, could hold up in advance for much of a day, move back to the
next hedgerow, the next hedgerow, and so on. It was absolutely murderous for the troops bogged down
in this area. It would not be until August that the American breakthrough occurred
when General Patton was at last dispatched to the continent to lead the American Third Army,
and it came roaring out of the Cotantin Peninsula and raced to the east northeast toward Falaise.
At this point, General Montgomery, and at this point, and certainly in retrospect,
after the war, always would maintain that the original plan, his original plan,
had called for him not necessarily to take combat, to use that as the hinge,
and then the Americans would be the door that would swing for the great breakout.
This is some creative retrospective thinking, I think, on the part of General Montgomery,
but certainly it would be Patton whose Third Army would begin the War of Movement,
breaking out and tearing into the Germans. The Falaise, an entire German army group,
would be trapped by the Americans coming from the south, the British and Canadians moving down
a bit from the north. The killing and destruction in the so-called Falaise pocket
was so intense, the slaughter so overwhelming, that Allied pilots flying over the battlefield
at 1,500 feet could smell the stench of death rising from the battlefield.
In mid-August, the second Allied invasion occurred on the Mediterranean coast of France,
led by a joint American and French force that rapidly began to push northward.
At this juncture, the only issue remaining for the campaign in France was the fate of Paris.
Would the Allies attempt to seize the city, would the Germans defend it,
leading almost everyone agreed to the city's destruction?
Eisenhower's intention, originally, was simply to bypass Paris. It was, as far as Eisenhower was
concerned, of very little strategic importance. The political significance of it, the symbolic
significance of it, was obviously important, especially to the French. But in terms of
military operations, Eisenhower believed that it would simply slow down the Allied advance.
The Allies would be forced to supply the city of Paris, the civilians of Paris,
and that this would be a diversion of much needed resources.
Initially, the decision to bypass Paris had been supported by General de Gaulle,
who had been promised by Eisenhower when the two were in Africa,
that Paris would be liberated by French forces. The question now was which French forces?
As the Allied troops broke out of Normandy, resistance forces in Paris, indeed all over the
country, had risen up. The French resistance, which had struggled against the Germans in German
occupation since 1940, now came out in full force. de Gaulle had created a general staff for what he
called the FFI, the French forces of the interior, and had convinced Eisenhower to recognize him as
a co-equal of the other national commanders under supreme headquarters of the Allied expeditionary
force. de Gaulle was, in the best of times, a difficult person to deal with, his sense of pride
had been wounded over and over and over again by the Allies who were not completely,
did not consider him completely trustworthy. Nonetheless, de Gaulle was particularly worried
that the Parisian resistance, with its heavy communist influence, would seize the city.
If the city were going to be liberated, de Gaulle argued, it had to be liberated by the FFI,
by his forces, liberated from without, not by the communists within the city.
He ordered the Parisian resistance under no circumstances to unleash what he called a
premature rising against the German garrison. There were two concerns for de Gaulle. One was that if
the resistance in Paris, largely dominated, he was afraid by the communists, did in fact rise
against the Germans, that it would lead to the destruction of the city, that the Germans would
use this as the fighting in the city. The city would destroy Paris, the jewel of western civilization
as far as de Gaulle was concerned, and second, he didn't want there to be what he called a
second commune. There was the commune of 1871 when the Germans had surrounded Paris,
and a left-wing uprising had sent the city and French political culture into a crisis.
On August 22, 1944, with the threat that de Gaulle would, on his own initiative,
send French troops to Paris. Eisenhower relented, and General Leclerc was ordered to advance with
his French armored division on the city. In a mad dash for Paris, 120 miles away,
Leclerc, supported by American forces, entered the city whose resistance had risen anyway.
De Gaulle was unable to actually control events in Paris, and accepted the surrender of the German
garrison. The Germans had indeed planted, begun the process. German demolition teams had begun the
process of mining the Eiffel Tower, the Louvre, all the bridges on the Île de la Cité, the Île
Saint-Louis, the major cultural monuments of Paris. But the general there, the German general,
was finally convinced that he did not want to be the man who would be remembered for the destruction
of Paris. The fall of Paris then was the final installment in the Battle for France, which
commenced on D-Day, June 6. By early September, the Allied armies had reached Belgium and Holland,
and were approaching the German frontier. The war in Europe, in the late summer of 1944,
seemed to be drawing to a speedy close. And indeed, the summer of 1944, both on the eastern
and western fronts, did represent the beginning of the war's final phase. The Allied success in
France was matched by a devastating defeat, meted out to the Germans by the Red Army in July,
when the entire center of the German front in Russia collapsed, and the Russians began the
long arduous push toward the eastern frontiers of the Third Reich. But the war was not over.
The dying continued for almost a year after D-Day. In fact, the largest pitched battle in American
history remained to be fought, the Battle of the Bulge, in December and January of 1944-45.
But after the events of the summer of 1944, after the success of D-Day,
the outcome of the war in Europe was no longer in doubt. The tide had been irrevocably turned,
and the liberation of Europe from Nazi tyranny was at hand.
