Lecture 20, Operation Market Garden and the Battle of the Bulge
By the late summer of 1944, the western allies stood in control of most of France, Belgium,
Holland, lay before them, the frontier of Germany beckoned. In this our 20th lecture
in the series in the Second World War, we're going to examine allied operations from the
fall of Paris in late August of 1944 through the winter. Looking at particularly Operation
Market Garden, the allied plan to get across the Rhine in 1944, and then the German counter
attack the Ardennes offensive in the winter of 1944 and into January 1945. At this point
in the war with the fall of Paris, the breakout out of Normandy, it really did seem as if
the war might come to an end in Europe in 1944. The Germans seemed to be reeling, defeated.
At this point, the debate broke out within the allied high command between General Montgomery,
the British commander, who would advocate what he called a single-thrust strategy aimed
at driving directly toward the ruler, and possibly even on to Berlin if necessary, and
General Eisenhower, who would prefer a broad front approach to the strategic advance toward
Germany. The allies would encounter several problems in this period. One was a shortage
of troops we would discover in 1944 that despite the enormous mobilization of manpower in the
United States, that the American army actually was too small for the task that it had been
assigned to fight in two theaters of war in the Pacific and now in Europe. There would
also be a problem of overconfidence, extraordinary overconfidence in the part of the allies in
the summer and fall of 1944, for which the allies would pay a terrible cost in the Ardennes
in the winter with the German offensive that would come to be known as the Battle of the
Bulge. The allied debate over offensive strategy really burst forth with the fall of Paris on
August 25th. The city of light was spared by the Germans and by the allies. It was declared
an open city. Leclerc and Bradley's troops entered the city. Some of the American troops
were somewhat bitter because they got to march down the Champs Elysees, march through the
city at the other side, only then to get put back on trucks or march and move on toward
the front after the Germans. But shortly thereafter, the British 2nd and Canadian 1st, the American
1st armies slammed into Belgium and by September 15, almost all of Belgium and Luxembourg were
in allied hands. Meanwhile, Patton's 3rd army had swung into the northeast portions of France
and was making rapid headway. Indeed, the German frontier was now only a few miles away. The
offensive needed to halt not so much because of German resistance, which seemed to be cracking
at every possible place, but simply because the armies were outrunning their supplies.
Supply would become one of the major problems as well. Fuel shortages began to develop. The only real
operative ports, beaches, were still in Normandy and as the American troops, the allied troops pushed
farther away from those resupply centers they came. The debate then centered around General
Montgomery's position, who Montgomery argued with Eisenhower, urging what he called a single-thrust
strategy with the British 2nd and American 1st armies, under his command naturally, driving
toward the Rhine and the Ruhr, while the Canadians and the Americans under Patton would halt
in order to conserve fuel and supplies and those scarce supplies and fuel would be funneled
to Montgomery's forces in the north. Eisenhower, on the other hand, advocated a broad front
strategy with all armies moving ahead simultaneously, putting pressure on the Germans, stretching
German resources across a broad front. Montgomery was certainly unhappy and later argued that Eisenhower's
decision prevented not only the early encirclement of the Ruhr, but a dash all the way to Berlin.
Montgomery, after the war, would maintain that Eisenhower had made a terrible decision here.
That victory really was within the Allies grasp in the summer of 1944 and that if only he, Montgomery,
had been given the necessary fuel, supplies, had been given precedence over Patton and the others,
then it would have been possible to concentrate Allied forces, smash the Germans across the Rhine
in the north and drive directly to the Ruhr, knocking the Germans out of the war early,
or then even continuing on this great juggernaut headed toward Berlin. Montgomery is probably
correct about the advance to the Rhine. There's no question that had he been given the resources,
Allied forces under his command, the British 2nd Army, American 1st, could have driven toward
the Rhine with great force in the summer of 1944, but crossing the Rhine was still going
to be a very difficult proposition and Montgomery was wildly optimistic about the possibility
of a drive toward Berlin or even actually into the Ruhr itself. The Allies lacked the supplies
for such an ambitious policy and there was no solution in sight to that supply problem.
This was something Eisenhower understood. That problem, the problem of getting supplies
to the advancing Allied armies was ease somewhat by the capture of Marseille, but the Allies
still badly needed a major port in northwestern Europe near the action. Moving supplies from
Marseille in the south or from Normandy still was taking too long. The obvious choice was
the Belgian port of Antwerp, one of Europe's largest and most important ports, and Antwerp
actually fell to the British on September 4th with the port intact, an important achievement
for the British, but the problem was not solved by the seizure of Antwerp because Antwerp lay
on the Shelts River 60 miles from the North Sea and the Germans continued to control the
Belgian and Dutch territory that bordered the river's estuary. While it had the port,
one still had to send supplies up and down that river to get to the port and the Germans
were able to harass and make any sort of ship movement and make it really major resupply
impossible by that route. Hitler planned to hold on to this estuary for as long as possible.
The Allies certainly knew this to deny the use of the port and indeed the Germans continued
to hold out in the Shelts estuary until November 9th and until that time Antwerp was absolutely
useless to the Allies. A second debate would break out in the Allied camp in roughly this
period. Montgomery thwarted in his single thrust strategy, now put forward a new plan, a plan
to cross the Rhine in the north in the Netherlands. If it worked, he argued, the Allies would
jump the only major river barrier that guarded Germany and would outflank the northernmost
fortifications of what was called the Vestval, sometimes the Siegfried Line, along the Dutch-German
border. It would also threaten the V2 launch sites in Holland. One of the aspects of the
D-Day attack that we did not mention in talking about the operations on the continent was
Hitler's launch in the aftermath of the D-Day of the so-called V-weapons. Vergelthungswaffen
in German, it means revenge or vengeance weapons. The buzz bombs that would chug, chug, chug, chug
and could be heard coming across the channel, the first missiles of certainly of modern warfare,
you could see them. They could actually be shot down, traced on radar and shot down by
the RAF or the Americans with some difficulty. These were terrifying enough, but the Germans
also began shortly thereafter launching the V2s. Rockets that fired into the above the
stratosphere would come down with devastating impact on London and could not be seen, could
not be anticipated. They simply would arrive with devastating impact. So getting to these
launch sites in the low countries was a major concern for the Allies in Holland in particular
in 1944. However, a drive to the Rhine in Holland would require crossing four rivers and three
canals before reaching the lower Rhine at Arnhem. It would require airborne troops to
seize bridges all along the route with British ground troops pushing north to relieve them.
The plan that Montgomery came up with to drop large numbers of airborne troops all along the way
as far north as Arnhem, about 65 miles away, they would seize the crossover, seize the bridges,
allowing the Allies pushing from the south along route north to actually cross the rivers
and get across the Rhine. This last bridge at Arnhem was 64 miles away. Eisenhower was dubious
about this plan, but he agreed, approved Montgomery's plan and what came to be known as
Operation Market Garden was launched. The American 101st and 82nd Airborne Divisions,
the so-called Red Devils, were to be dropped with the bridge at Arnhem to be taken, the key bridge
at Arnhem to be taken by the Red Devils. Market Garden began on September 17, 1944 with a huge
parachute drop. It was a daring enterprise and an enormous enterprise. There is a film called
Bridge Too Far from the Cornelius Ryan book by the same name, which has a visual depiction of this.
It's remarkable even in the later filming, an enormous parachute drop. That went successfully,
but problems quickly emerged. For one thing, there were two German Panzer divisions within the vicinity
of Arnhem. What is remarkable about this and symptomatic of the period, I think, is that
ULTRA had already informed the Americans or we had been informed by ULTRA of the presence
of these armored divisions in the area, and yet the parachute drop went ahead on schedule.
I think what one sees in this is the beginning of, it reflects, I think, this excessive optimism,
that since the Germans were beaten, we were now going to be able to push the Germans out,
and even though these two armored divisions were present, they could be brushed aside.
It is this overconfidence in this period that would prove to be nearly fatal.
The British drop was also too far away from the objective and their advance was quite slow.
The American 82nd Airborne had difficulty capturing the bridge over the Wall River,
and so there was a great deal of delay in the operation.
Things didn't go as smoothly as anticipated after the initial drop.
Also, the advance of the main force, the ground force moving from the south, was glacially slow.
It moved along one major road, and the Germans quickly brought this under artillery fire,
so that the progress to relieve the airborne troops in the north, the progress was unbelievably slow.
Finally, relief arrived to all of the paratrooper units except the British airborne at Arnhem.
This was indeed, as Cornelius Ryan has argued, a bridge too far.
It was too far away, and after nine days of intense fighting,
the Red Devils managed to break out of breakthrough German lines and to link up with the relief force.
When they did so, of the 9,000 British paratroopers that had gone into Arnhem, 2400 emerged to link up with the relief column.
The failure of Operation Market Garden, and it was an abysmal failure,
ended all hopes of crossing the Rhine in 1944, and for all intents and purposes,
really ended the possibility of the war coming to an end in the west in 1944.
There would be no easy crossing of the Rhine in the north.
U.S. forces under Hodges' First Army and Patton were probing into Germany, but the going was very, very slow.
German resistance was tenacious, the terrain was bad, Patton was bogged down in Lorraine,
slogging away in the most unproductive campaigning of Patton's career in Europe.
The First Army would take Aachen, the first German city to fall on October 21st,
after a month of slow and heavy fighting, particularly in an area called the Hürtgen Forest,
where the fighting was brutal, resistance terrible, the terrain difficult.
The fighting in the Hürtgen Forest was especially bloody and resistance terrific.
Patches' Seventh Army and de Latres' French troops were advancing from the south,
but they encountered de Vosges Mountains, the long, low range along the border of Alsace, and also their advance slowed.
So what had seemed to be this initial burst out of France, and coming after the liberation of Paris,
now in every direction, northeast and from the south, all were slowed,
even the existence of the Red Ball Express, this extraordinary resupply system of roads being taken over
and run in a one-way street, literally to the front, and then with the trucks revolving on a 24-hour basis,
couldn't keep up the necessary supplies to the troops at the front.
Summer had turned to fall, and victory in Western Europe was still elusive.
In this situation, Hitler decided to take one last gamble in the West.
He wanted one last offensive, a desperate effort to split the Allies in the West,
an offensive to drive between Montgomery's armies in the north and the Americans farther to the south with Antwerp in the middle.
When Hitler presented his ideas for this to his commanders, Rundstedt and the others were absolutely mortified.
At all times, this was the time to marshal one's resources.
This was the time to begin to pull back to defensible lines, to hold the Russians were still hammering away in the East,
advancing on a broad front toward Germany.
Now the key was to find defensible positions, to pull back beyond the Rhine, to hold the Americans and the British,
to force them into a long, slow, arduous advance.
Hitler would have none of it.
Instead, there was going to be a kudagrass, a dramatic stroke that would smash the Allies in the West
and possibly lead to some sort of negotiated peace.
Hitler's plan was to smash into the Allied forces through the Ardennes, in the Ardennes.
Then sent armored spearheads dashing for Antwerp.
This would isolate Montgomery's forces in the north.
It would deny the Allies the use of the port.
He assembled 24 divisions, including 10 Panzer divisions equipped with the newest German tanks,
the Tigers and the Panthers.
It was a larger force than the Germans had used in the invasion of Western Europe in 1940.
And many of these troops, especially the armored divisions, were battle-hardened veterans,
not of the Western Front to the Eastern Front, who had been brought back SS units as well.
Waffen SS units brought back elite troops for this assault in the West.
The Allies had only weak forces at this point along many areas of the front,
weak in the sense of under-equipped, understaffed, and certainly inexperienced.
It was at this point in the war that already the needs of manpower were being felt.
And the Allies were already contemplating the idea,
the Americans already contemplating the idea of actually pulling ground troops out of the Army Air Corps units
stationed in England and Italy and giving them rifles and sending them into infantry units.
The area that was weakest were only four divisions of Hodge's First Army along the Ardennes.
The Germans, and there was an amazing intelligence lapse here.
On the one hand, one wonders, the Allies looking at this situation in the winter of 1944 now,
they have fairly strong forces in the north, Patton's position is still down in Lorraine in the south,
and the Ardennes right in the center, this key area in the center of the line,
is considered by the Western Allies to be impenetrable to the Germans.
The Germans can't launch an offensive operation there, particularly in the winter and particularly with armor,
despite the fact that the Germans had invaded through the Ardennes in 1870 and in 1940 with great effect.
In addition, intelligence reports were filtering back to Allied high command
that there was a considerable amount of troop movement, tank movement from east to west.
Radio silence meant that ultra was of little help,
but in fact the lack of radio traffic should have alerted the Allies that something was afoot.
Part of this was explained away, the Germans were closer to their own turf,
they didn't need to use radio transmissions as much, there were other ways of communicating,
all of this was true, but one senses here this again almost fatal overconfidence of the Allies.
The Allies did detect the transfer of Panzer divisions from the east,
and actually intercepted messages concerning German air reconnaissance over the Ardennes,
and yet no particular steps were taken to face the possibility of a German offensive,
simply seen as being impossible.
It was one of the great intelligence failures of the Second World War.
On December 16, 1944, the Germans launched what Hitler called Operation Autumn Fog.
He caught the overmatched Americans unprepared, German troops,
both of which were dressed in American uniforms, were able to infiltrate Allied lines,
they picked English speaking and American sounding,
Germans dressed them in American MP uniforms behind the lines to change signs
and to generally cause havoc and confusion.
The German forces overwhelmed the outnumbered Americans over a 70 mile front,
and the Panzers headed for the Meuse River.
The low overcast kept the Allied air power neutralized for a week,
so that what was the great Allied advantage, complete air superiority,
indeed air supremacy, was of no value.
This was actually one of the great strokes of luck for the Germans,
that the weather was so bad during this time.
The fighting was intense and conditions terrible, heavy, wet, snowfall.
It had to be the coldest winter in Europe in the 20th century to that point.
The first SS Panzer Division was particularly aggressive.
It would be during this German offensive in the Ardennes,
that troops largely from the Eastern Front, used to fighting in conditions at the Eastern Front,
where prisoners were not taken, where the rules of war were not observed,
where the Geneva Convention meant nothing.
These SS troops were now employed in the West,
leading to the murder of a number of American prisoners of war.
The most notorious incident, of course, near Malamadie,
where 86 American prisoners were machine gunned and shot by SS troops.
Isolated US units continued to hold out, especially at two key road junctures in Eastern Belgium,
at St. Viet and at Best Stone.
These were crucial road junctures that the Germans had to seize.
Speed was of the essence for the Germans. They understood this.
They were lucky the weather was still holding out bad for the Allies,
and so they needed to break through.
They couldn't be held up.
The longer they were held up, the dicier the operation became.
St. Viet fell on December 22, but Best Stone held.
Reinforced by the elements of the 101st Airborne.
Best Stone would be surrounded, and the Germans would offer.
The German general offered the American commander there, Anthony McAuliffe,
the opportunity to surrender.
This, of course, has gone down in the lore of the Second World War.
It's not quite give me liberty or give me death,
but when the German commander sent a formal word using all of the courtesies and so on,
the formal courtesies of German military lore,
to offer surrender to the American forces at Best Stone,
McAuliffe supposedly stumbling around said,
ah, nuts, and one of his associates said,
well, just say that. Send that message back.
And so to the German offer of surrender,
and the sort of flowery, formal German proposal,
the response went back nuts.
It did go down as one of the great comments of the Second World War.
I think McAuliffe regretted it almost ever after,
since he was constantly asked about this after the war.
But it seemed to be the essence of defiance.
The 101st as well as McAuliffe's troops held out,
and on December 23rd, the skies cleared,
and the Allied planes were at last able to take off.
Allies were able to employ their air power,
and they decimated the German armored spearheads
who were deprived of fuel.
Here one sees the impact of something we're going to talk about
in a future lecture, which is the impact of Allied air power,
hammering away at German oil supplies,
so that one of the goals was not simply to reach Antwerp,
deprive the allies of the port, split the allies,
but also to get the oil supplies of the allies built up in the West.
On December 26th, Patton's troops,
who had turned from Lorraine and raced northward,
broke the siege of Beston.
Montgomery, who had been charged with lifting the siege,
and who would create enormous ill will over this episode,
arrived at Hodges headquarters,
and according even to one of Montgomery's own men,
said he arrived at Hodges headquarters with the air of Christ come to cleanse the temple.
He had ridden to the rescue of the Americans who had mucked everything up.
Patton would lift the siege of Beston December 26th.
Montgomery did not launch his assault to come to the relief of the Americans
until January 3rd.
At this point, the German offensive had ground to a halt
without crossing the Muse River.
Autumn fog had been a wildly ambitious German operation.
It created a bulge in Allied lines 45 miles wide and 65 miles deep,
hence the name, the Battle of the Bulge,
but it really had no chance of reaching Antwerp.
Runstedt wanted to withdraw, to pull his troops back,
but Hitler refused, and by the end of January,
the bulge in Allied lines had been eliminated.
Hitler had sacrificed his last reserves and his best armor in this undertaking.
He had delayed the Allied offensive in the west,
but he had exhausted his strength on the enterprise
and an enterprise which had virtually no chance of success.
Everything would have had to break right for the Germans
for this operation to have achieved the strategic objectives that Hitler had foreseen.
And, of course, it desperately weakened German strength in the east,
armored strength particularly, at a critical juncture.
The Russians were preparing a massive offensive in Poland from mid-January,
and German troops there would find themselves drastically overmatched.
And Hitler also refused to withdraw troops to the east bank of the Rhine,
as Runstedt and the others had begged him to do.
Instead, he demanded that the German troops would fight for every inch of German soil.
It was absolutely suicidal. His commanders understood it.
The German troops would find themselves caught between the Allies in the west and the Rhine
and were in for a desperate winter.
The failure of Hitler's offensive in the Ardennes would mark the last gasp of Nazi Germany in the west.
There was, at this point, by the end of December, beginning of January 1945,
the Germans could not win the war in Europe.
The last gasp, the last hope for some sort of miraculous victory had now vanished.
And yet the war would go on until May of 1945.
But Germany now would be in retreat and on the defensive.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses on Tape series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at teachco.com
or you may call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
That's 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
Thank you very much.
