These lectures are part of the Great Courses on Tape series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The great courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Browse our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled World War II, a Military and Social History, Part
3.
The lecturer is Professor Thomas Childers.
Professor Childers received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University
of Tennessee and he earned his PhD in history from Harvard University.
For over 20 years, Professor Childers has taught in the Department of History at the
University of Pennsylvania.
He has also lectured in London, Oxford, Berlin, Munich and other universities in the United
States and Europe.
Professor Childers is the author and editor of several books on modern German history and
the Second World War.
He is currently completing a trilogy on the Second World War.
The first volume, Wings of Morning, the story of the last American bomber shot down over
Germany in World War II, was praised by Jonathan Yardley in The Washington Post as a powerful
and unselfconsciously beautiful book.
Chapter 21, Advance Across the Pacific
In the last set of lectures, we have been examining events in Europe, in the European
Theater of Operations, examining strategic dilemmas, strategic problems confronted by
both the allies and the Axis powers.
In this, our 21st lecture, we are going to shift our focus geographically across the
world to the Pacific, examining the American strategy in the Pacific, the debates within
the American high command about routes for the advance towards the Japanese home islands,
and to examine the beginning of the campaigns that would lead American forces slowly and
inexorably, and with terrific losses, toward the final assault on Japan.
The war in the Pacific was to be largely an American responsibility.
In the division of labor, the British were to take care of Southeast Asia, coming out
of Burma, India, and so on, while the United States would shoulder the responsibility for
the larger Pacific, so that whereas we've been talking about conflicts between British
and Americans over strategy, the Mediterranean strategy versus the cross channel invasion,
there would be no replays of this inter-allied conflict in the Pacific Theater, rather here
the strategic debates would be between the various armed forces of the United States,
the Navy versus the Army, MacArthur versus his Admiral King and his Navy counterparts.
Initially, in 1942 and 1943, progress was slow.
The initiative had been rested away from the Japanese at Midway and at Guadalcanal, and
gradually the gap between the industrial capacities of the two powers began to widen.
The great fear of Yamamoto at the outset of the war, that if the war went beyond several
months, if the Americans were not brought to the bargaining table within a matter of
months, that over the long haul, Japan simply could not compete with American industrial
strength, American industrial production, and American manpower.
As time passed, this became increasingly clear.
The gap would grow at a spectacular pace that would profoundly affect the outcome of the
war.
Initially, Franklin Roosevelt had favored one Commander-in-Chief for the Pacific Theater,
in many ways the counterpart to Dwight Eisenhower in his position in Europe.
But Admiral King and FDR both had hoped that Admiral Nimitz would be that man.
On the other hand, General MacArthur, the defender of the Philippines, and his dramatic
escape from Baton had made MacArthur a hero in the United States.
The solution, King, Nimitz, Roosevelt, were all fairly convinced that one Commander-in-Chief
was necessary and believed that it should in fact be Nimitz.
But there was the problem of MacArthur.
What to do?
What to do with the Philippines?
The solution, and one that was not an entirely happy one, was a divided command structure
in the Pacific.
General MacArthur would be Commander of Allied Forces in the Southwest Pacific, responsible
for Australia, the Solomons, New Guinea, the Bismarck Archipelago, the Philippines,
the Dutch Indies, except for Sumatra.
While Admiral Nimitz would retain his position as Commander of the Pacific Fleet and become
Commander-in-Chief of North, Central, and Southern Pacific theaters of operation.
The Southwest Pacific then was an Army operation, and MacArthur reported directly to General
Marshall while the Navy ran the other operations and Nimitz remained under the control of Admiral
King.
Britain, meanwhile, retained operational control over Burma and the rest of Southeast Asia.
In this emerging, with this divided command structure, there was obviously a strategic
debate.
The Navy favored what came to be known as a Central Pacific strategy, an advance through
a series of island chains, the Marshalls, the Carolines, and the Marianas.
Island chains and individual islands, which were certainly obscure, hardly known by anyone
in the United States before 1942-43, but would become etched in the experience and memories
of hundreds of thousands, indeed millions, of Americans over the next few years.
This Central Pacific strategy, this advance through the Marshalls, the Carolines, the
Marianas offered, Nimitz argued, the most advantageous and direct route to Japan.
It would allow a concentration of resources.
And these three far-flung island chains contained over a thousand small islands, and the Japanese
simply couldn't defend all of them.
The United States, in this, according to this strategy, would be able to pick and choose
its targets.
It would be able to maneuver.
The Japanese would be stretched to the utmost.
And finally, the conquest of the Marianas would bring the Japanese home islands into
range of American heavy bombers.
The Solomon's, New Guinea, and even Rabal, the major Japanese base, and garrison could
be bypassed, and the Japanese troops there simply allowed to, as the Navy put it, wither
on the vine.
The key to this strategy was the capture of the Japanese naval base at truck in the Carolines.
The army, on the other hand, and MacArthur most certainly, preferred to drive along the
northern coast of New Guinea, then an attack on the Philippines.
Not surprisingly, this strategy would concentrate the American effort in the southwest Pacific
under, no surprise at all, General MacArthur's command.
The result, just as there had been a compromise on command structure, there would now be a
compromise on strategy.
In April of 1943, the Joint Chiefs of Staff opted for a two-pronged strategy, merging
both Army and Navy proposals.
They believed that the Navy's central Pacific strategy should, in fact, be the highest priority,
to recognize that too much blood had already been spilled in the Solomon's and New Guinea
simply to abandon operations there.
So the American advance on Japan would proceed on two axes, the southwest, an army area of
operations, and the central Pacific and Navy area of concentration.
The offensives were based on what came to be known as the island hopping technique, seizing
key islands or parts of island chains, then jumping forward several hundred miles, followed
by another leap, leaving possibly pockets of Japanese defenders isolated.
Japan would be guessing, would stretch their resources to the breaking point, and the allies,
the Americans, would move inexorably on toward the Japanese home islands.
The offensive in the southwest Pacific would come in 1943 and into 44.
The Joint Chiefs had laid down the guidelines for strategy that MacArthur and Halsey, Admiral
Halsey under MacArthur's general direction would follow in 1943.
This operation was called Operation Cartwheel.
The two key targets of this operation were in the Solomon's, New Guinea, northwest of
Guadalcanal, and Bougainville.
Successful landings there would permit Halsey's forces to bypass most of the Solomon's and
provide air bases for assault on Rabaul.
The importance of land-based aircraft and land-based air power was driven home in March
of 1943 in what came to be known as the Battle of the Bismarck Sea.
When General George M. Kenny, in his fifth Air Force under MacArthur, began experimenting
with B-25 Mitchell bombers, lightweight two-engine bombers, attacking at low level.
In the winter of 1943, pilots had been specially trained for these low-level operations and
then in March, ultra-indicated Japanese convoy containing seven troop carriers and eight
destroyers had left Rabaul for New Guinea.
B-17s, the big four-engine bombers, tried to attack and in fact sank two of the troopships.
Then the B-25s and lower dive bombers sank all of the troop carriers as well as four
destroyers.
For the first time, land-based aircraft had destroyed a Japanese fleet without the aid
of naval forces.
It strengthened the American resolve to gain advanced air bases and the determination to
build airfields, to use air power in conjunction with the Navy and armed and ground forces
to pressure the Japanese.
General Yamamoto, I think sensing that awful sense of the tide turning against him, inexorably
turning against him, tried to reverse this virtually tidal wave of rising U.S. air power
by sending 300 Japanese planes to attack American bases in the Solomon's and New Guinea in a
series of major air raids, but in each suffered very serious losses without reversing the
balance of air power.
Believing that he had in fact achieved a victory, he had been getting incomplete reports of
great damages to American aircraft, Yamamoto decided to visit Bougainville to congratulate
his pilots.
That was an intercept, Ultra-intercepted this and his plan to visit, 18 American P-38s lightnings,
jumped his plane, shot it down as it approached Bougainville, and Japan lost one of its great
military figures before Operation Cartwheel was even underway.
Yamamoto, who had warned of the dangers of an all-out conflict with the United States,
would not be alive to see his worst fears realized.
Cartwheel was launched in June of 1943 against New Guinea and the Solomon's.
New Georgia and Bougainville would allow Halsey's forces to bypass most of the Solomon Islands
and provide air bases for raids on Rabaul.
The sense that Rabaul was the key, it in truck, these two key Japanese positions had to be
taken and so air bases for raids on Rabaul.
Assaults began in late June, fighting was intense and horrific in the rugged, jungle-choked
terrain, intricate Japanese defenses.
For the first time in combat in the war, the flamethrower would be used as a major weapon
in combat on the ground.
A series of naval engagements resulted in Japanese defeats at sea as well as on land.
In Bougainville was especially important, since a foothold there would allow the Americans
to build airfields closer to New Britain and fighter planes could escort bombers on raids
against Rabaul.
By November, Japanese resistance in Bougainville had come to an end, had been broken.
Meanwhile, MacArthur continued his operations along the northern New Guinea coast, using
American and Australian troops.
Progress along the coast was agonizingly slow.
The Japanese fought tenaciously and in December launched an attack on New Britain in torrential
raids, fighting in the monsoon season, something that virtually everyone thought was impossible
and was absolutely miserable.
Nonetheless, by the end of 1943, the Allies were closing in on the fortress at Rabaul from
the western end of New Britain and Bougainville and New Georgia.
By March, 1944, the Allies had seized Los Negros and the Admiralty Islands and now closed
the fence around Rabaul.
At this point, it might have been, the temptation was to launch a major assault, in fact MacArthur
had thought from the outset that there would have to be a major battle over Rabaul, where
the Japanese had a great many troops, but it was already decided that it would be possible
seeing the way the course of the conflict was going to actually bypass it, simply to
seal it off, not have a frontal assault on this highly fortified Japanese position, and
this is exactly what happened.
So there's progress being made in a slow, agonizing way, fighting engagements across
the islands in the southwest.
Meanwhile, in the Central Pacific, Admiral Nimitz had built up far larger naval forces
than were available for Operation Cartwheel.
The Fifth Fleet under Admiral Spirits commanded eight carriers, seven battleships, seven heavy
and three light cruisers, 34 destroyers, and in addition, a new advance in technology
had was now available to the Americans.
That was the arrival of the Hellcat fighter plane.
It would become the best carrier-based aircraft in the Pacific, and the day of the Japanese
Zero was quickly going to pass.
The first objective for Nimitz in the Central Pacific was the Gilberts.
The objective's two small atolls, hardly visible on the map.
One was McKinn at the northwest extremity, but the other, a tiny island near the center
was going to be the real key.
This was Tarawa.
Tarawa was well defended by a garrison of some 5,000 Japanese troops.
It was actually not one island, but a number of islands and coral reefs along a 15-mile
lagoon.
The key point was BTO, a stretch of island two and a half miles long, but at its widest
portion across only 800 yards deep, a tiny island.
The taking of Tarawa was considered essential.
Intelligence had warned Admiral Spearance that the November tides were highly unpredictable
and raised fear that the invasion force would become stuck on the reefs that were just underneath
the surface of the sea, just around the coral reef that surrounded the islands.
The Admiral, however, decided not to postpone the attack.
He didn't want to wait until December, and so on November 20th, 1943, Marines stormed
ashore at Tarawa.
The first three waves were able to take advantage of a new item in the inventory of naval and
amphibious warfare.
This was the Amtrak, the vehicle which was able to move across the reefs.
The tide was low, just as intelligence had feared, but instead of being caught on the
reefs, these Amtrak were able to go over the reefs and deliver the first three waves of
Marines onto the beach where they were encountered fierce resistance.
For all of the remaining waves of incoming Marines, the deeper, clumsier landing craft
ran aground on the coral reef.
The Marines were dislodged hundreds of yards from shore and had to wade in chest-deep water
through withering Japanese fire until they reached the beach.
It was a brutal encounter.
By nightfall, the beachhead was only 300 yards deep, and 1,500 of the 5,000 Marines on shore
were either dead or wounded.
Resistance on Tarawa would end on November 23rd, but Tarawa, bloody Tarawa, as it came
to be known, was a rude shock, a shock to the Marines and to the American military planners,
and also a shock to the American public.
Here was this tiny atoll hardly could be found with a magnifying glass on the map, and 1,000
Americans were dead and 2,000 were wounded.
For the Japanese, the toll was even grimmer.
Of the 5,000 Japanese troops on Tarawa, 17 survived.
Was this American planners and the public worried?
Was this a prelude?
Is this what all of these islands would be like?
This island-hopping strategy, this advance across the Pacific toward Japan, was each
one of these islands going to be contested in this sort of way with this level of casualties.
It was a terrifying prospect.
From the Gilberts, Nimitz would make a leap to the Marshall Islands.
There things went far more smoothly by bypassing the outer islands and leaping 400 miles into
the center of the chain.
The neutralization of the Japanese base at truck in the Carolines and the western rim
of the Marshalls was important.
It was a very important naval and air base that could threaten all American operations.
This was carried out in mid-February when carrier-based American planes destroyed over
200 Japanese aircraft, sank eight warships, damaged one carrier, and ended trucks' value
as an air base and a base of naval operations.
The assault that was pressed on into the Marianas, to Guam, and Saipan, and Tinian, all hallowed
names in Marine Corps and naval history.
The decision was made to leapfrog all the other Caroline islands and to move 1,000 miles
northwest to this series of islands, Saipan, and Guam, and Tinian.
These unlike the islands already encountered, certainly unlike Tarawa, were substantial
islands, and they lay only 1,200 miles from the home islands of Japan, taking them with
open a variety of strategic options, an assault on the Philippines in the west, something
that MacArthur was certainly still very keen on, a northward thrust toward the Bonin Islands
within 700 miles of Japan, establishing important air bases for long-range American bombers.
The B-29, with its great range, was already becoming available to American forces here,
so the taking of the Marianas would move American air power, land-based air power, within striking
distance of Japan itself.
So the Marianas loomed extremely large in American strategic thinking in the summer
of 1944. Nimitz's key objective in the Marianas was to be Saipan, and on June 15, 1944, as
the Allies had been on shore for a little over a week in Normandy, American forces stormed
ashore at Saipan. There the fighting was, as it had been at Tarawa and elsewhere, incredibly
bloody.
On July 6, 1944, Admiral Nagumo and General Seto committed suicide to inspire their troops.
And on the night of July 6 and 7, the Japanese launched a massive frontal assault, a suicide
charge that decimated the remaining Japanese troops. It was a suicide charge. Marines had
seen this before, but nothing like this of this scale, this magnitude. The suicide of
the Japanese commanders seemed to struck the Americans as being not brave, but as simply
bizarre fanatical beyond comprehension, and one gruesome chapter would remain as 8,000
Japanese civilians committed suicide on Saipan. Throwing themselves off the cliffs on the
northern side of the island, blowing themselves up with hand grenades, drowning themselves
in the ocean, in many cases with American troops within earshot of the Japanese, pleading
with the civilians not to take this sort of action. What provoked the Japanese was that
fear of the Americans, certainly the indoctrination of the Japanese, that if they fell into American
hands, the women would be raped, the men would be mutilated and murdered, was part of it.
The cult of suicide that was very powerful within Japanese society also would play a
role and then just the desperation and the fear of surrender. For the Americans witnessing
this, there was a horrifying sense that this really was a prelude, a preview of what would
happen if American forces, when American forces, reached the Japanese home islands. If Japanese
civilians would commit mass suicide on Saipan, the Japanese commanders would commit suicide
if there would be a bonsai charge, a suicide charge of large numbers of Japanese troops.
When it wasn't about victory, it wasn't to reverse the tide, the outcome of the battle,
this was already sealed. This was about dying, this was something else. And there was a horrifying
sense that each step closer to Japan was simply going to bring greater and greater scenes
of this sort of horror. While the fighting was going on on Saipan, American forces continued
to press, naval forces continued to press on, the battle of the Philippine Sea in June
of 1944 would see more horrific losses for the Japanese. The Americans in this conflict,
this struggle, would use carrier-based aircraft to intercept a number of Japanese, a huge
number of Japanese planes. The huge American air superiority, about a thousand versus about
200 Japanese, led to staggering losses for the Japanese who lost 275 of 373 planes shot
down to only 29 losses for the Americans. Two American subs sank two Japanese carriers,
it came to be known as the Great Mariana's Turkey Shoot. So crippling a defeat was this
for Japanese forces. It was a defeat not only of air power, but of Japanese naval power
as well, and it was a defeat from which the Japanese would never recover. On July 24th,
Tinian was invaded to, once again, repeated scenes of fanatical suicide charges, blind
heroism on the part of the Japanese, or crazed fanaticism, depending upon one's point of
view. It was over within eight days. Guam was invaded on July 21st, where the beachhead
was resisted, and once again, more suicide charges, but the outcome was never in doubt.
On August 1st, organized resistance on Guam ceased. The loss of the Mariana's was a shattering
blow to the Japanese. Tojo's government fell nine days after the fall of Saipan, and the
United States was now in a position to strike the Philippines, as MacArthur wanted to do,
and to threaten Japanese oil supply from the East Indies. The Americans also began preparing
new air bases for the B-29 Superfortresses that were arriving steadily, preparing for
the strikes at the Japanese home islands. The progress across the Pacific was filled
with these intense short conflicts, and a growing horror that the war in the Pacific,
while going extremely well for the Allied cause, for the Americans in this island hopping
technique, that a new kind of war had been entered into with an enemy that was almost
beyond comprehension. One American pilot, who was fighting the Japanese at this point,
a naval aviator, said in his memoirs about this particular period of the war, and then
what would follow the emergence of the kamikazes, that always wanted to think that the soldier,
the airman, the sailor on the other side was somebody just like you, somebody who wanted
to do his job, believed in his cause, and then wanted to go home. But at a certain point
in this campaign of island hopping across the Pacific, Americans came to believe that,
as he said, for us, the war seemed to be about winning for the Japanese. It seemed to be
about dying.
