Lecture 22, Turning Point in the Southwest Pacific,
Leyte Gulf and the Philippines.
Hello and welcome to our 22nd lecture in this series on the Second World War.
In our last lecture, we followed the progress of the American drive across the Central Pacific,
examining Admiral Nimitz's strategy, the island hopping technique,
of moving across the various island chains of the Central Pacific, aiming toward the home islands of Japan.
In this lecture, we want to shift our focus to that second axis of American advance across the Pacific.
This, the Southwest Theater, dominated by of course General Douglas MacArthur,
an army theater for the most part.
And yet it would be here that one of the major campaigns of the Second World War would occur,
indeed the largest naval engagement of the Second World War would take place,
and that is the Battle of Leyte Gulf in October of 1944.
So we want to examine two major engagements that would really seal the fate of Imperial Japan.
One is the Battle of Leyte Gulf, which would inflict a terrific defeat on the Imperial Japanese Navy
and render it really for the remainder of the conflict of secondary importance,
and then the liberation of the Philippines.
Douglas MacArthur had promised when he had left the Philippines in early 1942 that he would return,
he would fulfill that promise in this, what would become one of the largest engagement battle in the Pacific
during the Second World War, the battle for the Philippines.
The prelude to both of these, the Battle of Leyte Gulf and the Battle of the Philippines,
has to be seen in MacArthur's original intention to begin the conquest of the Philippines by invading Mindanao,
but Admiral Halsey suggested bypassing and landing instead at Leyte on the eastern edge of the Philippines.
MacArthur and Nimitz would ultimately agree about this,
but Nimitz insisted on the invasion of a series of islands about 500 miles to the southeast of Mindanao,
the Paloas Islands, as an advance base for the invasion.
On October 20th, the original date for the invasion was set as October 20th, 1944, the invasion of Leyte,
but first it was going to be necessary, MacArthur believed, to seize Pailalu,
and the 1st Marine Division was sent to take this small island as a blocking position for the invasion.
The tragedy of Pailalu began on September 15th, 1944.
The fighting on this island was in a series of engagements where one has always tended to say,
this was the most savage, this was the most brutal.
Conditions on Pailalu were unbelievably bad.
The fighting took place in 115 degree heat against heavy Japanese fortifications
in conditions that were really indescribable.
I think, in fact, the most powerful book of personal recollections about the entire Second World War
is written by a veteran of the Pailalu campaign that's E.B. Sledge, Gene Sledge's With the Old Breed,
an absolutely devastating account of the day-to-day conflict on Pailalu
in this unbelievable heat against great Japanese resistance.
The Marines and Army units involved in the Pailalu campaign would suffer 6,000 casualties
and resistance on Pailalu, which was expected to be squashed within a matter of a week, maybe two,
would only brought to an end on November 26th.
And, ironically enough, Pailalu would ultimately be irrelevant to the success of the Leyte landings,
as necessary, as it turned out.
On October 20th, U.S. Army forces landed on Leyte in within three days.
It seized the capital and two important airfields.
MacArthur landed on the first day, making the statement as he walked ashore,
people of the Philippines, I have returned.
The Japanese, at this point, were in a desperate situation.
Could the tide of events in the Pacific be reversed?
Objectively speaking, I think if Yamamoto had been around, he might still have argued well.
At this point, there is no way to reverse the tide of events.
Possibly, possibly, with one dramatic stroke somewhere around the Philippines,
maybe it would be possible to inflict a major defeat on the Americans.
And somehow, if not reverse the tide, the overall tide of events in the Pacific,
at least to blunt the American offensive.
The Japanese developed a plan for a major naval engagement.
The objective was to force a decisive naval battle with the American Pacific Fleet,
which might still provide victory for Japan, victory on a much more circumscribed scale
than had been their original intention.
Admiral Toyota devised a master plan that called for the entire combined fleet
to converge on the Philippines.
A northern force under Ozawa was to move south from Japan as a decoy
to lure Admiral Halsey's third fleet away from Leyte.
This northern force of Ozawa's included Japan's four remaining aircraft carriers.
This was clearly a decoy for the Japanese.
The four carriers contained only 110 aircraft.
And while this force was to be seen as a decoy to lure Halsey's third fleet away from the Philippines,
at the same time two Japanese task forces were to steam northward from the Singapore area,
wind their way through the congested waters of the Philippines,
and merge on Leyte Gulf from two directions.
Their mission was to destroy the American transports carrying the troops for the invasion of the Philippines
and the supporting warships.
A two-fold objective, destroy important elements of the U.S. fleet
and nip the American invasion of the Philippines in the bud.
This then was the Japanese objective.
One of those task forces under Admiral Kurita contained five battleships,
including the super ships Yamoto and Tsusashi, the two largest battleships in the world,
as well as 12 cruisers and 15 destroyers.
An enormous naval task force.
It would move through the San Bernardino Strait and close on Leyte from the north.
Meanwhile, Admiral Nishimura's force of two battleships, a heavy cruiser,
four destroyers would steam through the Saragayu Strait to the south
and would be joined by yet another task force dispatched from Japan.
Toyota's plan was daring.
It was typically ambitious.
The maneuvering of these three task forces with timing to converge in the Philippines
with the decoy force and so on was typical, I think, of Japanese naval planning.
And if it succeeded, it would deal a severe blow to the United States
and possibly even reverse the balance of forces in the Pacific.
But it relied heavily on precise timing.
It relied heavily on maneuvering through very congested waters.
And the entire operation was to be undertaken without carrier-based air support.
Only land-based planes from the Philippines would attempt to offset the great American air superiority
provided by the American carriers.
The battle would take place between October 23 and October 25.
On October 23, American submarines sited Karita's huge force and alerted Admiral Halsey.
They also sank two heavy cruisers and disabled a third, but Karita continued on toward the San Bernardino Strait.
On October 24, American aircraft attacked and sank the giant battleship Musashi and damaged three others.
When Karita turned west, Halsey believed he was withdrawing
and therefore shifted his third fleet northward to intercept the Japanese carrier force,
Ozawa's decoys, to the north.
He did not even leave a covering force at the San Bernardino Strait
and he did not inform Admiral Ken Cade, whose seventh fleet remained on station
with only five small escort carriers, three destroyers and a number of smaller vessels.
He had taken the bait. He had seen, he had worded the carriers and he was off to get them.
Karita then swung back, pushed through the San Bernardino Strait
where his vast armada broke on the startled Americans.
He thought that he was confronting the big American carriers and he pressed in for the kill.
That was exactly the decisive engagement that the plant had called for.
But, and this was very rare for the Japanese who were extremely good at nighttime maneuvers.
Japanese naval practice was very skillful in nighttime maneuvers.
His force became dispersed, confusion followed.
For a while, sort of fighting, several destroyers were sunk, one of the small carriers,
the American carriers.
Indeed, the Japanese seemed on the verge of inflicting an annihilating defeat on American forces.
Nothing remained between Karita and the Leyte invasion force except a number of small carriers.
Victory was indeed at this point within his grasp.
But because his attack had moved beyond his control, his vessels were dispersed in a way that he was uncomfortable with
and also because he still thought the big American carriers were present,
instead of pressing his attack, he broke off believing that the large American carrier force
he thought present would annihilate his strung out forces.
Instead, that large carrier force was hundreds of miles away with Halsey,
searching down the Japanese carriers of this northern decoy force.
Karita withdrew back through the San Bernardino Strait and an opportunity for the decisive engagement
that the Japanese sought had been missed.
Halsey, meanwhile, did press his attack against those always forces in the north.
He sank all four of Japan's remaining carriers.
500 aircraft landed and ship-based were lost.
The United States sank three battleships, four cruisers, 11 destroyers.
In fact, destroyed Japanese naval power in what proved to be the largest naval battle in history.
It was indeed the decisive engagement that the Japanese had hoped for,
but the outcome went in the other direction and, in fact, in a more predictable direction.
It was at the Battle of Leyte Gulf, as this engagement came to be known,
that the Japanese introduced a new weapon and one that, although it was not capable of reversing the tide of battle,
would certainly have a dramatic impact on American morale and would inflict terrific casualties.
This, of course, was the kamikaze or the divine wind, the special suicide planes, suicide units
employed by the Japanese now in desperation to break the momentum of American forces.
The term kamikaze or divine wind referred to the typhoon that had destroyed the Mongol fleet of Kublai Khan
in the late 13th century saving Japan from invasion.
A suicide unit now composed of pilots who deliberately crashed their TNT-laden planes into American ships
would now be launched at the Americans.
The kamikaze special attack corps was to inflict both material and morale damage on U.S. forces.
The first attack came on October 21st, a foretaste of what was to come,
but the main assault would come on October 25th, 1944.
200 Japanese suicide planes would slam into the American fleet.
The response of American sailors seeing this, of pilots desperately trying to, naval aviators desperately trying to shoot down these,
the stunning, the shock of seeing planes come in for what looked like a standard dive bombing attack
only to keep going and keep going and keep going was unbelievable.
If one sees film footage of these engagements with the kamikaze roaring down in the Battle of Leyte Gulf,
I think it's some of the most dramatic footage of the entire Second World War,
shot in many cases in color in a way that the scenes from the European theater so rarely were,
but a flak of all sorts of anti-aircraft fire, a hail of anti-aircraft fire,
and these Japanese planes bearing down onto the American planes and then slamming into the sides
or the decks of the carriers or the other ships.
The kamikazes at the Battle of Leyte Gulf would sink 24 American vessels, seriously damaged 27 others.
They would inflict 2100 casualties, 738 of whom were killed.
The kamikazes, along with the Banzai charges, the refusal to surrender,
these sorts of practices that one had seen with the Japanese, the mass suicides elsewhere,
simply drove home yet again, completed, in fact.
A Western view of the Japanese is a fanatical enemy ready to die rather than face defeat,
rather than surrender.
And once again, is this a preview of what we are to anticipate as we draw closer to the Japanese home islands?
Mass suicides on Saipan, these kamikaze attacks, the Banzai charges.
Was there no limit to this?
In this sense, I think the Pacific Theater would offer, in terms of combat,
such a different frame of mind for American servicemen confronting this enemy,
even, I think, a more stark and strange experience than those Americans who were confronted with the real evils of the SS.
The Battle of Leyte Gulf then would seal the fate of the Japanese Navy in the Second World War.
The invasion of the Philippines, which followed, would go a long way toward breaking the back of Japanese military power in the Southwest Pacific.
Leyte was invaded on December 10th, Mindoro on December 15th.
The invasion of Luzon at Lengayan Bay on January 9th, 1945, against General Yamashita,
would mark the beginning of the American assault on the Philippines.
Mark Field, which had fallen to the Japanese at the very beginning of the war, would fall back into American hands on January 30th, 1945.
The fighting from Manila, from February 3rd to March 3rd, was a struggle unmatched in the Pacific Theater.
It was more reminiscent of Stalingrad, of the major battles in Europe, of urban fighting, than any other conflict in the Pacific Theater.
Block by block, war on a European scale. It's estimated that 100,000 Filipino civilians died in the fighting, or fell victim to Japanese atrocities.
As the Japanese were pushed out of Manila, almost a replay of the rape of Nanking.
Torture, scenes of torture, horrendous torture, execution of Philippine civilians suspected of being resistance fighters,
or simply civilians who happened to be at the wrong place at the wrong time.
The Patan Peninsula fell by late February 1945, as did Corregidor.
The fall of these positions, so important symbolically for the United States after their loss so early on in the war in 1942,
marked a major, I think, morale booster for the American population, certainly thinking about possibly the end of the war against Japan.
The Japanese would withdraw into the mountainous interior of Luzon, and bloody fighting would continue until the very end of the war,
all the way through the summer of 1945, Japanese resistance would continue in the Philippines.
MacArthur sent American troops to each of the islands, ignoring a Joint Chiefs of Staff decision to bypass them.
As far as MacArthur was concerned, he had pledged to return. He had pledged to liberate the Philippines.
He had made a pledge to the Filipino population, and while in some ways it didn't seem to make a great deal of military sense,
it was a pledge to a Philippine population which had the largest resistance groups in all of Japanese-occupied Southeast Asia and the Pacific.
Indeed, the Philippines would be really alone outside of China as fostering a major resistance group to the resistance organization against the Japanese.
The battle for the Philippines was the largest military engagement fought by the United States in the Pacific.
The United States would suffer 48,000 wounded and 14,000 deaths in the liberation of the Philippines.
The Japanese would suffer 350,000 losses. It was the most costly defeat for the Japanese in the entire Pacific War.
At this point, with the fall of the Philippines, with the defeat of the Japanese Navy at Leyte,
with the Americans moving along the Central Pacific Axis and now also through the Southwest, the war in the Pacific could have,
one could argue should have come to a close at this point.
The first American bombing raid on the Japanese home islands had come in June of 1944.
It would be the spring of 1945 when the massive raids would begin.
The major B-29 raids launched by General Curtis LeMay, something that we'll talk about in a future lecture.
The war might have come to an end at this juncture.
American submarines were slowly but surely choking Japan.
American submarine warfare against the Japanese had been enormously successful.
Slowly the Japanese were cut off from their trade, cut off from their raw materials, cut off from food supplies.
The stranglehold of the American Navy on the Japanese home islands and especially through the use of the submarine was growing.
The news was growing tighter and tighter.
Air power was about to be visited upon Japan in a major way.
Up until the spring of 1944, the United States and what few efforts it had made to actually bomb the Japanese home islands
had largely concentrated on high altitude daylight precision bombing.
In the spring of 1945, that policy would change, as we will see, and the United States would go over to a different sort of bombing policy.
The war might have ended here, but it did not.
The advance would have to continue. There would be no Japanese surrender.
The Americans advancing now again across the Central Pacific continued to move.
Nimitz planned to continue his drive through the island chains toward Japan.
And while Manila was the battle of Manila was still raging,
Nimitz would launch an attack on the Bonin Islands which stretched from near Saipan close to the Japanese home islands.
These islands, the Bonin Islands, would eliminate attacks by Japanese fighters operating from the islands.
American fighter planes would now be able to use bases there to escort B-29s.
And this might also serve as an advanced base for the super fortresses themselves.
If nothing else, this last island chain would provide emergency landing facilities for B-29s
returning from Japan to their air bases in the Marianas, to Tinian in particular.
The islands were not the sort of jungle islands.
The jungle choked terrain of Guadalcanal and so on, but rather were volcanic.
The island targeted for the first invasion was perhaps the most inviting was Iwo Jima,
which means sulfur island. It was a barren, desolate, pork chop shaped island.
And it was to be the key in the new American advance closer to the home islands of Japan.
The battle of Iwo Jima would be launched in February of 1945.
It would go, would last until through March.
Iwo Jima, bounded with bubbling sulfur pits, casting a dense, acrid smell over the island.
The beaches held no sand, but instead consisted of black volcanic ash, so soft that just walking across it was difficult.
A man sunk up to his ankles in this black volcanic ash.
Although the island's volcano, the 550 foot high Mount Surabachi, was dormant,
the marines found that if they tried to dig into the ash, the ash covered beaches,
the earth was hot to the touch several inches down.
This battle, the battle of Iwo Jima and the battle which would follow it,
the battle of Okinawa would mark the last two stepping stones in the American march across the Pacific.
At this point, in the spring of 1945, February, March, the war in both Europe and Asia seemed to be coming to a close.
The Battle of the Bulge had been successfully brought to a close in Europe.
The Germans' last gap offensive blunted.
And in the Pacific, the inexorable march of American forces across the Pacific now seemed to be honing in on the Japanese home islands.
It was at this point that already one began to see, and we'll talk about this in future lectures,
that questions about the post-war world, thinking about a post-war environment began to occupy Franklin Roosevelt,
would occupy Winston Churchill, certainly occupy Stalin, but there was still the business at hand.
The business at hand was the final defeat of Nazi Germany and the defeat of Imperial Japan,
and that was going to extend across certainly the spring in Europe and through the summer in the Far East.
Thank you.
